Wikiri , and overthrow in such sort , that of 300 soldier , horseman , many Indians , and negro , there return but 18 . other affirm , that he be defeat in the very entrance of Guiana , at the first civil town of the empire call Macureguarai . captain Preston in take saint Iago de Leon ( which be by he and his company very resolute perform , be a great town , and far within the land ) hold a gentleman prisoner , who die in his ship , that be one of the company of Hernandez de Serpa , and save among those that escape , who witness what opinion be hold among the Spaniard thereabouts of the great riches of Guiana , and el Dorado the city of Inga . another Spaniard be bring aboard i by captain Preston , who tell i in the hear of himself and diverse other gentleman , that he meet with berreos campmaster at Caracas , when he come from the border of Guiana , and that he see with he forty of most pure plate of gold curious wrought , and sword of Guiana deck and inlay with gold , feather garnish with gold , and diverse rarity which he carry to the spanish king . after Hernandez de Serpa , it be undertake by the adolantado , don Gonzales Ximenes de Casada , who be one of the chief in the conquest of Nuevo reino , who daughter and heir don Antonio de Berreo marry . Gonzales seek the passage also by the river call Papamene , which rise by Quito in Peru , and run southeast 100 league , and then fall into Amazones , but he also fail the entrance , return with the loss of much labour and cost . i take one captain George a Spaniard that follow Gonzales in this enterprise . 364 1595 - Gonzales give his daughter to Berreo , take his oath Antonio and honour to follow the enterprise to the last of his berreo - substance and life , who since , as he have swear to i , have spend 300000 ducat in the same , and yet never can enter so far into the land as my self with that poor troop or rather a handful of man , be in all about 100 gentleman , soldier , rower , boat - keeper , boy , and of all sort : neither can any of the forepass undertaker , nor Berreo himself , discover the country , till now late by conference with a ancient king call Carapana , he get the true light thereof : for Berreo come about 1500 mile year he understand aught , or can find any passage or entrance into any part thereof , yet he have experience of all these forename , and diverse other , and be persuade of their error and mistake . Berreo seek it by the river Cassamar , which fall into a great river call Pato : Pato fall into Meta , and Meta into Baraquan , which be also call Orenoque . he take his journey from Nuevo reyno de Granada where he dwell , have the inheritance of Gonzales Ximenes in those part : he be follow with 700 horse , he drive with he 1000 head of cattle , he have also many woman , Indians , and slave . how all these river cross and encounter , how the country lie and be border , the passage of Ximines and Berreo , my own discovery , and the way that i enter , with all the rest of the nation and river , your lordship shall receive in a large chart or map , which i have not yet finish , and which i shall most humble pray your lordship to secret , and not to suffer it to pass your own hand ; for by a draught thereof all may be prevent by other nation : for i know it be this very year seek by the french , although by the way that they now take , i fear it not much . it be also tell i year i depart England , that Villiers a new wrick the admiral be in preparation for the plant of Amazones , to which river the french have make diverse ^ v ^ ofAm voyage , and return much gold , and other rarity . i m “ 0 365 ’ speak with a captain of a french ship that come from thence , his ship ride in Falmouth the same year that my ship come first from Virginia . there be another this year in Helford that also come from thence , and have be fourteen month at a anchor in Amazones , which be both very rich . although , as i be persuade , Guiana can be enter that way , yet no doubt the trade of gold from thence pass by branch of river into the river of Amazones , and so it do on every hand far from the country it self ; for those Indians of Trinidad have plate of gold from Guiana , and those canibal of Dominica which dwell in the island by which our ship pass yearly to the west Indies , also the Indians of Paria , those Indians call Tuearis , Chochi , apotomio , Cumanagotos , and all those other nation inhabit near about the mountain that run from Paria through the province of Venesuela , and in Maracapana , and the canibal of Guanipa , the Indians call Assawai , Coaca , aiai , and the rest ( all which shall be describe in my description as they be situate ) have plate of gold of Guiana . and upon the river of Amazones , Thevet write that the people wear croissant of gold , for of that form the guianians most common make they : so as from Dominica to Amazones , which be above 250 league , all the chief Indians in all part wear of those plate of Guiana . undoubted those that trade Amazones return much gold , which ( as be aforesaid ) come by trade from Guiana , by some branch of a river that fall from the country into Amazones , and either it be by the river which pass by the nation call tisnado , or by Carepuna . i make inquiry among the most ancient and best travel of the Orenoqueponi , and i have knowledge of all the river