judge the river in this place to be at least thirty mile broad , reckon the island which divide the branch in it , for afterward i seek also both the other branch . after we reach to the head of the island , call Assapana , a little to the westward on the right hand there open a river which come from the north , call Europa , and fall into the great river , and beyond it on the same side , we ancker for that night , by another island six mile long , and two mile broad , which they call Ocaywita : from hence in the morning we land two guianians , which we find in the town of Toparimaca , that come with we , who go to give notice of our come to the lord of that country call Putyma , a follower of Topiawari , chief lord of Aromaia , who succeed morequito , who ( as you have hear before ) Berreo put to death : but his town be far within the land , he come not unto we that day , so as we anchor 395 A . D . 1595 - they enter the river Orenoque which run east and west . the I | will of Assapana . the island of Iwana . the I | will of Ocaywita . again that night near the bank of another island , the isle of of bigness much like the other , which they call puta - putapayma . payma > over against which island , on the main land , be a very high mountain call oecope : we covet to anchor rather by these island in the river , then by the main , because of the Tortugas egg , which our people find on they in great abundance , and also because the ground serve better for we to cast our net for fish , the main bank be for the most part stony and high , and the rock of a blue metalline steele - ore . colour , like unto the best steele - ore , which i assure take it to be : of the same blue stone be also diverse great mountain , which border this river in many place . the next morning towards nine of the clock , we weigh anchor , and the breeze increase , we sail always west up the river , and after a while open the land on the right side , the country appear to be champain , and the bank show very perfect red . i therefore send two of the little barge with captain Gifford , and with he captain thou , captain Calfield , my cousin Greenvile , my nephew John Gilbert , captain Eynus , master Edward porter , and my cousin butshead Gorges , with some few soldier , to march over the bank of that red land , and to discover what manner of country it be on the other side , who at their return find it all a plain level , as far as they go or can discern , from the high tree they can get upon : and my old pilot , a man of great travel , brother to the cacique toparimica tell i , that those be call the plain of the plain of the Sayma , and that the same level cu - h reac ^ ed to Cumana , and Caracas in the west Indies , " mana , and the which be a hundred and twenty league to the north , Caracas . and that there inhabit four principali nation . the first be the Sayma , the next Assawai , the third and great the Wikiri , by who Pedro Hernandez de Serpa before mention be overthrow , as he pass with three hundred horse from Cumani towards oren - 396 oque , in his enterprise of Guiana : the four be call Aroras , and be as black as negro , but have smooth hair , and these be very valiant , or rather desperate people , and have the most strong poison on their arrow , and most dangerous of all nation , of which poison i will speak somewhat be a digression not unnecessary . there be nothing whereof i be more curious , than to find out the true remedy of these poison arrow : for beside the mortality of the wound they make , the par tie shot endure the most insufferable torment in the world , and abide a most ugly and lamentable death , sometime die stark mad , sometime their bowel break out of their belly : which be present discolour as black as pitch , and so unsavoury , as no man can endure to cure , or to attend they . and it be more strange to know , that in all this time there be never Spaniard either by gift or torment that can attain to the true knowledge of the cure , although they have martyr and put to invent torture i know not how many of they . but every one of these indian know it not , no not one among thousand , but their soothsayer and priest , who do conceal it , and only teach it but from the father to the son . those medicine which be vulgar , and serve for the ordinary poison , be make of the juice of a root call Tupara : the same also quench marvellous the heat of burn fever , and heal inward wound , and break vein , that bleed within the body . but i be more behold to the guianians then any other : for Anthonio de Berreo tell i that he can never attain to the knowledge thereof , and yet they teach i the best way of heal as well thereof , as of all other poison . some of the Spaniard have be cure in ordinary wound , of the common poison arrow with the juice of garlic : but this be a generail rule for all man that shall hereafter travel the Indies where poison arrow be use , that they must abstain from 397 A . D . I595 - aroras a black people use venomous arrow . the juice of garlic good against ordinary poison . speedy drink to be avoid of such as be wound with poison arrow . the province Aromaia . the pie of Murrecotima . drink , for if they take