, by reason that the charibe of Guanipa have kill most of his follower , and burn his town ) be present with they , and take away many of the woman of that place . Arracurri , another Indian of the nation of the Arwaccas inhabit in Barima , be likewise present , and conduct the Spaniard to all the indian dwelling . they be not of Anthony de Berreo his company , that follow this chase , but be the Spaniard of Margarita , and the Caraccas , with who * Santiago forsake his governor Berreo join himself . for which fact he now lie in fetter at Trinidad , every day expect sentence of death . the occasion hereof grow as follow . when Berreo , have lose his man , be leave with Fasshardo at Cumana all alone , as forlese , and never likely to compass his intend conquest of Guiana : the governor of the Caraccas and Margarita consult together , send with all speed into Spain , to advertise their king , that Berreo be utter able to follow this enterprise , that he have give it over , and do now sojorne in his old day at Fasshardo his house , mind nothing else but his solace , and recreation . they far declare , of how great importance this matter be : and that a english gentleman of such reckon , as they name your lordship to be , have be in Guiana , and understand so much of the state thereof , and the nation thereunto adjoin , as topiawarie , be both old and wise , can inform you of , who also in confirmation of friendship , have give you his only son , to who 460 the inheritance of the country do belong after he : there be no other likelihood , but that you , who adventure so far , and in such sort as you do , only to see , and know a certainty , will leave nothing unattempted to possess so rich a country , and without all doubt will return present . that mean time , you have leave this age sire alive , to be a block in their way , to who after his decease , this enterprise by patent do belong , and to be a weak adversary against your self , who at all time you know easy how to distress : and that therefore it may be behooveful for his majesty to revoke Berreo his grant , and to use their service , who be ready and willing without any delay to undertake the charge . Theise news be at large amplify and deliver to the king : Domingo de vera , Berreo his campmaster , who be send into Spain , five month before your arrival at Trinidad , with a sufficient quantity of gold get out of Guiana , to levy and furnish 500 man , have get knowledge of this practice , so solicit this cause in Berreo his behalf , that present order be give for the victual and man of ten ship to be send to Berreo : and far , this gold bear such weight , that the king command other 18 . of his ship to stop at Trinidad , and not to follow their other direction , before they see that place secure from enemy . Berreo suppose that these governor in send with such speed into Spain , mean he no good ; to approve his care and constancy , and that he never will yield under the burden of his adverse fortune ; give no time or breath to his adversary nor himself : return forthwith to Carapana his port , only with fifteen man , be the scatter remnant of those who you late dispossess of Trinidad . Theise governor follow he , and assure themselves of present employment from their king , preoccupate the time of their directions * to be return from Spain , enter Guiana with their man , with full determination to murder Berreo , and to dispatch all his company . they indeed 461 kill two or three , but Berreo flee towards Caroli , where he stay hope for succour from his son Antony de Ximenes , to come down the river from Nuevo Reyno de Granada . the margaritane with their accomplice busy themselves , some in search the country , other in purvey of victual out of the river that do lie eastward , of which number these be , that enter into Moruga with twenty canoas . Santiago pass up into topiawaries country , and there take Francis sparrow sir George Gifford his man prisoner , who with plenty of gold ransom his life , and be now abide in Cumana . this do , they all return to Trinidad , and begin to build their town there , when unhappy to their small comfort the eight and twenty sail arrive , and take Santiago prisoner . the other actor in this interlude vanish , and in canoas recover Margarita and Cumana again . eighteen of the say ship leave all thing in good order , depart from Trinidad to follow their other direction : ten doe yet remain fortify at Conquerabia , and expect our come . this particular relation i have from a indian , servant to Berreo , that can speak Spanish , who i take in the river . he be of the nation of the laos , and from a child breed up with Berreo . i give he trade to buy he a Canoa to return into his country , and so leave he glad , that he have meet with we . now the Indians of Moruga be chase from their dwelling , do seek by all mean possible to accord all the nation in one , so to invade the Arwaccas who be guide to the Spaniard , in show their town , and betray they . for they be full persuade , that by drive these Arwaccas , who serve the Spaniard ( for a great part of this nation do also hate , or not know they ) out of their territory , and Trinidad , the Spaniard for want of bread , will be enforce to seek habitation far off , or at the least in time consume and be waste . 462 the 6 . day of April we come to a anchor within the 2 % mouth of the river Raleana , have spend