between Orenoque and Amazones , and be very desirous to understand the truth of those warlike woman , because of some it be believe , of other not . and though i digress from my purpose , yet i will set down that which have be 366 deliver i for truth of those woman , and i speak with a cacique or lord of people , that tell i he have be in the river , and beyond it also . the nation of the seat of the these woman be on the south side of the river in - Amazon , the province of Topago , and their chief strength and retract be in the island situate on the south side of the entrance some 60 league within the mouth of the say river . the memory of the like woman be very ancient aswell in Africa as in Asia : in Africa those that have Medusa for queen : other in Scythia near the river of Tanais and Thermodon : we find also that Lampedo and marthesia be queen of the Amazon : in many history they be verify to have be , and in diverse age and province : but they which be not far from Guiana do accompany with man but once in a year , and for the time of one month , which i gather by their relation , to be in April : and that time all king of the border assemble , and queen of the Amazon ; and after the queen have choose , the rest cast lot for their Valentines . this one month , they feast , dance , and drink of their wine in abundance ; and the moon be do , they all depart to their own province . if they conceive , and be deliver of a son , they return he to the father ; if of a daughter they nourish it , and retain it : and as many as have daughter send unto the begetter a present ; all be desirous to increase their own sex and kind : but that they cut off the right dug of the breast , i do not find to be true . it be far tell i , that if in these war they take any prisoner that they use to accompany with those also at what time soever , but in the end for certain they put they to death : for they be say to be very cruel and bloodthirsty , especial to such as offer to invade their territory . Theise Amazones have likewise great store of these plate of gold , which they recover by exchange chief for a kind of green stone , which the Spaniard call Piedras hijada , and we use for spleen 367 stone : and for the disease of the stone we also esteem they . of these i see diverse in Guiana : and common every king or cacique have one , which their wife for the most part wear ; and they esteem they as great jewel . but to return to the enterprise of Bereo , who ( as i have say ) depart from Nuevo reyno with 700 horse , beside the provision above rehearse , he descend by the river call Cassanar , which rise in Nuevo reyno out of the mountain by the city of Tuvia , from which mountain also spring Pato ; both which fall into the great river of Meta : and Meta rise from a mountain join to Pamplon in the same Nuevo reyno de Granada . these , as also [ he - 639 . i guaiare , which issue out of the mountain by Timana , fall all into Baraquan , and be but of his head ; for at their come together they lose their name ; and Baraquan far down be also rebaptize by the name of Orenoque . on the other side of the city and hill of Timana rise Rio grande , which fall in the sea by sancta Marta . by Cassonar first , and so into Meta , Berreo pass , keep his horseman on the bank , where the country serve they for to march , and where otherwise , he be drive to embark they in boat which he build for the purpose , and so come with the current down the river of Meta , and so into Baraquan . after he enter that great and mighty river , he begin daily to lose of his company both man and horse ; for it be in many place violent swift , and have forcible eddy , many sand , and diverse island sharp point with rock : but after one whole year , journey for the most part by river , and the rest by land , he grow daily to few number ; for both by sickness , and by encounter with the people of those region , through which he travel , his company be much waste , especial by diverse encounter with the amapaians : and in all this time he never can learn of any passage into 368 Guiana , nor any news or fame thereof , until he come to a further border of the say Amapaia , eight day journey from the river Caroli , which be the further river that he enter . among those of Amapaia , Guiana be famous , but few of these people accost Berreo , or will trade with he the first three month of the six , which he sojourn there . This Amapaia be also marvellous rich in gold ( as both Berreo confess and those of Guiana with who i have most conference ) and be situate upon Orenoque also . in this country Berreo lose 60 of his best soldier , and most of all his horse that remain in his former year travel : but in the end , after diverse encounter with those nation , they grow to peace ; and they present Berreo with ten image of fine gold among diverse other plate and croissant , which , as he swear to i and diverse other gentleman , be so curious wrought , as he have not see the like either in Italy , Spain , or the low - countreys : and he be resolve , that when they come to the hand of the spanish king , to who he have send they by his campmaster , they will appear very admirable , especial be wrought