to the last of the south , it be at least 100 league , so as the river mouth be 300 mile wide at his entrance into the sea , which i take to be far big than that of Amazones . all those that inhabit in the mouth of this river upon the several north branch , be these Tivitivas , of which there be two chief lord which have continual war one with the other . the hand which lie on the right hand , be call Pallamos , and the land on the left , Horotomaka , and the river by which John Dowglas return within the land from Amana to Capuri , they call Macuri . these Tivitivas be a very goodly people and very 382 valiant , and have the most manly speech and most deliberate that ever i hear , of what nation soever . in the summer they have house on the ground , as in other place : in the winter they dwell upon the tree , where they build very artificiali town and village , as it be write in the spanish story of the west Indies , that those people do in the low land near the gulf of Uraba : for between may and September the river of Orenoque rise thirty foot upright , and then be those island overflow twenty foot high above the level of the ground , save some few raise ground in the middle of they : and for this cause they be enforce to live in this manner . they never eat of any thing that be set or so wen : and as at home they use neither plant nor other manurance , so when they come abroad , they refuse to feed of aught , but of that which nature without labour bring forth . they use the top of palmito for bread , and kill dear , fish , and pork , for the rest of their sustenance . they have also many sort of fruit that grow in the wood , and great variety of bird and foul . and if to speak of they be not tedious , and vulgar , sure we see in those passage of very rare colour and form , not elsewhere to be find , for as much as i have either see or read . of these people those that dwell upon the branch of Orenoque , call Capuri and Macureo , be for the most part carpenter of canoas , for they make the most and fair canoas , and sei they into Guiana for gold , and into Trinidad for tobacco , in the excessive take whereof , they exceed all nation ; and notwithstanding the moistness of the air in which they live , the hardness of their diet , and the great labour they suffer to hunt , fish and foul for their live ; in all my life , either in the Indies or in Europe , do i never behold a more goodly or better favour people or a more manly . they be wont to make war upon all nation , and especial on the cannibal , so as none 383 the Arwacas on the south side of Orenoque . the port of the Ciatvani . a river call the great Amana . dare without a good strength trade by those river : but of late they be at peace with their neighbour , all hold the Spaniard for a common enemy . when their commander die , they use great lamentation , and when they think the flesh of their body be putrify , and fall from the bone , than they take up the carcase again , and hang it in the caciques house that die , and deck his scull with feather of all colour , and hang all his gold plate , about the bone of his arm , thigh , and leg . those nation which be call Arwacas , which dwell on the south of Orenoque , ( of which place and nation our indian pilot be ) be disperse in many other place , and do use to beat the bone of their lord into powder , and their wife and friend drink it all in their several sort of drink . after we depart from the port of these Ciawani , we pass up the river with the flood , and anchor the ebb , and in this sort we go onward . the three day that we enter the river , our galley come on ground , and stick so fast , as we think that even there our discovery have end , and that we must have leave fourscore and ten of our man to have inhabit like rook upon tree with those nation : but the next morning , after we have cast out all her ballast , with tug and hail to and fro , we get her aflote , and go on . at four day end we fall into as goodly a river as ever i behold , which be call the great Amana , which run more direct without wind and turn then the other : but soon after the flood of the sea leave we ; and be enforce either by main strength to row against a violent current , or to return as wise as we go out , we have then no shift but to persuade the company that it be but two or three day work , and therefore desire they to take pain , every gentleman 8c other take their turn to row , and to spell one the other at the hour end . Every day we pass by goodly branch of 384 river , some fall from the west , other from the east into Amana , but those i leave to the description in the cart of discovery , where every one shall name with his rise and descent . when three day more be overgo , our company begin to despair , the weather be extreme hot , the river border with very high tree , that keep away the air , and the current against we every day strong than other : but we evermore command our pilot to promise a end the next day , and use it so long , as we be drive to assure they from four reach of the river to three , and so to two , and so to the next reach : but so