, that they may the easy have surprise they in our absence . the next night we have news bring we to Mawranamo , where we yet ride , that there be ten canoas of Spaniard in the mouth of Coritine ; and fear lest they 12 have intend to come to we in the night , we fit all our gun and musket , and keep good watch to prevent they of their purpose ; who , as it be afterward tell we , go along the coast to buy bread and other victual for they in Orenoque , Marowgo , and Desekebe . upon Friday the six of May we weigh and make down the river , and upon Sunday the eight we get clear of it . this river be much like unto Marawynne in breadth , and about fifty league from the mouth to the first fall , full of island as the other : in which three river , Mano , tapuere , and tabvebbi , otherwise Tapuellibi : with six town , Warrawalle , Mawranamo , maapuere , maccha - ribi , Yohoron , and Vaperon . and so clere our self of this coast , we take our course to the island of the west Indies . now i think it not amiss to speak something of this country . and first touch the climate ; though it stand within the Tropic , and something near to the equinoctial , so that the sun be twice a year over their head and never far from they , yet be it temperate enough in those part . for beside that we lose not a man upon the coast , one that be sick before he come there , be nothing sick for be there , but come home safe , thank be to God . and for my own part , i be never better in body in all my life , and in like sort fare it with the rest of the company : for indeed it be not so extreme hot as many imagine . the people in all the low part of the country go naked , both man and woman , be of several language , very tractable , and ingenious , and very love and kind to Englishmen general ; as by experience we find , and upon our own knowledge do report . in the upper country they go apparel , be , as it seem , of a more civil disposition , have great store of gold , as we be certain inform by the great store low Indians , of who we have some gold , which they m bring and buy in the high country of Wiana , be able to buy no more , because they want the thing which now we have leave among they . they keep no order of marriage ; but have as many wife as they can buy , or win by force of their enemy , which principal be the cause of all their war . for bread there be infinite store of casavi , which be as good bread as a man need to eat , and better than we can carry any thither . we spend not a bit of our own all the while we be upon the coast . it be make of a root so call ; which they take and scrape , and crush all the juice out , be poison ; and when it be dry it be as fine flower as our white meal make : which dry as it be , without any moisture , they strew upon a round stone , have a still fire under it , and so it congeal to a cake ; and when it come new off , it eat like to our new white bread . beside there be great store of guiny - wheat ( whereof they make pass good drink ) which after it be once sow , if you cut off the ear , on the same stalk grow another . for victual , we either do not , or at least need not to have spend any of our own : for there be great store of as good fish in the river , as any be in the world . great store of fowl , of diverse sort . tortoise - flesh plentiful , and tortoise egg innumerable . deer , swine , cony , hare , cock and hen , with potato more than we can spend . beside , all kind of fruit , at all time of the year : and the rare fruit of the world , the pine , the plantan , with infinite other variable and pleasant , grow to their hand , without plant or dress . for commodity , though we have but small time to search , because we spend so much time in search the river : yet we have bring example of some , which the country yield in great plenty : as a kind of long hemp like unto steel hemp , fine cotton wool , which the tree yield great store of ; and wherewith the woman make a fine thread , which will make excellent good fustian or stocking . great store of pitch , diverse sort of sweet gum , and west indian pepper , balsamum , parrot and monkey . beside diverse other commodity , which in good time may be find out to the benefit of our 1597 - countrey , and profit of the adventurer , who as yet have venture much , have gain little . now leave the river of Cori tine , pass by saint Vincent , Santa Lucia , and Matalina , we come to Dominica upon the Friday follow , be the thirteenth of May , have lose the bark that come out with we the wednes - tty thy ty - day before . upon Sunday morning , the fifteen of tn may , we come to Guadalupe , where we water at ” ° the Souther part of the island , and have do by night , we set sail , and stand away to the northward , but be becalm all night , and until ten of the clock on Monday night : at which time have a fair gale at east , and after at southeast , we pass along in the sight of monserate , Antigua , and Barbuda . upon the nine of June , be Thursday , we make the island of Flores and Corvo : and the eight and twenty of June we make the lisart , and that night come all safe to Plymmouth , bless be God . between the isle of Barbuda in the west Indies and England we have three mighty storm , many calm , and some contrary wind . and upon the fourteen of June 1597 , there be diverse whale play about our pinnace , one of they cross our stem , and go under , rub she back against our keel : but by none of all these we sustain any loss . thank be to he that govern all thing . write by master Thomas Masham .