we come to a anchor the next day be good Friday in five fathom near the triangle Islands call the carere . and upon the Carenes . Saturday stand to the westward , we stop against the town of Maware , which be a little to the Maware . Westward of the town Comanamo : from whence and from the other town in that bay , which be some 6 or 7 , we have canoas come off to we as before with such thing as they have themselves in use , with parrot , monkey , and cotton - wool , and flax . from whence we depart upon Monday follow the 28 of march 1597 . and pass by the river of euracco and Amano , which open but a small river , and be shall off , we come to marawinne the next day : and find a marawinne channel of three , four , and five fathom , we stand a rtver ' into the river : and the same day come to a anchor some 2 league in against the mouth of cooshepwinne , which river go into Amana . into which , ( understand that there be arwaccawe dwell ) this night we send our boat and come to a town call Marrac one league in : and find the people some - Marrac , a thing pleasant , have drink much that day , be as towne - it seem a festival day with they , yet be they very fearful and ready to run away at the first sight of we , have seidome see any christian before . but assoon as Henry our indian interpreter have tell they what we be , and our intent , they come to we and use we kind , and bring we victual and other thing . and the next day their captain Mawewiron come out into marawinne , with diverse canoas , and trade with we , and we go in again to they on shore , who make very much of we , and carry we from house to house , and make we eat and drink in every house which we come in . and the next day follow be the last of march , have the captain of Marrack with we , we weigh and stand into the river , and about two of the clock in the afternoon come to a anchor some eight league within the river , a little short of a Quiparia a town call Quiparia , the people whereof be caribe : tCmibffae W ^° ’ w ^ en see we come towards their town with ' our boat , begin all to run into the wood , until the captain of Marrac which be with we in the boat , leap overboard and swim on shore unto they , and tell they that we be Englishman , and come in friendship to trade with they . upon who report they come before night six or seven canoas aboard we , yet very fearful , because there be never either ship or Christian see in that river before . the first of April , we weigh Macirria a again , and stand in to the next town call Macirria : town . where come to anchor , there come a canoa from Amano to we , with great store of victual , which canoa we buy : and because we meet with some shold , we be loath to go any far with our pinnace : so there we more she , and the next day at three of the clock in the afternoon , eleven of we ( master Monax have the government of the action , by the captain appointment ) with Mawerirou , Henry , and William of Cawo , in the canoa which we buy , go into the river far to search it so far as we can , and that night get some five league from our ship . and between two village , awodwaier and Mapeributto , we take up our lodging in the wood . the three of April , betimes in the morning , we take our course still unto the river , and in the afternoon come to one house where we find many Indians , where we hire another canoa and four Indians , into the which i go , and one more of our man , and this night get twelve league far , and as before , lodge among the wild beast . on Monday the four of April , we come to the fall of this river about two in the afternoon : and have 8 shoot up some of the rock , we go on shore upon a island , and there confer of our far proceed . And inquire of the Indians that we hire for our pilot of the last house , whether the fall be passable or not : their first answer be , that they have nothing to eat : but we be loath to loose so much labour , and the sight of that upper rich country , which we desire , tell they that they shall have victual of we ( though God know we have none for our self ) who see we so importunate , say far , that the rock will kill the canoas : which they say because indeed they have no victual : which by some be take for sufficient to proceed no far , and so we leave off , and only stay some two hour upon the island , and with the swiftness of the current , fall that night down io league again . though i for my own part offer in that small canoa that i be in , be so leak , that my self do nothing but lave out the water , to lead they the way , and if they see any danger to i , they may choose whether they will come into it or not themselves . for see the country above be rich as we be inform , that their bow be handle with gold , ( be man of a extraordinary stature for talnes ) we shall have take the more pain , and have fare the hard , until we have get up in the country which we see with our eye : for though we have not victual in any sort to carry we up , yet the wood do yield fruit and the palmito tree afford meat , whereby we may have make shift to live , until we have come to the inhabitant , by who we may both be refresh with victual , and also have reap that , which may have do we good as long as we have live . but to return to the rest of our voyage : the day after we go from the fall we come to our ship , which be the five of April 1597 . on Wednesday we fall with our pinnace to Quiparia again : where 9 A . D . * 597 - a rich country . bow handle with gold . we bring she on ground right before the town , and pitch