testimony of the Amazon broad and as much beat , as the way between Salamanca and Validolid : and this be when the great entrance or discovery be make by the great river of the Amazon or Marannon by Pedro de Orsua , and afterwards by other that succeed he : and they suppose that Dorado which they seek , be far up in the country , do not inhabit there , and afterward return without discover Dorado ( which they never find ) and without that great province which they leave . a short description of the river of Marannon or Amazones , and the country thereabouts , as also of the sea of freshwater , take out of a ancient discourse of all the port , creek , and haven of the west Indies , write by Martin Fernandez de Enciza , and dedicate to Charles the emperor , anno 1518 . Arannon lie in seven degree and a half northward of the equinoctial , it be a great river , and have more than fifteen league in breadth eight league within the land . it have many island , and in this river within the land forty league there be near to the say river a mountain , whereupon grow tree of incense , the tree be of a good height , and the bough thereof be like to plumtree , and the incense do hang at they , as the ice do at the tile of a house in the winter season when it do freeze . in this river be take four Indians in a small boat , call in the indian language a Canoa , that come down by the river , and there be take from they two stone of emerald , the one of they be as great as a man hand . they say that so many day journey go upward by the river , they find a rock of that stone . likewise there be take from they two loaf make of flower , which be like to cake of soap , and it seem that 19 A . D . 1518 . they be knead with the liquour of balsamum . all this coast from the cape of S . Austine unto Marannon be a clear coast and deep , but near to the river be certain shold towards the east part . and by the west part the river be deep , and it have a good entry . from this river Marannon , unto the river which be call the sea of fresh water , be 25 league : this river have 40 league of breadth at the mouth , and carry such abundance of water that it enter more than 20 league into the sea , and mingle not it self with the salt water : this breadth go 25 league within the land , and after it be divide into part , the one go towards the southeast , and the other towards the southwest . that which go towards the southeast be very deep and of much water , and have a chanel half a league of breadth , that a carrack may go up through it : and the tide be so swift , that the ship have need of good cable . the river of this port be very good , and there have be some that have enter 50 league within it , and have see no mountains . the Indians of this country have their lip make full of small hole in 4 part , and through those hole be put small ring , and likewise at their ear : and if any man ask of they where they have their gold , they answer , that go up by the river so many day journey , they find certain mountain that have much of it , and from those mountain they bring it when they will have it , but they make no great account of it , for they neither buy nor sell , and among they be nothing but change . in this country they eat bread of root , and Maiz , and they eat certain root which they call aies and batatas , but the batatas be better than the other root , and be raw they have a smell of chestnut : they be to be eat roast . Theise Indians do make wine of the fruit of datetree , which fruit be yellow in colour , and be as great as a little dove egg , and be in season be good to be eat , and of it proceed good wine , and be preserve for a long time . Theise kind of people do make their house with upper room , and they sleep in they , as also all their habitation be in the upper room , and that which be below , they leave open : and also they use certain mantel of cotton wool , and these they tie at the end with rope , and the one end of the rope they make fast to one part of the house , and the other end to the other part of the house : and in these they lie , which be their bed , and these kind of bed be use in ' all India , and there be not in any part of India any chamber that the people do use to lodge in aloft from the ground , nor they make any high room , but only in this part of India : and in all other place they make their house without any loft or chamber , and they cover their house with the leaf of datetree , and of grass . and from this fresh water sea unto Paria , the coast lie west northwest , and be so full of shold that the ship can come near to the land . there be from this river to Paria 250 league . in this fresh water sea , the tide do ebb and flow as much as they do in Britain , and it stand in 6 degree and a half . Paria stand on the other side of the equinoctial towards the north , in seven degree : in Paria the sea flow but little , and from Paria towards the west , the sea do not flow . from the entry of the gulf of Paria unto the cape that lie towards the west , be 35 league , and from thence the coast turn towards the north - east other 35 league , and from thence the coast turn towards the west . before this gulf stand the island of Trinidad , and towards the west do appear the gulf of Paria like to half a round circle , after the fashion of a diameter , and at the end of this circle be the entery inn of Paria , and at this entery there be between the land and the island 8 league , and on the other side there be but little space between the hand and the land , but it be deep , and have a good entry : this hand of Trinidad have in length 25 league , and as many in breadth , and 21 A . D . I5l8 . stand in eight degree , and be inhabit of many people , and as yet not under subjection . here the Indians do use to shoot with bow and arrow which be of a fathom in length , make of reed , which grow in that country , and at the end of they be artificial join a piece of wood very strong , unto the which piece of wood at the end of it , they put a bone of a fish , in place of a arrow head : these kind of bone be hard than diamond , and every one of they be three or four finger long , and they be take out of a fish that have three of these bone , one upon the back , another under every wing : but that which grow upon the back be the strong and the great . in this island the people say that there grow gold : and in this island and in Paria grow reed so great , that they make staff of they and carry of they into Spain . likewise there be popinjays very great and gentle , and some of they have their forehead yellow , and this sort do quick learn to speak , and speak much . there be likewise in the gulf of Paria pearl , although not many , but very good and great .