a speciali letter write from Feliciano Cieza de Carvalsho the governor of Parajua in the most northern part of Brasil , 1597 , to fillip the second king of Spain , answer his desire touch the conquest of Rio Grande , with the relation of the besiege of the castle of Cabodelo by the Frenchman , and of the discovery of a rich silver mine and diverse other important matter . receive your majesty letter bear date the nine of November 1596 . whereby i understand that your majesty do determine to proceed in the discovery and conquest of Rio Grande , accord to the relation which be send your majesty by don Francisco de Sousa , governor general of this realm of Brasilia : together with a copy of a letter , which your majesty send unto we , bear date the two and twenty of march 1596 . Moreover i receive another letter from your majesty bear date the 15 of march 1597 . both which letter be to one effect . it may please your majesty to understand that there be diverse gentleman in these country of as good ability as my self , which seek to live at home only for their ease and pleasure , and be not wont to hazard nor venture their body , life , and good so often time in your majesty service as i have do and common do ; and can keep their good and riches , and not spend nor waste they as i have do , and daily do so wilful : yet nevertheless be spend in your majesty service , i be very glad thereof . for i and they be always ready at your majesty commandment . and as concern your majesty commandment in command i that i shall put to my help hand in the conquest of Rio Grande : although this captainship of Parajua and country where i do thecaptaine - governe do want ability for that purpose , yet never - ° f thelesse your majesty shall always find i ready to s ^^ h - tn do your majesty the best service i can : for it be six degr . 45 very well know how forward i have be always min . of and be in this conquest , and still do put to my s ° u & erly lati - helping hand , as pardy your majesty do under - u e ' stand by a letter which i write to your majesty by my son , bear date the 19 of march 1596 wherein your majesty may understand what good service i have already do therein , and always will be ready to my power to do the like in further of the say enterprise . it may please your majesty to understand that the three of July there be bring unto i a Frenchman a prisoner , who present himself unto i . and i examine of he , he tell i that he come run away from certain french ship man xi 65 e of war , which come upon this coast : and he tell i that he have serve your majesty in the war of France . likewise he tell i that he leave i seven great ship Frenchmen of war ride at a anchor in Rio Grande , and that there be 13 french ship of war more , which have give battery to the the castle of castle of Cabodelo , and land 3 50 soldier all in ' u ^ b the w ^ xte armour > and the battery continue from Friday french . until the Monday follow both by sea and land , and great store of Frenchmen be slay , and two captain of the french . on our side the captain of the castle be slay , and other two Portugal » hurt : other harm they have none . there be but twenty Portugal in the castle , and five piece of ordinance . they mean to have keep the castle , and to have trade with the indian people . So see they can not take the castle , they hoist sail , and go from thence to Rio Grande : and be altogether they be in number 20 sail at a anchor in Rio Grande . and some of they determine after they be new trim and dress , and have take in fresh victual , and stay there until easter , than to depart from thence to the Honduras , and so to burn and spoil some town thereabouts . i certify Manuel Mascarenhas of these information , by my letter , request he to send i with all expedi - the garrison cion those soldier which be in garrison in fernambuck of femam - to ayje i > and to defend this captainship from the ’ enemy . but the friar of the covent will not consent thereunto , nor suffer they to be send unto i . so i be force to make shift with those soldier only which i have in my government and take they with i , and march to the place where the enemy be entrench , and upon Whitsunday in the evening about the country three of the clock , have in my company a negro of ofpetig ^ ar country of Petiguar , which be our guide , he against the bring we where the enemy camp be ; and present Portugal . i do assault they , and slay great store of they , burn 66 t597 - the village and country of those rebel , which do join with the Frenchman , and take many of they prisoner . so they tell i that there be ten great french ship of war which be at a anchor in Rio Grande . likewise i be inform , that there be a Frenchman call Daurmigas , which have discover and find great store of silver in a place call copaoba . the a rich silver silver have be try and melt , it be very good and f : and at fine silver , and there be great quantity . the man which tell i of this have be in the i , and dayesjourney have see it try and melt . and 1 have be my ofParajua . self once in the place : it be but 6 day journey t111 - 717 - 1 from this captainship . furthermore this Frenchman tell i that one Monsieur Mifa a french captain , and a kinsman of the governor and vice - admiral of diepe in Normandy , have one of his arm strike off at the siege of the castle of Cabodelo ; who be depart from Rio Grande , with determination to come back hither again the next year in the month of Januarie follow , and to inhabit in this country of Paraiba , which be 20 league from Fernambuck , because of the great store of silver , which they have already find here . moreover i be inform that a noble man of France call the earl of Villa Dorca do intend to come upon this coast with a great fleet from rochel . it be good that your majesty will send into France to know the certainty thereof . the Frenchman likewise tell i that all the cannibal all the cani - of Petiguar have join themselves in company with ball rfpett - certaine Frenchmen , which be cast away in two with Jt ^ ship upon this coast . the one of these ship which Frenchmen be cast away be one rifole , and the other ship against they be this man . and those Frenchmen which come portusal - upon this coast do join themselves with those cannibal which do rebel , and do divide themselves into two squadron . so i send present to Manuel french ship lade with great store oj silver oar . mascarenhas that he shall send i aid and munition . but he send i word again , that he have none to spare , and that he do purpose with all speed to go himself to Rio Grande ; and that he be not able to furnish himself so well as he can wish , nor to bring his soldier into the field , for lack of shot , powder , and other munition , which he do want . hereupon once more the 29 of July i with my soldier march to the enemy camp , and there join battle with the indian rebel , which be join with the Frenchman that be their leader , i do set upon they , and slay great store of they , and take fourteen of they prisoner . they do report the very same news , which the other Frenchmen do tell i as touch the ship which be in the harbour of Rio Grande ; and how their pretence be to have come and have take we , and spoil the country . but now be put to flight and have receive the overthrow , they can get no victual to victuali their ship : which have be the cause