certainty , that this fire shall be such as we shall never be able to prevent , and assure these fire be dangerous thing and not to be prevent upon the sudden , unless it be afore prepare for and foresee . for when it come upon the sudden and unlooked for , and unprovide for , it bring man into a great amazement and at their wit end . and therefore let all man ride in river in their enemy country be sure to look to be provide before hand , for against fire there be no resistance without preparation . also it be a practice in these hot country , where there be such expert swimmer , to cut the cable of ship : and one night it be practise to cut the admiral cable , and yet the boat ride by the cable with two man in she to watch all the night , and the bwoy only be cut , but not the cable : but after that night , see then our good watch , they never after attempt it . while all these thing pass , our ship ( God be thank ) through the industry of our governor , and diligent labour of our man , begin to be whole lade , and all the best merchandise convey aboard our ship , so that our admiral mean to depart that night , which be the 31 day after our entrance , or else on the next day at the far , and so warn be give to all man to make themselves ready . our admiral be aboard his ship you same morning , espy in the sand right against the place where the ship ride , that there be a small bank of sand new cast up , under which he perceive now and then some people to be : present he take his 59 A . D . I595 « boat and go to the town and call all the captain together , declare that the enemy be about some pretence right against the ship , consult whether it be best to sally out and see what they be do , or depart that evening accord to the former determination . the admiral be of opinion to depart that night , say it be but folly to seek war since we have no need to do it : other affirm , it be good to see what they do , lest the wind may be contrary and the ship not get out , and so our enemy may build upon we to our great disadvantage . well , say the admiral , the matter be not great , for there can be no danger in this sally , for where they work it be within falkonshot of the ship , and if any power shall come against you , the ship may play upon they with 40 piece of ordinance at the least , so that a bird can pass there but she must be slay . i be somewhat unwilling you shall go , for i have not be well these two day , and i be not strong to march upon those heavy sand : they answer all at once , you shall not need to trouble your self for this service , for you see it be nothing and of no danger , be so near the ship , doubt you not we will accomplish this service well enough , and return again within this hour . the admiral answer : the danger can be great , but yet you shall go out strong for fear of the worst . and so the admiral marshal they 275 man French and english , which be under the conduct of Edmund Barker , captain Barker of Plymouth , vice - admiral to captain Venner , captain Addy , and the three french captain all go out together , and they be to march upon a narrow piece of ground to the place whether they be send unto : in the brode part betwixt the sea and the water on the other side , it be not above a stone cast , for it be a bank of sand lie between the river and the sea , so they need not to fear any come on their back or on their side , and before they can not man come , but he must pass by all the ship which no company of man be able to do without present death . the admiral command they at their departure to go no further than the place he send they to , and so he himself go aboard the ship and make ready all the ordinance for fear of the worst , not know what may ensue , although he see no danger may follow . thus we march quiet till we come to the place we be send unto , be right over against the ship : out of which place come some dozen shot , which see we come , discharge and run their way with such as be work within the say platform . so that we come into it and perceive they have begin to lay plank to plant ordinance upon . our admiral command , if there be any such thing , to burn the plank and return in again , which we may have do without hurt of any man finger : but our leader be not content to have perform the service commit they in charge , but will needs express and against their order march on further to fight with certain ensign almost a mile off - , clean out of the reach of the ordinance of all our ship , and where lie the strength of the whole country . when our man begin to draw near those ensign of man , the ensign seem to retire with great speed , which our man follow with such great haste that some outrunning other some , our order be break , and those ensign retire themselves into the force of the whole country , so that our foremost man be in the midst of their enemy year they be aware , which be slay year the rest can come to succour they . the enemy encourage by this , come also upon the rest , which present begin to retire , and the enemy follow they till they come within the reach of the ordinance of our ship , where they be beat off and leave their pursuit . in this conflict be slay captain Barker captain