go in the time of the southeast wind , which be from march forward , i advise thou that thou fall not in more degree than sixteen and a half , because of the sholde call os baixos do Abrolhos , which be very dangerous , and stretch very far into the sea . and also go west from they , that thou keep thy lead go and be often sound . and if thou chance to see the land , and a high hill and long withal , much like to the pike , it be the hill that be call Monte Pasqual . and from thence thou must go to the north , and when thou have bring it southwest of thou , than thou may bear with the land , but with great care to look about thou . mark when thou see the land and come to see a red cliff , then look to the southward , and thou shall see a great smooth coast along the sea , and then on the north side thou shall descry porto seguro . And go along the coast thou shall see the town of porto seguro stand upon the top of a hill ; which hill be a white rock : and on the north side of the say rock there be a very high land . i advise thou that when thou be east and west with the say land , i mean with this rock , that than thou look to the northward , and 79 to avoid os baixos do Abrolhos . monte Pasqual . the place of thou shall see certain rock lie two league off into r a th ® sea > whereon the sea do break , and to the south - ptrto seguro , ward of they thou may come to a anchor against which stand the town , and haste a good place to ride in thirteen in 16 deg . and fathom in sight of the town . one three . and if it be thy chance to arrive in the time of the north - east wind , and come in the height of fifteen degree and two three part , and see not certain hill , 16 degree . than thou must go along the coast be in 16 degree , and under the first high land that thou shall descry , thou a dangerous shall see certain sandy bay along the sea coast : and if rwer in 16 thou have sight of a river in this height , put not thy self saint ' into it , neither bear with the land , for it have many sholde . and off they lie certain sink ground , Baixos de call os Baixos de Santo Antonio . and from hence Santo Antonio . to southward lie porto seguro . i advise thou that go along the coast to the southward , and see such sholde , and the sea to break upon they , as the other which i last speak of , thou shall run along they a sea board of they : and when thou be at the end of they , than the town will bear west of thou : and than thou may go to thy anchoring place as be abovesaid , give these shold a good birth . the course to the haven name Baia do Spirito Santo , that be to say , the bay of the holy ghost , lie on the say coast of Brasil , and the mark thereof . how shall understand that the ship go for Spirito Santo , when it double the sholde os Baixos that have do monzmn be certain set wind with which the tide set . abrolhos , and have bring it self in 20 or 19 degree and a half , than it may hall with the land in 18 or 19 degree and a half , and in twenty . and the say ship must go in this height , because on this coast there be no monzoin . if thou chance to come in the height of 19 degree market on they and see low land to the northwest off thou , than north s , e thou be on the north side of Spirito Santo , and thou SPmt ° ant0 ‘ may make account that it be the land lie over criquare , and over the river call Rio dolce , that be the river of sweet or fresh water . if thou come along the land thou shall find certain high hill : but trust not the first that thou see only . for beside the rest thou shall see a round high hill which be at the cape end , which be call la Sierra de mestre Alvero . take heed that the situation go for this land thou look to the north and thou shall see a river call Rio do Reyes Magos : that be , Aharo . the river of the three king . And come to the Rio do Reyes southward thou shall see present the mouth of the bay to open . at the end of this hill on the south side , thou have a point of a rock , which be call a punta do tubaron . and on the south side of the bay it have two or three black high hill , and in the midst of the bay thou shall go in westward . i advise thou that in go in thou take heed of a shall which lie in the mouth of the bay : thou must leave it to the southward of thou , and then ply to double a certain island which lie within , and thou must leave it to the northward of thou : and when it bear on the north or Northeast , thou may come to a anchor : for all be clean ground . and if thou chance to come by this course , and fall in 20 degree , and see many hill , and one among the rest very high and craggy : it be call a Sierra de Guari - sierra de parim , that be , the hill of guaraparim , and see another inzo ^ degrees hill on the north side , which be call a Sierra de Pero a Sierra de cam : both these lie on the south side of Spirito Santo . Pero Cam . and from these hill thou shall see a little hill name guaipel . and when thou see these hill , thou shall see three little island together , lie to the southward : and then from these thou shall see another rocky , bare , and round island : and to the land off this island thou shall see a great bay . if thou will thou may anchor xi 81 f here safe . and if thou will go in , thou shall bring thy self east and west with the hill , and so thou may go in . and thou shall leave a low land to the north a ilha de of thou , which be call at ilha de Repouso , that be , the Repouso . isle open rest . anj thjs jsje jietaiong the coast : and thou may be bold to ride betwixt it and the main , give it a breadth off . from these three island to Spirito Santo be 12 SpiritoSanta league : and run northwards to come to Spirito stand in 20 gantoj thou shall see another island , and shall go a sea - egrees . board of it , and by and by the