that they be mighty hinder in their intent , and dare not come any more to attempt we . and the Indians be so dismay , that in haste they will have no more help nor aid of the Frenchman . so by these mean of necessity the Indians must submit themselves unto we , consider they be quite spoil and overthrow for a long time . likewise they have inform i touch the silver mine which be find , that it be most true . for those french ship which be in Rio Grande have lade great store of the oar . wherefore i certify Manuel de Mascarenhas of the frenchmens news , and how every thing do stand ; wish he to make ready four ship and three hundred soldier , and so to take the harbour of Rio Grande , be now clear and void of the enemy : and to search out the situation of the place , and where be best to fortify and to build some fort for the defence of this river , where need shall require . hereunto Mascarenhas send i word , that when he go himself , and find it true which have be report touch the silver mine , that than he will send both man and ship . therefore your majesty must give order , that the rest of the governor shall aid and assist i in these war : otherwise of my self i be not able to do more than i have already do in defend of this country against our enemy which be many . it may please your majesty to be advertise , that from time to time i have write unto don Francisco de Sousa governor general of this realm , who be in Baia , as concern these Frenchmen of war : but he will not answer i to any purpose , because i do write unto he for such thing as i do want , which be shoot , powder , man , and munition requisite for your majesty service and safeguard of this captainship . for here be neither shot , powder , nor any thing else to defend we from our enemy ; nor any that will put to their help hand for the defence of this country , and the service of your majesty . and therefore it be needful that your majesty shall commit the charge and government into the hand of Diego Sierva , with express charge that all the captain and commander upon pain of death obey he and be ready at all time to aid and assist he in your service . otherwise this country can be keep and maintain , have so great war continual as we have , and be trouble withal . for this Diego Sierva be a very good soldier , and have good experience ; and be fit to govern this ; country . your highness be also to send he commission with express commandment to follow these war ; otherwise this country can be keep , but daily they will rebel . for here be none that will serve your majesty so just as he will do : who will have a great care in any thing which shall concern your majesty service touch the estate of this country . for the governor Sousa do two fort to be build at Cabodelo . the country spend your majesty treasure in build his own ingenios or sugar - mill . and those captain which your majesty intend to send hither must bring with they shoot , powder , and all kind of weapon , furniture , and munition for the defence and safeguard of this country , and for the conquest of Rio Grande . for there be no kind of munition in all this country to be have , if occasion shall serve . it be also good that your majesty shall send order for the build of a couple of fort or castle at Cabodelo , for they be very needful for the defence of the enemy , which daily do war against this captainship . for that man which shall govern this country , if he be no more fortunate than i have be hitherto , shall not miss one time or another , but he shall .. loose all the country . if don Francisco de Sousa have danger jday send i t ^ 086 two hundred and fifty soldier which i to be lose . do send for , which be in garrison in the castle of arrecife , which do nothing but spend your majesty victual and treasure , and have not send they to Baiha , the war where there be no need , these war of Petiguar have of etiguar . bene end long ago , and have save your majesty a great deal of charge which you have spend in follow of a new cap - this conquest of Rio Grande . i have choose one captain John de Matas Cardoso to be governor of Cabodelo , who be a very sufficient man . a great con - furthermore , it may please your majesty to under -^ cun6the stand > that the chief friar of this monastery of saint government of Antony have complain on i to the lord governor the indian general , and have cause great strife and debate between town . he anj i touch the government and rule of these indian town . for the friar will command and govern both the Indians and their town as well in ecclesiastical as Temporali cause , as touch the punishment of the body of such as be offender . but i have resist they in your majesty name , and have allege , that none but your majesty must rule and govern they and their country , and that the town appertain 70 to your majesty , and not unto the friar . but the governor have write a letter unto i , signify that he have pronounce a sentence against i in the friar behalf , which be this . the king our master have send a decree and certain statute touch the good government and order to be execute and keep in those indian town : and that upon sight hereof i shall present banish all the mamaluke and white man which dwell in any of those indian town with all speed , and that none of they from hence forward shall enter into the say village , without commandment and consent of the say friar . so this sentence be present unto i by the reverend father Custodio , prior of Sant Anton of Brasil , with a further postscript of the governor import these word ; i do likewise charge and command you the governor of Parajua , that present upon sight hereof you shall restore those village and house which you have burn and destroy in the last war , and likewise the town of thetowne of S . Augustine , and that you shall build they again at and au & ustine - your own proper cost and charge : for the friar allege that these town be give they , by a decree send they from pope pius quintus , that the say friar shall govern and rule they . on the other side i have pronounce another sentence against the say friar , in your majesty name , and for your majesty , allege that those town , village , and subject appertain and belong unto your majesty , and that in temporali cause i be to punish those offender , which shall rebel against your majesty : and as touch ecclesiastical cause that the vicar of this cathedral church shall rule , govern and instruct they in the christian religion . so we both have appeal unto your majesty herein , and your majesty may peruse all our write , and then determine that which shall be best and most profitable for your majesty service and enlargement of your crown . for through these broil the inhabitant of this Parajua forsake their house and dwell place , and so do some of the friar , because they can be suffer to rule and govern . also the Indians have complain against i , because i have burn their village in this last rebellion . wherefore if your majesty do not send some order for this country and see into these case , it will breed great dissension and rebellion among we , and we shall be ready to cut one another throat before it be long . thus i think good , accord to my humble bind duty , and for the service of your majesty and quietness of this realm , to certify your majesty the truth of the whole matter ; hope in short time that your majesty will send some good order to qualify these broil : for there be great hatred and malice among we . Jesus Christ preserve and keep the royal person of your majesty with long health , as it please he . from the captainship of Parajua this present 20 of August . 1597 . Feliciano Cieza de Carvalsho .