hereafter follow a rutty from the say river of plate to the strait of Magelane . he cape of Santa Maria be in 35 degree . from thence to the cape de Santo Antonio , which be on the other side of the river , be 30 league northnortheast , and southsouthwest . and this be the broad place of the river . and this cape be in 36 degree and a half , and it be a black gross land . and thou must mark that 25 league a seaboord the mouth of the river there lie certain sand , which be call Baixos de los Castellanos . he that fall with the cape of Santa Maria must take good heed to go southeast until he be in 36 degree , and from thence southsoutheast until 36 degree and a half , give the say shold de los Castellanos a breadth : and also take heed of the flat of the cape . and when he find 40 or 45 fathom , and russet sand , than he must go southwest and by south , until he be in 40 degree : where he shall find great store 85 Baixos de los Castellanos . Baia Anegada . Punta de Tierra Ilana . Baia sin fondo . Cabo redondo . Puerto de los leones . Puerto de los . leone in 44 degree wonderful better . of weed , which come from the coast , and a man may go 20 league from the shore in this sound . from the cape de Santo Antonio to the cape de Arenas gordas be eight and forty league , and the coast lie north - east and Southwest , and by east , and by west : and in the first eighteen league be the river call Rio de Santa Anna , which have at the entrance certain flat and shold , give they a good breadth , and come not nigh they by much , but keep thy self in forty fathom to go sure . from the cape de Arenas Gordas to the cape of Sant Andre be one and thirty league : it lie north - east and by east , and southwest by west : i mean when thou be in the midst with a equal distance from they both . and between both the cape be many bay and river , but all full of sandy sholde . from the cape of Sant Andres to the bay call Anegada , that be , the sink bay , be 30 league eastnortheast , and westsouthwest . it stand in 40 degree , rather less than moor . from the bay call Baia Anegada to the point of the plain land be 25 league northnortheast , and southsouthwest . this point lie in 41 degree and a half . and from this point to Baia sin fondo , that be to say the bottomless bay , be 35 league eastnortheast , and westsouthwest . this bay stand in 42 degree and a half , rather less than moor . and from Baia sin fondo to Cabo Redondo , and Puerto de los leones , be 37 league Northnortheast and Southsouthwest , somewhat to the north and south . and if thou mean to go out from thence with a compass about after the manner of a half circle or a arch , so thou may pass through the Baia sin fondo along the shore : for there be water enough . note that from the river of plate to this place be never a good harbour for great ship . from this place to Puerto de los leones the coast be clean , and a man may come nigh unto the land : and it be a low land with white cliff . this harbour be in 44 degree . and as a man go thither , after he be in 43 degree or more , he must have a care to look out for certain small rock which lie near the land , and lie north of the harbour . from this harbour to Cabo de Matas , or the cape of shrub , be 30 league north and south , half a point to the east and to the west : and betwixt they there be a great bay very long : and to the northwest 18 league from Cabo redondo be a river lie east and west : and it be call Rio de Camarones , or , the river of shrimp . you shall know when you fall with this river , by see many white spot upon the water , and they be small shrimp . from this river to Cabo redondo the coast lie northwest and by north , and southeast and by south . this cape be in 45 degree and a half large . from this say cape to Cabo Blanco and Barancas Blancas that be to say , to the white cape and white cliff be 32 league lie north and by east and south and by west : and they stand in 47 degree . from this cape the coast lie towards the north side northwest about three league all full of white cliff steep up : and the last cliff be the big both in length and height , and show to be the sail of a ship when it be under sail . Theise white cliff be 6 in number . take good heed of these little rock . Cabo de Matas . Rio de Camarones . Cabo redondo in 45 degree if a half large . Cabo Blanco and Barancas Blancas in degree . and this cape have in the face thereof a certain round land that show to be a island afar off : and it have certain point of rock hard by it . and two cable length from the land be 25 fathom water . above these white cliff the land be plain and even : and it have certain wood . there be much people in the country : eop ^ t0 of who i wish thou to take good heed . take heed of . from this cape the land lie north and south ; which be the first fall of the cape : and in the face thereof it have a point of rock , which show themselves . and on the south side of this cape be a good harbour and road , and there be a bay in the midst . ' Morro de Santo Yves , in 50 degree large . Rio de Cruz . Rio the gale - gps and the mark thereof . from Cabo Blanco to Puerto de San Julian be 37 league , and the coast lie north and by east and south and by west . this harbour of saint Julian have in the entrance certain high hill , which afar off seem to be tower . on the south part of the entrance the channel be deep in the midst : and thou must borrow near the north side then to the south . within the harbour be two island : thou must come to a anchor hard to they . this haven lie in 49