degree . and between Cabo Blanco and this harbour be the island of ascension , and they be eight . from this say harbour to the hill of saint Yves be 35 league ; the coast lie north - east and Southwest : it be a low land and even and have only one hill , and it be a plain from one part to the other , and have certain cliff to seaward , and to the southward , and to the south side it have certain little copy : it stand in 50 degree large . from the hill of saint Yves to Rio de Cruz be 8 league , Northeast and Southwest : and on the northside of the river it have a very high land , and in the top it be plain and lie two league broad , lay out along north and south , and the downfall on both side have as it be saddle . this cape have many point of rock lie 4 league into the sea : and when thou have sight of this land , it be good for thou to keep from it a good breadth off . And go from thence thou may run in sight of the land in 25 fathom . from Rio de Cruz to Rio de Galegos be 25 league , Northeast and Southwest ; and it stand in 52 degree and of a degree . it have a certain high land : and in the high of the say land it be plain , and to the north - east it be a pike up , and have certain white cliff : and on the top and something downward it be black : at the foot of this high land to the eastward thereof it have certain step like a lather : and to the sea it have a sharp point that lie into this cape almost half a league . to the southward of this cape where the lather be , there be a little bay , which be the entrance 88 of Rio de Galegos , it eb and flow here 12 fathom . a man must have a great care how he go in here for the cause abovesaid : but he must keep himself out and not anchor in it . in the mouth of Rio de Galegos it from Rio de Galegos to the streit of Magelan the flow iz fa - coast lie northnorthwest and southsoutheast : 8 league thome . unto Cabo de la virgin maria , which be the entrance into Cabo de la the strait : and 4 league before a man come to this vir ^ n maria . cape there be white cliff with certain black spot in they ; and they be cause with the fall down of the water . here be water enough , and thou may come to a anchor hard aboard the shore , and haste a good defence for a southwest wind . and the cape it self be the high land of all , and be like to cape saint Vincent in Spain : and it have on the east side a ledge of rock , and a point of sand , with diverse sand which show themselves at a low water : thou must take great heed here and give they a good breadth ciudad de hombre de jesus call by m . candish port famine , because he half a league or a quarter of a league off , until thou bring the cape westnorthwest , and than thou may fiundal the 0 stir away southwest . and when thou come to the - 0 0 0 - mtsh . and ’ . - mish , and low land and into ten or twelve fathom , than art fa tqwne thou over against la purification . and half a league within the land the city of number de Jesus be build , east and west with the say cape right against a cliff , which come from the say cape , and go within the streit . this cape stand in 52 degree just . and this be to be take for a warning , that he that come near this cape , and pass by it as i have say with the wind at Northeast , or any other wind off the sea incline to the southeast , must not come to anchor , but present be sure to pass by ; because in self utter abandon , and ruin . where hombre de jesus stand . Southwest wind reign much here in summer . from march summer this place be much subject to Southwest wind , which blow right in : and they put a man from his tackle , and make he to loose his voyage . and from march forward there blow favourable wind from the fi ™ ™ baptize the sea to go from this cape to enter into the streit , from favourabie for this say cape the streit go in to the northwest 14 the streit . Cabo de San Gregorio a good roadstead for any wind from the northwest to the southwest . the indian about gape de san Gregorio in the streit be very treacherous . the second strait call Nuestra sen - nora de Gracia . Punta de santa Anna in 53 deg . and a half . Rincones . la Ciudad deal don Philippe : which be now utter ruin . league : and the channel wax narrow and narrow unto the first strait which run eastnortheast , and westsouthwest . And come out of the mouth thereof a man must keep himself a point to the northward , because there be rock and shoald . and if you see bed of weed , take heed of they , and keep off from they : and after you be past this straight you must stir westsouthwest 8 league unto Cabo de San Gregorio , which be a high white cliff , and be a good road for any wind from the northwest to the southwest . but man must beware and not trust the Indians of this cape : for they be subtle and will betray a man . from this cape begin the second strait which be call Nuestra sennora de Gracia , and lie eastnortheast and Westsouthwest 3 league . And come out of this strait thou shall see 3 little island , lie west off " this strait : thou may go between they , for there be no danger : provide always that thou keep well off from the bay on both side , lest thou be imbay . and from these island thou must keep forward in the channel Westsouth west two league : and then the coast lie north and south unto 53 degree and a half , unto a place call Punta de Santa Anna : and to the northwest thereof in a corner or nook ( which be one of the rincone or nook ) be the town build call la Ciudad deal don Philippe . thou must come to a anchor to the northward thereof , after thou be past the castle and a great tree .