south end of the same captain Venner and his company , himself and his company in the midst of the town , and captain Barker and captain Addy at the other end of the town , give great charge , that no man upon pain of great punishment and loss of his share , shall break up or enter into any warehouse , without order and direction from the admiral . and this commandment be as well keep as ever any be keep , where so great spoil and booty be find : for it be not know in all the time of our be there , that any disorder be commit , or any lodge or warehouse break open , or any spoil be make , or pillage of any thing ; which be a note much to be observe in such a action : for common mariner and soldier be much give to pillage and spoil , make great account of the same then of their share . order be put in all thing , we keep a very sure watch this first night , and the morning be come , our admiral and captain Venner , with the rest of the captain , go about the town , and give order for the fortify of it with all expedition : so that within two day it be surround with post and plank , all that part of the town next the main land , at least nine foot high ; for ( God be thank ) we find provision in the town , sufficient store for it . now it be to be understand , that this town be environ on the one part by the sea , and on the backside by a river that run behind it ; so that to come to it by land , you must enter it by a small narrow passage not above forty pace over at a high water . at this passage we build a fort , and plant in it five piece of ordinance , which we take out of the first fort we win at our come into the harbour . now we have the town in possession , our admiral send for the Hollander by his chyrurgian , which have be bring up in that country , a man know their condition , and sober and discreet of his own carriage . at his first come aboard of they , they seem to stand upon their own guard and defence , for they be three great and strong ship : but he use himself so , that they at the last will he to come into the great of their ship , which be above 450 ton . than he declare to they our intent of come thither , and that they shall be there as sure from any show of violence or injury offer they , as if they be in their own house , and if they shall think so good , his admiral will fraught they for England , if they will be content with fraught reasonable , and as they shall agree , and it shall be at their own choice whether to go or not , he will not force they , unless it be to their benefit and good like . although this people be somewhat stubborn at the first , as that nation be in these cause , yet be satisfy with good word and good deal they come aland , and after conference have with the admiral , they be so satisfy , that they go through with a fraught : and then we join with they , and they with we , and they serve we as true and as faithful as our own people do , both at watch and ward , by sea and all other service . within two day after our come in , about midnight , a great number of Portugal and Indians with they , come down upon we with a very great cry and noise ; but God be thank , we be ready for they : for our admiral suppose some such assault , have provide all our musket with hailshot , which do so gall both the Indians and the Portugal , that they make they present retreat . and this be to be note , that there 1595 - was both the horse and his rider slay both with one of these shot . our man follow they some five or six score , but no further . we lose in this conflict but only one man , but have diverse hurt . what be lose of their part , we can not tell , for they have before day , after our retreat , carry away all their dead . within three or four day after our come in appear before the harbour 3 ship and 2 pinnace , the pinnace be somewhat near , descry our flag , and one of they come in , which be a french pinnace , declare all the rest to be french bottom ; which our admiral will shall come in : and so they do . Theise be Frenchmen of war , and come thither for purchase . the captain come aland , and be welcome ; among who be one captain John Noyer of diepe , that the year before have take in our admiral at the hand of Mona in the west Indies , where his ship be cast away , come out of the east Indies . to this man our admiral offer great kindness , and perform it , and be not ungrateful for his former benefit show unto he . this captain desire of our admiral to bestow upon he his ship lade of fernambuc - wood , which fie grant he , and also his pinnace , and more , give he a caravel of about 50 tun , and bid he lade she with wood also ; which with other benefit he grateful receive . to the other two captain he grant their lading of wood , the one captain be of diepe , the other of rochel . the captain of diepe confess that he meet Abraham Cocke Abraham certain month before , and be distress for want of Goeke g / nng water , give he some , and go with he to a water ojpiate , meet place where he have water enough , and so depart from mthall he , say that his man be very weak . the come in of these ship do much strengthen we ;