Martin Garzia to the mouth of the river be eight league in pass along on this side to seek one of the mouth of the river Parana , as it be hereafter describe . but you have need first to harbour in a bay , which be in the very cliff or Barranca , and you must stay for the full sea . and if you fall into the Rio uruay . mouth of the river which be call uruay , you must leave it on the right hand , i say on the north side . and forthwith leave the say mouth forward towards the west , you may enter into the first mouth although it seem narrow ; or rather you may enter into any of Parana be then the mouth : for all of they meet together in Parana , great river . which be the main river . and he that desire to go from the isle of Martin Garzia to the river of Palmas , which be the best of all Rio de las these arm , or mouth to speak more proper , be to palmat ' shape his course to the west , and come over to the other shore , and sail along the coast northnorthwest he shall discover the mouth of this river of Palmas : and he must enter hard by los juncale , which lie on the south side : and afterward within be very deep sound . all these mouth of this river which be 5 , be full of shold towards the east above the space of two league . and if the course of the water be not swift there , you can not enter into they , as i have already say , and you must pass all along with much heed and foresight . and if peradventure you have pass cape saint marie and be come over to cape Blanco , consider it , that it be so even and smooth a land , that you can scarce discern it a league from the main , unless it be a very clear day : and after this sort the coast lie low unto the river de Buenos aeres . and from thence the coast lie somewhat high unto the entrance of the river de Palmas : all the coast run as i say before . and all along this coast be naughty people , which eat those which they kill , and many tiger . from the isle of Martin Garzia unto Sant Salvador be nine or ten league . this be a island which stand two league within the first mouth : where Sebastian Cabota take possession . and this country be very well people by a people call Carios ; and you must beware of all these people : for they be your deadly enemy . the most southerly mouth of Parana call Rio de Palmas be sixteen league long , and it have many turn , and many palm or datetree grow near it , whereupon it be call the river of palm tree : and forthwith it enter into the river Parana , as soon as these sixteen league be finish . all the other arm contain likewise sixteen league in length , save one small or narrow arm , which be call the river de los beguaes ; for this contain forty league in length . from this 99 cape Blanca on the south side of the mouth of the river of plate a very low and even land . man - eater upon the south shore . sant Salvador a island ten league off . Sebastian Cabota . 16 . league . Santo Spirito 50 league from Rio de Palmas . los tenbuis a people . 15 . league . the Quiloacas 20 . league . this town perhaps may be the town ofSantaAnna , 15 . league . the mequaretas a people . 20 league . the mepenes 30 league . 8 . league . the river Paraguai . the 7 . current . the town of Piquiri or Picora 170 league up the river of Parana . you must enter by the mouth of the river of Palmas unto Santo Spirito , the way be fifty league : you be to pass still along the cliff . as you enter on the left hand which be on the west shore up this river there be many isle , lake and small river , and many Indians which be your enemy . from Santo Spirito unto a people which be call los tenbuis be fifteen league . this be by the narrow arm whereby they pass into the river Parana : it be the more because it be the long way . from the tenbuis by this narrow arm upward unto the Quiloacas , which be another nation , be twenty league ; and all up this river be great store of people . from the Quiloacas , to a place where the Spaniard now have build a town , be fifteen league . from this town unto the people call los Mequaretas be twenty league . here be many shold which continue thirty league . all these thirty league be sink land : where be many isle , flat , and nation , which be our enemy . from the Mequaretas unto the people call mepenes be these thirty league . and from hence begin the coast of the firm land unto the mouth of the river Paraguai ; save that there be eight league more of sink ground . from the mepenes unto the mouth of the river of Paraguai be thirty league : it be a river that can be mistake although it have many arm and island and danger , it have a mark two league beneath the mouth on the east side , to wit , a high land , where be 7 point , which we call the 7 current : and immediate above these current there be a island as you pass up the river over against the point aforesaid stand the mouth of Paraguai . this mouth be very plain to be find in seek whereof a man can be deceive . from this mouth the river of Parana be divide , which be a very great river : and it go unto the town of Piquiri , which be a hundred and seventie league : and it run all this space ioo north and south , and in the way be many flat and shoald ; and great store of people , which be a bad nation , although they be divide . from the place where these two river be divide , that be to say , from the mouth of Paraguai be sixty league unto the city of Assumption . this be a good river , and better to sail then all the rest of the river , which be in this country . and from this town to los xaraes be 200 . league , very well inhabit with people of diverse nation , which serve the Spaniard . the two famous voyage