a rutty which declare the situation of the coast of Brasil from the isle of Santa Catelina unto the isle of Santa Catelina . Rio Grande . Puerto de Biaza , or Laguna . Isla de raparo . the mouth of the river of plata , and all along up within the say river , and what arm and mouth it have to enter into it , as far as it be navigable with small bark . Rome the isle of Santa Catelina , ( which be in 28 degree of southerly latitude ) unto Rio Grande be forty league . this river by another name be call Ygai . the island of Santa Catelina be six league in length : it have two small hand on the north side between the main land and it : and on the south side it have a shall of rock , which lie hide very near unto the point of the isle . you be to pass between the firm land and the point of the isle . from Santa Catelina to the haven of Biaza , which by another name be call la Laguna , be twelve league : it be a good haven within : but you must stay the full sea to enter into it , because it have shoalde in the mouth , and it may be know by a small island which lie a league into the sea which be call la Isla de raparo , that be the island of succour or defence , and you must ride there to search the channel . from this harbour unto the river before name there Rio Grande . be not haven for a ship to harbour it self . and Rio Grande have many shoald in the mouth thereof . it be a river that none but very small ship can enter into . certain and this river divide the country of the people call hand 12 cario from other nation which be call guavaes . and league distant from this river unto the entrance of the mouth of they from the mouth river of plate it be all a plain land , and very low : you ° plate ’ which " must sa ^ e a ons two or three league into the sea from aree ^ n the sh ° re > untiu you come to certain island which lie number . twelve league from the mouth of the river of plate . from Rio Grande unto these island be 68 league . and from these island unto the cape of saint marry the coast run north - east and Southwest , somewhat incline a point to the south . the island be three , and may be know as you come from the sea by two point , which show like the ear of a conie : you may ride between they and the main . from Rio Grande to the cape of saint Marie be 80 the cape of league : and the cape may be know by one island s - ma ™ - which lie from it a league and a half into the sea . you may sail between the main and that island , be - from cape cause there be above 8 or 9 fathom water . the cape of saint marie . saint mary stand in 3 5 degree of southerly latitude . Isla de the cape of Santa Maria upon the point thereof have a little hill which stand over against the isle of Seales . from this coast of Santa Maria you must coast along they the way to land always on the north shore , and along the same be en . ter certain bay . from the cape unto the river of Solis be ' ten league , the coast run east and west . there io league stand a island over against the mouth thereof . from within the this river of Solis unto los tres mogote which be on e - the main land be three league . and from los mogote tes league ’ unto the isle of saint Graviel be other 8 or 9 league saint Graviel more : all this distance run east and west . Theise 8 league . be five small island : to ride here you must keep somewhat near the main within a harquebus shoot half a league before you come at the island , and straightway you shall see a cross stand on the say land , and there be a harbour for some wind . from saint Graviel unto the river of Sant Juan go Rio the 8 . Juan along the same coast , i say on the north shore , be three 3 league . league : it be very well know by the break cliff which it have , which be a white hill . the entrance into this river be very dangerous : because it be shallow , and none but very small ship can enter into the same : the entrance thereof be on the west side very near the land , great carack may ride within the harbour . from this Martin gar - river unto the isle of Martin Garzia be three league : it zia 3 league . xi 97 g be one island alone , and you must sail along the coast on the north shore : and after you be come unto the island , i say , over against the same , you shall have three fathom water , and on the west side it have a little creek where you may ride . he that desire to cross over the river of plate unto Rio de Buenos the river de Buenos aeres from the isle of saint Graviel , aeres on the must shape his course Southwest : and the cut over be Sthe river f sixteen league and upon his arrival on the south plate . shore of the river , he must seek a channel of three fathom water , and strait he must go along the coast until he come to a break cliff and a point like unto the firm land , which be distant from this channel three or four league : and when thou see this break cliff , the first keep thou a league from it . here upon this river of spanish colonic Buenos Aeres be the first colony that don Pedro de Oliver of ” Mendoza plant . this river lie very much hide : Buenos Aeres , because it be not see , it be very shallow at a low sea , wherefore you must come in with the first of the flood . from the isle of Martin Garzia unto certain small the isle of island which be call the isle of saint Lazarus be two San Lazaro . league ) these be shoald : and to go thither you must go hard aboard the main . for there go the channel : all this be to be pass on the north shore , and with small bark , and with good heed . from the isle of