the well govern and prosperous voyage of m . James Lancaster , begin with three ship and a galley - frigat from London in October 1594 , and intend for Fernambuck , the port - town of Olinda in Brasil . in which voyage ( beside the take of nine and twenty ship and frigate ) he surprise the say port - town , be strong fortify and man ; and hold possession thereof thirty day together ( notwithstanding many bold assault of the enemy both by land and water ) and also provident defeat their dangerous and almost inevitable firework . here he find the cargazon or freight of a rich east indian carrack ; which together with great abundance of sugar , brasil - wood , and cotton he bring from thence ; lade therewith fifteen sail of tall ship and bark . n September 1594 the worshipful m . John wat , aiderman , m . Paul Banning , aiderman , and other of worship in the city of London , victual three good ship ; to wit , the consent , of the burden of 240 ton or thereabouts , the Salomon , of 170 ton , and the virgin , of 60 ton : and appoint for commander in this voyage , m . James Lancaster of London , 43 a ship with 80 ton of wine take . another prize with 40 tun of wine take . gentleman , admiral of the fleet , m . Edmund Barker of London , viceadmiral , and m . John aude of Poplar near London , rearadmiral , have in their say ship to the number of 275 man and boy .. be full furnish with all needful provision , we depart from Blackwall in October follow , keep our own coast , until we come into the west country , where we meet with such gust and storm , that the Salomon spend her mast at the range of Dartmouth , put into harbour ; but by the earnest care and industry of the generail and other have charge , she be short again provide . which do , have a pleasant gale for our purpose , we put forth from Dartmouth the last of November follow . but contrary to our expectation , not fifty league from our own coast , we lose the Salomon and the virgin , by a storm of contrary wind that fall upon we : yet be alone , in hope to meet they about the canary or cape blank , we keep on our course to the canary , but can hear no tiding of our consort ; which great grieve we . thence we go , bear for the isle of tenerif , where in the morning early we have sight of a sail , which be becalm under the shore , be tow with their boat a head , have one other at her stern . for this sail we man our boat , appoint our man well for fight , if need shall require . the Spaniard see our boat come , enter they , and leave the ship , seek to save themselves by flight : but our man pursue they so fast , that they board they , and bring they with their ship to our general . this ship be lade with 80 ton of canary - wine , which come not unto we before it be welcome . we keep and man it , ply that day , and the next night thereabouts . the very next morning we have sight of one other ; to who in like manner we send our boat : but their gunner make a shot at she , and strike off a proper young man arm ; yet we inforce she to yield , and find 40 ton of wine in she . the Spaniard have their free passage , and a acquittance for the delivery of their wine , be all set on shore upon tenerif , make a quick return of their long voyage intend into the west Indies . hence we depart towards cape blank ; and before we come thither , we meet again with the virgin our rear - admiral , who man tell we for very truth , that the Salomon be return for England : enforce so to do , by spend her mast the second time . which when our man understand , they be all in a maze , not know what to do , and say among themselves that their force be but small when all our strength be together , and now we have lose the one half of our strength , we be not able to perform the voyage : and therefore some of they come to the captain , ask he what he will now do , see the Salomon be lose , the one half of our strength , give he counsel ! to bear up for the west Indies , and prove there to make his voyage , because his first plat for want of strength be clean overthrow . the captain hear this new novelty , as not unacquainted with the variable pretence of mariner , make they this answer : sir , i make know to you all at my come out of England what i pretend , and that i mean to go for Fernambuck , and although at the present we want one of our ship , yet ( God will ) i mean to go forward , not doubt but to meet she at the appoint place , which be either at cape blank or the island of cape Verde : for i be assure that m . Barker the captain be so resolute to perform this voyage , that his mast be repair , he will not fail to meet we , and it be no wisdom for we to divert our course , till we have seek he at those place where our appoint meeting be : for the divert of course be the overthrow of most of our action . and i hope you will be all content herewith : for to go any other course than i have determine , ( by God help ) i will not be draw unto . with these reason and many other show , they rest all satisfy : and at our come to cape Blank ( God be praise ) we four y twenty sail of ship y of caravel take by the Salomon . Maio . a gally - frigat carry out of England in piece . the