dine with i : and after dinner , the Spaniard have receive the canoa , which be sink , aland , and stone to ballast they , which my boat carry they , and all other thing to their like and content , they depart from i . the general also depart , and his company , who be go , i divide the sugar and ginger among my people , which Spanish the Spaniards give we : and after spend the day in present . ordinary business . the 10 day in the morning , our skiff go a fish , whereof we eat as much to supper as serve the company : the rest we salt for store , and to prove if they will take salt or not . the 11 day , betimes in the morning , our skiff go again to fish , and take great plenty . about seven of the clock i go aland , take with i the master , and other of our best man , to the number of 22 person , and travel to the place where our people before have thing find find many great jar of earth , and decay habitation in the uland of the Indians , and tree , be dead and wither , of sweet wood . from that place we see over the top of a narrow wood , a fair plain , which at the request of the master and the rest , i go with they to see . we pass through a thick and perilous wood , before we come to the suppose plain : and when we come to it , we find the low part thereof high than any of our head , and so mossy under foot , that we slip to the knee many step , which so weary we , that for my part , i be very sick , and so haste aboard , leave the master with 15 man , which cut a tree of sweet wood , and bring many piece thereof aboard . 185 they leave the harbour in 27 degree and 50 . min . about 3 afternoon , m . Walker and many of our man be ashore , the wind come fair , and we lay out a warp to the north - east , and begin to wind ahead . after we lay out another warp with a bend , and wound to the plat , and so rid by it with one anchor all night . the 12 day about five a clock in the morning , we set sail , and as we run out betwixt the ledge of rock and the main , in eight fathom water , as we be cat our anchor , the catt - rope , stopper , and all break ; so that we be glad to let slip all the cable , and cast off our boat and skiflfe to weigh the same . after we have stand out a good way , the admiral be under sail : then cast we about and go room with the admiral which weave we , who send in his pinnace and the Francis to help out our boat ; so by the help of the admiral pinnace , with her sail , we have our boat the soon , and about 12 a clock at noon have take in the anchor , cable , our long boat , skiflfe , and all , and put out all our sail bear after the admiral , which go hence south by east . about six a clock at night , be thick weather , we lose sight of the land , be four league off or thereabouts . all night it be but little wind : yet go we our course south by west . the 13 day about seven afore noon , the wind blow at southsoutheast , and be very foggy ; with which gale we stand in larboard tack west , till ten a clock the same forenoon . then have we sight of the land ahead , all along ( for it wax clear weather ) it show a far off like white cliff , but be all sandy hill , and bay along the sea side . at one a clock after noon we be in j 6 fathom water , and within half a league of the shore , where we see several fire make by the Indians to give warning to the other people within the land , as we suppose . than we cast about , and stand off southeast by east till midnight , that the wind come large : then go we our course south by west till next morning . the 14 day we go our course south by west , have sight of the land at six a clock in the morning 186 1582 . about seven league off : and so go till six at night , that we see land again seven league off west , and the wind shift to the south . than we cast about , and stand off eastsoutheast at seven at night for a while : then come up the wind at northwest , and blow agood . the 15 day in the morning , the admiral be ahead , as far as we can almost see she , by who default i know not ; and be little wind we can not get to she till four of the clock after noon : than we hail she , and stand in between the southsouthwest and the southwest till six at night , that the wind be variable , and foul weather . than we cast about , and sound in 23 fathom soft oaze , and stand off a while Northeast ; and present cast about again , and go south by east larboard tack , and southsoutheast , among all night : find at four in the morning 15 fathom sand . the 20 day , about ten a clock afore noon , we go aboard the admiral ; viz . m . Walker , the master , the pilot , the two merchant , and my self , be direct so to do by the general . upon our come the general be go to dinner , where we also dine with he . have dine , the general call we