the voyage of m . John winter into the south sea by the strait of Magellan , in consort with m . Francis Drake , begin in the year 1577 . by which straight also he return safe into England the second of June 1579 . contrary to the false report of the Spaniard which give out , that the say passage be not repasseable : write by Edward Cliffe mariner . they set forward from Plymouth the 13 . of December . n the year of our lord i ^ Tl ' the r9 * of September there go out of the river of Thamis over the land end one good and new ship call the Elizabeth , of 80 ton in burden : in company whereof go also a small pinnace be 12 ton in burden call the Benedict . the say ship with her pinnace arrive at Plymouth : in which haven be three ship more , one call the pelican in burden 120 ton , be admiral of the fleet : a bark call the marigold in burden thirty ton , with a flyboat of 50 ton . Theise ship have in they 164 man , and be victual and furnish with all kind of necessary provision to make a voyage into the south sea . we set sail the 15 of November , but be put into Falmouth by contrary wind : and afterward be constrain to put back again to Plymouth to repair the great hurt which diverse of our fleet have sustain in that tempest : and at length the 13 of December we set forward from thence upon our voyage . the five and twenty of December we have sight of cape Cantin : this cape lie in the latitude of 32 . cape Cantin . degree and 30 . minute upon the coast of Barbary , Asaphi , near to a town call Asaphi . the land all along this coast be high and great mountain . sail from the say cape Southsouthwest about 18 league , we find 148 a little island call mogador a english mile distant from the main , we send our boat to sound the depth , and at the return thereof we understand by our man that the haven be without danger , have five fathom of water fist by the rock enter in upon the point of the island : wherefore we enter in with our whole 1577 - mogador a island on the coast of Barbary . fleet the 27 of December . the moor that be on the main see our ship ride there , come from the mountain to behold we : who our general , m . Francis Drake espy , show to they a white flag in token of friendship , and send his boat to shore with one of our man , which not long before have be captive in the country , and partly understand their language , to talk with they . when the boat come to shore , the say man go on land to they : to who they show many token of friendship , cast up their eye to heaven , and after look down upon the ground , as though they have swear by heaven and earth , promise peace . that do two of they come aboard to our general , and our man stay on shore for a pledge . these two moor , after they have make good cheer , and receive certain gift of our general go to shore again , and our man come aboard also . but the crafty slave have devise to betray we , come the next day along the sea side with certain camel as though they have bring some merchandise to traffic with we : to who our general send certain of our man in the boat to learn what they have bring , give charge that none of they shall go on land . but the boat be near the shore one of our man more hasty than wise leap to shore ; who the moor immediate take by force , and set he on horseback carry he away into the mountain , so that we see he no more after that time . in the mean time we set up a pinnace in the island , whereof we bring 4 loose out ^ re . lmse of England : which be finish , the last of December out we weigh , and come out of the north part of the England . 149 island , the same way that we come in : for the south chanel be dangerous , have but 8 foot at low water , Mogadorin ^ i and be full of rock . this island stand in 31 m degree 2 of latitude , be one league in circuit , not ‘ inhabit ; and have infinite number of dove upon it . at sea we meet with a contrary wind , so that we beat oflf and on , till the 4 of Januarie 1578 , at which time a more favourable wind begin to blow at Northeast , and then we set our course Southsouthwest , till cape de Guer on the 7 of Januarie we come as high as cape de Guer , m 30 degree , stand in 30 degree of latitude . here our new pinnace take 3 spanish fisherboat , call cantars . from thence we run Southwest and Southsouthwest , carry the say cantars along with we , till the 10 of the say month , at which time we find our self in 27 degree 4 min . be 10 league westcape bojador southwest from cape bojador , which lie on the main in Africa . from thence we run south and by 4 . min . ‘ west , until the 13 day at noon , at which time we have sight of Rio del oro , where our pinnace take a Portugal caravel . the 15 , the marigold take a caravel de las about cape de las barbas . and thence we run along CateBlanco coast be low sandy land , till we arrive at cape in 20 degree . Blanco . this cape show it self like the corner of a 30 min . wall upright from the water , to they which come from the northward : where