be another poor town , which have six or seven time be spoil by the Frenchman . from hence there lie a high way to the new kingdom of Granada , but it be above seven hundred league in length , A . D . 1572 - 87 . SantaMartha . a mighty ridge of mountain . the rich • valley of Tagrona . Rio de Hacha . Cabo de la Vela . great store of pearl . 237 A . D . 1572 - 87 . this way be travel very seidome , because the Indians will usual set upon the traveller . moor up into the land the country lie plain , and there be some gold , and a few town inhabit with Spaniard , whereof i have have but small notice , and therefore i let they the lie of Margarita . pass . the next place of any account be the hand of Margarita , where there be but few Spaniard inhabitant . this island of Margarita be very small , and lie four league from the main land : it have heretofore be very rich of gold and pearl , and so will have continue till this present day , have it not be spoil by man of war , because it stand so far from the main land , notwithstanding they yet gather good store of excellent horse and mule . pearl . upon this island be breed better horse and mule then in any other part of the Indies , therefore they carry they from hence to Peru , albeit they have great store of horse in Peru , but not so good . and because we have begin to speak of the hand of Margarita , you be to understand , that to the north more than 70 . Hands . of the foresay coast of Tierra firma lie above seventie hand be all very little , except Cuba , Hispaniola , and boriquen , or Sant Juan de Puerto rico , which he of boriquen , although it be not very great , yet be it inhabit by the Spaniard . the other small hand have be inhabit by the Indians , and have have good store of gold , pearl , and emralde ; but the Spaniard have destroy most of those Indians from off the earth , and in many of those hand there be nothing of any value , wherefore i have small cause to entreat any Hispaniola . further of they . but Hispaniola be a hand of great bigness , and have be very full of people , and abound with mine of gold and with pearl , but now all be the indian kill themselves , rather than they will serve the tyrannous Spaniards . waste away . it be at the Spaniard first come thither , as full of inhabitant as any place of that bigness in the whole world , yet now there be none left : for they be man of so hard a heart , that they murder themselves rather then they will serve the Spaniard : for be man under so small civil governe - 238 1572 - 87 . mean as they be , never be there any people know of so resolute and desperate mind : for oftentimes a great number of they be together over night , they shall be find all dead before the morning : such extreme hate do this brutish people bear against the Spaniard , that they choose rather to die the death , than to endure their insolence . it happen on a time , that a Spaniard call certain Indians to work in the mine ( which labour of all other do most grieve they ) they , rather than they will go , offer to lay violent hand on themselves : which the Spaniard perceive say unto they : see you will hang your self rather than go a pretty jest . and work , i likewise will hang my self and will bear you company , because i will make you work in a other world : but the Indians hear this , reply , we will willing work with you here , to the intent you may not go with we into another world : so unwilling be they of the Spaniard company . so that of all the inhabitant of this hand there be none that escape death , save only these few , which come to pass by the mean of this one Spaniarde , otherwise they will have hang themselves also . some of these people be yet live , but very few . this hand of Hispaniola be for the most part call the he of Sant Domingo , because the chief city thereof be so call , which be the first city in all the west Indies that be inhabit . there be in this city above eight hundred fire - house of good building inhabit by gentleman of great wealth . this hand be unhealthful , for it rain here the most part of the year . the riches that now this hand afford be sugar ( for sugar , hide , here be many ingenios or sugar - house ) and great coppermine . store of hide by reason of the abundance of cattle ; there be copper mine also , which be the cause that they have such store of copper - money , for their gold mine be all ' exhaust , and the gold which they have come from other place . this hand be ( as be beforesaide ) destitute of the first inhabitant , and the 239 Spaniard lack man to work in their ingenios , and to look unto their cattle , they be force to bring negro negro thither out of Guinea , where they have so ' increase increase , that the hand be now as full of they , as ncreas .. t be of natural inhabitant ; so that the Spaniard carry negro from this hand to the main land and there sell they . the chief victuali that they have i root call in this hand , be a kind of root call Juca , which be juca ' eat as it come new out of the ground be present death : but first they boil it and after press