find a great current as we suppose by the rippling water , which after we find to be a ordinary tide , the flood set to the northwest , and the ebb southeast , and here we have but 18 . fathom water , and no land to be see : it be on the southermost part of the showle that lie in about 11 . degree , but hail south off again , it present deep unto 50 . fathom , and after hail southeast and by east , and east southeast , we sound , but have no ground in 120 . fathom . the 21 . of October we fall with land upon the coast of Guinea , in the height of 8 . degree , a very high land , but of no great length : it be the high land over sierra sierra Leona . Leona . we draw in to the land , and find near the shore more water than in the off : at the northern end of the high land our ancker about a mile , and somewhat more from the shore in 11 . fathom . to go into the harbour of Sierra Leona we do borrow upon the south side , have no ground in 10 . fathom , half a mile from the shore . upon the northside of this harbour be very shoal water , but on the southside no fear , more than be to be see . the 23 . day be Sunday we come to a anchor in the bay of fresh water , and go ashore with our boat , we speak with a Portugal , who tell we that not far off there be negro inhabit , and that in give to the king a Botija of wine , and some linen cloth , he will suffer we to water and wood at our pleasure . but 205 our captain think it not good to give any thing for that which they may take free , land , and certain of our man with they , whereupon the Portugal and the negro run all away into the wood . than we return again into our boat , and present go and land in another place , think to have fetch a walk , and so to come to our boat again . but wander through a little wood , we be sudden and unaware a ton of they upon a town of the negro , whereupon they strike up negro . their drum , give withal a great shout , and off go their arrow as thick as hail . we be in number about 30 . caliver , and 20 . with our weapon , which we also let fly into the wood among they , and what hurt we do , we know not . then we return to our boat , and take wood and water at our pleasure , and reasonable store of fish , and a strange among the rest we hail up a great foul monster , monster . who head and back be so hard , that no sword can enter it : but be thrust in under the belly in diverse place , and much wound , he bow a sword in his mouth , as a man will do a girdle of leather about his hand , and likewise the iron of a boar spear . he be in length about nine foot , and have nothing in his belly , but a certain quantity of small stone , to the value of a pottle . another great the four of November we go on shore to a town “ oh / thne ™ ™ Negros , which stand on the southeast side of er egro . the harbour , about a sacar shoot from the road , which we find to be but late build : it be of about two hundred house , and wall about with mighty great tree , and stake so thick , that a rat can hardly get in or out . but as it chance , we come direct upon a port which be not shut up , where we enter with such fierceness , that the people flee all out of the town , which we find to be fine build after their fashion , and the street of it so intricate , that it be difficult for we to find the way out , that we come in at . we find their house and street so fine and clean keep , that 206 it be a admiration to we all , for that neither in the house nor street be so much dust to be find , as will fill a egg shell . we find little in their house , except some matt , goard , and some earthen pot . our man at their departure set the town on fire , and it be burn ( for the most part of it ) in a a town quarter of a hour , the house be cover with burnt - reed and straw . after this we search the country about it , where we find in diverse plain good store of rice in stack , rice in stack . which our man do beat out , and bring a board in the husk , to the quantity of 14 . or 15 . ton in both our ship . the 17 . day of November we depart from Sierra Leona , direct our course for the strait of Magellan . in this harbour diverse of our man fall sick of a disease in the belly , which for the time be extreme , but ( God be thank ) it be but of small continuance . we find also in diverse place of the wood , image set idol . upon pin , with diverse thing before they , as egg , meal , rice , round shoot of stone , and diverse other thing , such as the barbarous people have to offer up . when we come near to the line , we find it nothing so hot as it be at Sierra Leona , by reason of the great wind and rain . about the 24 . day of November one or two of our man die , and other also be sick of a Calentura . the second day of January we have a little sight of land , be about the height of 28 . degree to the southward of the line . the 4 . day we fall with the shore high and bold , in 30 . degree , and a terse , little more or less . all of it to the northward be a high land , but to the southward it do present fade , and be a very low land , and all sandy . about six league from the