moisture , for when their wing be dry , they can fly . from the first day of our departure from the island of cape Verde , we sail 54 . day without sight of land , and the first land that we fall with be the coast April . of Brasil , which we see the five of April in the height 33 - agree . o £ 33 . degree towards the pole antarctike , and be discover at sea by the inhabitant of the country , 106 1578 . they make upon the coast great fire for a sacrifice ( as we learn ) to the devil , about which they use conjuration , make heap of sand and other ceremony , that when any ship shall go about to stay upon their coast , not only sand may be gather together in shoald in every place , but also that storm and tempest may arise , to the cast away of ship and man , whereof ( as it be report ) there have be diverse experiment . the seven day in a mighty great storm both of lightning , rain and thunder , we lose the canter which we call the Christopher : but the eleven day after , by our general great care in disperse his ship , we find she again , and the place where we meet , our general call the cape of joy , where every ship take in some cape of water . here we find a good temperature and sweet air , a very fair and pleasant country with a exceed fruitful soil , where be great store of large and mighty deer , but we come not to the sight of any people : but travel further into the country , we perceive the foot of people in the clay - ground , show that they be man of great stature . be return to our ship , we weigh anchor , and run somewhat further , and harbour our self between a rock and the main , where by mean of the rock that break the force of the sea , we rid very safe , and upon this rock we kill for our provision certain seawolve , common call with we seal . from hence we go our course to 36 . degree , and t ^ ir entrance enter the great river of plate , and run into 54 . and 55 . fathom and a half of fresh water , where we fill our water by the ship side : but our general find here no good harbour , as he think he shall , bear out again to sea the 27 . of April , and in bear out we lose sight of our flyboat wherein master Doughtie be , but we sail along , find a fair and reasonable good bay wherein be many , and the same profitable abundance of island , one whereof have so many seal , as will at the seal . 107 the file - boat cast off and burn . the people of the country . least have lade all our ship , and the rest of the island be as it be lade with fowl which be wonderful to see , and they of diverse sort . it be a place very plentiful of victual , and have in it no want of fresh water . our general after certain day of his abode in this place , be on shore in a island , the people of the country show themselves unto he , leap and dance , and enter into traffic with he , but they will not receive any thing at any man hand , but the same must be cast upon the ground . they be of clean , comely , and strong body , swift on foot , and seem to be very active . the eighteenth day of May our general think it needful to have a care of such ship as be absent , and therefore endeavour to seek the flyboat wherein master Doughtie be , we espy she again the next day : and whereas certain of our ship be send to discover the coast and to search a harbour , the marigold and the canter be employ in that business , come unto we and give we understanding of a safe harbour that they have find , wherewith all our ship bare , and enter it , where we water and make new provision of victual , as by seal , whereof we slay to the number of 200 . or 300 . in the space of a hour . here our general in the admiral ride close aboard the flyboat , and take out of her all the provision of victual and what else be in she , and hail she to the land , set fire to she , and so burn she to save the iron work : which be a do , there come down of the country certain of the people naked , save only about their waste the skin of some beast with the fur or hair on , and something also wreathe on their head : their fence be paint with diverse colour , and some of they have on their head the similitude of home , every man his bow which be a ell in length , and a couple of arrow . they be very agile people and quick to deliver , and seem not to be ignorant in the feat of 108 war , as by their order or range a few man , may appear . Theise people will not of a long time receive any thing at our hand ; yet at length our general be ashore , and they dance after their accustom manner about he , and he once turn his back towards they , one leap sudden to he , and take his cap with his gold bane off his head , and run a little distance from he and share it with his fellow , the cap to the one , and the band to the other . have dispatch all our business in this place , we depart and set sail , and immediate upon our set forth we lose our canter which be absent three or four day : but when our general have she again , he take out the necessary , and so give she over near to the cape