number of seal , as may seem incredible to any man that have not be there , some of they be 16 foot long , not fear the presence of man : for the most of our man be upon the island , for the space of 15 day to set up a pinnace , during which time the seal will come and sleep by they , and rather resist our man , then give place , unless mortali blow force they to yield . when our pinnace be build , we go to another island , where we do water , and afterward depart the first of Januarie 157 9 , and run towards the north till the 20 of the say month , and then we arrive at a island which lie on the coast of Brasil , near to a town call sant Vincent inhabit by the Portugal . the say town lie 24 degree southward , almost under the Tropic of Capricorn . here , by reason of foul weather we lose our pinnace , and 8 man in she , and never see they since . here also our ship be in great 160 danger , by the mean of a strong current , which have almost cast we upon the shore before we be aware , insomuch that we be constrain to anchor in the open sea , and break our cable and lose a anchor , and present let fall another anchor ; in weigh whereof our man be sore spoil . for the capstan run about so violent with the rise of the ship in the sea , that it throw the man from the bar , and break out the brain of one man : one other have his leg break , and diverse other be sore hurt . at last we goat up our anchor and set sail , and run into a place call Tanay , where we ride under a island and take in wood and water . and while we stay here , there come 3 Portugal aboard we in . a canoa , to know what we will have , or of what country we be . to who our captain make answer : that we be Englishman , and have bring commodity for their country , if they will traffic with we : whereat they great marveil . for they say that they never hear of any english ship to have be in that country before ; and so they go to land again , have one of our man with they to speak with the governor of the town , and we keep one of they for a pledge . Shortly after there come another canoa aboard we with one Portugal and all the rest naked man of the country : of who we have two small ox , one young hog , with certain hen : also pome - cytrons , limon , orange , and other fruit of the country . for the which our captain give to they , linen cloth , comb , knife , and other trifle . in the mean time the governor of the town send word that we shall have nothing , unless we will bring our ship into the haven . whereunto our captain will in no case consent : for all their practice be to have get we within their danger , nevertheless we come somewhat near the town with our ship , as though we will have go in ; but we never mean it . here we take in our man ; and set the Portugal xi 161 l A . D . I579 - a dangerous current . Tanay a ptace in Brasil . the isle of SantSebastian about the Tropic of Capricorn . cape sant Augustine . the isle of Fernando de Loronha . the sea of weed , near the Tropic of Cancer . their arrival at ilfoord - combe in Devonshire . pledge on land . after that we go to a hand call the isle of Sant Sebastian ; where we take fish . here the Portugal have betray we , if a Brasillian one of their slave have not be . for he steal from they , and show unto we by sign , that the Portugal be come with their canoas to take we , as it fall out in deed : for the next morning they show themselves with 12 or 16 canoas , some of they have 40 man in they . the same night two of our man run away with our boat to the Portugal . and thus we come away from thence towards our own country the 17 of march : and have sight of the cape of sant Augustine , lie in 8 degree to the southward of the line . after that we have sight of a island lie within 3 degree of the equinoctial , call the isle of Fernando de Loronha . we cross the equinoctial the 13 of April , and have sight of the north star the 19 of the say month . the 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 of may , we sail through the sea of weed , about the space of 100 league , be under the Tropic of Cancer . from whence we keep our course towards the north - east , until we have the pole raise 47 degree . the 22 of may we run Eastnortheast . the 29 we sound and have 70 fathom with white oaze ; have the north pole raise 51 degree . the 30 of may we have sight of saint Ives on the north side of cornwall , and the 2 of June 1579 we arrive at ilfoord - combe in devonshire . and thus after our manifold trouble and great danger in have pass the strait of Magellan into the south sea with our general m . Francis Drake , and have be drive with he down to the southerly latitude of 57 degree , and afterward pass back by the same strait again , it please God to bring we safe into our own native country to enjoy the presence of our dear friend and kinsfolk , to who be praise , honour , and glory , for ever and ever . amen . Edward cliff , mariner .