of good hope . the cape of the next day after be the twenty of June , we harbour our self again in a very good harbour , u ‘ call by Magellan port S . Julian , where we find a port . Julian . gibbet stand upon the main , which we suppose to be the place where Magellan do execution upon some of his disobedient and rebellious company . the two and twenty day our general go ashore to the main , and in his company , John Thomas , and Robert Winterhie , Oliver the master gunner , John Brewer , Thomas hood , and Thomas Drake , and enter on land , they present meet with two or three of the country people , and Robert Winterhie have in his hand a bow and arrow , go about to make a shoot of pleasure , and in his draught his bowstring break , which the rude savage take as a token of war , begin to bend the force of their bow against our company , and drive they to their shift very narrow . in this port our general begin to inquire diligent of the action of m . Thomas Doughtie , and find they not to be such as he look for , but tend rather to contention or mutiny , or some other disorder , whereby ( without redress ) the success of the voyage may great have be hazard : whereupon the company 109 be call together and make acquaint with the particular of the cause , which be find partly by master doughties own confession , and partly by the evidence of the fact , to be true : which when our general see , although his private affection to m . Doughtie ( as he then in the presence of we all sacred protest ) be great , yet the care he have of the state of the voyage , of the expectation of her majesty , and of the honour of his country do more touch he , ( as indeed it ought ) then the private respect of one man : so that the cause be thorough hear , and all thing do in good order as near as may be to the course of our law in England , it be conclude that m . dough tie shall receive punishment accord to the quality of the offence : and he see no remedy but patience for himself , desire before his death to receive the communion , which he do at the hand of m . Fletcher our minister , and our general himself accompany he in that holy action : which be do , and the place of execution make ready , he have embrace our general and take his leave of all the company , with prayer for the queen majesty m . Thomas and our realm , in quiet sort lay his head to the block , doughty where he end his life . This be do , our general ’ make diverse speech to the whole company , persuade we to unity , obedience , love , and regard of our voyage ; and for the better confirmation thereof , will every man the next Sunday follow to prepare himself to receive the communion , as christian brethren and friend ought to do , which be do in very reverent sort , and so with good contentment every man go about his business . August . the 17 . day of August we depart the port of the strait saint Julian , and the 2o . day we fall with the strait or of Magellan . fret of Magellan go into the south sea , at the cape or headland whereof we find the body of a dead man , who flesh be clean consume . the 21 . day we enter the strait , which we find to have many turn , and as it be shutting up , as if there be no passage at all , by mean whereof we have iio i that the wind often against we , so that some of the fleet recover a cape or point of land , other shall be force to turn back again , and to come to a anchor where they can . in this strait there be many fair harbour , with store of fresh water , but yet they lack their best commodity : for the water be there of such depth , that no man shall find ground to anchor in , except it be in some narrow river or corner , or between some rock , so that if any extreme blast or contrary wind do come ( whereunto the place be much subject ) it carry with it no small danger . the land on both side be very huge and mountainous , the low mountain whereof , although they be monstrous and wonderful to look upon for their height , yet there be other which in height exceed they in a strange manner , reach themselves above their fellow so high , that between they do appear three region of cloud . these mountain be cover with snow : at both the southerly and easterly part of the strait there be island , among which the sea have his indraught into the strait , even as it have in the main entrance of the fret . this straight be extreme cold , with frost and snow continual ; the tree seem to stoop with the burden of the weather , and yet be green continual , and many good and sweet herb do very plentiful grow and increase under they . the breadth of the strait be in some place a league , the breadth of in some other place 2 . league , and three league , and the itreight of in some other 4 . league , but the narrow place have ° se and a league over . the 24 . of August we arrive at a island in the strait , where we find great store of foul which - abundance of can not fly , of the bigness of goose , whereof we * e kill in less than one day 3000 . and victual our self thorough therewith . 57 degree and a terce of southerly latitude . Botero wit that another have find this place all island . m . winter separate and return . the trending the 6 . day