Instructions give by the right honourable the [ he . 75 + 1 lord of the counsel , to m . Edward Fenton esquire , for the order to be observe in the voyage recommend to he for the east Indies and Cathay . April 9 1582 . irst you shall enter as captain general , into the charge and government of these ship , viz . the bear Gallion , the Edward Bonaventure , the bark Francis , and the small frigate or pinnace . 2 item you shall appoint for the furnish of the vessel in the whole , to the number of 200 able person , account in that number the gentleman and their man , the minister , chirurgeon , factor , etc which say number be no way to be exceed , whereof as many as may be , to be seaman ; and shall distribute they into every vessel , as by advise here before your go shall be think meet : provide that you shall not receive under your charge and government , any disorder or mutinous person , but that upon knowledge have , you shall remove he before your departure hence , or by the way as soon as you can convenient avoid he , and receive better in his place . 3 item , for the more and better circumspect execution , and determination in any weighty cause incident in this voyage , we will that you shall take unto you for assistant , captain Hawkins , captain ward , m . Nicholas Parker , m . Maddox , m . Walker , m . Evans , Randolph Shaw , Matthew Taiboys , with who you shall consult and confer in all cause , matter , and action of importance , not provide for in these instruction touch this service now in hand . and in all such matter , so handle , argue , and debate , we think that convenient always to be execute , which you shall think meet with the assent also of any 4 of they , the matter have be debate , and so assent unto , in the presence of your 163 say assistant . and in case that such conference and debate the opinion of the aforesaid assistant be find in effect any way to differ , than it be think meet , that all such matter so argue upon , shall rest to be put in execution in such sort as you shall think most meet , have the assent of any 4 of they , as aforesaid . and if any of these assistant shall die , than the number of the one half of the survivor to join with the general captain for consent in all thing aforesaid . 4 of all which your assembly and consultation , for the matter aforesaid , we think it very convenient , that a particular and true note shall be keep , for which cause we appoint master Maddox minister , and if he shall decease , than the general with half the assistant survivor , to name one to keep a book of all such matter as shall be bring in consultation , and of all such reason as shall be propound by any person , either on the one side , or on the other : what be resolve on , and by who consent , who dissent there from , and for what cause . in which book he shall in the begin of the note of every such assembly , set down particular the day , and the place , if it may be , the name of the person then present , and upon what occasion the say consultation be appoint or hold , and shall have to every act , the hand of the general , and of all , or so many of the say assistant as will subscribe : which book the say master Maddox , or the other upon his decease appoint in his place shall keep secret , and in good order to be exhibit unto we , at your return home . 5 item , if there happen any person or person employed in this service , of what calling or condition , he or they shall be , shall conspire , or attempt private or public , any treason , mutiny , or other discord , either touch the take away of your own life , or any other of authority under you , whereby her majesty service in this voyage may be overthrow or impugn : we will therefore , that upon just proof make of any such 164 instruction to Edward Fenton a . d . 1582 . treason , mutiny , or any other discord attempt as aforesaid , the same shall | be punish by you , or your lieutenant , accord to the quality and enormity of the fact . provide always , and it shall not be lawful neither for you , nor for your lieutenant to proceed to the punishment of any person by loss of life or limb , unless the party shall be judge to have deserve it by the rest of your assistant , as be before express , or at the least by four of they . and that which shall concern life to be by the verdict of twelve man of the company employ in this voyage , to be impanele for that purpose , with the observation of the form of our country law in that behalf , as near as you may . provide , if it shall not appear , that the forbear of the execution by death , shall minister cause to increase the fact of the offender , than it be better to convince the party of his fact , by the oath of 12 indifferent person , and to commit he to hard imprisonment , until the return . and aswell of the fact commit by any , as also of the proof thereof , and of the opinion of you , and your assistant , and the manner of the punishment , the register shall make a particular and true note , in the book of your consultation , as be before appoint . 6 item , you shall not remove captain William haw - kins your lieutenant , master captain luke ward your viceadmiral , or captain of the Edward Bonaventure , nor captain Carlile from his charge by land , who we will m . Carlile not to refuse any such service as shall be appoint to he uPm occasion by the general and the council , nor any captain of other mass not in * t vessel from their charge , but upon just cause due prove , and by consent of your assistant , or of four of they at the least . 7 item , for the succession of the general , governor of this whole voyage , if it shall please God to take he away , it be think meet that there shall be the