well condition , stow the same again . in the mean time , my self , and other in our boat , scrape off the worm , and wash the rudder , and part of one side of our ship . after dinner , the master , pilot , and i , go ashore , and observe the sun at noon , which be pass , with our net we draw plenty of diverse sort of fish , and go from that bay to the water place : from thence , aboard the generail , which have take physic , and give they and the Francis fish for their company , and so go aboard , where our company have rummage aforemast : so that this afternoon we take in two boat more lade of stone afore mast . the sixth day in the morning , before six of the clock , we see a sail which go towards the southward , the admiral not have knowledge thereof . i go aboard , and certify he ; who appoint i to go and bring she in , and to take captain Parker 182 and some of the galleon man into the Francis , and the admiral skiff with we : so we give her chase , and take she six league to the leeward of the place we ride in . than not be able to fetch the road again , we anchor in the sea . i intend to come away in the pinnace , and leave the Francis , and the prize together , be ready to depart , the wind blow at south a stout gale , and rain ; so that about six of the clock , we anchor in the road , where our ship rid . after we have take they , and that captain Parker and i be aboard , we have much talk with they before they come to the ship ; and be anchor there , the chief man be carry aboard the general , which be a gentleman , name don Francisco de Torre Vedra , nephew to the governor of the river of plate , name don John de Torre Vedra . we find a Englishman , name Richard carter Richard bear in limehouse , who have be out of England four and twenty year , and have be near twelve ta ^ en - tn year dwelling in the river of plate , at a town name prize . ascension , three hundred league up in the river , whither they be now determine to go and inhabit , have two woman , and two young child , seven friar , the rest boy , and sailor , to the number of one and twenty person . the number the old friar be have in great reverence among the 1 in the rest : insomuch that they call he the holy father . r ’ he be abide in no place ; but as visitor he go visit from monastery to monastery . the substance of all the speech be , that the spanish fleet be before the strait of Magellan , as they think ; for they be depart six week pass from the river of Jenero , where they have be seven month to refresh and winter , and that these be not of that company , but come out of Spain the 26 of May 1582 in a bark of fourscore tun , and fourscore person , of purpose for the river of plate . 183 the friar be eighteen in number , can not agree , and their bark be a ground at Spirito santo , like to be lose : therefore the old friar buy this small bark of 46 tun , at a port name Spirito santo , in Brasill ; and so divide themselves : and come from thence , lose company at sea : but they think they be before at the river of plate . after his speech , i go and appoint ( by the general order ) man to remain aboard the prize with captain Parker , and bring one of the Portugal sail away with i , and come aboard , where i find that our man have fill water all day . the 7 day in the morning the general send for i ; where he show i and m . Maddox certain article which the friar and mariner Spaniards be examine of ; which tend altogether to the knowledge of the spanish fleet intent , and of the mean whereby we may be discover by the way of the river of plate by land to Peru . in this time come the rest : after who come it be debate , whether it be best to take the boat and people with we or not . which be not determine ; but refer till further examination . then be it determine to pass by the strait , notwithstanding the Spaniard be there , but not to set up forge , nor to build pinnace , but water , and so thorough . the eight day afore noon m . Walker and i go aboard the admiral to dinner , where be determine to discharge the spanish bark , name our lady of pity , and all the man , except Richard carter the english man , and John Pinto a Portugal , which dwell at the river of plate . after dinner , the generail appoint i and captain Hawkins to see they all set aboard their ship , and to receive from they certain necessary , which willing they impart with we , and to leave they satisfy . which do , i return aboard . the 9 day , be Sunday , in the morning , i send m . Shaw and m . Geffries aboard the admiral , to peruse the Spaniard letter : wherein they find the estate of the 184 1582 . fleet which be in the strait of Magellan , as by the note thereof appear . about ten of the clock the generail , m . Maddox , captain Hawkins , and captain Parker , come aboard of i . the general begin to reprove my quarter master for grudge of victuali for the Francis . which be answer : and he well satisfy . then send i for the old friar and don Francisco ; who all