go to Tydore before he come to ternate , the king will have nothing to do with we , because he hold the Portugal as his enemy : whereupon our general resolve to run with ternate , where the next morning early we come to anchor , at which time our general send a messenger to the king with a velvet cloak for a present , and token of his come to be in peace , and that he require nothing but traffic and exchange of merchandise , whereof he have good store , in such thing as he want . in the mean time the vice - king have be with the king accord to his promise , signify unto he what good thing he may receive from we by traffic : whereby the king be move with great like towards we , and send to our general with speciali message , that he shall have what thing he need , and will require with peace and friendship , and moreover that he will yield himself , and the right of his island to be at the pleasure and commandment of so famous a prince as we serve . in token whereof he send to our general a signet , and within short time after come in his own person , with boat , and canoas to our ship , to bring she into a better and safe road than she be in at present . in the mean time , our general messenger be come to the court , be meet by certain noble personage with great solemnity , and bring to the king , at who hand he be most friendly and gracious entertain . the king purpose to come to our ship , send before 4 . great and large canoas , in every one whereof be certain of his great state that be about he , attire in white lawn of cloth of Calicut , have over their head from the one end of the Canoa to the other , a cover of thin perfume mat , bear up with a frame make of reed for the same use , under which every one do sit in his order accord to his 125 A . D . » 579 - the king of ternate offer himself and his kingdom to the service of the queen of England . the great and strange canoas of the king of ternate . the king of ternate come to visit sir Francis . Drake . saga a kind of meal . dignity , to keep he from the heat of the sun , diverse of who be of good age and gravity , do make a ancient and fatherly show . there be also diverse young and comely man attire in white , as be the other : the rest be soldier , which stand in comely order round about on both side , without who sit the rower in certain gallery , which be three on a side all along the canoas , do lie off from the side thereof three or four yard , one be orderly build low than another , in every of which gallery be the number of 4 . score rower . these canoas be furnish with warlike munition , every man for the most part have his sword and target , with his dagger , beside other weapon , as lance , caliver , dart , bow and arrow : also every Canoa have a small cast base mount at the least one full yard upon a stock set upright . thus come near our ship , in order they row about we , one after another , and pass by , do their homage with great solemnity , the great personage begin with great gravity and fatherly countenance , signify that the king have send they to conduct our ship into a better road . soon after the king himself repair , accompany with 6 . grave and ancient person , who do their obeisance with marvellous humility . the king be a man of tall stature , and seem to be much delight with the sound of our music , to who as also to his nobility , our general give present , wherewith they be pass well content . at length the king crave leave of our general to depart , promise the next day to come aboard , and in the mean time to send we such victual , as be necessary for our provision : so that the same night we receive of they meal , which they call Sagu , make of the top of certain tree , taste in the mouth like sour curd , but melt like sugar , whereof they make certain cake , which may be keep the space of ten 126 1579 - yeere , and yet then good to be eat . we have of they store of rice , hen , unperfect and liquid sugar , sugar cane , and a fruit which they call figo , with store of clove . the king have promise to come aboard , break his promise , but send his brother to make his excuse , and to entreat our general to come on shore , offer himself pawn aboard for his safe return . whereunto our general consent not , upon mislike conceive of the breach of his promise , the whole company also utter refuse it . but to satisfy he , our general send certain of his gentleman to the court , to accompany the king ’ s brother , reserve the vice - king for their safe return . they be receive of another brother of the king , and other state , and be conduct with great honour to the castle . the place a ** that they be bring unto , be a large and fair ternatehouse , where be at the least 1000 person assemble . the king be yet absent , there sit in their place 60 . grave personage , all which be say to be of the king counsel . there be beside 4 . grave person , apparel all in red , down to the ground , and attire on their head like the Turk , and these be say to be roman , and Ligiers there to keep continual traf - romana and fike with the people of ternate . there be also 2 . Turks Ligiers in this place , and one Italian