the north pole be elevate 20 degree 30 min . and the crocier be the guard of the south pole , be raise 9 degree 30 min . the say crocier be 4 star , represent the form of a cross , and be 30 degree in latitude from the south pole : and the low star of the say crocier be to be take , when it be direct under the uppermost ; and be so take as many degree as it want of 30 , so many you be to the northward of the equinoctial : and as many degree as be more than 30 , so many degree you be to the southward of the equinoctial . and if you find it to be just 30 then you be direct under the line . 150 within the say cape Blanco we take one ship more , all the man be flee away , save two . we bring this ship with all the rest which we have take before , into our harbour , 5 league within the cape , where we wash and trim our ship , and go to sea again the 22 of Januarie , leave all the Spaniard there with their ship , save one Cantar , for which our general give they the Benedict . in which course we run continual to the southwest , until the 26 day , when we find the north pole raise 15 degree 15 min . have the wind Northeast or Eastnortheast , which be common on that coast . for it do blow for the most part continual from the shore : and we keep the say course , until we come near the island Bonavista , within 2 league off the shore ; so that we hale off again northwest , the space of one hour , and then run Southwest again , till day light the 27 of Januarie : from which time we run southsouthwest , until 3 of the clock in the afternoon , at which time we approach near the island of Mayo , be high and hilly land , the isle of save that the north part of the island stretch out mat0 - it self , a league into the sea very low . we come to anchor under the west part of this island the 28 day of Januarie , and stay there until the 30 of the same . during which time , our general appoint m . John winter and m . Thomas Doughtie , to go over to the east part of the island with 70 man , to get some fresh victual . and as we march through the island , about the midst thereof , we find one house have a garden belong to it , in which we find ripe grape , also ripe grape in ripe gourd , and melon , in the most dead time of our i ™ ™ ™ - winter . we find also a tree which bear the fruit cocos , which be big than a man head , have within the coco the utter coat , which be about 3 inch thick , a certain nut as big as two fist , and have within a white substance , clean fast to the shell , which be half a inch thick , very pleasant to taste , and within that a certain hollowness or void place , wherein be contain a pure 151 brava . nonnez de Silva . and pleasant water in taste , and as some think , marvellous comfortable . as we pass through this island the inhabitant flee into the mountain , so that we can have no talk with they . but we understand by the Portugal which come with we , that they be but servant to those of saint Iago , to keep their cattle and goat , which be very plentiful in this island : but we find they so wild , that we can take none save some young kid : wherefore we return back again to our ship . the Portugal have salt their well near to the sea , so that we can , not water . then our general command every man aboard : afterward we weigh , and run over to Sant Iago the same night , be io league distant from thence : which seem to be a fruitful island and well people . for we see 3 town on the shore : two of which shoot at we , as we pass along . our general make a shot at one of they again . And sail along the shore , at the south part of the island , we take a Portugal ship lade with wine and other commodity . this island have 15 degree in latitude . from hence we run southsouth west to the isle of Fogo , so call , because it cast continual flame of fire and smoke out of the top thereof , all the whole island be one high mountain . two league west from the isle of Fogo , be another island call Brava , where the sea be above 120 fathom deep near to the shore , so that we can not anchor for the depth of the sea , by reason whereof we be constrain to depart without water . here the general discharge the Portugal , give unto they our pinnace which we build at mogador : with wine , bread , and fish , and so dismiss they the first of February , take one of their company along with he , call nonnez de Silva . the 2 of February we set off from Brava , and direct our course southsoutheast , run so until the 9 of February , be within 4 degree of the equinoctial : at ! 52 which time , we have the air trouble with thunder and lightning , notwithstanding calm with extreme heat , and diverse time great shower of rain . the 17 day we be right under the line , which be the most fervent place of the burn zone : where in the midst of February we sustain such heat , with often thunder and lightning , that we do sweat for the most part continual , as though we have be in a stove , or hothouse . here we see