be separate , wherein be no full order conclude , but that we shall speak every night with the admiral , if we convenient may , and so to appoint our course from time to time , if we lose company , to stay fifteen day 179 in the river of plate , and from thence to go for the strait , and there to ride , and water , and trim our ship . the 12 in the afternoon m . Maddox , m . hall , m . Bannister , and other come aboard to visit m . Walker . after a time of abode with he , they return to the gallion all again , except m . Maddox who remain with m . Walker here aboard . this night m . Maddox and i , behold many constellation in the firmament , and set down certain new star raise to the southward . all day and night we go south , and south by east among . the seventeenth day in the afternoon we shoot off three piece of ordinance in honour of our queen majesty . this day after dinner come master Maddox , and captain drake with other to take their leave of master Walker , as i with , all my company have do before , suppose he past hope of recovery . at 19 degree of four of the clock , find our self in nineteen southerly degree to the southward of the line , and clear of aiu e ' the shoald call by we Paul , we go hence south - southwest all night follow . the 18 day be Sunday , after dinner the general , m . Maddox , captain Parker , and many other come aboard , and visit m . Walker : which do , they drink , and depart aboard again . all this day and night , we go our course Southwest by south , with a frank gale . the 19 day about noon , the sun be in our zenith , be decline to the southward 21 degree , and 33 minute , where we find the air fresh and temperate , as in England in June , when a fresh gale of wind cold evening , do blow in the heat of the day , but the evening , the night , and the morning be more fresh and cold here , than it be in England either in June or Julie . the first of December , about six of the clock in the morning , we see land on the coast of Brasil , in the height of 28 degree or there about , which bear 180 northwest , and be eight league from we very high land . we stand in with it , be much wind , and come near , find diverse island : and see the diverse hand . Francis will not come room nor run ahead we , we stand in with the shore , and sound in 30 fathom oaze three league off the land , bear from the westnorthwest to the northnorthwest of we , and so stand still till it shoald orderly into seven fathom , within a mile of a headland : then perceive a breach over our bow , and no hope of a good harbour , in that place , we bear up room , and our admiral after we , who we hale : than he tell we he will seek harbour to leeward , require i to go ahead . then see the bark be astern i hoist out my skiff , and set her mast and sail , take her ging , and Tobias one of my master mate with i , and run before the ship , sound in 15 fathom fair sand , leave a ledge of rock aseaboord of we : so the ship and the bark looff up under a headland , and anchor in eight fathom , half a mile off the land , have bring the headland which lie in 27 degree 50 minute the latitude southsoutheast off they , and the north land Northeast dezree off they . 50 minute . i stand on with the skiff , hope to find a better harbour to leeward three league , but it prove not so : wherefore i return , and in my way aboard i meet with a rock in the sea , where we land , and kill good store of fowl , and after i go aboard the admiral , where i present he with foul , and return aboard to supper . in this time our boat have be aland , and find water , ballast , and two decay house , as they tell i , and our man aboard hook freshfish . this night we ride quiet . the second , be Sunday , our master moar our ship further into the bay . we bring the south point southeast off we , and the north land Northeast : and so rid . 181 jin exceed great draught offish . the wood set on fire by our man . a sail see and take . after dinner captain Parker , with my boat , and company , go a land , and there place pipe , and make three well . in the mean time , i accompany with m . Hawkins , m . Maddox , m . Cotton , and diverse of my own people , land far within the bay , and find two river of fresh water , and a good fish place . present i send aboard for my net , with which at one draught we draw 600 great mullet , and 5 great bass ; the like draught be never see with so small a net : with which we go aboard , give to the admiral 240 , to the Francis 80 , and the rest our company spend , and give almighty God thank for his great goodness . all this while be captain Parker and other go into the land , and fire the wood ; which burn extreme . the three day in the morning our carpenter calk without board , and the master and other take up all the merchandise in the stern sheet to the keel , and there put down a boat load of stone : and see the merchandise