the relation of a voyage make by a pilot call 1579 . Nuno da Silva for the viceroy of new Spain , the 20 . of may , in the year of our lord 1579 . in the city of Mexico , from whence it be send to the viceroy of the portugall - indy : wherein be set down the course and action pass in the voyage of sir Francis Drake that take the aforesaid Nuno da Silva at S . Iago one of the island of Cabo Verde , and carry he along with he through the strait of Magellan , to the haven of Guatulco in new Spain , where he let he go again . Uno da Silva bear in Porto , a citizen and inhabitant of Guaia , say , that he depart out of his house in the begin of November in the year of our lord 1577 . take his course to Cabo Verde , or the green cape , where he anchor with his ship close by the haven of the island of Sant Iago , one of the island of Cabo Verde aforesay , be the nineteenth of 133 January in the year of our lord 1578 . And lie there , there come six ship , which seem to be Englishman , whereof the admiral board his ship , and by force with his man take he out of his ship , bring he in the boat aboard the admiral ship , leave some of his best man aboard his ship : and although the fortress of the island shoot four or five time at they , yet they hurt not the Englishman : who have do , set sail from thence to the island of Brava , take with they the ship of the say Nuno da Silva : be there , they fill certain vessel with fresh water : from thence hold their course inward to sea , have first with a boat set the man of Nuno da Silvas ship on land , only keep Nuno da Silva in his ship , as also his ship with the wine that be therein . and Nuno da Silva say , the cause why they keep he on board be , because they know he to be a pilot for the coast of Brasilia , that he may bring they to such place in those country as have fresh water . be put off " from the island of Brava , they hold their course to the land of Brasilia , which they descry upon the first of April , under the height of thirty degree : and without land or take in fresh water , Rio de plata , they hold on their course to Rio de la plata , that be , the river of silver , lie under five and thirty degree , little more or less : where they go on land , and provide themselves off fresh water . from thence they hold on their course till they come under nine and thirty degree , where they anchor : and be there they leave two of their six ship behind they , and sail but four in company ( that of Nuno da Silva be one ) till they come to the bay call bay de las Baya de las Islas , that be , the bay of the hand , lie under nine and forty degree , where it be say , that Magellan lie and winter there with his ship , when he first discover the strait , which now hold his name . into this bay the twenty of June they enter , and there anchor so close to the land , that they may 134 send to it with a harquebus shoot : and there they see the land to be inhabit with Indians , that be apparel with skin , with their leg from the knee downward , and their arm from the elbow downward naked , all the rest of their body be clothe , with bow and arrow in their hand , be subtle , great , and well form people , and strong and high of stature : where six of the Englishman go on land to fetch fresh water , and before they leap on land , four of the indian come unto their boat , to who the Englishman give bread and wine : and when the Indians have well eat and drink , they depart thence : and go somewhat far from they , one of the indian cry to they , and say : Magallanes , esta he minha terra , that be , Magallanes , this be my country : and because the Englishman follow they , it seem the indian flee upward into the land , and be somewhat far off , they turn back again , and with their arrow slay two of the english shipper , one be a Englishman , the other a Netherlander : the rest come back again and save themselves in the boat , wherewith they present put off from the shore . here they stay till the seventeenth of August , upon the which day they set sail , run along by the coast about a league and a half from the land , ( for there it be all fair and good ground , at twenty , and five and twenty fathom deep ) and be about four or five day before they come to the mouth or entry of the strait : but because the wind be contrary , they stay till the 24 of August before they enter . the entry or mouth of the strait be about a league the descrif - broad , on both side be bare and flat land : on the turn of the north side they see Indians make great fire , but on the south side they see no people stir . the four * ‘ and twenty day aforesaid , they begin to enter into the strait , with a eastnortheast wind . This straight may be about a hundred and ten league long , and in breadth a league . about the entry of the strait , and J35 half way into it , it run right forth without any wind or turn : and from thence about eight or ten league towards the end , it have some boutes and wind , among the which there be one so great a hook or headland , that it seem to run into the other land : and there it be less than a league broad from one land to the other : and from thence forward it run straight out again :