piece of ordinance , and his caliver , and good store of victual , with all other necessary for his intend voyage . and he go with the negro above a fwer run - twelve league up into the main land , unto a river that seuti ” ea run into the south sea : and by this river in a wood he ’ cut down timber , and build a pinnace , which be 45 foot long by the keel ; which pinnace be finish , he go down the river and pass into the south sea , carry six negro with he for his guide , and he arrive at the hand of pearl be 25 league distant from Panama . this hand lie in the south sea as they sail from Peru to Panama , and here he stay ten day , before he can take any ship , but at length there come a small bark from a place call Quito in Peru : this bark he take , and find in her 60000 pezo of gold , with much wine and bread : and not be content with this , he stay a long while , before he will send away his prize or any of his man . Shortly after he take another bark that come from Lima , wherein he find 100000 pezo of silver in bar , which be all aboard his pinnace , he shape his course towards the river from whence he come : but before his departure he land on the foresay hand to find pearl , and go to a small town of the hand inhabit by negro for the same purpose : where find but small store , he return to his pinnace , and come near unto the river he send away his two prize , and with his pinnace enter up the river . the negro of the hand of pearl , so soon as the Englishman be depart , post in their canoas to Panama , to signify unto the governor what they have do . whereupon the governor within two day after send out four bark and a hundred soldier , and negro to row , the captain of which soldier be call Juan de Ortega : who go first to the hand of pearl , and there have knowledge which way 230 the Englishman do take , and in pursue they he meet with the two prize take by the Englishman , which tell he that they be go up the river . but when he be come to the entrance of the river , he know not which way to take , because the river run into the sea by three mouth , and not all at one . therefore be determine with himself to pass up the great of the three , he see come down with the stream many feather of hen out of one of the lesser mouth : which mouth he enter , and sail four day up the same , he descry the Englishman pinnace lie upon the sand , and come to board she , they find in she no more but six Englishman , of which they kill one , and the other 5 flee , and have thorough ransack the say pinnace , they can find nought in she , but victual . the Spaniard see this , determine to seek out the Englishman by land , and leave about twenty man to keep their bark they march with eighty shot up into the country , and half a league from the river they find a little house make with bough , where the Englishman have leave all their treasure ; which the Spaniard take and carry back to their bark , mean not to follow the Englishman any further ; but the english captain with all his man , and above 200 negro follow the Spaniard unto the river side , and set upon they with great fury : howbeit the Spaniard lie behind the bush do easy put the english to flight , and they take seven of they alive , and slay eleven and five negro : so the Spaniard return with the loss of two man and five or six hurt . than they ask those Englishmen which they have take prisoner , why they depart not with their treasure , have fifteen day liberty ? they answer , that their captain have command they to carry all that gold and silver unto the place where their ship be , and they be agree to carry it , although they make three or four journey , for he promise to give they part of the treasure beside their wage , but the mariner will needs have it by and by : whereat the captain be angry because they put so 231 A . D . 1572 - 87 . small trust in his word , will not suffer his sailor to carry it , but say he will get negro to serve his turn , and so these be the negro aforesaid , who he have bring to carry away the gold and silver : but by the way he meet with the five Englishman which flee from the pinnace , who tell he of the Spaniard ; and than he make friend with all his man , and get the negro to take his part : but have the overthrow , and his best man be slay and take prisoner , he think to have return to his ship , and so to have go for England . the spanish captain have hear this discourse of the english prisoner , bury the dead body , embark all thing , and with the Englishman and their pinnace return back unto Panama . thus be the Englishman voyage overthrow . now so soon as the four bark and the pinnace be arrive at Panama , the governor of that place send a messenger overland to number de dios , to advertise the townsman , where the Englishman ship lie : whereupon they of number de dios man out four ship and go into the bay of Dariene where the Englishman have leave their ship , which they take away with they to number de dios , with all her ordinance ; so that the poor Englishman be leave in the mountain