his assistant into his cabin , and there deliver to we in write two demand , to be by we consider upon , and he to have our opinion therein . the effect of the demand be these . 1 whether it be best for we to adventure our self to pass the strait of Magellan or not ; consider the force of the enemy , which we know to be there before we : and also that our determination be there to set up our pinnace , make iron hoop , carene our ship , and do all our necessary business for the full accomplishment of our voyage . 2 if that course be not think best , which way be meet for we to take . to the first we be of opinion , that it be good to hear the opinion of captain Hawkins , captain Drake , 187 Richard carter the english man take in the prize , carry along with they . they retume in the latitude of 33 - and the two pilot , which have pass the strait and know the harbour , and like place to be fortify , and inhabit or not , who be call , and the three master with they . their opinion be as diverse as their name ; and as much difier , as before this time they be wont usual to do : only they all agree in this one point , that it be impossible for we to pass the strait without see , and encounter with the ship , although the fortification of the land do not annoy we : which be long and thorough debate , and their opinion with the three master demand , which accord not scant any one with other , they be dismiss . then the general receive the opinion of we his assistant , begin with the young in authority first : which when he have hear they all over , and be set down in write under our hand , he take deliberation till after supper to give his determination . when we have all sup , than he send for we down into his cabin , and deliver in write his determination , ( which be ) to victuali , and furnish our self on this coast , before he proceed any further ; and name two place , the river of plate , or saint Vincent , to be choose . for the better decipher of the river of plate , and the commodity thereof , be call before we , Richard carter , which do dwell there ; who can not assure we of any wine , except we can stay four month for it : but other victual plenty . the river be shoal and dangerous , the road seven league from any town , or place of commodity : which consider with the treachery that may from thence be use , into the strait by sea , and into Peru by land , we all conclude to go to saint Vincent , which place be inhabit by Portugal , and where in honest sort we may convenient have all our business do . with this resolution we take our leaf about eight a clock at night , and be come aboard , present bear up , and go room , have all the day before beat up the 188 1583 . wind larboard - tacked eastsoutheast till at night : after it be a little wind all night we go north next hand . the 21 day , after service , i declare unto my company the intent of our return to the port of saint Vincent , wherewith they be well satisfy , be before doubtful that we shall not proceed , but return without performance of our voyage . it continue calm all day till six at night , than we go northwest by west till eight at night , and then we cast about , and stand off eastsoutheast , and east by south all night with a good gale . the 22 day in the morning we miss the Francis , John drake in which by all presumption go room in the begin of Francts .. a r r ° ° go to the .. river of plate , the 2 5 day , be Chnstmasse day , it be little wind wherein his inn the forenoon till ten a clock ; than it blow a fresh ship be cast gale , with which we go our course Northnortheast , bull they in the afternoon it be less wind : yet go we our ' ' landmdlived course north by east , and northnortheast , and north , and month north by west , till midnight . then be in shoal among the water , we cast about , and lie southsoutheast , and south - Savages . east by south , a hour ; and see our admiral come not after we , we cast about back again , and present meet he : so we go both together next hand southsoutheast all the rest of the night . this afternoon we see the infinite numskim of fish so thick in the sea , that it seem a water ber ° ffish . trouble with trample of horse ; which be thick , and slimy : for we have take up some of it . the 17 day of January , about seven a clock , the master , m . Blaccoller , and i go in our skiff , and row , and sound round about a isle , and find 16 fathom within a stone cast hard aboard the shore , and fair ground : after we land , and find nothing but wood and bush , and strange worm : we see a falcon , and one other small bird , and therefore name it falcon I | will : Asmalllsland it be a mile about , with a rock on the east side , which which our man lie close to it , and it be in sight without danger . after aucon we come aboard , and dine ; at two a clock we set sail , with wind southeast , and run in Northeast a while , till the 189 wind scant : than we go in Northnortheast , till we be in seven fathom and a half of water ,