, but i know not how much , which they take , and send the passenger ( with two friar that be in she ) in a boat to land . the next day they hang a man of the ship , because he will not confess two plate of gold that he have take , which after they find about he : which do , they let the ship drive , follow on their course . the first of march towards noon , they espy the ship lade with silver , be about four league to seaward from they : and because the english ship be somewhat heavy before , whereby it sail not as they will have it , they take a company of Botijas or a / retie de - spanish pot for oil , and fill they with water , hang vice to make they by rope at the stern of the ship to make her sail on wiftl ^ better : and the ship that sail towards Panama swjty - maje towards the english ship to know what she be , think it to be one of the ship that use to sail along the coast , and to traffic in the country : and be hard by she , the english captain bid they strike , but the other refuse to do it , with a great piece he shoot her mast overboard , and have wound the master with a arrow , the ship present yield , which they take , and sail with her further into the sea , all that night and the next day and night , make all the way they can . 144 the three day be out of sight of the land , they begin to search the ship , and to lade the good out of she into their ship , which be a thousand three hundred bar or piece of silver , and fourteen chest with ryal of eight , and with gold : but what quantity it be i know not , only the passenger say that there be great store , and that three hundred bar of the silver belong to the king , the rest belong to certain merchant . that do , they let the ship with the man sail on their course , put the three pilot in she that they bring with they , so that as then they have none but their own man aboard , be the sixth of march , and from thence they hold their course towards the land of Nicaragua . the thirteenth of march , either the day before or after , in the morning they descry land , not be very high , be a small island two league from the firm land , and there they find a small bay , wherein they anchor at five fathom deep close by the land , and there they stay till the twenty day . upon the which day there pass a frigate close by the island , which with their pinnace they follow , and take she , bring she to the english ship , which frigate be lade with Salsaperilla , and Botijas or pot with butter and honey , and with other thing . the english captain go on board , and cast the Salsaperilla on the land , leave all the rest of the ware in the frigate , and then he put all his piece into the frigate , that so he may lay his ship on shore , to new calk and trim she , which continue till the three and twenty or four and twenty of march . which do , and have make provision of wood and fresh water , they hold on their course along by the coast , sail westward , take the say frigate and her man with they , and have sail two day , they take their man out of she , and set they in the pinnace , among the which be four sailor , that mean to sail to Panama , and from thence to China , whereof one they take , with the letter and patent that he have about he , among xi 145 king 1579 - Nicaragua the island of can . the first sight of Nueva Espanna . they calk and trim their ship at the lie of can over against Nicaragua . sea - charts of the south sea take . they arrive at Guatuko . a prill 13 . Stilo novo . Nuno da Silva set on land . the which be the letter of the king of Spain , send to the governor of the philippinas , as also the sea - card wherewith they shall make their voyage , and direct themselves in their course . and so sail until the sixth of April , about evening they discover a ship that hold two league to seaward from the land : and before the next day in the morning they be hard by she , and sudden fall upon her while her man sleep , and present make the man enter into their ship , among the which be one don Francisco Xarate . which do , they follow on their course with the say ship , out of the which they take certain pack and other ware , but i know not what it be . they likewise take a negro out of it , and three day after they both let the ship and man go whether they will , set therein the two sailor that shall go for China , which they have take in the frigate , keep only one sailer to show they where they shall find fresh water , to the which end they take the empty vessel with they to fill with water , and so keep on their course to the haven of Guatulco , where they put in , be upon Monday the thirteenth of April , and have anchor , they stay there till the six and twenty of April : and about three or four hour within the night , they set sail , hold their course westward , and a hour or two before they let Nuno da Silva go , put he into another ship , that lie in the haven of Guatulco . from thence forward the Englishman pass on their voyage , to the island of Malucos , and from thence they pass by the cape de buena esperanza , and so to England , as it be well know , so that thjs be only the description of the voyage that they make , while the say pilot Nuno da Silva be with they .