his residence in the same , as also the bishop . it contain xooo house , and 40 ingenios for sugar , and have much cotton , but no brasill - wood at all . the sea run up into the country here 14 or 15 league , where they get some year good store of amber - griese . here be great plenty of victual , and although the country be hot , yet be it healthful , and the air wholesome . the next town upon as Ilhas . the coast call as Ilhas , or the isle , be but a small town , contain not above 150 house , and but three ingenios for sugar . most of the inhabitant be labour man , which use to carry victual in their small bark unto Fernambuck : their lord be call Lucas Giraldo . Puerto seguro . the next place unto this be call Puerto seguro : it consist of 4 small town , which contain not in all above 300 house . the inhabitant of this town also live by carry of victual along the coast ; and the town it self belong to the duke de Avero . hard the sholde by this port begin the sholde which they call Abrolhos ; call Abrol - anj these sholde lie above 25 league into the sea . ’ the next habitation of Christians beyond these sholde Espirito Santo , be Espirito Santo which consist of two town , both of they contain about 300 house : and they belong to a gentleman call Vasques Fernandes de Coutinho . RiodeJenero . from hence you pass along the coast to the river of Jenero , which have about three hundred house . in 25 ° this place the Frenchman first inhabit , who captain be call Monsieur de Villegagnon . the say captain make here a fort , and plant good ordinance thereon , and jade every year great store of brasill - wood from hence , and have great friendship with the savage people , who do he good service , by reason whereof the Frenchman reap much benefit out of this country . but the king of Portugal send out a power against the Frenchman , who first take the french ship by sea , and then land and besiege the fort , and at length take it , and the captain thereof : unto who , because he be a gentle person , and never hurt the Portugal , they give thirty thousand ducat for his ordinance , and for all other thing that be in the fort , and so send he for France . since which time the Portugal have inhabit this river . there be at this present only two ingenios , but great store of brasill - wood , with plenty of victual . from this river of Jenero they pass along the coast four town to Sant Vincente , which have 4 town , the great whereof be call Santos , and consist of four hundred ymcente , i ’ house , there be also three ingenios . a few year these english pass there come two english ship into this harbour man be m . which be go for the strait of Magellan . who be in this port , there come thither three of the king ’ of Spain ship , and fight with the Englishman , but the Englishman sink one of their ship , and therefore the t111 - 788 - ] king command a fort to be make , to the end that - afirtbuilt no English ship that be bind for the strait of Magellan shall victuali there , the which fort stand on against the the mouth of the harbour . this country belong to a english . gentleman call Martin Alonso de Souza : this be the last inhabit place upon all the coast of Brasill . this coast of Brasill be very full of mountain , and have much rain fall upon it , for which cause they can go from town to town by land : all the habitation of this . country be by the sea side . from Sant Vincente the § anta qate 0 coast be all mountainous , till you come to the he of Santa Una . 251 Catelina , and from this hand till you come even to the straight of Magellan , the coast be very plain and without wood . have proceed thus far , it will not be amiss to Rio de laPlata , speak somewhat of the river of plate , which be one of the great river in all the world : for at the mouth it be above five and twenty league from land to land : and the Spaniard have go up in it above six hundred league , and can not attain to the head thereof . the first Spaniard that enter this river , and inhabit the same be call Solis , who pass up 100 league into it , and call it by . the name of Rio de la plata , that be to say , the river of silver , because of the fine and clear water that be in it , for i have not hear of any silver that ever be find there . the say Solis return into Spain , without any further search into this river : howbeit another Sebastian ca - captain call Sebastian Cabota go up this river 150 b ° ia ' league , and build a fort , which fort stand until this present : where leave his ship , he go high up the river in small pinnace , and all along as he go he find many Indians : but find neither gold nor silver , nor ought else of any great value , he return to his ship , and sail for Spain . not many year after a certain gentleman call don Pedro de Mendoza furnish forth a great fleet of ship , wherein be ship a thousand man , forty mere , and twenty horse , with all other creature to inhabit this river : and come thither he go up into the country to see what riches he can there find , leave all his stuff , cattle , and provision Buenos at a place call Buenos ayere