very desperate , consider the number of Portugal and Indians which be then gather together , to the number of seven or eight thousand , and their artillery upon the shore , play upon we : but nevertheless we have proceed , if the wind have favour we . the 16 day we go to certain ingenios of the Portugal , where we find the people flee and we enter their house without resistance . we find 221 A . D . I587 . in their purge house 1000 pot of sugar , some half purge , some a quarter , and some new put into the pot : so that every man take his pot of sugar for their provision , and set all the rest on fire . the 17 day we all weigh to go to another ingenio , to see if we can find there better sugar , and in the way we meet with a prize , which be a caravel , which we find drive with the weather , and enter she , and have in she only three falcon of iron , which our pinnace bring away , and set the ship on fire . dalamor in the small prize run so far in , that he bring his ship on ground , where she lie three or four hour , till such time as there come from the town five caravel full of man , which be perceive of we , our captain with our man go to he to aid he . the caravel come within falcon shoot of we , but dare come no near , lest they may have taste of the like banquet , that they receive the last time . about half flood come the galley again , and three caravel more , but before they come , the bark be a float , and set sail : and then they all go to guard their ingenios , which we have purpose to visit : but the night come on , persuade we to the contrary . the 19 day we set sail to go into the road of Baya again , with our pinnace , and a flag of truce , to see if we can recover our four man , which remain alive of those ten , that perish in our boat , of who we speak before , which four be unfortunate fall into their hand : but they at our approach near the town , shoot at we , and we as ready as they , give they in all 27 shot , and so ankor a little from the town , to see what they will do . the 20 day ride still before the town , our admiral send a negro ashore , with letter from the Portugal , that we have prisoner aboard : the effect of which letter be , that if we may have our man release and deliver we , they shall have they from our ship . 222 the next day in the morning , in stead of their bloody flag , they put up two white flag , and send a Gingatho off to we with two Indians , with letter of answer from the governor ; but they will not consent in any case that we shall have our man , and will their Portugal to take their captivity patient , for they will not redeem they : a motion they make in their letter , to buy again one of their prize , which we have take out of the road : but our admiral answer they , no , see they detain our man , we will keep both their man , and ship too . the same evening we weigh , and come out of the haven , half a league to seaward . the 22 we set sail to sea , and the 23 come to a a island \ z island twelve league to the southward of Baya , to wood , tesgustothe j ten 6 7 > > south of Bata . and water . i the 24 day be aboard with our pinnace , we meet with a Canoa , wherein be one Portugal , and six Indians : we shoot at the Canoa , and kill a indian , and take the Portugal , and one of the Indians , and bring they aboard our ship : we there examine they , and the Portugal confess that there be a ship lade with meal , and other victual , bind for Fernambuck , but put into a creek , because she dare not go along the coast , hear of our ship . whereupon we man both our pinnace , and take the Portugal with we , to go and seek the same ship , but that night we can not find she . the 26 day we go again , and find she , be hail up into a creek , where a man will have think a ship boat can not have enter : we find she indeed lade with meal principal : but she have also in her fourteen chest of sugar , of which two be in powder , and twelve in loaf . this ship be of the burden of one hundred and twenty ton , and a new a new portu - ship , this be the first voyage that ever she make , ^ s ^ . ete ^ een and as the Portugal confess , she be freight for ' Fernambuck , but the man of Baya have great want 223 a good warn fir we to be circumspect in land . June . a offer of captain Lister to go with his one ship only for the south sea . of bread , buy both they ? ship and her lade , and so think to stay she in this creek , till we be go off the coast : but it be our good hap to disappoint their pretense , and to fetch she from thence , where they think she as safe as if she have be at Lisbon . the 28 day we divide the meal among we , accord to the want of every ship . the 30 day , 16 or 17 Dutchman go with their boat from the hulk to shore , to fill water : and upon a sudden they be assault with fifty or sixty Portugal , and so many more Indians arm with shot and other weapon , and they slay their master and Purser , and the rest be hurt , but yet escape with their life : a good warn for we to be circumspect , and careful in our land . the last day of may we cast off one of our prize , which we call the George , and our admiral and the hulk take the man and other necessary out of