be find the middle of the strait the land rise high , till you d ' werse rich come to the end or the strait where you enter into the south sea , in which place next the south sea the strait be very dangerous , by reason of the sholde and rock that lie on the north side . thus Magellan after he have enter the south sea , within 60 day come to the isle of the Malucos , without touch at any land until he come thither : and so seek there to the death of lade his ship at a hand inhabit by Moores , he be Magellan . by they treacherous slay . now the Spaniard be too few for the manage of all three ship , because xi 257 r many of they be dead , partly with sickness , and partly with the hardness of the voyage , determine to abandon one of their say ship , and so man the other two : which two be lade with spice and other riches know not what course they be best to take : howbeit at length it be determine , that one of these two ship shall go for Nueva Espan na , and the other for the cape of buena esperanza , and so for Spain . the ship that go for Spain be call the victory , the pilot Sebastian deal whereof be a Biscain name Juan Sebastian deal canon , man thatever to w ^ om king gay great reward , and appoint sail about globe for his arm , whereon be write : the world . Primus omnium circunde disti i ; that be , thou be the first man that ever sail about i . and albeit this voyage be so long and troublesome as be before mention , yet many other have attempt the same . and the next that seek to pass the say two ship of strait of Magellan be two ship of Genoa , which Genoa . come as far as the mouth of the strait be by a mighty storm drive back again , and one of they , who master be call Pancaldo , put into the river of plate , and be cast away about Buenos Aeres , where to this day part of the say ship be to be see , and some of the man be yet live in the river among the Spaniard : and the other ship return to Genoa again . a three voyage also there be a bishop of Placencia in Spain , who to you strait . covetjng riches , set forth a fleet of four sail , to pass the strait , and so to go for the Malucos : and get licence of the emperor he send his say 4 ship towards the strait which have very fair wind till they come thither : but be enter 20 league within the strait , a storm of westerly wind take they , and drive 3 of they on shore , 8c the four back into the sea , which ( the storm be pass ) return into the strait to seek for his consort , 8c find many man go on the shore side , but the ship be beat all to piece . so they on land call unto the ship ; but 258 the captain thereof , consider that his ship be but little , and that he have but small store of victual , will not go to they on shore , but proceed on his voyage , and pass the strait . and because he be alone he will not sail to the Malucos , but go for the coast of Peru to the city of Lima , where the ship remain unto this day . the man of the other three ship , which be leave in the strait be to the number of two hundred and fifty ( who captain be kinsman to the bishop of Placencia be call * Queros ) be never hear of until this present day , it be forty year since they be leave there . a year after this , certain merchant of the groin in Galicia set forth other three ship , which ship also come to the strait mouth , where one of they be cast away with all the man , and the other two return for Spain . also i have have intelligence of certain Portugal ship , which be come to the mouth of the strait lose two of their pinnace which they send to discover the land , and then return back . and after these , two french ship be send from the river of Jenero by monsieur de Villegagnon , but be come to the latitude of 45 . degree , they be drive back by a storm of contrary wind . after all this the governor of Chili call don Garcia de Mendoza son to the mark of Cannette determine to discover the say strait from the south sea , send from Chili two ship under the conduct of a captain call Latherelio : but the danger to seek these strait by the south sea be more than by the north sea , because all the storm of the north sea come from the land , but in the south sea all the wind and storm come off the sea , and force the ship to run upon the leeshore , insomuch that the say two ship be cast away in fifty degree . the seek of these strait of Magellan be so dangerous , and the voyage so troublesome , that it seem a matter almost impossible to be perform , insomuch that for the space of thirty year no man make account 259 * Gonsalvo de Oviedo , part 2 . lib . 20 . call this captain Camargo . a four voyage to the strait . a fiftandsixt voyage to the strait of Magellan . two french ship send for the stir eight of Magellan . A . D . 1572 - 87 - sir Francis drake voyage aboutyeworld . the cause why m . Douty be behead . sir Francis Drake drive into degree of southerly latitude . la Mocha in 38 deg . 30 min . over against the province of Arauco . thereof ; until of