sea from the admiral , i assemble master Walker , master Shawe , master jeflry , the master , the master mate , and venture werg the pilot , to who i show that i be desirous to sever , and go back to seek our admiral , whereunto the master , never meet pilot , and master mate answer direct , that we can afterward . not fetch the isle where we leave they , and to meet they in go back it be very unlikely and to we dangerous many way , aswell for fall into the lap of the Spaniard , as to be put on a lee shore : whereupon all the rest advise i to stand off into the sea , whereunto i assent , remember withal , that time spend consume victuali , and how long we have beat up and down in the same bay before , to get in with calm and contrary wind . thus we conclude that m . Walker shall set down each man opinion , and we set to our hand , and from henceforth he to keep a register of all our proceed , as m . Maddox do aboard the admiral . the first day of February , we go east by south , and east southeast with a stout gale : and go the same course the 3 . 4 . and 5 . day follow . 197 the 5 . day about 10 . a clock in the forenoon m . Walker die , who have be weak and sick of the bloody flix 6 . day , we take a view of his thing , and prise they , and heave he over board , and shoot a piece for his knell . the 14 . day i call into my cabin the two merchant , the master and the pilot , show they our want of victual and other necessary : whereupon they and i conclude , that it be best for we to return to our country , with as little loss of time and expense of victual as may be , be without hope of relief upon this coast , and yet to keep the coast of Brasil to friend for fear of extremity . the 17 . day in the morning have much rain , we save above two ton of water , of which we be very glad . the 18 . day i observe the variation of the compass , which vary one point , and a half to the southward , by our ordinary compass of London . the second day of march the master , pilot , and i agree to fetch the isle of Fernando Loronha . from the 3 . day to the 10 . day we go west , and by south , and run in for the shore . the 10 . day we see the land , which be sandy hill with wood on it . the 11 . day seek to go a shore , we see four man , which weave to we with a white shirt , and we weave to they with a flag of truce : at length one of they swim to our boat side , and there lay in the sea talk with we , almost a hour : in the end , be partly persuade by Pinto , who talk with they in the indian - tongue , and partly entice with such trifle as i show he , be come into our skiff , and call to his companion on shore , who come aboard swim : we deliver they certain barrico to fetch we the full of fresh water : after , there come down 40 . Indians , boy , woman , and man , and with they a french boy , but the former Indians deceive we of our barrico . whereupon 198 Pinto and Russell swim a shore to seek water , but find none . the same day we sail to a place where boat may land , and i go a land in my skiff , and find the indian , and Frenchman which be with i the day before , and they bring our three barrico full of fresh water : for which i reward they with some trifle . in the mean time our boat go ashore , and our man with some of the indian bring we twenty barrico more of fresh water , and i my self go to shore and bring 23 . hen of India . the 12 . day betimes in the morning , we man our boat and skiff , and take some trifle thing to shore , and barricos : at our first arrival the rude Indians flock together , wade to the skiff wherein i be , beg and wonder about we : first i cause they to fetch 27 . barrico of water , who i reward with small bell , etc in the mean time they bring hen to i , wade to the skiff , for i keep my self always afloat , and for their hen i give they a knife , and a small look glass . all this while m . Blackcoller our pilot , Thomas Russel , mark thawght be still on shore , and will not tarry aboard : in the end , fear some treachery , because all the indian be slip on shore from i , i call our man away , and sudden they lay hand on our man ashore , and with their bow shoot thick at we in the boat , and wade into the water to we , lay hand on our skiff , yet God of his mercy deliver we from their hand , with the loss of five man slay , and other hurt . thus we get aboard with 40 . hen , duck , turkey , and parrot , and three hogshead of water : and i carry a Frenchman aboard with i , name Jaques Humphrey , who be by chance in the boat with i when this fray begin . the 17 . day we take three shark in the morning . from that day to the first of April , we go our course , sometime with rain , and sometime with variable 199 A . D . I583 - treason of the Indians .