very naked and destitute of all comfort : for the Spaniard have take out of the foresay house of bough all their tool and other necessary , so that they can by no mean have any succour : whereas otherwise they may have build another pinnace , and provide better for themselves to have return for their own country . these news come to the ear of the viceroy of Peru , he think it not convenient to suffer those fifty Englishman which be yet alive , to continue in the mountain among the say negro . wherefore he send a servant of his call Diego de Frees with 150 shot to seek they , who at length find they make of canoas to take some one small bark or other that sail to and again in the north sea , whereby they may the 232 better shift for themselves : but before they have finish their pretend work , the spanish soldier set upon they , and take fifteen of they that be sick : but the rest flee , who the Spaniard pursue among the mountain , and in the end the negro betray they , and they be all take and carry to Panama . where the justice ask the english captain , whither he have the queen licence , or the licence of any other prince or lord ? and he answer that he have none , but that he come of his own proper motion . which be know to the justice , the captain and his company be condemn and be all put to death at Panama , save the captain himself , the master , and the pilot , and five boy , which be carry to Lima , where the captain and the two other man be execute , but the boy be yet live . the king of Spain have intelligence of these matter , Warn make send 300 man of war against those negro who have a £ a ™ sttlie assist the Englishman , which negro before be slave unto the Spaniard , and ( as be aforesaid ) flee from their master into those mountain , and so join themselves to the Englishman , think by that mean to be revenge of the Spaniard cruelty . at the first come of these three hundred soldier they take many of the negro , and do great justice on they accord to the quality of their offence . but after a season the negro grow wise and wary , and prevent the Spaniard so , that none of they can be take . whereof the king be advertise by his captain , as also how the country be full of mountain and river , and very unhealthfiill , insomuch that his soldier die , he write unto his say captain to make a agreement with those negro , to the end the country may be in quiet . and so they come to agreement with the captain of the negro , and all be appease . afterwards the negro inhabit two place which the Spaniard allot unto they , the king pardon be proclaim unto all those which before the day of the proclamation thereof have run from their master , 233 seven french ship take by the galley . sir Francis drake voyage to saint Iago , Sant Domingo , Cartagena , and saint Augustine . Cartagena . upon condition that from that day forward , whatsoever other fugitive negro shall resort unto they , they shall return they home either dead or alive , if not , that they shall pay for they . upon these condition , and to make all quiet in the mountain , all thing be conclude and agree upon . so that now the negro dwell in great town , where they have Spaniard for their teacher , and a Spaniard for their judge , and with this they hold themselves very well content , and be obedient unto their ruler . the Spaniard since they conquer those part have see many Frenchman on that coast , but never any Englishman in that place , save those two only which i have before mention . and although the Frenchman have come strong , yet dare they never put foot on shore as the english do . but the king of Spain hear that Englishman as well as Frenchmen begin to haunt that coast , cause two galley to be make and well appoint , to keep the coast . the first year that they be make they take six or seven french ship . so soon as this be know there use few english or french man of war to come on the coast , until this year 1586 . when as the aforesaid Francis Drake come with a strong fleet of about four and twenty ship , and do such harm as be well know unto all Christendom . but ( God spare the king of Spain life ) he will sufficient provide to keep his subject from the invasion of other nation . now to go forward with our begin discourse , the next town upon this coast beyond number de Dios be Cartagena : it stand in a more healthful place , and be a great town than the other , border upon a better country , which abound with plenty of victual , and have a very good port for the harbour of ship : and it be call Cartagena , because it resemble very much the city of Cartagena in Spain . it contain above four hundred household . it be very rich by reason of the ship stay there , when they go or come from 234 Spain . and if the ship chance to winter before they go home into Spain , than they lie at Cartagena . also it be great enrich by the merchandise , which be there discharge to be carry to the new kingdom of Granada , from which kingdom much gold be bring unto Cartagena . this new kingdom of Granada be two hundred reyn0 league within the land : neither can they travel from Granada . Cartagena to this kingdom by land , because of the mountain and stand water , which lie in the way , so that they be fain to carry their good up a river call the