within a league of shore : than we cast about , and stand off southsoutheast all night , till six a clock the next morning . the 18 day about three a clock , afore day , we see our admiral again , and keep her company till day . citron isle . the 19 day , be within a league of the citron I | will , about eight a clock afore noon , we go aboard the general , viz . m . Walker , the master , the pilot , and my self , rejoice of our good meeting , who tell i of their evil road , where they lose a anchor , a cable , and a hauls , and how the day before , their pinnace be ashore on the same hand , and find foul , and water there , whither now they have send their boat and pinnace for more water , where i know they have small store . i also take captain Parker , the master , and m . Wilks with i , go ashore , and travel to the top of the isle , which be wooded , and high grass , but evil water , and little on it , but young foul plenty , and dangerous come to they . by this time ( i have set the isle , and headland about in sight with a compass ) come a small gale at southsoutheast ; than our admiral shoot off a piece for the boat , and hence i go , and dine aboard with he , and come after aboard , and go in Northnortheast and Northeast till morning : at which time we be within a league of the isle , enter before their arrwall s . Vincent , but know not how much water be upon at saint Vtncent . bar to go out < the 20 day in the morning , be calm , the general pinnace come in to the shore , with intent to sound three canoas the entrance , but see three canoas , with each at the least ° { / 7ndian man > whereof the great part be naked Indians , ' which row , the rest Portugal , they return aboard again . the canoas come with a flag of truce within , call of our ship , and we show they the like , ask what we be , and of what nation : at length one Portugal go aboard the admiral , by who the general send a letter to the governor , crave a pilot to bring in 190 our ship of courtesy , and to have traffic . about noon , have the wind at south , we bear in northwest , and so to the north - east , as the channel trend : but come into seven fathom water , we anchor , until our boat have sound the bar . during which time , i go aboard the admiral , to confer with he about our proceed . after i have stay a while aboard the admiral , the generail come aboard with i , where we publish unto all my company very good rule for their behaviour and profit , to their great satisfaction : after he go down into my cabin , where with all his assistant he confer of diverse particular of our voyage : by which time the boat be return from sound , we depart , and set sail , follow our skiff and with our ship get within the bar into seven fathom : then be becalm , we anchor again before a sandy bay , wherein stand a castle a castle . and house : we rid within musket shoot of it : and anchor about four a clock afternoon . then go i forward with my skiff unto a further point , sound along . before my return , the generail have send for i to supper ; and thither i go : but be ready to sit down , there come out to we a canoa , wherein can ° a with be ten Indians and two Christians ; the one a ancient genouois , the other a Portugal : who come aboard , and “ christian there receive a small banquet , declare their come whereof one be to understand our intent , and what we seek : who be a old be satisfy , depart with a farewell of three great piece from each ship . the 2i day about three a clock afternoon , come a canoa , with the old genouois name Joseph Dory , a John whithall fleme name Paul badeve , and Steven repose a Portugal , and bring a letter from the governor , and well at withal , answer of fear and doubt of we , etc after Santos , have many speech and request , a banquet be make they , and marry this the generail in his pinnace with his music , and trumpet ; dory and i in my skiff with trumpet , drum and fife , and tabor and pipe , accompany they a mile up the river : at go 191 off , we salute they with a volley of three great piece out of each ship : and after we come captain Parker with the admiral long boat , and certain shot in the same , to attend on the generail . the 22 day betimes in the morning , i go aboard the admiral to confer about the send of some token and present to the governor , which be by all the assistant determine to send he three yard of fine scarlet , and three yard of fine murry - cloth ; and to Joseph Dory the old genouois , Steven repose the Portugal , and to Paul badeve the fleming , each of they three yard of fine Santos . black cloth , which our merchant go up to Santos withal in the admiral skiff , about nine a clock aforenoon . also this forenoon , we be mind to go up high with our ship into harbour , i advise they to go view the place , and sound the road before we go up ; which we do : where be find the place both unconvenient , and the road worse : and so we return , and leave the first