the voyage set out by the right honourable the earl of Cumberland , in the year 1586 . intend for the south sea , but perform no far than the latitude of 44 . degree to the south of the equinoctial , write by m . John Sarracoll merchant in the same voyage . he 26 . day of June , in the year 1586 . and in the 28 . year of the queen majesty reign , we depart from Gravesend in two ship ; the admiral call the red dragon , and the other the bark Clifford , the one of the burden of 260 . ton , with 130 . man , and the other of the burden of 130 . ton , with 70 . man : the captain of the admiral be m . Robert Withrington , of the viceadmiral m . Christopher Lister , both be furnish out at the cost and charge of the 202 1586 . right honourable the earl of Cumberland , have for their master two brethren , the one John Anthony , and the other William Anthony . the 24 . of July we come into the sound of plymouth , and be there constrain by westerly wind , to stay till the 17 . of August , we then depart with another ship also for our rear - admiral call the roe , whereof m . Hawes be captain , and a fine pinnace also call the Dorothy , which be sir Walter ralegh . we four being out in the sea , meet the 20 . of August , with 16 . sail of hulk in the sleeve , who name themselves to be man of Hamborough , lade and come from Lisbon . our admiral hail their admiral with courteous word , will he to strike his sail , and to come aboard to he only to know some news of the country , but he refuse to do so , only strike his flag and take it in . the vice - admiral of the hulk be a head , will neither strike flag nor sail , but pass on without budge , whereupon our admiral lend he a piece of ordinance , which they repay double , so that we grow to some little quarrel , whereupon one of the sternemost hulk , be as i suppose more afraid than hurt , strike amain , our admiral be near he , lay he aboard , and enter with certain of his man , how many i know not , for that we be give chase to the windermost man , think our admiral will have come up again to we , to have make they all to have stroke : but the weather grow to be very thick and foggy , with small rain , he come not up but keep with another of the hulk which captain Hawes have board and keep all night , and take out of her some provision that they best like . they learn of the man that be in the hulk , that there be 7 . hulk lade in Lisbon with Spaniards good , and because their lade be very rich , they be determine to go about Ireland , and so they let she go again like a goose with a break wing . the next day after be the 21 . day , we espy 5 . sail more , which lie along to the eastwards , but by 203 reason of the night which then be near at hand , we can hardly come to they . yet at last we hail one of the big of they , and they tell we that they be all of Hamborough : but another say she be of denmark , so that indeed they know neither what to say , nor what to do . our admiral be more desirous to follow his course , than to linger by chase the hulk , call we from pursue they with his trumpet , and a piece of ordinance , or else we will have see what they have be , and wherewith they have be lade . the 22 . day because of contrary wind we put into Dartmouth all 4 . of we , and tarry there seven day . the 29 . we depart thence and put out to sea , and begin our voyage , think at the first to have run along the coast of Spain , to see if we can have meet with some good prize to have send home to my lord : but our captain think it not the best course at the last , but rather keep off in the sea from the coast . and upon Saturday the 17 . of September we fall with the coast of Barbary , and the 18 . hail in with the road of Santa Cruz . the 21 . day we fall with one of the island of the canary , call Forteventura . in run alongst this island , we espy upon a hill by the water side , one wave with a white flag , whereupon we man both our boat , and send they towards the shore , to understand what news . they find they to be two ragged knave and one horseman , and they Lanzarota tell we that Lanzarota be take , and spoil in August spoil by the Turk : when we see they have nothing else to menoj gie / s . we anj proceed on our course , and fall again with the coast of Barbary . the 25 . day of September about 10 . of the clock we riodelqro , ' ™ feH with Rio del oro , stand just under our Tropike : nda ^ alfe we ancker in the mouth of it in 8 . fathom , the entrance ' of it be about 2 . league over . and the next day our captain with the boat search the river , and find it to be as broad 14 . or 15 . league up , as at the entry of it , ’ but find no town nor habitation , save that there 204 come down two poor man , and one of they speak good spanish , and tell our captain , that certain Frenchman use to come thither , and jade some ox trade of the hide , and goat hide , but other commodity there be none . we depart thence the 27 day , and the last day pjj 77o j ' of the month be calm we go aboard our general , and there consent to go for Sierra Leona , to wood and water . from thence till the 10 . of October we be much becalm with extreme hot weather , much lightning , and great store of rain . this 10 . day we sound ,