it , and the liquor that be strain therefrom be deadly poison : howbeit this root be press so dry , that there remain no moisture in it , they mingle and temper the same with water and so make cake thereof , which be very savoury and good to eat , and this be all the bread which they have in those hand . there go from hence yearly into Spain 7 or 8 ship at the least full freight with sugar and hide . the we off near unto Hispaniola lie another great hand Cuba - call Cuba , it be like unto Hispaniola , although there be not so much sugar . the principali town of this island be call Havana , which have a excellent harbour belong thereunto . the townsman be very rich by reason of the fleet that come from Nueva Espanna , and Tierra firma which touch there ; for the safeguarde of which fleet and of the town it self there be a castle build near the say harbour keep with spanish soldier ; neither be there any castle or soldier in all the hand but only here . there be also another hand saint Juan de inhabit with Spaniards call boriquen or Sant Juan Puerto neo . je puerto rico . p be but little , yet every way as plentiful ! as the other two be ; and therefore i omit to speak thereof . but now to prosecute my discourse of the port - town upon the main land : eastward and southward from Margarita there be no town inhabit by Spaniard or Ternambuck . Portugal , till you come to Fernambuck upon the coast of Brasil ; notwithstanding that between the say hand 240 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv downloadeflkrfomhttps ^ www . cambndge . orga ^^ Nofa flatWn 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 09 : 32 , subject to the 1572 - 87 . and Fernambuck run the mighty river of Marannon , the great whereof ( both because of the greatness and the riches ww ° f contain therein ) i must needs make some relation , in marmnon - regarde i have promise to speak of every place that be of any value in all the Indies . this river be one of the great in the world , and be first find when as the Spaniard seek out the other coast : but none can pass up this river because of the greatness of the current which come down , as also there be many shelf of sand lie in the mouth thereof : whereby it be long before the riches in and about this river be know , until such time as the kingdom of Peru be conquer : at which time a captain call Gonsalo Pizarro pass through the country of Peru come at length into a land which they name la Canela , because there grow great store of Sinamome , but not altogether so good as that which come from the east Indies . the say captain proceed far into the country come at length to a mighty river , where he see the country people row in their canoas , and bring gold to buy and sell with the Spaniard . captain Pizarro see this , be desirous to find out the end of this river , but he can not travel by land because of the high mountain : wherefore he make a small bark or pinnace to go and discover from whence the say Indians bring their gold , and send in the say pinnace a captain under he call Orellana , who with fifty man go down the river , but can not return to their general Pizarro , because of the great current 0 0 which be very strong against they , force they to fifty man . pass along the river , and to enter into the sea , and so they sail on forward to the foresay he of Margarita : but as they pass down this river they find it well inhabit with Indians , which be possess of great store of gold . Theise man with their pinnace be pass down this river eight month , for the river lie very crooked , which make a long way by water , neither dare the Spaniard ever land , because they see xi 241 queen the great river of Marannon or Orellana . Orellana send down the river of Mar - the country so full of people , but they take many canoas , wherein they have great store of victual and some gold . now this Orellana come unto Margarita with these good news and riches , determine not to return unto his captain Pizarro which send he , but take his way from thence to the king of Spain , and present he with the gold that he bring out of the river : whereupon the king send he with a fleet of ship and six hundred man to inhabit the say river : but because of the great current and sholde that be therein , he leave the most part of his man and ship , and with those that remain he go unto certain island hard by the river , and build he pinnace ; but the country be very unhealthful , himself and many of his man die , and the residue go every man which way please he best . the fame of this river be straightway spread through Spain and Portugal , insomuch that a gentleman of Portugal call Lewis de Melo ask licence of don Juan the three , than king of Portugal to go and conqu the say river : for from the mouth of this river to the mouth of the river of plate , be that part of America which the king of Portugal ( accord to the partition make between they and the king of Spain ) do hold : so that the king of Portugal have this river in his part give it to the say Lewis de Melo to conquer : who take ten ship and eight hundred man ( among which many be gentleman ) and come to the mouth of this river , lose