think to have hail in with the ship , and to have fetch out some of they : but the wind blow then off the shore , so that we can not possible do it . and again the next day at night we conclude to go with our own two boat , and two other boat of the country which we have take before , which go with caravel - saile , into the road , and accord perform the same , notwithstanding the shot of the enemy . the moon do shine , and give very good light , and in we go with our caravel and boat , and the shot come about our ear as thick as hail : but the Portugal and the rest perceive we no whit at all to shrink or be dismay , forsake their ship , and begin to provide to save themselves , some with their boat , some by swim , and so we enter the ship with a great shout , and find few to resist we : but yet the shore not be a cable length from we , they do so ply both their great and small ordinance at we , that it much annoy we : but yet for all that we make light of their shot , and our man of the bark Clifford enter the admiral and vice - admiral , and our admiral man enter two other ship of the like burden , and present every one cut the cable in the house , and so by the help of God in despite of they all , we bring away four of they . the least whereof be of the burden of 130 ton . in this broil the hulk shoot at we many time , but do no hurt at all : but at the last come by the hulk tow our new prize , we hail they and demand whence they be , they answer we of Flushing , and then we command he to weigh anchor , and to come after we : and not dare to refuse it , he do so , and bring with he a caravel with forty or fifty butt of wine in she , and 216 another small bark which have little or nothing in she : and ride by we as one of our company , and be a ship of the burden of two hundred and fifty ton . our hard hap be to find no great matter , either of merchandise or victual in these ship , save in one of they we find four butt of wine , in another two , in another one , and some fish , and all the rest of their lade be on shore . all this be do upon easter eeve , and we give thank to God , that we have speed so well : and that very night there come a boat from the town , with a dutch merchant , and one Portugal , to offer some ransom for the ship , as they say , but as i judge rather to espy our strength : we keep they that night aboard , and the next day we send they to our admiral . the next day be easter day arise a very great storm insomuch that our caravel which we first take brake from we , and one of our new prize also , by mean of the break of her cable , slip away : whereupon , although the wind be great , and the sea troublesome , yet we send certain of our man in our boat , to recover they if they may , but we fear , that the rage of the weather have cause we to lose both our man and prize . in the midst of this storm , our two Spaniard which we take in the river of plate , see we all busy about our prize , begin to think how they may escape our hand , and sudden slip both out of one of the cabin window , and by swim get a shore , a thing which seem to we impossible , consider the outrage of the weather . this storm continue long , and prevent we of make our intend attempt against the town , have as much to do as possible we may , in keep our ship and prize from run ashore ; and fall into the hand of those that stand gape greedy for our ruin . the 19 day the storm be a little cease , we all weigh and come to a island that lie next northwest 217 from the bay , and the twenty day we go on , shore , and our carpenter set up our pinnace . the 23 day the people of the country come down amain upon we , and beset we round , and shoot at we with their bow and arrow , but in short time we cause they to retire , and many of they be carry away by the help of their fellow , although we have some of our man hurt with some of their arrow . the 24 day we receive out of the caravel twelve butt of wine and four barrel of oil , and half a quarter . the 26 of April our pinnace be launch : and the same day come down unto we a great number of Portugal and Indians , with who we skirmish the space of two hour to their cost . the second day of may the admiral boat go a shore with 14 man to fill water , and present be on shore , they be entrap with two or three hundred Indians which assault they , and slay one or two of our man , but the rest escape notwithstanding the number of the enemy , and come safe again with water to the ship . we suffer this loss by mere negligence , and want of circumspection . the 5 day the captain of the admiral himself take a small bark , his own little caravel , our pinnace and the dutchmans boat , and at night go on shore to get victual , among the bullock which be in the field : and in the morning they be go so far , that they be out of sight . which be perceive by the enemy , they present make ready their galley for admiral , with four caravel , with as many man in they as possible can thrust in and stand one by another : and they bear over with the north shore to meet with our pinnace and boat : whereupon our man fall into great danger , although m . Lister our captain dissuade m . Withrington from that attempt , by lay before he the danger both of himself and we also , be so far