picture in table of 14 . inch , 30 . and 40 . livre . a piece . the 16 . day we go from green island to the water place , which be about a league to the westward , where we take in about 18 . ton of water , and the 22 . day come again to seal island to make provision of seal , where a storm arise , which put we in some danger , by the break of our anchor and cable , and the wind blow so cold , that we much marveil at it , consider the height of the place . i must needs in this place find fault with our self and the whole company , that ride in this river 16 . day , the channel be not sound , nor the way make perfect . the 29 . day we take into our ship one mile Philips , which be leave in the west Indies by m . Hawkins . the first of February i take the sun in 38 . degree . and the 3 . day of February i take it again and find it to be in 41 . degree . 210 the 7 . day of February our captain master Lister be in one of the prize , hoist over board his gondola , and go aboard the admiral , and be there they send their gondola aboard we , for our master , master Collins , and my self , and at our come we be call into the captain cabin , where be set in counsel for matter touch the state of our voyage , these man who name be under write . ' master Robert Withrington captain of the admiral . master Christopher Lister captain of the bark Clifford . John Anthony , master of the admiral . Thomas hood , pilot for the strait . William Anthony , master of the bark Clifford . David Collins . } { Tristan Gennings . master William Withrington . " master Beumond Withrington . master wasne . } { master Norton . master Wilkes . } { master Harris . Thomas Anthony . Nicholas porter . the master gunner : and Alexander Gundie , his mate . John Sarracol . this company be all assemble together , the master m . John an - of the admiral declare that the cause of our assembly t ^ onie . be to determine after good advice , what course or way be best and most likely to all man judgment to be take . first for the good preferment of my lord voyage , than the health of our man , and last the safeguard of our ship , and further show his mind to we all in these word , as near as i can carry they away . my master , my lord determination touch this our voyage be not unknown unto you all , have appoint it to be make , and by the grace of God to be perform by we for the south sea . but for as much 211 as we do all see the time of the year to be far spend , as also the wind to hang contrary , the weather draw on cold and cold , the night long and long , our bread so consume that we have not leave above two month biscuit , our drink in a manner all spend , so that we have nothing but water , which in so cold a country as the strait , if we shall get in , and be force there to winter , will no doubt be a great weaken to our man , and a hazard of the overthrow of the voyage : these thing consider , both our captain , master hood , and i do rather think it good for the wealth of our voyage , the health of our man , and safety of our ship , to go room with the coast of Brasill , where by God grace we shall well victuali our self , both with wine which be our great want , and other necessary . beside , it be give we here to understand by the Portugal which we have take , that there be no doubt but that by god help and our endeavour , we shall be able to take the town of Baya , at our pleasure , which if we do put in practice , and do not perform it , be somewhat advise by they , they offer to loose their life . and have by this mean victual our self , we may there spend upon the coast some three or four month , except in the mean time we may happen upon some good thing to content my lord , and to purchase our own credit : otherwise , we may take the spring of the year , and so proceed , accord to my lord direction . and assure your self ( by the assistance of God ) we will not return without such benefit by this voyage , as may redound to my lord profit , and the honour of our country . now if there be any of you that can give better course and advise , than this which i have deliver , let he speak , and we will not only hear he , but thank he for his a resolute and counseH ( anj follow it . captain thi ® speech of m . Anthony , m . Lister our captain Lister . answer in this sort : m . Withrington , and m . Anthony , 212 both , you know , that the last word that my lord have with we in such a chamber be , that in any case we shall follow our voyage only for the south sea , except by the way , we may perchance meet with such a purchase , as that we may return with 6000 pound : and therefore i see no safety , how we may dare offer to go back again , be so near the strait as we be : for my part i neither dare nor will consent unto it , except we be further force , then yet we be . my account be this , that he that die for this year be excuse for the next , and i rather choose death , than to return in disgrace with my lord . hereunto both the captain and master of the admiral reply that they be all of that mind : yet notwithstanding , that in go room the voyage be in better possibility to be perform , then in winter either in the strait , or at port S . Julian , all thing consider and so agree , and conclude all in one , they be determine present to bear up . the