287 a kinsman of his call Alvares de Mendanio , and Pedro Sarmiento as lieutenant , and in the vice - admiral go Pedro the Ortega . this fleet depart forth of the haven of Lima , and sail 800 league westward off the coast of Peru , find certain island in eleven degree to the south of the equinoctial inhabit with a kind of people of a yellowish complexion , and all naked , who weapon be bow and arrow , and dart . the beast that they see here be hog and little dog , and they find some hen . here also they ckmes ^ ing / ir , find a muster of clove , ginger , and cinnamon , although andsinamon . the cinnamon be not of the best ; and here appear unto they likewise some show of gold . the first island that the Spaniard discover , they name Santa Izabella ; and here they build a small pinnace , with the which and with their ship boat they find out between nine and fifteen degree of southerly latitude eleven great island be one with another of 80 league in compass . the great island that they discover the isle of be according unto the first finder call Guadalcanal , Guadalcanal . on t ^ e coast whereof they sail 150 league , before they can know whither it be a island or part of the main land : and yet they know not perfect what to make of it , but think that it may be part of that continent which stretch to the strait of Magellan ; for they coast it to eighteen degree and can not find the end thereof . the gold that they find be upon this island or main land of Guadalcanal , whereas they land and take a town , find small grain of gold hang up in the house thereof . but because the Spaniard understand not the language of the country , and also for that the indian be very stout man , and fight continual against they , they can never learn from whence that gold come , nor yet what store be in the land . these indian use to go to sea in great canoas that will carry 100 man a piece , wherein they have many conflict one against another : howbeit unto the Christians 288 they can do no great hurt ; for that with a small pinnace and two falcon a few may overcome 100 of they . at this place fourteen man mistrust nothing , row to land , to take in fresh water , who on the sudden certain Indians in four canoas set upon , take the ship boat , and slay all the man therein : wherefore a man can go on shore too strong , nor yet be too wary in a strange land . hereupon the Spaniard go on shore in their pinnace , and burn the town , a town burn . and in this town they find the small grain of gold before mention . they be discover of these island from one to another about fourteen month , at the end of which time ( because that upon the coast where they be , the wind continue still in one place , may be a occasion of long tarry ) they consult which way to return . southward they dare not go for fear of great tempest which be that way usual : wherefore sail to the north of the line , they fall with the coast of Nueva Espanna ; on which coast they meet with such terrible storm , that they be force to cut their main mast over - bourd , and to lie nine month beat it up and down in the sea , before they can get into any harbour of the Christians . in which time by reason of evil government , and for lack of victual and fresh water , most of the man in their admiral die ; for five whole day together they have neither water nor meat : but in the other ship they behave themselves so well , that the great part of they come safe unto the land . he that pass the strait of Magellan , or sail from the coast of Chili direct for the Malucos must needs run in sight of some of these island before speak of . at which island lie so furnish 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 hen , excellent almond , potatos , sugar - cane , with diverse other sort fit for the sustenance of man in great abundance . also among these island you shall have some quantity of gold , which the Indians will give you in truck for xi 289 t abundance of good victual upon the isle of Salomon . convenient in the way to the Malucos you may your self with plenty of victual , as hog , A . D . 1572 - 87 . a new rich trade for gold , clove , ganger , and cinnamon . why these isle be call the isle of Salomon . other commodity . for the Spaniard in their discovery of these island not seek nor be desirous of gold , bring home notwithstanding 40000 pezo with they , beside great store of clove and ginger , and some cinnamon also which be not so good as in other place . the discoverer of these island name they the isle of Salomon , to the end that the Spaniard suppose they to be those isle from whence Salomon fetch gold to adorn the temple at Jerusalem , may be the more desirous to go and inhabit the same . now the same time when they think to have send colony unto these island , captain Drake enter the south sea : whereupon commandment be give , that they shall not be inhabit , to the end that such Englishman , and of other nation as pass the strait of Magellan to go to the Malucos may have no succour there , but such as they get of the indian people .