unto he , some by force , and some because they dare not say to the contrary , and other of their good will , and so in the end they all agree unto his determine purpose . then make they Fernando de Gusman their head , 8c Agira be make a captain . this do , because the people shall the better hold their opinion , he do as great a villainy as ever any Spaniard commit : for he make a altar , whereon he and all the soldier renounce their service unto the king of Spain , 8c so as people without a king , choose the say don Fernando to be their king , and do homage unto he . Theise matter be thus finish they consult among themselves which shall be the best way for they to go of Peru . “ to Peru ? for they can not go up the river , by which they come down , in regard of the strong current , and go back overland they shall be very weak for want of horseman : wherefore they determine to go down the river . then say Lopez de Agira , that they will carry nothing with they but the pinnace and soldier which shall fight , and that it be best to leave behind they all the Indians which they bring from Peru , with the woman and the sick man . whereunto the general don Ferdinando will not agree , because he know that when they be go the people of the country will kill they all . Lopez de Agira hear this , and long to be chief governor himself , take unto he 30 of his own countryman of his Fernando and disposition , and on the sudden slay don Fernando , Gusman who not many day before he have swear to obey : 8c slay . 245 now by his subtle practise , be withal eloquent in his talk , he cause the soldier to appoint himself their governor , and make they believe that all the cruelty commit be for their saveguard : neither do the tyrannic of this wretched man here end . he be bear in Biskay a country near unto France , wherefore i believe he rather to have be a Frenchman than a Spaniard , for that in the heart of a Spaniard can not be a new mass - so much cruelty as this man show . now be ready sacre ’ to go his way , he determine not to carry with he any gendeman or person of quality , and therefore he slay all such person ; and then depart only with the common soldier , he leave behind he all the spanish woman and sick man , with all other creature . if i shall rehearse all the cruel murder of this wicked man one by one , i shall be over tedious unto you . only in few word i say , that this man proceed down the river , have with he only four hundred man : but before he pass the river , and be come to Margarita , he have no more leave but two hundred and thirty man , for the rest he have put to death , and leave on shore among the people of the country : all which tyranny he use , because he ever stand in fear of his life : for have he see at any time but two soldier talk together , he will straight suspect that they be conspire of his death , and therefore he use the practise abovesaid . and he never go any way , but that he have in his company thirty Biscayne of his own will and mind ready to execute his cruel purpose . great store of as these soldier with their captain come down gild in the the r [ verj they see many canoas with gold in they nver of Mar - passjn „ too a j fro and people on both side of the river , and in their passage many time they land , and get good store of gold and victual . now also do they amazmes find that to be true which Orellana have report , namely at there be Amazon , that be to say , woman that husband ^ in fight in the war with bow and arrow : but these the war . woman fight to aid their husband , and not by they - 246 self alone without the company of man , as Orellana report . there be of these woman upon diverse part of this river , who see the Spaniard fight with their husband come in to succour they , and show themselves more valiant than their husband ; for which cause it be name , the river of Amazones . the Spaniard intent be only to pass down the river , neither seek they at all to discover the inland , and yet they take good store of gold , put it into one of their pinnace , where Lopez de Agira himself be embark , which pinnace at the mouth of the river be cast away , but he himself escape , because he have not as yet fulfil his bloody mind . and when he be come to the island of Margarita , the governor thereof suppose he have be one of the king loyal captain , receive he with pinnace , and bring good store of victual unto he . but he put the say governor immediate to death , land on the hand , and take it and two ship that be there , and constrain likewise a hundred and fifty man , which he good store of gold . Lopez de Agira arrive at Margarita 1568 . there find , to go with he , beside other that go voluntary , carry from thence good store of victuales , and many horse also . and then he return to the main land , say , that with his small force he will subdue the whole India : imagine belike that all the old soldier and poor people , at the first sight of he , will turn to his side and take his part . howbeit he be foul deceive : for before he have march two day journey up