mischief as they do before , because the Spaniard take better heed unto they . from that time until this present there have be no peace at all : for notwithstanding many captain and soldier have do their uttermost , yet can they not bring that people whole in subjection . and although the Spaniard have in this province eleven town and two bishopric , yet have they little enough to maintain themselves , by reason of the war ; for they spend all the gold that the land yield in the maintenance of their soldier : which will not be so , if they have peace , for than they may work in all their mine . Eleventowns , andtwobishop - ricks in Chili . 277 description thus have speak somewhat of the situation of ^ ofchil ^ ™ Chili , and of the troublesome conquest thereof , i will Baldivia . return to my former discourse where i leave . Baldivia therefore be of 150 house have twice be burn and spoil by the Indians ; so that now it be wax poor , but before the indian sack it , it be very rich : and it stand up a river four league from the tie province sea . pass from hence you come to the plain country insethe '* Arauco be situate over against the island la Mocha , island la on wbich island the Indians that inhabit belong to the Mocha situate main land . in 38 deg . and have pass this plain of Arauco , the next town a hayi . of the Spaniard that you come unto be la Concepcion which have be the great and the rich town in all Chui : but by reason that the Indians have burn the same four time , it be now grow very poor , and have small store of people : it contain about some two hundred house . and because it adjoin upon the plain of Arauco , where these valiant Indians be , therefore this town be environ about with a strong wall , and have a fort build hard by it : and here be 500 soldier continual in garrison . between this place Valparizo anj Valparizo , the Indians call the coast by the name WortofS ^ Ia 0 Mapocha . Sant Iago it self stand 25 league up into the country , be the principali town of all Chili , deg . 40 min . and the seat of the governor : it consist of about 800 house . the port of Valparizo whither the good come from Lima by ship , have about twenty house stand by it . the next town near the sea side coquimbo beyond this be coquimbo , which stand two league standethtm ^ . up jnto janj ; anj contain about 200 house . next C %' iapo . mtn ' unt0 coquimbo stand a port - town call Copiapo inhabit altogether by Indians which serve the Spaniard : and here a gentleman which be governor of the town have a ingenio for sugar : at this place end the whole province of Chili . here also the mountain join hard upon the sea be the cause why all the land between Copiapo and Peru , contain 160 league , lie desolate . 278 the first town on the coast of Peru call Atacama be a description inhabit by Indians which be slave unto the Spaniard . ° fperu - but before i pass any far i will here also declare unto you the first discovery of Peru with other matter thereto belong , and then will i return to the seacoast again : and to the end you may understand i the better , i will begin with Panama . after that the Spaniard have inhabit the north side of this main land , pass over the mountain they discover the south sea : where because they find indian people with gold and pearl , they build a town eighteen league to the west of number de dios hard upon the seaside , and call it Panama . from hence they discover along the coast of Nueva Espanna : and for that Nueva Espanna be at the same time inhabit by Spaniards , there begin a trade from thence to Panama : but from Panama by sea to the coast of Peru they can not trade in a long time , because of the southerly wind blow on this coast almost all the year long , which be a hindrance to ship sail that way : and by land the passage be impossible , in regard of mountain and river : yea it be fifteen year before they pass the island of pearl , which be but twenty league from Panama . there be at this time in Panama two man , the one call Francisco Pizarro bear in the city of Truxillo in Spain , a valiant man , but withal poor : the other call Diego de Almagro be very rich . Theise man get a company unto they , and provide two caravel to discover the coast of Peru : and . have obtain licence of the governor of that place , Francisco Pizarro set forth with the two foresay caravel and 100 man , and Diego de Almagro stay in Panama to send he victual and other necessary . now Francisco Pizarro sail along the coast meet with much contrary wind and rain , which put he to great trouble ; and he begin also after a while to lack victual , for he be sail of that in eight month which they now pass in fifteen day , and not know the right course he run into every river and bay that he see along the coast : which 279 be the chief cause that he stay so long on his voyage : also thirty of his company die by reason of the unhealthfulness of the coast . at last he come to a Isla deal Gallo . Island call by he Isla deal Gallo , be situate from the main land six league . from hence he send one of his ship to Panama for a new supply of victual and of man : which ship be depart , 40 of his man that remain behind make a mutiny , and pass up into the