next day be the 8 of February , there fall out many and diverse speech on each part concern the alter of our course , some will continue for the strait , and other some will not . whereupon a view be take in both ship of victual , and reasonable store be find for both company : and the wind withal come to the north , we determine to take out of the prize the best necessary that be in they , and so cast they off , and to ply for the strait . all this time we hold on our course , and the 15 day we find our self in the height of 44 degree , but then the wind come to the south , with much rain , wind , cold , and other untemperate weather , continue in that sort five or six day , in which time we hull back again into the height of 42 degree . Sunday be the 20 of February , our admiral be something to the leeward of we , and the storm somewhat cease , put aboard his flag in the mizzen shrowd , as a token that he will speak with we , and there - 213 they return be in the latitude of degree . upon we bear room with he , and have hail one another , captain Withrington show the disposition of all his company , which be rather to go room with the coast of Brasil , than to lie after that sort in the sea with foul weather and contrary wind . our captain on the other side show the contrary disposition of his man , and company , will notwithstanding to proceed : but in the end , both the ship fall asunder , and our captain say , see then there be no remedy , i must be content , though against my will . the 21 day the weather grow fair , and the wind good at the south for the strait , yet our admiral bare room still , we suppose he will have take the benefit of the time : whereupon our whole company begin to think of the inconvenience that will arise by divide our self , and lose our admiral , be very willing to continue their course , and yet not without the company of the admiral . and then we begin to cast about after he , and at the last bear with he , and he tell we , that upon a second view of the victual , he find their store so slender , and their want so great , that there be no remedy for they but to seek some mean to be relieve , which be the only cause that he bear northward . this speech make we of the bark to enter into a new consultation : and we find many of our man weak , and all our caliver not serviceable , and the smith that shall mend they to be in the admiral . we consider also , that by break of company , each ship shall be the more weaken : we continue in this consultation till the four and twenty day , and in all that time find master captain Lister more desirous to accomplish , and to fulfil the voyage , and not willing in any case to turn his ship , but that the desire which we all have to continue in consort with our admiral , make we to think well of his company , and in fine a agreement and conclusion be thus make on all side , to follow the admiral , without any more talk of the strait till the spring . 214 the io day of march , it fall out so unfortunate , that Samuel Teller our master mate , fall overboard , and so perish , we be not able by any mean to recover he . the eight and twenty day be in the height of one and twenty degree , we espy a sail , which we judge came out of the strait , and have rich lade , but the night be at hand , we lose she very unlucky , and the next day can have no sight of she . the five day of April we fall with the land of Brasilia , in the height , as i judge , of sixteen degree and a tierce , and our captain go then aboard the admiral , where they conclude to send the pinnace and our boat on shore for fresh water , because we stand in need of it , which do so with eighteen good man , and three or four ton of water cask . they be from we till the eight day in the morning , at which time we espy they again , and that day we come all together into the road of Camena , where there come a Canoa aboard we , and one of the chief Portugal that belong to the place . here we take in beef , hog , water and wood at our pleasure , have almost no man able to resist we , but some of our Portugal steal from we in the Canoa . the 11 day we enter into the haven of Baya , where we be receive at the point come in , with two great piece of ordinance , which discharge bullet at we five time a piece , but they lose shot and powder , and do we not harm . after we have pass the point , we hail in for the road as close as the wind will permit we , but can not come so near as we desire , and therefore we come to a anchor a fair birth off the town , not without great store of shot from thence , but yet our harm be none at all for ought they can do . at our come in , we find in the road eight ship and one caravel , of the which one be a hulk or double fly boat of the burden of two hundred and fifty ton , have in her 24 piece of good ordinance : she with the 215 A . D . 1587 . march . the ride of Camena . they come into the river of Baya . they take 4 ship out of the harbour of Baya , notwithstanding the shot of the enemy . a hulk of Flushing . rest of the ship , together with the town , give we shot , and shoot , but not one touch so much as any of our sail . and lest we shall seem in the mean time to be idle , we repay for every shot of they , two or three sometime at the ship and the town together . the next day at night we