of September we enter the south sea at the cape or head shore . the seven day we be drive by a great storm from the enter into the south sea two hundred league and odd in longitude , and one degree to the southward of the strait : in which height , and so many league to the westward , the fifteen day of September fall out the eclipse of the moon at the hour of six of the clock at night : but neither do the elliptical conflict of the moon impair our state , nor her clear again amend we a whit , but the accustom eclipse of the sea continue in his force , we be darken more than the moon seven fold . from the bay ( which we call the bay of sever of friend ) we be drive back to the southward of the strait in 57 degree and a terce : in which height we come to a anchor among the island , have there fresh and very good water , with herb of singular virtue . not far from hence we enter another bay , where we find people both man and woman in their canoas , naked , and range from one island to another to seek their meat , who enter traffic with we for such thing as they have . we return hence northward again , find the 3 . of October three island , in one of which be such plenty of bird as be scant credible to report . the 8 . day of October we lose sight of one of our consort wherein m . winter be , who as then we suppose be put by a storm into the strait again , which at our return home we find to be true , and he not perish , as some of our company fear . thus be come into the height of the strait again , we run , suppose the coast of Chili to lie as the general map have describe it , namely northwest , which we find to lie and trend to the north - east and of the coast of eastwards , whereby it appear that this part of Chili have not be true hitherto discover , or at the least not true report for the space of 12 . degree at the 112 least , be set down either of purpose to deceive , or of ignorant conjecture . we continue our course , fall the 29 . of November with a island call la Mocha , where we cast anchor , 2 % and our general hoist out our boat , go with ten of Mocha in 38 . our company to shore , where we find people , who the cruel and extreme deal of the Spaniard have force for their own safety and liberty to flee from the main , and to fortify themselves in this island . we be on land , the people come down to we to the water side with show of great courtesy , bring to we potato , root , and two very fat sheep , which our general receive and give they other thing for they , and have promise to have water there : but the next day repair again to the shore , and send two man aland with barrel to fill water , the people take they for Spaniards ( to who they use to show no favour if they take they ) lay violent hand on they , and as we think , slay they . our general see this , stay here no long , but weigh anchor , and set sail towards the coast of Chili , and draw towards it , we meet near to the shore a indian in a Canoa , who think we to have be Spaniards , come to we and tell we , that at a place call S . Iago , there be a great spanish ship lade from the kingdom e of Peru : for which good news our general give he diverse trifle , whereof he be glad , and go along with we and bring we to the place , which be call the port the port of of Valparizo . when we come thither , we find indeed the ship nute . ride at anchor , have in her eight Spaniard and three negro , who think we to have be Spaniards and their friend , welcome we with a drum , and make ready a Bottija of wine of Chili to drink to we : but as wine ofChili . soon as we be enter , one of our company call Thomas moon begin to lay about he , and strike one of the Spaniard , and say unto he , Abaxo Perro , that be in english , go down dog . one of these Spaniard xi 113 h see person of that quality in those sea , all to cross , and bless himself : but to be short , we stow they under hatch all save one Spaniard , who sudden and desperate leap over board into the sea , and swim ashore to the town of saint Iago , to give they warning of our arrival . they of the town be not above 9 household , present flee away and abandon the town . our general the town of man his boat , and the spanish ship boat , and go saint Iago take . to t ^ e town , and be come to it , we rifle it , and come to a small chapel which we enter , and find therein a silver chalice , two cruet , and one altar - cloth , the spoil whereof our general give to m . Fletcher his minister . we find also in this town a warehouse store with WineofChiR . wine of Chili , and many board of cedarwood , all which wine we bring away with we , and certain of the board to burn for firewood : and so be come aboard , we depart the haven , have first set all the John Grieg > a Spaniard on land , save one John Griego a greek pilot take , bear , who our general carry with he for his pilot to bring he into the haven of Lima . when we be at sea , our general rifle the ship , and find in her good