may know the harbour by one little island that lie southeast off the mouth of the harbour , and it be distant 4 league . Furthermore , you may know the harbour by a high rock that stand on the south side ; and this rock be very much like a watch tower . also if you be any thing in , you may anchor in 5 fathom at a low water . item , it flow there south and north , and high at spring tide 3 fathom and a half water ; and in the off the flood set to the northward . item , in the latitude of 48 degree 50 minute you shall have 44 fathom black sand about 5 league off : and about 3 league off you shall have 25 fathom , and great shingle stone . 354 item , in the latitude of 49 degree you shall have sound in 38 fathom oazy sand . item , in the latitude of 51 degree 10 minute you shall have sounding 4 league from the shore in 44 fathom small black stone . sounding within the entrance of the strait . item , about two league from the northermost shore you shall have 38 fathom black sand , and all along you shall have deep water , not less than 18 or 20 fathom in the fair way . sounding on the coast of Chili in the south sea . item , in the latitude of 36 degree you shall have sounding in 12 fathom , 2 mile from the land , brown sand . item , in the latitude of 35 degree , you shall have sounding one league off from the land in 10 fathom white sand . sounding on the coast of new Spain in the south sea . item , in the latitude of 14 degree to the north of the line , you shall have sounding 4 league from the land in 30 fathom , brown sand . item , from the latitude of 14 degree unto the latitude of 15 degree , you shall have fair shoald 3 league from the land . sounding on the coast of Africa unto the eastward of the cape of buena esperanza 40 league . item , to the eastwards of the cape of buena esperanza 40 league , in the latitude of 34 degree and 10 minute , 8 league from the land , you shall have 65 fathom , and brown sand . [ a ought 355 a note of the lie of the land unto the southward of port desire . n primis , seal bay stand unto the southward of port desire 12 league southsouthwest . Furthermore , unto the southward of Seales bay 3 league , you shall have very low land . also more unto the southward of Seales bay 7 league , in the height of 48 degree 40 minute , you shall see a rock 5 league off the shore , the land lie southwest and by south . item , in the latitude of 49 degree you shall see a small flat island , about a league and a half off the shore , the land lie southwest and by south . Furthermore , from the latitude of 49 degree i unto the latitude of 50 degree , the land lie south and by west , and be high land . item , from the latitude of 50 degree unto the latitude of 50 degree 40 minute , the land lie southwest and by south . Furthermore , from the latitude of 50 degree 40 minute unto the latitude of 52 degree 17 minute , the land lie south and by west , north and by east . item , in the say latitude of 52 degree 17 minute , there go in a harbour , which be to be know by a long beache that lie on the south side of the harbour . Moreover , the say harbour stand 12 league unto the northward of cape joy . Furthermore , from the latitude of 52 degree 17 minute unto the latitude of 52 degree 40 minute ( in which heighth stand cape joy ) the land lie southsoutheast , and n orthnorthwest . item , come from the northward , you shall see before you come to cape joy , a very long beach , about the length of 8 league , be 5 league short of the cape unto the northward . also unto the southward of the cape , you shall see another beach about a league 356 long , adjoin hard under the cape ; about which beach be the entrance of the strait of Magellan , the which strait be in breadth six league over , from the cape unto the south shore , lie south and by east . item , from cape joy , be the entrance of the strait of Magellan , unto the first narrow passage of the say strait ; the course be west and by north , and east and by south , and be distant 18 league ; the land be in breadth from the one side to the other one league . item , from the first narrow unto the second narrow passage , the course be west and by south , and east and by north ; and the distance be 12 league : and in breadth the one side be from the other about two league over . item , from the second narrow unto the island that be call Elizabeth , Bartholomew , and Penguin island , the distance be 5 league , and the course be southwest and Northeast : the island be distant a league and a half the one from the other . item , from the say island unto port famine be 16 league : the course be southsouthwest , and northnortheast . Moreover , from port famine unto cape froward , the course be south and by west , and north and by east : and they be distant 8 league asunder . item , from cape froward unto saint Jeromes river , be 16 league : the course be northwest and southeast . also from saint Jeromes river unto the uttermost land on the south side , the which be call Cabo Deseado , the course be northwest and somewhat to the northward , and be distant 30 league . So the whole length of the strait of Magellan be 105 league . the entrance of the strait . the end of the strait . a note of the lie of the land in the south sea . in primis , there stand in the latitude of 52 degree and 50 minute , three or four island , about 8 league from Cabo Deseado : the course be northnorthwest , and 357 in which height stand Quintero . 27 deg . 40 mi . in which height stand Copiapo . southsoutheast . and those island stand in the mouth of the strait of Magellan