and twenty league within the strait , where we find a sea answerable to the ocean . in this time we free our ship from water , and after we have rest a little , our man be not able to move ; their sinew be stifle , and their flesh dead , and many of they ( which be most lamentable to be report ) be so eat with lice , as that in their flesh do lie cluster of lice as big as peason , yea and some as big as bean . be in this misery we be constrain to put into a coove for the refresh our man . our master know the shore and every coove very perfect , put in with the shore , and more to the tree , as beforetime we have do , lay our anchor to the seaward . here we continue until the twenty of October ; but not be able any long to stay through extremity of famine , the one and twenty we put off into the channel , the weather be reasonable calm : but before night it blow most extreme at westnorthwest . the storm grow outrageous , our man can scarce stand by their labour ; and the strait be full of turn reach we be constrain by discretion of the captain and master in their account to guide the ship in the hell - dark night , when we can not see any shore , the channel be in some plice scarce three mile broad . but our captain , as we first pass through the strait draw such a exquisite plat of the same , as i be assure it can in 407 1592 . the cape deseado most dangerous double , after they have be nine day in the south sea . a excellent plat of the strait of Magellan . penguinisle within three league of port desire . any sort be better : which plat he and the master so often peruse , and so careful regard , as that in memory they have every turn and creek , and in the deep dark night without any doubt they convey the ship through that crooked channel : so that i conclude , the world have not any so skilful pilot for that place , as they be : for otherwise we can never have pass in such sort as we do . the 25 we come to a island in the strait name penguinisle , whither we send our boat to seek relief , for there be great abundance of bird , and the weather be very calm ; so we come to a anchor by the island in seven fathom . while our boat be at shore , and we have great store of penguin , there arise a sudden storm , so that our ship do drive over a breach and our boat sink at the shore . captain Cotton and the lieutenant be on shore leap in the boat , and free the same , and throw away all the bird , and with great difficulty recover the ship : my self also be in the boat the same time , where for my life i labour to the best of my power . the ship all this while drive upon the lee - shore , when we come aboard , we help to set sail , and weigh the anchor ; for before our come they can scarce hoist up their yard , yet with much ado they set their fore - coarse . thus in a mighty fret of weather the seven and twenty day of October we be free of the strait , and the thirty of October we come to penguinisle be three league from port desire , the place which we purpose to seek for our relief . when we be come to this isle we send our boat on shore , which return lade with bird and egg ; and our man say that the penguin be so thick upon the isle , that ship may be lade with they ; for they can not go without tread upon the bird , whereat we great rejoice . then the captain appoint Charles Parker and Edward smith , with twenty other to go on shore , and to stay upon the isle , for the kill and dry of those penguin , and promise 408 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . i59x after the ship be in harbour to send the rest , not only for expedition , but also to save the small store of victual in the ship . but Parker , smith , and the rest of their faction suspect , that this be a devise of the captain to leave his man on shore , that by these mean there may be victual for the rest to recover their country : and when they remember , that this be the place where they will have slay their captain and master , sure ( think they ) for revenge hereof will they leave we on shore . which when our captain understand , he use these speech unto they : i understand that you be doubtful of your security through the perverseness of your own guilty conscience : it be a extreme grief unto i , that you shall judge i bloodthirsty , in who you have see nothing but kind conversation : if you have find otherwise , speak bold , and accuse i of the wrong that i have do ; if not , why do you then measure i by your own uncharitable conscience ? all the company know indeed , that in this place you practise to the utmost of your power , to murder i and the master causeless , as God know , which evil in this place we do remit you : and now i may conceive without do you wrong , that you again purpose some evil in bring these matter to repetition : but God have so shorten your confederacy , as that i nothing doubt you : it be for your master sake that i have forbear you in your unchristian practice : and here i protest before God , that for his sake alone i will yet endure this injury , and you shall in no sort be prejudice or in any thing be