for the town : and as we be under sail we meet with one of the king canoas come toward we : whereupon we shake the ship in the wind and xi 337 y march 1588 . ourarrivalat Java major . the morisco or , Arabian tongiie common in Java . clove , pepper , sugar , and many other commodity in Java major . stay for the canoa until it come aboard of we , and stand into the bay which be hard by and come to a anchor . in this canoa be the king secretary , who have on his head a piece of die linen cloth fold up like a Turk Tuliban : he be all naked save about his waste , his breast be carve with the broad arrow upon it : he go barefooted : he have a interpretor with he , which be a Mestizo , that be , half a indian and half a Portugal , who can speak very good portugese . this secretary signify unto our general that he have bring he a hog , hen , egg , fresh fish , sugar - cane and wine : ( which wine be as strong as any aquavitae , and as clear as any rock water : ) he tell he far that he will bring victual so sufficient for he , as he and his company will request , and that within the space of four day . our general use he singular well , banquet he most royal with the choice of many and sundry conserves , wine both sweet and other , and cause his musician to make he music . this do our general tell he that he and his company be Englishman ; and that we have be at China and have have traffic there with they , and that we be come thither to discover , and purpose to go to Malaca . the people of Java tell our general that there be certain Portugal in the island which lie there as factor continual to traffic with they , to buy negro , clove , pepper , sugar , and many other commodity . this secretary of the king with his interpretor lie one night aboard our ship . the same night , because they lie aboard , in the evening at the set of the watch , our general command every man in the ship to provide his harquebus and his shot , and so with shoot off 40 . or 50 . small shot and one Sacre , himself set the watch with they . this be no small marveile unto these heathen people , who have not common see any ship so furnish with man and ordinance . the next morning we dismiss the secretary and his interpretor with all humanity . 338 the four day after , which be the 12 . of march , accord to their appointment come the king canoas ; but the wind be somewhat scant they can not get aboard that night , but put into a bay under the island until the next day , and present after the break of day there come to the number of 9 or 10 . of the king nine or in . canoas so deep lade with victual as they can swim , ° fthe with two great live ox , half a score of wonderful ' great and fat hog , a number of hen which be alive , drake , goose , egg , plantan , sugar cane , sugar in plate , coco , sweet orange and sour , lymes , great store of wine and aquavitae , salt to season victual withal , and almost all manner of victual else , with diverse of the king officer which be there . among all the rest of the people in one of these canoas come two Portugal , two portu - which be of middle stature , and man of marvelous in proper personage ; they be each of they in a loose jerkin , and hose , which come down from the waste to the ankle , because of the use of the country , and partly because it be lend , and a time for do of their penance , ( for they account it as a thing of great dislike among these heathen to wear either hose or shoe on their foot : ) they have on each of they a very fair and a white lawn shirt , with fall band on the same , very decent , only their bare leg except . these Portugal be no small joy unto our general and all the rest of our company : for we have not see any Christian that be our friend of a year and a half before . our general use and entreat they singular well , with banquet and music : they tell we that they be no less glad to see we , than we to see they , and inquire of the estate of their country , and what be become of don Antonio their king , and whether he be enquiry oj living or no : for that they have not of long time bene Antony . in Portugal ! , and that the Spaniard have always bring they word that he be dead . than our general satisfy they in every demand ; assure they , that their king be alive , and in England , and have honourable 339 the wife kill themselves after their husband death . a strange order . allowance of our queen , and that there be war between Spain and England , and that we be come under the king of Portugal into the south sea , and have war upon the Spaniard there , and have fire , spoil and sink all the ship along the coast that we can meet withal , to the number of eighteen or twenty sail . with this report they be sufficient satisfy . on the other side they declare unto we the state of the island of Java . First the plentifulness and great choice and store of victual of all sort , and of all manner of fruit as before be set down : then the great and rich merchandise which be there to be have . than they describe the property and nature of the people as follow . the name of the king of that part of the island be