John Austin . Francis Copstone . Richard Garet . James Eversby . Nicolas Parker . Leonard . John pick . Benjamin . William Maber . James not Christopher Hauser . 399 a isle near port desire abound with seal and penguin . they depart the second time from port desire for the strait of Magellan . after they have deliver this relation unto our captain under their hand , than we begin to travel for our life , and we build up a smith forge , and make a colepit , and burn coal , and there we make nail , bolt , and spike , other make rope of a piece of our cable , and the rest gather muscle , and take smelte for the whole company . three league from this harbour there be a isle with four small isle about it , where there be great abundance of seal , and at the time of the year the penguin come thither in great plenty to breed . we conclude with the pinnace , that she shall sometime go thither to fetch seal for we ; upon which condition we will share our victual with her man for man ; whereunto the whole company agree . so we part our poor store , and she labour to fetch we seal to eat , wherewith we live when smelte and muscle fail : for in the nepe stream we can get no muscle . thus in most miserable calamity we remain until the sixth of August , still keep watch upon the hill to look for our general , and so great be our vexation and anguish of soul , as i think never flesh and blood endure more . thus our misery daily increase , time pass , and our hope of the general be very cold , our captain and master be full persuade , that the general may perhaps go direct for the strait , and not come to this harbour : whereupon they think no course more convenient than to go present for the strait , and there to stay his come , for in that place he can not pass , but of force we must see he : whereunto the company most willing consent , as also the captain and master of the pinnace ; so that upon this determination we make all possible speed to depart . the sixth of August we set sail , and go to Penguinisle , and the next day we salt twenty hogshead of seal , which be as much as our salt can possible do , and so we depart for the strait the poor 400 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . 1592 . wretch that ever be create . the seven of August toward night we depart from penguinisle , shape our course for the strait , where we have full confidence to meet with our general . the nine we have a sore storm , so that we be constrain to hull , for our sail be not to endure any force . the 14 we be drive in among certain isle never before this - certain isle cover by any know relation , lie fifty league n ™ er before or better from the shore east and northerly from the northstreight : in which place , unless it have please God east off they of his wonderful mercy to have cease the wind , we strait . must of necessity have perish . but the wind shift to the east , we direct our course for the strait , and the 18 of August we fall with the cape in a very thick fog ; and the same night we anchor ten league within the cape . the 19 day we the first and pass the first and the second strait . the 21 we s ‘ con ? double cape froward . the 22 we anchor in savage coove , so name , because we find many savage ward . there : notwithstanding the extreme cold of this place , savage coove . yet do all these wild people go naked , and live in the wood like satyr , paint and disguise , and fly from you like wild dear . they be very strong , and throw stone at we of three or four pound weight a incredible distance . the 24 in the morning we depart from this coove , and the same day we come into the northwest reach , which be the last reach of the strait . the northwest the 25 we ankor in a good coove , within fourteen league of the south sea : in this place we purpose to s ets shall stay for the general , for the strait in this place be scarce three mile broad , so that he can not pass but we must see he . after we have stay here a fortnight in the deep of winter , our victual consume , ( for our seal stink most vile , and our man die pitiful through cold and famine , for the great part of they have not clothes to defend the extremity of the winter cold ) be in this heavy distress , our captain and master think it the best course to depart from the strait xi 401 3 c their first entrance into you south sea . they enter the south sea the second time . into the south sea , and to go for the isle of Santa Maria , which be to the northward of Baldivia in 37 degree and a quarter , where we may have relief , and be in a temperate clime , and there stay for the general , for of necessity he must come by that isle . so we depart the 13 of September , and come in sight of the south sea . the 14 we be force back again , and recover a coove 3 league within the strait from the south sea . again we put forth , and be 8 or 10 league free of the land , the wind rise furious at westnorthwest , we be enforce again into the strait only for want of sail ; for we never dare bear sail in any stress of weather , they be so weak : so again we recover the coove three league within the strait , where