sea , and in stay our case be ruinous . Theise be hard choise ; but be thus perplex , we make choice rather to fall into the hand of the lord , then into the hand of man : for his exceed mercy we have taste , and of the other cruelty we be not ignorant , so conclude to depart , the 6 of February we be off in the channel , with our ordinance and small shot in a readiness , for any assault that shall come , and have a small gale of wind , we recover the sea in most deep distress . then bemoan our estate one to another , and recount over all our extremity , nothing grieve we moor , than the loss of our man twice , first by the slaughter of the cannibal at port desire , and at this he of Placencia by the Indians and Portugal . And consider what they be that be lose , we find that all those that conspire the murder of our captain and master be now slay by savage , the 414 gunner only except . be thus at sea , when we come to cape Frio , the wind be contrary ; so that 3 week we be grievous vex with cross wind , and our water consume , our hope of life be very small . some desire to go to Baya , and to submit themselves to the Portugal , rather than to die for thirst : but the captain with fair persuasion alter their purpose of yield to the Portugal . in this distress it please God to send we rain in such plenty , as that we be well water , and in good comfort to return . but after we come near unto the sun , our dry penguin begin to corrupt , and there breed in they a most loathsome and ugly worm of a inch long . this worm do so mighty increase , and devour our victual , that there be in reason no hope how we shall avoid famine , but be devour of these wicked creature : there be nothing that they do not devour , only iron except : our clothes , boot , shoe , hat , shirt , stocking : and for the ship they do so eat the timber , as that we great fear they will undo we , by gnaw through the ship side . great be the care and diligence of our captain , master , and company to consume these vermin , but the more we labour to kill they , the more they increase ; so that at the last we can not sleep for they , but they will eat our flesh , and bite like mosquito . in this woeful case , after we have pass the equinoctial towards the north , our man begin to fall sick of such a monstrous disease , as i think the like be never hear of : for in their ankle it begin to swell ; from thence in two day it will be in their breast , so that they can not draw their breath , and then fall into their cod ; and their cod and yard do swell most grievous , and most dreadful to behold , so that they can neither stand , lie , nor go . whereupon our man grow mad with grief . our captain with extreme anguish of his soul , be in such woeful case , that he desire only a speedy end , and though he be scarce able to speak 415 A . D . 1593 - Cabo Frio 30 league east off the lie of Placencia . a moststrange and noisome kind of worm breed of unsalted penguin . for sorrow , yet he persuade they to patience , and to give God thanks , and like dutiful child to accept of his chastisement . for all this diverse grow rage mad , and some die in most loathsome and furious pain . it be incredible to write our misery as it be : there be no man in perfect health , but the captain and one boy . the master be a man of good spirit with extreme labour bear out his grief , so that it grow not upon he . to be short , all our man die except 16 , of which there be but 5 able to move . the captain be in good health , the master indifferent , captain Cotton and my self swell and short wind , yet better than the rest that be sick , and one boy in health : upon we 5 only the labour of the ship do stand . the captain and master , as occasion serve , will take in , and heave out the topsail , the master only attend on the spritsail , and all of we at the capsten without sheat and tack . in fine our misery and weakness be so great , that we can not take in , nor heave out a sail : so our topsail and spritsail be tear all in piece by the weather . the master and captain take their turn at the helm , be mighty distress and monstrous grieve with the most woeful lamenta - they arrive atbear - haven in Ireland the 11 of June « 593 - cion of our sick man . thus as lose wanderer upon the sea , the 11 of June 1593 , it please God that we arrive at bearhaven in Ireland , and there run the ship on shore : where the irish man help we to take in our sail , and to more our ship for hoot : which slender pain of they cost the captain some ten pound before he can have the ship in safety . thus without victual , sail , man , or any furniture God only guide we into Ireland , where the captain leave the master and three or four of the company to keep the ship ; and within 5 day after he and certain other have passage in a english fisherboat to Padstow in Cornwall . in this manner our small remnant by God only mercy be preserve , and restore to our country , to who be all honour and glory world without end .