pound weight in silver in piece of eight rial , and abundance of household stuff and storehouse full of all kind of ware : but our general will not suffer any man to carry much cloth or apparel away , because they shall not cloy themselves with burden : for he know not whether our enemy be provide with furniture accord to the number of their man : for they be five man to one of we : and we have a english mile and a half to our ship . thus we come down in safety to the town , which be very well bud , and marvellous clean keep in every street , with a town - house or guild hall in the midst , and have to the number of two hundred house at the least in it . we set it on fire to the ground , and good to the value of five or six thousand pound : there be also a bark ride in the road which we set on fire , and fire . depart , direct our course to the hand of Puna . the 25 day of may we arrive at the hand of Puna , where be a very good harbour , where we find a great ship of the burden of 250 ton ride at a anchor with all her furniture , which be ready to be hale on ground : for there be a speciali good place for that purpose . we sink it , and go on shore where the lord of the hand dwell , which be by the water side , who have a sumptuous house marvellous well contrive with very many singular good room and chamber in it : and out of every chamber be frame a gallery with a stately prospect into the sea on the one side , and into the hand on the other side , with a marvellous great hall below , and a very great storehouse at the one end of the hall , which be fill with botija of pitch and bash to make cable withal : for the most part of the cable in the south sea be make upon that hand . this great cacique do make all the Indians upon the hand to work and to drudge for he : and he himself be a indian bear , but be marry to a marvellous fair woman which be a Spaniard , by reason of his pleasant habitation and of his great wealth . 313 A . D . 1587 . 25 pound weight in silver . the town of Paitahad 200 house in it . a bark set on the hand of Puna within 1 degree the equinoctial to the south . a great ship burn . great store of cable make in Puna . this spanish woman his wife be honour as a queen in the island , and never go on the ground upon her foot : but hold it too base a thing for she : but when her pleasure be to take the air , or to go abroad , she be always carry in a shadow like unto a horselit upon four man shoulder , with a veil or canopy over she for the sun or the wind , have her gentlewoman still attend about she with a great troop of the best man of the hand with she . but both she and the lord of the island with all the Indians in the town be new flee out of the island before we can get to a anchor , by reason we be becalm before we can get in , and be go over unto the main land , have carry away with they to the sum of 100000 crown , which we know by a captain of the island a indian , which be leave there with some other upon the island under he , who we have take at sea as we be come into the road , be in a balsam or canoa for a spy to see what we be . the 27 our general himself with certain shot and some targeteer go over into the main unto the place where this foresay Indian captain which we have take have tell we that the cacique , which be the lord of all the island , be go unto , and have carry all his treasure with he : but at our come to the place which we go to land at , we find new arrive there four or five great balsa , which be lade with plantan , bag of meal , and many other kind of victual . our general marvel what they be and what they mean , ask the indian guide and command he to speak the truth upon his life : be then bind fast , he answer be very much abash , as well as our company be , that he neither know from whence they shall come , nor who they shall be : for there be never a man in any one of the balsa : and because he have tell our general before , that it be a easy matter to take the say cacique and all his treasure , and that there be but three or four 314 ... 15871 house stand in a desert place and no resistance , and that if he find it not so , he shall hang he . again be demand to speak upon his life what he think these Balsas shall be , he answer that he can not say from whence they shall come , except it be to bring 60 soldier , which he do hear be to go to a place call Guaiaquil , which of be about 6 league from the say island , where two guaiaiu ^- or three of the king ship be on the stock in building , where be continual a hundred soldier in garrison who have hear of we , and have send for sixty more for fear of burn of the ship and town . our general not any whit discourage either at the sight of the balsa unlooked for , or for hear of the threescore soldier not until then speak of , with a brave courage animate his company in the exploit , go present forward , be in the night in a most desert path in the wood , until such time as he come to the place