Raja Bolamboam , who be a man have in great majesty and fear among they . the common people may not bargain , sell , or exchange any thing with any other nation without speciali licence from their king : and if any so do , it be present death for he . the king himself be a man of great year , and have a hundred wife , his son have fifty . the custom of the country be , that whensoever the king do die , they take the body so dead and burn it and preserve the ash of he , and within five day next after , the wife of the say king so dead , accord to the custom and use of their country , every one of they go together to a place appoint , and the chief of the woman , which be near unto he in account , have a ball in her hand , and throw it from she , and to the place where the ball rest , thither they go all , and turn their face to the eastward , and every one with a dagger in their hand , ( which dagger they call a Crise , and be as sharp as a razor ) stab themselves to the heart , and with their hand all to bee - bath themselves in their own blood , and fall grovel on their face so end their day . this thing be as true as it seem to any hearer to be strange . the man of themselves be very politic and subtle , and singular valiant , be naked man , in any action 340 they undertake , and wonderful at commandment and fear of their king . for example : if their king command they to undertake any exploit , be it never so dangerous or desperate , they dare not nor will not refuse it , though they die every man in the execution of the same . for he will cut off the head of every one of they which return alive without bring of their purpose to pass : which be such a thing among they , as it make they the most valiant people in all the southeast part of the world : for they never fear any death . for be in fight with any nation , if any of they feel himself hurt with lance or sword , he will willing run himself upon the weapon quite through his body to procure his death the more speedy , and in this desperate sort end his day , or overcome his enemy . Moreover , although the man be tawny of colour and go continual naked , yet their woman be fair of complexion and go fare woman more apparel . in Java - after they have thus describe the state of the island , and the order and fashion of the people ; they tell we far , that if their king don Antonio will come don Antonio unto they , they will warrant he to have all the Malucos at commandment , beside , China , Sangles , and - tn £ ast * the isle of the philippinas , and that he may be indy . assure to have all the Indians on his side that be in the country . after we have full content these Portugal , and the people of Java which bring we victual in their canoas , they take their leaf of we with promise of all good entertainment at our return , and our general give they three great piece of ordinance at their depart . thus the next day be the 16 . they depart of march we set sail towards the cape of good hope , call by the Portugal Cabo de bvena esperancza on c the southermost coast of Africa . the rest of march and all the month of April we spend in traverse that mighty and vast sea , between the isle of Java and the main of Africa , observe the heaven , the crosier or south - pole , the other star , the 341 fowl , which be mark unto the sea man of fair weather , foul weather , approach of land or island , the wind , the tempest , the rain and thunder , with the alteration of tide and current . the 10 . day of may we have a storm at the west , and it blow so hard that it be as much as the ship can stir close by under the wind : and the storm continue all that day and all that night . the next day be the 11 . of may in the morning one of the company go into the top , and espy land bear north , and north and by west off we , and about noon we espy land to bear west off we , which as we do imagine be the cape of buena esperanza , whereof indeed we be short some 40 . or 50 . league : and by reason of the skantnesse of the wind we stand along to the southeast until midnight ; at which time the wind come fair , and we hale along westward . the 12 . and 13 . day we be becalm , and the sky be very hazy and thick until the 14 . day at three of the clock in the afternoon , at which time the sky clear , and we espy the land again which be the cape Cabo Falso , call Cabo Falso , which be short of the cape de bvena esperanza 40 or 50 league . this cape be very easy to be know . for there be right over it three very high hill stand but a small way one off another , and the high stand in the midst , and the ground be much low by the seaside . the cape of good hope bear west and by south from the say Cabo Falso . the 16 . day of may about 4 . of the clock in the afternoon the wind come up at east a very stiff gale , which hold until it be Saturday with as much wind as ever the ship can go before : at which time by six of the clock in the morning we espy the pro - they double montorie or headland , call the cape de