be low and champion soil , and so we see none other ground else in all the strait but that be craggy rock and monstrous high hill and mountain . in this river be great store of savage which we see , and have con -^ ruti ^ h1 ference with they : they be men - eater , and feed savage that altogether upon raw flesh , and other filthy food : which ever be people have prey upon some of the Spaniard before ten . speak of . for they have get knife and piece of rapier to make dart of . they use all the mean they can possible to have allure we up far into the river , of purpose to have betray we , which be espy by our general , he cause we to shoot at they with our harquebuss , whereby we kill many of they . the chanel of so we sail from this river to the channel of saint saint Jerome . Jeromej which be 2 league off . from the river of saint Jerome about three or four league , we run ne west unto a cape which be on the 300 north side : and from that cape unto the mouth of the strait the course lie northwest and by west , and northwest . between which place and the mouth of the strait to the southward we lay in harbour until the three and twenty of February , by reason of contrary wind and most vile and filthy foul weather , with such rain and vehement stormy wind which come down from the mountain and high hill , that they hazard the best cable and anchor that we have for to hold , which if they have fail , we have be in great danger to have be cast away , or at the least famish . for during this time , which be a full month , we feed almost altogether upon muscle and limpit , and bird , or such as we can get on shore , seek every day for they , as the fowl of the air do , where they can find food , in continual rainy weather . there be at every mile or two mile end a harbour on both side of the land . and there be between the river of saint Jerome and the mouth of the strait go into the south sea about 34 . league by estimation . so that the length of the whole strait be about 90 . league . and the say mouth of the strait stand in the same height that the entrance stand in when we pass out of the north sea , which be about 52 . degree and f to the southward of the line . the 24 . day of February we enter into the south sea : and on the south side of the go out of the strait be a fair high cape with a low point adjoin unto it : and on the north side be 4 . or 5 . Hands , which lie 6 . league off the main , and much break and sink ground about they : by noon the same day we have bring these hand east of we 5 . league off ; the wind be southerly . the first of march a storm take we at north , which night the ship lose the company of the huge gallant , be in 49 . i and 45 . league from the land . this storm continue 3 . or 4 . day , and for that time we in the huge gallant be separate from the other 2 . 301 A . D . 1587 . February 1587 . the strait of Magellan be about 90 league long . the western mouth of the strait be in 52 degree and 2 terce . theirentrance into the south sea the 24 of February . Hands in the southseacalled LasAnegadas . march 1 . extreme dan - gerofthehugh gallant by a great leak . ship , look every hour to sink , our bark be so leak , and our self so dilver and weaken with free it of water , that we sleep not in three day and three night . the 15 . of march in the morning the huge gallant come in between the hand of S . marry and the main , where she meet with the admiral and the content , which the lie of have rid at the hand call la Mocha 2 . day , which Mocha in and stand jn the southerly latitude of 38 degree : at subject to the which place some of our man go on shore with the Spaniard . viceadmiral boat , where the Indians fight with they with their bow and arrow , and be marvelous wary of their caliver . Theise Indians be enemy to the Spaniard , and belong to a great place call Arauco , and take we for Spaniards , as afterward we learn . arauco be the this place which be call Arauco be wonderful rich , rich place m a ( j fuq of gold mine , and yet can it not be subdue for glide , and at any time by the Spaniard , but they always return be not subdue with the great loss of man . for these Indians be the marvelous desperate and careless of their life to live Spaniard as at their own liberty and freedom . ^ et ' the 15 . day aforesay in the afternoon we weigh saint marie anchor , and run under the west side of saint marie 3 i , hand , where we rid very well in 6 . fathom water , and terce , which be very fair ground all that night . subdue to the the 16 . day our general go on shore himself with Spaniard . 70 . or 80 . man every one with his furniture : there come down to we certain Indians with two which be the principal of the hand to welcome we on shore , think we have be Spaniards , for it be subdue by they : who bring we up to a place where the Spaniard have erect a church a church with cross and altar in it . and there be ™ and altar ? a ^ out church 2 . or 3 . store house , which be full ’