concern the mighty kingdom of Coray , tributary to the king of China , and borther upon his north - east frontier , call by the Portugal Coria , and by they esteem at the first a island , but since find to adjoin with the main not many day journey from Paqui the metropolitan city of China . the more perfect discovery whereof and of the coast of Tartary northward , may in time bring great light ( if not full certainty ) either of a northwest or a Northeast passage from Europe to those rich country . collect out of the Portugal Jesuit yearly japonian epistle date 1590 , 1591 , 1592 , 1594 , etc the first testimony contain a resolute determination of quabacondono the great monarch of all Japan , to invade and conquer China by the way of Coray , be a country divide from the isle of Japan only by a arm of the sea about twenty league broad , and abound with victual and all other necessary for the maintenance of the war . out of the epistle of father Frier Lewis Frois , date 1590 . uabacondono have subdue all the petty kingdom of Japan , in the year of our lord 1590 ( as father Frier Lewis Frois write in his japonian epistle of the foresay year ) grow so proud and insolent that he seem another Lucifer ; so far forth , that he make a solemn vow and oath , 422 that he will pass the sea in his own person to conquer China : and for this purpose he make great preparation , say , that since he be become lord of all Japan , he have nothing now to do but to conquer China , and that although he shall end his life in that enterprise , he be not to give over the same . for he hope to leave behind he hereby so great fame , glory , and renown , as none may be comparable thereunto . and though he can not conquer the same , and shall end his life in the action , yet shall he always remain immortali with this glory . and if God do not cut he off , it be think very , that he will thorough attempt the same . and for his more secure passage thither , he be determine to leave behind he two governor ( after his manner ) in the part of Miac6 with the administration of Finqua ; and of those of his monarchic he say that he will take with he all the great japonish lord , or at the least all his principali subject , and leave in his dominion such guard and garrison as shall seem best unto he . and so have pass the winter , he mean to come to these part ofXimo , for from hence he be to set forth his army , Ximo . and : to pass to the land of Coray , which the Portugal Coray con - call Coria , be divide from Japan with a arm of the sea . and although the Portugal in time past thought , m a ^ ut ' that it be a lie or Peninsula , yet be it firm land , which join unto the kingdom of Paqui . and he have now strike such a terror with his name in the country of Coray , that the king thereof have send his ambassador hither to yield unto he a kind of homage , as he require ; which ambassador be now in the city of Miac6 . and by this Peninsula of Coray he may pass FromCorayan with his army by land in few day journey unto the city of Paqui , be the principali city where the king of - tn fa day China have his residence . and as the chinians be weak , to Paqui then and the people of Japan so valiant and fear of they , if of God do not cut he off in this expedition , it may fall china - out accord to his expectation . 423 but whatsoever become of China , it be hold for a certainty , that his come will cause great alteration in these part of Ximo , especial in this kingdom of Figen , wherein be the princedom of Arima and Omura , and all the force of our christianity : and he tell don Protasio when he be with he once before , that he will make he a great man in China , and that he will remove these lord , and deliver their government unto lord that be gentile ; which will be the ruin of all this christianity ; neither shall we have any place wherein to remain . for , as it be the custom of Japan in the alteration of estate and kingdom ( which they call Cuningaia ) to remove all the nobility and gentry , and to leave only the base people and labourer , commit they to the government of ethnic , we shall hereby also lose our house , and the Christians shall be disperse with their lord ; who sometime he handle in such sort , that he give they nothing to sustain themselves , and so they remain with all their follower , as man banish , and utter ruin . the second testimony contain the huge levy and preparation of quabacondono , as also his war and conquest , and the success thereof in the kingdom of Coray . together with a description of the same kingdom , and of their traffic and manner of government : and also of the ship of China , Japan , and Coray , with mention of certain isle thereunto adjacent , and other particular very memorable . out of the epistle of the aforesaid father friar Luis Frois date 1591 , and 1592 . a about this time quabacondono determine to put his war against China in execution , assemble sundry of his noble and captain , unto who he declare his intent ; who , albeit they be all of a quite contrary 424 opinion , yet all of they without any pretense of difficulty approve his determination . for he have give out that he will not abstain from this war , although his own son shall rise from death to life and request he ; yea whosoever will move any impediment or difficulty in that matter , he will put he to death . wherefore for certain month there be nothing in all place to be see , but provision of ship , armour , munition , and other necessary for the war . quabacondono make a catalogue of all the lord and noble his subject , will every one of they ( not a man except ) to accompany he in this expedition , enjoin and appoint to each one , what number they shall bring . in all these kingdom of Ximo he have nominate 4 of his especial favourite ; who ( to all man admiration ) he will have to be head over all these new kingdom , notwithstanding that here be 4 other far more mighty than they . of who ( by God good providence ) two be Christians ,