those wicked tide , which run after many fashion , we have also lose our ship in the same place : but God of his goodness have in all our extremity be our protector . So the 22 at night we depart with 14000 dry penguin , not be able to fetch the rest , and shape our course for Brasil . now our captain rate our victual , and bring we to such allowance , as that our victual may last six month ; for our hope be , that within six month we may recover our country , though our sail be very bad . So the allowance be two ounce and a half of meal for a man a day , and to have so twice a week , so that 5 ounce do serve for a week . three day a week we have oil , three spoonful for a man a day ; and 2 day in a week peason , a pint between 4 man a day , and every day 5 penguin for 4 man , and 6 quart of water for 4 man a day . this be our allowance ; wherewith ( we praise God ) we live , though weak , and very feeble . ' the 30 of January ' we arrive at the he of Placencia in Brasill , the first place that outward bound we be at : and have make the shall , our ship lie off at sea , the captain with 24 of the company go with the boat on shore , be a whole night before they can recover it . the last of January at sunrising they sudden land , hope to take the Portugal in their house , and by that mean to recover some casavi - meale , or other victual for our relief : but when they come to the house , they be all raze , and burn to the ground , so that we think no man have remain on the hand . then the captain go to the garden , and bring from thence fruit and root for the company , and come aboard the ship , and bring she into a fine creek which he have find out , where we may moor she by the tree , and where there be water , and hoop to trim our cask . our case be 412 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . 1593 - very desperate , we present labour for dispatch away ; some cut hoop , which the cooper make , other labour upon the sail and ship , every man travel for his life , and still a guard be keep on shore to defend those that labour , every man have his weapon like wise by he . the 3 of February our man with 23 shot go again to the garden , be 3 mile from we upon the north shore , and fetch cazavi - root out of the ground , to relieve our company instead of bread ; for we spend not of our meal while we stay here . the 5 of February be Monday , our captain and master haste the company to their labour ; so some go with the Cooper to gather hoop , and the rest labour aboard . this night many of our man in the ship dream of murder and ominous and slaughter : in the morning they report their dream , fir ^ aming one say to another ; this night i dream , that thou ‘ be slay ; another answer , and i dream , that thou be slay : and this be general through the ship . the captain hear this , who like wise have dream very strange himself , give very strait charge , that those which go on shore shall take weapon with they , and see they himself deliver into the boat , and send some of purpose to guard the labourer . all the forenoon they labour in quietness , and when it be ten of the clock , the heat be extreme , they come to a rock near the wood side ( for all this country be nothing but thick wood ) and there they boil cazavi - root , and dine : after dinner some sleep , some wash themselves in the sea , all be strip to their shirt , and no man keep watch , no match light , not a piece charge . sudden as they be thus sleep and sport , have get themselves into a corner out of sight of the ship , there come a multitude of Indians and Portugal upon they , and slay they sleep : only two escape , one very sore hurt , the other not touch , by who we understand of this miserable massacre : with all speed we man our 4X3 thirteen man lose at the lie of Placencia by their own extreme negligence . boat , and land to succour our man ; but we find they slay , and lay naked on a rank one by another , with their face upward , and a cross set by they : and withal we see two very great pinnace come from the river of Jenero very full of man ; who we mistrust come from thence to take we : because there come from Jenero soldier to Santos , when the general have take the town and be strong in it . of 76 person which depart in our ship out of England , we be now leave but 27 , have lose 13 in this place , with their chief furniture , as musket , caliver , powder , and shoot . our cask be all in decay , so that we can not take in more water than be in our ship , for want of cask , and that which we have be marvellous ill condition : and be there more by tree for want of cable and anchor , we still expect the cut of our moring , to be beat from our deck with our own furniture , and to be assail by they of Jenero : what distress we be now drive into , i be not able to express . to depart with 8 ton of water in such bad cask be to starve at