, and the island of Camlaia . the fifteen of January we fall with a island call Capul , and have betwixt the say island and another island but a narrow passage , and a marvelous rippling of a very great tide with a ledge of rock lie off the point of the island of Capul : and no danger but water enough a fair breadth off : and within the point a fair bay and a very good harbour in four fathom water hard aboard the shore within a cable length . about 10 of the clock in the morning we come to a anchor . our ship be no soon come to a anchor , but present there come a canoa row aboard we , wherein be one of the chief cacique of the island whereof there be seven , who suppose that we be Spaniard , bring we potato root , which they call camotas , and green coco , in exchange whereof we give his company piece of linen to the quantity of a yard for four coco , and as much linen for a basket of potato root of a quart in quantity ; which root be very good meat , and excellent sweet either roast or boil . this caciques skin be carve and cut with sundry and many strike and devise all over his body . we 330 candish ’ s circumnavigation a . d . 1588 . keep he still aboard and cause he to send those man which bring he aboard back to the island to cause the rest of the principal to come aboard : who be no soon go on shore , but present the people of the island come down with their coco and potato root , and the rest of the principal likewise come aboard and bring with they hen and hog : hen and and they use the same order with we which they do with the Spaniard . for they take for every hog ( which they call balboye ) eight rial of plate , and for every hen ne or cock one rial of plate . thus we ride at anchor all that day , do nothing but buy root , coco , hen , hog , and such thing as they bring , refresh our self marvellous well . the same day at night be the fifteen of January 1588 , Nicolas Roderigo the Portugal , who we take out of the great Santa Anna at the cape of California , desire , to speak with our general in secret : which when our general understand , he send for he , and ask he what he have to say unto he . the Portugal make he this answer , that although he have offend his worship heretofore , yet now he have vow his faith and true service unto he , and in respect thereof he neither can nor will conceal such treason as be in work against he and his company : and that be this . that the Spaniard which be take out of the treason of the great sant anne for a pilot , who name be the spanish Thomas de Ersola , have write a letter , and secret seal it and lock it up in his chest , mean to the copy of convey it by the inhabitant of this island to manilla , the spanish the content whereof be : that there have be two pistes letter English ship along the coast of Chili , Peru , Nueva Espanna , and Nueva Galicia , and that they have take manilla , many ship and merchandise in they , and burn which be diverse town , and spoil all that ever they can come fiun ^ in unto , and that they have take the king ship which come from manilla and all his treasure , with all the Timothy shot - marchandize that be therein ; and have set all the tun . 331 people on shore , take himself away perforce . therefore he will they that they shall make strong their bulwark with their two galley , and all such provision as they can possible make . he far signify , Capul adjoin - that we be ride at a island call Capul , which be at the end of the island of manilla , be but manilla . one ship with small force in it , and that the other ship , as he suppose , be go for the northwest passage , stand in 55 degree : and that if they can use any mean to surprise we be there at a anchor , they shall dispatch it : for our force be but small , and our man but weak , and that the place where we the north - road be but 50 league from they . otherwise if west passage . jet we escape within few year they must make from manilla . account to have their town besiege and sack with a army of English . this information be give , our general call for he , and charge he with these thing , which at the first he utter deny : but in the end , the matter be make manifest and know of certainty by especial trial and proof , the next morn - the Spanish ing our general will that he shall be hang : ™ °*£ ansf : d which be accord perform the 16 of January . treachery . we ride for the space of nine day about this island of Capul , where we have diverse kind of fresh victual , with excellent fresh water in every bay , and great store the manner of of wood . the people of this island go almost all naked the people of anj be tawny of colour . the man wear only a a ? u ‘ stroope about their waste , of some kind of linen of their own weave , which be make of plantan leave , and another stroope come from their back under their twist , which cover their privy part , and be make fast to their girdle at their navel . a strange these people use a strange kind of order among they , tjun & which be this . Every man and manchild among they have a nail of tin thrust quite through the head of his privy part , be split in the low end and rivet , and