15 . the distance be 15 league . item , from the mouth of the strait unto the island league 6 . Capul , the course be southwest and by west 6 league . item , from the island of Capul unto the north head of the island call masbat , the course be northwest and league 15 . southeast , and the distance between they be 15 league . item , from the north head of the island call masbat l unto the island call Sebojon , the course be westsouth - league 1 » all west and eastnortheast , and the distance between they 2414 . be 15 league . a note of our course keep from the island Sebojon unto the southward . item , from the island of Sebojon unto the east end of the island call Pannay , the course be southeast and by south , northwest and by west , and the distance be league 22 . 22 league . item , that off the easter end of the island of Pannay there lie certain small island , unto the number of 12 or moor , and you shall have shall water among they . item , from the easter end of Pannay unto a bay that be call the bay of Lago grande , on the same island , the course be westsouthwest , and eastnortheast , league 18 . and the distance be 18 league . item , from the bay of Lago grande unto the island league 6 . that be call Ysla de los Negros , be the distance of 6 league southeast and northwest . item , from the bay of Lago grande unto three small island that stand in the latitude of 10 degree , the course be south and by west 12 league . Furthermore , from those three island unto the westermost end of Ysla de league 10 . los negro , the course be southwest and Northeast 10 364 1588 . league , where we be clear of the island of the philippinas . item , from the south end of Ysla de los negro unto the north head of the island call Mindanao , the course be south and north , and the distance be 30 league 30 . league . item , from the north end of Mindanao unto the south head of the say island , which be call cape Cannal , the course be south and by west , north and by east , and the distance be 26 league . league 26 . item , from the cape of Cannal between the south and the westsouthwest about 10 or 12 league off you league 12 . shall have great store of small island , about the number of 24 or moor . item , from the cape of Cannal unto the cape of batochina , the course be southsouthwest , and northnortheast , and the distance be 100 league , and between they set league 100 a great current unto the eastward . item , from the cape of Batochina unto the west head of Java minor , the course be southwest and by south , Northeast and by north , and the distance between they be 220 league . league 220 . item , from the west end of Java minor unto the east end of Java major , the course be west and by north , and east and by south , and the distance between they be 18 league : in the which course there lie one league 18 . * island between they , which island be in length 14 * this be the league . ofbaly . item , from the east end of Java major unto the cape of buena esperanza , the course be west and by south , and westsouth west , and the distance between £ easues they be 1800 league . j8oo . item , that cape Falso stand 30 league to the league 30 . eastward of cape de buena esperanza , and off the say cape Falso you shall have shoald 20 league off in 80 or 90 fathom , and the course be from cape Falso unto the cape of buena esperanza westnorthwest and league in all eastsoutheast . be 2292 - 365 league 1200 . a note of the distance and course from the cape of buena esperanza unto the northward . item , from the cape of buena esperanza unto the island of Santa Helena , the course be northwest , and northwest and by west , and the distance between they be 600 league . item , from the island of Santa Helena unto the island of Flores , the course between they be northnorthwest , and northwest and by north , and the distance between they be 1200 league . item , from the island of Flores unto the land end of England , the course be between the eastnortheast , and the north - east and by east , and the distance between they be four hundred and fifty league . a note of the variation of our compass . n primis , the variation of our compass on the coast of new Spain in the south sea in the latitude of 12 degree , be one point to the eastwards . item , the variation of our compass between the cape of California and the island of the philippinas , be one point and a half unto the eastward , that be , that the north do stand north and by east , and half a point unto the east . item , the variation of our compass between the island of Maluco and the cape of buena esperanza , be two point and a half at the most to the westward , that be , that the northnortheast be our north . 366 a note of our time spend in sail between certain place out of England , 1586 . n primis , we be sail between England and the coast of Guinea from the 21 day of July unto the 26 day of August unto the haven call Sierra leona , where we water and stay until the 6 day of September . item , we depart from the coast of of our abode ten day where we water . Guinea for the coast of Brasil the 10 day of September , and we have sight of the coast of Brasil the 26 day of October , be six league to the northward of cape Frio : and from thence we be sail unto the island of saint Sebastian until the 31 and last day of October , where we water and set up our pinnace : and we of our abode anchor on the northwest part of the island in ten four fathom , and stay there until the 23 day of November , item , the 23 day of November we depart from the water . island of Sant Sebastian , keep our course south and by west unto the