buena esperanza , ' bo ^^ which be a reasonable high land , and at the westermost point Speranza . a ^ e off the main do show two hammock , the one upon the other , and three other hammock lie further off into the sea , yet low land between and adjoin unto the sea . 342 this cape of buena esperanza be set down and accounted for two thousand league from the island of Java in the Portugal sea cart : but it be not so much almost by a hundred and fifty league , as we find by the run of our ship . we be in run of these eighteen hundred and fifty league just nine week . the eight day of June by break of day we fall in sight of the island of saint Helena , seven or eight league short of it , have but a small gale of wind , or almost none at all : insomuch as we can not get into it that day , but stand off and on all that night . the next day be the 9 of June have a pretty easy gale of wind we stand in with the shore , our boat be send away before to make the harbour ; and about one of the clock in the afternoon we come unto a anchor in 12 . fathom water two or three cable length from the shore , in a very fair and smooth bay under the northwest side of the island . this island be very high land , and lie in the main sea stand as it be in the midst of the sea between the main land of Africa , and the main of Brasilia and the coast of Guinea : and be in 15 . degree and 48 . minute to the southward of the equinoctial line , and be distant from the cape of buena esperanza between 5 . and 6 . hundred league . the same day about two or three of the clock in the afternoon we go on shore , where we find a marvelous fair and pleasant valley , wherein diverse handsome building and house be set up , and especial one which be a church , which be tile and white on the outside very fair , and make with a porch , and within the church at the upper end be set a altar , whereon stand a very large table set in a frame have in it the picture of our saviour Christ upon the cross and the image of our lady pray , with diverse other history curious paint in the same . the side of the church be all hang with stain clothes have many devise draw in they . A . D . 1588 . from Java to the cape of bona speranda it but 1850 . league . June 1588 . they anchor at the island of . Helena the t ) . of June . 8 . Helena be in the latitude of 15 . degree 48 . min . to the southward . 343 there be two house adjoin to the church , on each side one , which serve for kitchen to dress meat in , with necessary room and house of office : the cover of the say house be make flat , whereon be plant a very fair vine , and through both the say house run a very good and wholesome stream of fresh water . there be also right over against the say church a fair causey make up with stone reach unto a valley by the seaside , in which valley be plant a garden , wherein grow great store of pompion and melon : and upon the say causey be a frame erect whereon hang two bell wherewith they ring to mass ; and hard unto it be a cross set up , which be square , frame and make very artificial of free stone , whereon be carve in cipher what time it be build , which be in the year of our lord 1571 . this valley be the fair and large low plot in all the island , and it be marvelous sweet and pleasant , and plant in every place either with fruit tree , or with herb . there be fig tree , which bear fruit continual , and marvelous plentiful : for on every tree you shall have blossom , green fig , and ripe fig , all at one : and it be so all the year long : the reason be that the island Thegreatstore stand so near the sun . there be also great store of diverse of lemon tree , orange tree , pomegranate tree , pomecitron tree , date tree , which bear fruit as the fig tree do , and be plant careful and very artificial with very pleasant walk under and between they , and the say walk be overshadow with the leaf of the tree : and in every void place be plant parceley , sorel , basil , fennel , annis seed , mustard seed , radish , and many speciali good herb : and the fresh water brook run through diverse place of this orchard , and may with very small pain be make to water any one tree in the valley . this fresh water stream come from the top of the mountain , and fall from the cliff into the valley 344 the height of a cable , and have many arm out of it , which refresh the whole island , and almost every tree in it . the island be altogether high mountain and steep valley , except it be in the top of some hill , and down below in some of the valley , where marvelous store of all these kind of fruit before speak of do grow : there be great store grow in the top of the mountain then below in the valley : but it be wonderful laboursome and also dangerous travel up unto they and down again , by reason of the height and steepen esse of the hill . there be also upon this island great store of partridge , abundance of which be very tame , not make any great haste to fly in away though one come very near they , but only to run away , and get up into the steep cliff : we kill some of they with