, on the which island we water and wooded . , item , the 24 of January we depart from the island of Capul , and the 28 day of January we arrive in the bay of Lago grande , which bay be in the island of Pannay , Spaniards where there be Spaniards build of a new ship . eld of a item , the 29 of January we depart from the bay of nevi ship tn the t ’ , , 7 , r . , , philippinas , Lago grande , and the same day at night we be clear from the island of the philippinas , shape our course towards the island of Maluco . day 30 . item , from the 29 day of January unto the first day of march , we be navigate between the west end of the island of Pannay and the west end of the island of Java minor . of our abode item , the first day of march we pass the strait wzr ” at west head of the island of Java minor , and the 5 water . day of march we anchor in a bay at the Wester end of Java major , where we water , and have great store of victual from the town of Polambo . Java major . item , the 16 day of march we depart from the total of and Java major , and the 11 day of may we have sight buena Espe - and 4 ° league unto the eastwards of the cape of ranxa . buena esperanza , the land be low land . a note from the cape of buena esperanza unto the northward . of our abode TTem , the 21 day of may we depart from the cape herem1 ^ ® uena esperanza , and the 8 day of June we water anchor on the northwest part of the island of Santa Helena , where we water , and make our abode 12 day . item , the 20 day of June at night we depart day 14 . from the island of Santa Helena , and the 4 day of July we pass under the equinoctial line . 370 item , the 20 day of June at night we depart from the island of Santa Helena , and the 25 day of August in the morning we have sight of the island of Flores and 2 * 4 # space of Corvo in the latitude of 40 degree . ournavigation item , the 9 day of September 1588 we arrive , after iia ^ ewas a long and terrible tempest , in the narrow sea , in the threescore y haven of Plymouth in safety , by the gracious and most five day . merciful protection of the almighty , to who therefore be render immortali praise and thanksgiving now and for ever . amen . a note of our anker in those place where we arrive after our departure from England 1586 . hr = = = = = = | n primis , we anchor in the harbour of Sierra leona in 10 fathom water : and fathom 10 . a northwest wind in that road be the worst that can blow . item , you may anchor under the island that be call ilha Verde in 6 fathom fathom 6 . — — i water : and the wind be at the westnorthwest be the worst wind that can blow . item , you may anchor under the island of saint Sebastian on the northwest part in 10 fathom : and a Westsouth - fathom 10 . west wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor in port desire in 5 fathom water , and a west and by south wind be the worst . fa < i ° ms 5 - item , you may anchor under cape joy without the mouth of the strait of Magellan in 7 fathom water . fathom 7 . item , you may anchor within the strait of Magellan , until you come unto the first narrow in 25 or 30 fathom 25 . fathom water , in the mid way of the strait . item , you may anchor in the second narrow of the strait in 16 fathom water . fathom 16 . item , you may anchor under Penguin island on which side you please in 6 or 7 fathom water . fathom 7 . item , you may anchor in port famine in 5 or 6 fathom fathom 6 . water , and a southsoutheast wind be the worst . item , you may anchor in muscle cove , which cove be on 371 the south side , and be 7 league to the southward of fathom 12 . cape froward , and you shall ride in 12 fathom . item , you may anchor in Elizabeth bay , which bay be on fathom 8 . the north side of the strait in 8 fathom water . item , from Elizabeth bay unto Cabo deseado , you may anchor on both side of the strait in many place . a note of our anker after we be enter into the south sea . in primis , you may anchor in the bay of Mocha in 7 or 8 fathom water , and there a north - east wind be the worst . item , you may anchor on the north side of saint mary fathom 9 island in nine fathom water : and there a northnorthwest wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor in the bay of conception under fathom 9 one small island in 9 fathom water , and a northnorthwest wind be the worst wind in that bay . fathom 7 . item , you may anchor in the bay of Quintero in 7 fathom water , and a northnorthwest wind be the worst wind . fathom 6 . item , you may anchor in the bay of Arica in 6 fathom , and in that bay a westnorthwest wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor in the bay of Pisca and Paraca fathom 5 . in five fathom : and in that bay a northnorthwest wind be the worst . fathom 8 . item , you may anchor in the bay of cherepe in 8 fathom , and there from the northwest unto the south . east it be open . fathom 7 . item , you may anchor in the bay of Paita in 7 fathom water : and there a northnortheast wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor on the north - east part of the fathom 4 . island of Puna in 4 fathom : and a north - east wind be the worst . item , you may anchor at Rio dolce , where we water , fathom 10 . unto the eastwards of the island of Puna in 10 fathom . 372 a note of what depth we