to wit , Augustine eucunocamindono governor of half the kingdom of Finga , and cainocami the son of quambioindono governor of the great part of the kingdom of Bugen . the other two be ethnique , namely Toranosuque governor of the half of the kingdom of Finga and augustins mortali enemy ; and Iconocami governor of the residue of the kingdom of Bugen , and a enemy both to Augustine and Cainocami . and quabacondono have command all the christian lord of Teximo to follow christian governor . whereupon the lord Protasius be there with 2000 soldier ; and omurandono the lord of Ceuxima and augustins son in law , which late become a christian , with a thousand . also he appoint that the governor of Firando and Goto shall follow Augustine , who albeit they be Gentiles , have many Christians to their subject . wherefore Augustine be to conduct 15000 soldier , beside mariner , slave , and other base people to carry the baggage of the army , all which be as great a number as the former , so soon as they arrive in the kingdom of 425 Coray , be make soldier , and bear arm . unto the say Augustine , quabacondono , in token of singular favour , grant the first assault or invasion of the kingdom of Coray , to wit , that he only with his force may enter the same , the other lord remain in Ceuxima ( which be 18 league distant from Coray ) till they shall be advertise from Augustine : which thing procure unto Augustine great envy and disdain from they all ; howbeit ( as you shall forthwith understand ) it prove in the end most honourable unto he . the other christian governor Cainocami be but a young man of 23 year , he command the king of Bungo to follow with 6000 soldier ; so that with the 4000 which he have before , his number amount unto 10000 , beside mariner and other which carry burden . this be most joyful news to we , and to all the Christians . of the ethnic lord quabacondono appoint the governor of Riosogo together with Foranosuque to march with 8000 : and likewise the king of Sazeuma and Iconocami with as many . and among all he give the first and chief place unto Augustine . all the other soldier of Japan he cause to accompany his own person : the number of all together ( as appear out of a write catalogue ) amount to three hundred thousand person : of who two hundred thousand be soldier . the order prescribe in this whole army be , that first they shall make their entrance by the kingdom of Coray , which be almost a island , one end whereof join upon the main land of China ; which though it be a several kingdom of it self , yet be it subject and tributary unto the king of China . and because this kingdom of Coray be divide but by a arm of the sea from Japan , quabacondono determine to subdue the same , for that it so abound with victual , that from thence he may the easy invade china . while all thing be prepare , it be command , that at the chief port of Ximo call Nangoia , be twelve league distant from Firando , there shall be erect a mighty 426 great castle ; where quabacondono with all his fleet be mind to stay , till news be bring of the success of the aforesaid 4 governor or captain . he appoint also another castle to be build in fuchinoxima , which be another island situate between Nangoia and Ceuxima . and he build a three castle in Ceuxima , that his passage may be the more commodious . the charge of build these castle he impose upon the 4 aforesaid governor , and command the other lord of Ximo their associate to assist they ; all which so apply that business , that in 6 month space it be whole finish . the castle of Nangoia be environ with a double wall of square and beautiful stone , with broad and deep ditch like unto Miac6 . the innermost wall be less than the other two be 100 fathom square , within the compass whereof be so many house build both for the lord , and their follower , and also for merchant shop , and victualler house , distinguish with broad and direct street , that it seem a fair town . but ( that which be much more admirable ) all the way from Miac6 to Nangoia , at the end of every day journey , all the lord and governor , at the commandment of quabacondono , build each one within his jurisdiction new and stately palace from the ground , so that for 20 day together he lodge every night with all his train in one of those palace . and because these thing be do at the very same time when the expedition into the kingdom of Coray be in hand , all Japan be so grievous oppress ( quabacondono in the mean while be at no charge ) as it be most intolerable . yet be it incredible how ready every one be to do he service : which appear by these magnificent stately building rear up in so short a space , which in Europe will have require a long time and huge expense . in the mean season it be common give out , that this enterprise of quabacondono will have most unfortunate success , as be a matter wrought by constraint , and that it will be a occasion of manifold dissension in Japan : for no man there be , but 427 mislike of this war : yea , all the lord be in great hope , that some one man at length will step forth and restore their liberty ; howbeit there be none as yet find , which dare put his hand to that business . wherefore they be all ( though to their great grief and lamentation ) violent constrain to prosecute the enterprise . but quabacondono be void of all anxiety , to the end he may encourage his follower , boast that he will make great alteration of kingdom , and will bestow upon they the kingdom of Coray and China ; and unto the lord Protasius he have promise 3 kingdom : but he with all the other lord give he great thanks , have much rather retain a small portion of their estate in Japan , than to hunt after all those kingdom which he promise . and whereas quabacondono have by proclamation publish , that he will personal be present at Nangoia the 3 moon of this year ; troop and army of man begin to resort from all the quarter of Japan to these part . now be our affliction renew . for so long as quabacondono remain at Miac6 , we may stay in these part of Ximo without any danger : but after he begin to come this way , it seem impossible for our state to continue whole and sound , and we be put into no small perplexi tie . for the christian