the testimoniali of the company of the desire touch their lose of their general , which appear to have be utter against their meaning . the 26 of August 1591 we who name be here under write , with diverse other depart from Plymouth under m . Thomas candish our general , with 4 ship of he , to wit , the Galeon , the Robuck , the desire , and the black pinnace , for the performance of a voyage into the south sea . the 190 ? November we fall with the bay of Salvador in Brasil . the 16 . of December we take the town of Santos , hope there to revictuall our self , but it fall not out to our contentment . the 24 of January we set sail from Santos , shape our course for the strait of Magellan . the 8 of February by violent storm the say fleet be part : the Robuck and the desire arrive in porte desire the 6 of march . the 16 of march the black pinnace arrive there also : and the 18 of the same our admiral come into the road ; with who we depart the 20 of march in poor and weak estate . the 8 of April 1592 we enter the strait of Magellan . the 21 of April we anchor beyond cape froward , within 40 league of the south sea , where we ride until the 15 of May . in which time we have great store of snow , with some gusty weather , the wind continue still at westnorthwest against we . in this time we be enforce for the preserve of our victual , to live the most part upon muscle , our provision be so slender ; so that many of our man die in this hard extremity . than our general return for Brasil there to winter , and to procure victual for this voyage against the next year . so we depart the strait the 15 of May . the 21 be thwart of port desire 30 league off the shore , the wind then at Northeast and by north , at five of the clock at night lie north - east , we sudden cast about 397 the manner how they lose theirgenerall . lie southeast and by south , and sometime southeast : the whole fleet follow the admiral , our ship come under his lee shoot ahead he , and so frame sail fit to keep company . this night we be sever , by what occasion we protest we know not , whither we lose they or they we . in the morning we only see the black pinnace , then suppose that the admiral have overshoot we . all this day we stand to the eastwards , hope to find he , because it be not likely , that he will stand to the shore again so sudden . but miss he towards night , we stand to the shoareward , hope by that course to find he . the 22 of may at night we have a violent storm , with the wind at northwest , and we be enforce to hull , not be able to bear sail , and this night we perish our main tressle - tree , so that we can not more use our main topsail , lie most dangerous in the sea . the pinnace likewise receive a great leak , so that we be enforce to seek the next shore for our relief . and because famine be like to be the best end , we desire to go for port desire , hope with seal and penguin to relieve our self , - and so to make shift to follow the general , or there to stay his come from Brasil . the 24 of may we have much wind at north . the 25 be calm , and the sea very lofty , so that our ship have dangerous foul weather . the 26 our fore - shrowd break , so that if we have not be near the shore , it have be impossible for we to get out of the sea . and now be here more in port desire , our shroud be all rot , not have a run rope whereto we may trust , and be provide only of one shift of sail all wear , our topsail not able to abide any stress of weather , neither have we any pitch , tar , or nail , nor any store for the supply of these want ; and we live only upon seal and muscle , have but five hogshead of pork within board , and meal three ounce for a man a day , with water for to drink . and forasmuch as it have please 398 god to separate our fleet , and to bring we into such hard extremity , that only now by his mere mercy we expect relief , though otherwise we be hopeless of comfort , yet because the wonderful work of God in his exceed great favour towards we his creature be far beyond the scope of man capacity , therefore by he we hope to have deliverance in this our deep distress . also forasmuch as those upon who God will bestow the favour of life , with return home to their country , may not only themselves remain blameless , but also manifest the truth of our action , we have think good in christian charity to lay down under our hand the truth of all our proceed even till the time of this our distress . give in port desire the 2 of June 1592 . beseeching the almighty god of his mercy to deliver we from this misery , how or when majesty . John Davis captain . ‘ Randolph Cotton . John pery . William Maber gunner . Charles Parker . Roland miller . Edward smith . Thomas purpet . Matthew stub . John Jenkinson . Thomas Edward . " Edward Granger . John Lewis . William Hayman . George Straker . Thomas Walbie . William Wyeth . Richard Alard . Stephan Popham . Alexander coal . it shall please his divine ' Thomas Watkins . George Cunington . John Whiting . James Ling . the boatswain . Francis smith . John lay . the boatswain mate . Fisher .