over the voyage , consider they have be here but a small time , and because they be within fourty league of the south sea , it grieve they now to return ; notwithstanding what he purpose that they will perform . so he conclude to go for the cape of buena esperanza , and to give over this voyage . than our captain , after master Candish be come aboard the desire from talk with the company , tell he , that if it please he to consider the great extremity of his estate , the slenderness of his provision , with the weakness of his man , it be no course for he to proceed in that new enterprise : for if the rest of your ship ( say he ) be furnish answerable to this , it be impossible to perform your determination : for we have no more sail than mast , no victual , no ground - tackling , no cordage more than be over head , and among seventie and five person , there be but the master alone that can order the ship , and but fourteen sailor . the rest be gentleman , servingman , and artificer . therefore it will be a desperate case to take so hard a enterprise in hand . Theise persuasion do our captain not only use to master candish , but also to master cock . in fine upon a petition deliver in write by the chief of the whole company , the general determine to depart out of the strait of Magellan , and to return again for Santos in Brasil . so the 15 . of may we set sail , the general then 234 ^ return be in the Galeon . the eighteenth we be free of . the btreight , but at cape broward it be our hard hap Magellan . to have our boat sink at our stern in the night , and to be split and sore spoil , and to loose all our oar . the twenty of May be thwart of port desire , in the occasion of the night the general alter his course , as we suppose , by which occasion we lose he : for in the evening he it stand close by a wind to seaward , have the wind at 393 Northnortheast , and we stand the same way , the wind not alter , can not the next day see he : so that we then persuade our self , that he be go for port desire to relieve himself , or that he have sustain some mischance at sea , and be go thither to remedy it . whereupon our captain call the general man unto he , with the rest , and ask their opinion what be to be do . every one say , that they think that the general be go for port desire . then the master be the general man , and careful of his master service , as also of good judgement in sea - matter , tell the company how dangerous it be to go for port desire , if we shall there miss the general : for ( say he ) we have no boat to land our self , nor any cable nor anchor that i dare trust in so quick stream as be there : yet in all likelihood conclude that the general be go thither , we stay our course for port desire , and by chance meet with the black pinnace , which have likewise lose the fleet , be in very miserable case : so we both conclude to seek the general at port desire . they come the six and twenty day of may we come to port again to port desire , where not find our general , as we hope , ? fmathe2 ( > be most slender victual , without sail , boat , five ay it oar , nail , cordage , and all other necessary for our relief , we be strike into a deadly sorrow . but refer all to the providence and fatherly protection of the almighty , we enter the harbour , and by god quiet road , favour find a place of quiet road , which before we know not . have more our ship with the pinnace boat , we land upon the south shore , where we find a pool of a stand pool of fresh water , which by estimation may fresh water on ho [ de some ten ton , whereby we be great portde ^ ire comfort . from this pool we fetch more than forty ton of water , and yet we leave the pool as full as we find it . and because at our first be in this harbour we be at this place and find no water , we persuade our self that God have send it for our relief . also 394 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . j592 - there be such extraordinary low ebb as we have never scene , whereby we get muscle in great plenty . likewise God send about our ship great abundance of abundance of smelt , so that with hook make of pin every man ms ^^ s ani catch as many as he can eat : by which mean we ' preserve our ship victual , and spend not any during the time of our abode here . our captain and master fall into the consideration of our estate and dispatch to go to the general , find our want so great , as that in a month we can not fit our ship to set sail . for we must needs set up a smith forge , to make bolt , spike , and nail , beside the repair of our other want . whereupon they conclude it to be their best course to take the pinnace , and to furnish she with the best of the company , and to go to the general with all expedition , leave the ship and the rest of the company until the general return ; for he have vow to our captain , that he will return again for the strait , as he have tell we . the captain and master of the pinnace be the general man be well content with the motion . but the general have in our ship two most dangerous pestilent fellow , when they hear of this determination mutm3 - they utter mislike it , and in secret deal with the company of both ship , vehement persuade they , that our captain and master will leave they in the country to be devour of the cannibal , and that they be merciless and without charity : whereupon the whole company join in secret with they in a night to murder our captain and master , with my self , and all those which they think be their friend . there be mark take in his caben how to kill he with musket through the ship side , and bullet make of silver for the execution , if their other purpose shall fail . all agree hereunto , except it be the boatswain of our ship , who when he know the matter , and the slender ground thereof , reveal it unto our master , and so to the captain . then the matter be 39 call in question , those two most murderous fellow be find out , who name be Charles Parker and Edward smith .. the captain be thus hardly beset in peril of famine , and in danger of murder , be constrain to use lenity , and by courteous mean to pacific this fury : show , that to do the general service , unto who he have vow faith in this action , be the cause why he purpose to go unto he in the pinnace , consider , that the pinnace be so necessary a thing for he , as that he can not be without she , because he be fearful of the shore in so great ship . whereupon all cry out with curse and swear , that the pinnace shall not go unless the ship go . then the captain desire they to show themselves christian , and not so blasphemous to behave themselves , without regard or thanksgiving to God for their great deliverance , and present sustenance bestow upon they , allege many example of god sharp punishment for such ingratitude ; and withal promise to do any thing that may stand with their good like . by which gentle speech the matter be pacify , and the captain and master at the request of the company be content to forgive this great treachery of Parker and Smith , who after many admonition conclude in these word : the lord judge be - between you and i : which after come to a most sharp revenge even by the punishment of the almighty . thus by a generail consent it be conclude not to depart , but there to stay for the general return . than our captain and master , see that they can not do the general that service which they desire , make a motion to the company , that they will lay down under their hand the lose of the general , with the extremity wherein we then stand : whereunto they consent , and write under their hand as follow .