come aboard : which news they be full glad to hear of , and present strike their sail , hoist their boat out , and one of their chief merchant come aboard unto our general : and fall down upon his knee , offer to have kiss our general foot , and crave mercy : our general most gracious pardon both he and the rest upon promise of their true deal with he and his company concern such riches as be in the ship : and send for the captain and their pilot , who at their come use the like duty and reverence as the former do . the general of his great mercy and humanity , promise 325 one hundred and two and twenty thousand pezo of gold . a pezo be 8x . the merchandise in the great ship . the Spaniard set on shore to the number of 190 . mutiny against the general . their live and good usage . the say captain and pilot present certify the general what good they have within board , to wit , a hundred and 22 thousand pezo of gold : and the rest of the riches that the ship be lade with , be in silk , satin , damask , with musk and diverse other merchandise , and great store of all manner of victual with the choice of many conserves of all sort for to eat , and of sundry sort of very good wine . Theise thing be make know to the general by the aforesaid captain and pilot , they be command to stay aboard the desire , and on the 6 day of November follow we go into a harbour which be call by the Spaniard , Aguada Segura , or Puerto seguro . here the whole company of the Spaniard , both of man and woman to the number of 190 person be set on shore : where they have a fair river of fresh water , with great store of fresh fish , foul , and wood , and also many hare and cony upon the main land . our generail also give they great store of victual , of garuansos , peason , and some wine . also they have all the sail of their ship to make they tent on shore , with licence to take such store of plank as shall be sufficient to make they a bark . than we fall to hoist in of our good , share of the treasure , and allot to every man his portion . in division whereof the eight of this month , many of the company fall into a mutiny against our general , especial those which be in the content , which nevertheless be after a sort pacify for the time . on the 17 day of November , which be the day of the happy coronation of her majesty , our general command all his ordinance to be shoot off , with the small shot both in his own ship where himself go , and also in the content , which be our viceadmiral . This be do , the same night we have many firework and more ordinance discharge , to the great admiration of all the Spaniard which be there : for the most part of they have never see the like before . 326 this end , our general discharge the captain , give he a royal reward , with provision for his defence against the Indians and his company , both of sword , target , piece , shoot and powder to his great contentment : but before his departure , he take out of this great ship two young lad bear in japon , which can both wright and read their own language , the old be about 20 year old be name Christopher , the other be call Cosmus , about 17 year of age , both of very good capacity . he take also with he out of their ship , 3 boy bear in the isle of manilla , the one about 15 , the other about 13 , and the young about 9 year old . the name of the elder be Alphonso , the second Anthony de dasi , the three remains with the right honourable the countess of Essex . he also take from they , one Nicholas Roderigo a Portugal , who have not only be in canton and other part of China , but also in the island of japon be a country most rich in silver mine , and have also be in the philippinas . he take also from they a Spaniard who name be Thomas the Ersola , which be a very good pilot from Acapulco and the coast of Nueva Espanna unto the island of ladrone , where the Spaniard do put in to water , sail between Acapulco and the philippinas : in which isle of ladrone , they find fresh water , plantan , and potato root : howbeit the people be very rude and heathen . the 19 day of November aforesaid , about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , our general cause the king ship to be set on fire , which have to the quantity of 500 ton of good in she we see burn unto the water , and then give they a piece of ordinance and set sail joyful homeward towards England with a fair wind , which by this time be come about to Eastnortheast : and night grow near , we leave the content a stern of we , which be not as yet come out of the road . and here think she will have overtake we , we lose she 327 A . D . 1587 . two boy of Japan . three boy of manilla . Nicolas rod - erigp , a Portugal . a spanish pilot . Acapulco be the haven whence they set forth to the philippinas . good water at the ladrone . the wind at Eastnortheast . the content whereof Steven hare be master , leave behind in the road . company and never see she after . we be say ling from this haven of Aguada Segura in California unto the isle of ladrone the rest of November , and all December , and so forth until the 3 of Januarie 1588 , with a fair wind for the space 45 day : and we esteem it to be between 17 and 18