the admirable and prosperous voyage of the worshipful master Thomas candish of trimley in the county of Suffolk esquire , into the south sea , and from thence round about the circumference of the whole earth , begin in the year of our lord 1586 , and finish 1588 . write by master Francis pretty late of ey in Suffolk , a gentleman employ in the same action . ee depart out of Plymouth on Thursday the 21 . of July 1586 . with 3 . sail , to wit , the desire a ship of 120 . ton , the content of 60 tun , and the huge gallant a bark of 40 . ton : in which small fleet be 123 . person of all sort with all kind of furniture and victual sufficient for the space of two year , at the charge of the worshipful master Thomas candish of Trimley in the county of Suffolk esquire , be our general . 290 on Tuesday the 26 . of the same month , we be 45 . league from cape finis terrae where we meet with 5 . sail of biskayne come from the Grande 3 . greatbis - bay in newfoundland , as we suppose , which our , admiral shoot at , and fight with they 3 . hour , but m of we take none of they by reason the night grow on . the first of August we come in sight of Forteven - August . tura , one of the isle of the canary , about ten of the clock in the morning . on Sunday be the 7 . of August , we be get as high as Rio del oro on the coast of Barbary . Bio deal oro . on Monday the 19 we fall with cape Blanco : but cape Blanco . the wind blow so much at the north , that we can not get up where the canter do use to ride and fish : therefore we lie off 6 . hour west Southwest , because of the sand which lie off the cape Southwest and by dangerous south . sand the 15 . day of the same month we be in the height of cape Verde by estimation 50 . league off " the same . the 18 . Sierra leona do bear east off we , be 45 . league from we : and the same day the wind shift to the northwest , so that by the 20 . day of the say month we be in 6 . degree to the northward , from the equinoctial line . the 23 . we put room for Sierra leona , and the 25 . day we fall with the point on the south side of Sierra Sierra leona . leona , which master Brewer know very well , and go in before with the content which be viceadmiral : and we have no less than 5 . fathom water when we have least , and have for 14 . league in Southwest all the way run into the harbour of Sierra leona 16 . 14 . 12 . 10 and 8 . fathom of water . the 26 . of the say month we put into the harbour , and in go in we have by the southermost point when we have least 5 . fathom water fair by the rock as it lie at the say point , and after we come , 2 or 3 . cable length within the say rock , we never have less than 10 . fathom , until we come up to the 291 ride , which be about a league from the point , borrow always on the south side until you come up to the water place , in which bay be the best road ; but you must ride far into the bay , because there run marvellous great tide in the offin , and it flow into the road next of any thing at a southeast and by east moon . it be out of England to this place 930 . league : which we run from the 21 . of July to the 26 . of this month of August . on Saturday be the 27 . day there come 2 . Negros aboard our admiral from the shore , and make sign unto our general that there be a Portugal ship up within the harbour ; so the huge gallant be the rear - admiral go up 3 . or 4 . league , but for want of a pilot they seek no far : for the harbour run 3 . or 4 . league up more , and be of a marvellous breadth and very dangerous , as we learn afterward by a Portugal . on Sunday the 28 . the general send some of his company on shore , and there as they play and dance all the forenoon among the negro , to the end to have hear some good news of the Portugal ship , a Portugal towards their come aboard they espy a Portugal take . which lie hide among the bush , who we take and bring away with we then same night : and he tell we it be very dangerous go up with our boat for to seek the ship that be at the town . whereupon we go not to seek she , because we know he tell we the truth : for we bind he and make he fast , and so examine he . also he tell we that his ship be there cast away , and that there be two more of his company among the negro : the Portugal name be Emmanuel , and be by his occupation a calker , belong to the port of Portugal . on Monday morning be the 29 . day , our general land with 70 . man or thereabouts , and go up to their town , where we burn 2 . or 3 . house , and take what 292 spoil we will , which be but iide , but all the people flee : and in our retire aboard in a very little plain at their town end they shoot their arrow at we out of the wood , and hurt 3 . or 4 . of our man ; their arrow be poison poison , but yet none of our man miscarry at that time , arrowes - thanked be God .