distance be 90 league . league 90 . item , from the bay of cherrepe unto the bay of Paita it be 45 league , the course be 20 leag west - league 45 . northwest unto two island that be call the island of Lobos , and from thence unto the bay of Paita it be 25 league , the course be north and by east . item , from Paita unto cape Blanco , the course be north and by west , south and by east , and the distance be 25 league . league 25 . item , from cape Blanco unto the island of Puna , the course be eastnortheast and Westsouth west , and the distance be 25 league : and you shall see one island that league 25 . be call Santa Clara , which stand 10 league to the league in all southward of Puna . « « 751 . a note of certain place unto the northward of the line . in primis , from cape Blanco unto cape S . Laurence , the course be north and by east , south and by west , and the distance 60 league . league 60 . item , from cape S . Lorenzo unto cape S . Francisco , the course be north and by east , south and by west , and the distance be 40 league . league 40 . item , from cape S . Francisco unto the cape that be call cape Blanco , which cape be on the coast of new Spain , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 160 league : and you league 160 . shall have a great current that set out of the bay of Panama ; and the say current set south out . item , from cape Blanco unto the port de Veles , the course be Northeast and Southwest , and the distance 8 league . league 8 . 361 item , from the port de Veles unto the port of saint John , the course be northwest and southeast , and the league 17 . distance be 17 league . item , from the port of saint John unto Rio Lexo , the course be northwest , and southeast , and the distance be league 40 . 40 league . item , from Rio Lexo unto the gulf of Fonsecco , the course be westnorthwest , and eastsoutheast , and league 14 . they be distant 14 league . item , in the mouth of Rio Lexo there lie one island , and you must go in on the northwest part of that island ; on the which island you may be bold for to borrow on : and you must go from that island southeast up . item , that in the gulf of Fonsecco you shall have lie ten island , whereof three be people with Indians , whereon you may have water , wood , and salt . item , on the west side of the gulf of Fonsecco there be one town of Indians , which be call mapal , in which town there be great store of beef . item , from the river Lexo unto the bay of sonsonate , the course be east and west , and the distance be league 60 . 60 league . item , from the bay of sonsonate unto the port of Aguatulco , the course be northwest and by west , southleague 160 . east and by east , and the distance 160 league . item , from the bay of Coppeleto unto the port of league z . Aguatulco it be 2 league , the course be west and by north , east and by south . item , from the port of Aguatulco unto the port of angel , the course be east and west , and they be league 12 . distant 12 league . item , from the port of Aguatulco unto the port of Acapulco , the course be west and by north , east and league 78 . by south , and the distance be 78 league . item , from the port of Acapulco unto the port of saint Iago , the course be west and by north , east and league 80 . by south , and the distance be 80 league . item , from the port of saint Iago unto the port of 362 1588 . Natividad , the course be east and west , and the distance be 7 league . league 7 . item , from the port of Natividad unto the port of the island of Chiametla , the course be east and west , and the distance be 10 league . league 10 . item , from the island of Chiametla unto Cape de los Corrientes , the course be northwest and by west , southeast and by east , and the distance be 30 league . league 30 . item , from the cape de los Corrientes unto the bay of Xalisco , the course be Northnortheast , and southsouthwest , and the distance be 18 league . league 18 . item , from the bay of Xalisco unto the port of Chiametlan , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 30 league . league 30 . item , from the cape de los Corrientes unto the island call las tres Maria , the course be northwest and southeast , and the distance be 20 league . league 20 . item , from the cape de los Corrientes unto the cape of Santa Clara on the point of California , the course be westnorthwest , and eastsoutheast , and the distance be 108 league . league 108 . a note from the coast of America unto the westwards . item , from the cape of Santa Clara unto the island of the ladrone , the course be west and by south , east and by north , and the distance between they be 1850 iMpm league . l85 ° - item , that the southermost island of the ladrone stand in the latitude of 12 degree and 10 minute , and from thence unto the northermost island , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance between they be 200 league : and the say northermost island stand in 21 degree 10 minute . item , from one of the island of the ladrone , which stand in the latitude of 13 degree and 50 minute , which island be call * guaihaime , unto the cape de Spirito or Guana . 363 santo , which cape be upon one of the island of the fillip — pina , the course be west and to the southward , and the league 320 . distance be 320 league . item , from the cape of Spirito santo unto the mouth of the entrance of the strait of the philippinas , the course be west and by north , east and by south , and league