of wheat and barley ready thresh and make up in cade of straw to the quantity of a bushel of corn in every cade . the wheat and barley be as fair , as clean , and every way as good as any we have in England . there be also the like cade full of potato root , which be 302 very good to eat , ready make up in the store house for the Spaniard against they shall come for their tribute . this hand also yield many sort of fruit , hog , and hen . Theise Indians be hold in such slavery by they , that they dare not eat a hen or a hog themselves . but the Spaniard have make they all in that hand Christians . thus we fit our self here with corn ma ^ e asmuch as we will have , and as many hog as we have Christians . salt to powder they withal , and great store of hen , with a number of bag of potato root , and about 500 dry dogge - fish , and guinie wheat , which be call Maiz . and have take as much as we will have , yet we leave marvelous great store behind we . our general have the two principal of the hand aboard our ship , and provide great cheer for they , and make they merry with wine : and they in the end perceive we to be no Spaniards , make sign , as near as our general can perceive , that if we will go over unto the main land unto arauco , that there be much gold , make we Arauco richin sign , that we shall have great store of riches . but e - because we can not understand they , our general make some haste , and within 2 . or three day we furnish our self . the 18 . day in the morning we depart from this place , and run all that day Northnortheast about io . league , and at night lie with a short sail off and on the coast . the 19 we run in east Northeast with the land , and bear in with a place call the conception , where the concep - wee anchor under a hand , and depart the next tion ‘ morning without go on land . the 20 . we depart from the conception , and go into a little bay which be sandy , where we see fresh water and cattle , but we stay not there . the 30 . day we come into the bay of Quintero , Quintero which stand in 33 . degree and 50 minute . stand m the say day present after we be come unto a 50 anchor in the bay , there be a neteherd or one that keep cattle which lie upon the point of the hill asleep , 303 which when he awake and have espy three ship which be come into the bay , before we can get on shore , he have catch a horse which be feed by , and ride his way as fast as ever he may : and our general with 30 . shot with he go on shore . he have not be on land one hour , but there come 3 . horseman with bright sword towards we so hard as they may ride , until they come within some twenty or thirty score of we , and so stay , and will come no near unto we : so our general send unto they a couple of our man with their shot , and one Fernando , which be the Spaniard that we have take up at the mouth of the strait , which be one of the 400 . that be starve there . but the Spaniard will not suffer our man to come near with their shot , but make sign that one of our man shall come alone unto they : so the say Fernando the Spaniard go unto they , and our two man stand not far from they . they have great conference , and in the end Fernando come back from they , and tell our general that he have parl with they for some victual , who have promise as much as we will have . our general send he back again with another message and another shot with he : and be come near unto they , they will not suffer any more than one to approach they , whereupon our man let the Spaniard go unto they alone himself : who be some good distance from they , they stay but a theperjurleof small time together , but that the say Fernando leap a Spaniard . up behind one of they and rid away with they , for all his deep and damnable oath which he have make continual to our general and all his company never to forsake he , but to die on his side before he will be false . our general see how he be deal withal , fill water all that day with good watch , and carry it aboard : and night be come , he determine the next day to send into the country to find their town , and to have take the spoil of it , and to have fire it if they can have find it . 304 the last of march captain Havers go up into the country with 50 . or 60 . man with their shot and furniture with they , and we travail 7 . or 8 . mile into the land : and as we be march along , we espy a number of herd of cattle , of cow and bullock which be wonderful wild : we see also great store of horse , mere and colt which be very wild and unhandled : there be also great store of hare and cony , and plenty of partridge and other wild fowl . the country be very fruitful with fair fresh river all along full of wild foul of all sort . have travail so far that we can go no further for the monstrous high mountain , we rest our self at a very fair fresh river run in and alongst fair low meadow at the foot of the mountain , where every man drink of the river , and refresh themselves . have so