to all his noble , will they to be of good cheer , for that he will not deal about alter of their estate , till 3 . year be expire : whereupon they be ease of exceed great care and grief . for albeit there be no great trust to be give to his word , yet we hope that 437 this year he will not meddle : what he will do afterward , God know . in Coray at this present there be above 200000 . japonian soldier , who at the commandment of quabacondono be divide throughout the whole kingdom . Augustine lie upon the very extreme frontier of China : but because the chinians be separate from the kingdom of Coray with a mighty river of 3 . league broad , and abound with great ship , and have plant innumerable troop of man upon the shore , the success of the war remain most doubtful and uncertain . neither do we know whither the japonians will proceed any far this year or no . the three testimony of Coray , signify ( among other notable and political observation ) the late success of the war of Japan against Coray ; and to what end quabacondono still maintain garrison in that kingdom . out of the epistle of father Organtino Brixiano , bear date from Japan anno 1594 . the whole empire of Japan be now in the hand of this king quabacondono : and ( which have not be know since the first creation thereof ) there be not the breadth of one foot throughout all the whole island , which be not absolute subject unto he . and he reign in so great peace and tranquillity , that if his successor follow the same course of government , there be no likelihood of future sedition or perturbation in any of the kingdom . and doubtless the mean which he use to establish continual ! peace and concord among the japonians , be very great and effectual ! . one be , that after he have pass his public promise , he never put any of his adversary to death , which his predecessor Nabunanga perform not : for he have subdue any kingdom , will put all the lord and governor to the sword . but this king grant unto they not only life , but also yearly revenue , whereby to 438 maintain themselves in a honest and mean estate : in which regard they all rest content , and willing submit themselves . another be , in that he have bring the husbandman and peasant ( by who assistance and wealth all the pety - king - doms be after a sort sustain ) unto such extreme poverty , that they have scarce wherewithal ! to keep life and soul together : as likewise he have bereave they of all kind of weapon . the three be , because he have most straight forbid all contention , sedition , fray , and skirmish . for whosoever be find culpable of this crime , they die every man of they on both party . if any escape by flight , their kinsfolk be punish in their stead ; and for lack of they , their servant ; and for default of both their next neighbour . if many be guilty , many be punish and suffer death : but hence it come to pass , that many innocent person be constrain to die . and this severity be the cause , why there be at this present so seidome fray and contention in Japan . the four be , that in administer of justice he be most upright , without all respect either to his own kindred , or to his ancient captain , or the blood royal , or any of the Bonzii , be they never so famous : and be once advertise of a crime , he pardon no man . and albeit himself be exceed addict to woman , yet will he permit none of his subject to have any concubine . for which cause not many day ago , he banish a Bonzio of great wealth , be in alliance and dignity most near unto himself . And be inform that all the Bonzii of Miac6 keep concubine , he will have put they all to death , have not the governor of Miac6 promise , that he will undertake to keep they from offend any more in that kind . wherefore he cause all the Bonzii every month to be swear , that they shall live honest upon pain of death : as also he have swear the head or superior of all their 439 the war of Japan against Coray and China . religious house under pain of death , to give up their name who they most suspect of the foresay crime . hence it be , that all of they ( if you regard their outward estate ) live in extreme fear ... the five be , for that he suffer none of his soldier , nor his great lord to live in idleness . if there be no war for their employment , he occupi they in building of stately palace , and in raise new fortress , or in repair and strengthen of old , and also in perform other notable work , to the ornament of Japan , and to his own last honour . so that at this present near unto Miac6 there be thirty thousand man employ about the build of one castle ; and in the city of Bozacca above a hundred thousand : which employments afford they neither place nor time to practise any rebellion . the sixth be he alter of government : for he removeth his governor from one extreme part of Japan to another . the seven , for that unto his soldier ( beside the ordinary pay continual allot unto they for their service ) in time of war he allow victual at his own cost . whereof it come to pass , that he effect whatsoever he think good by their mean . neither have he hitherto wage any war , wherein his enemy be not vanquish , accord to his own desire : this late war of China only except , which far surmount all his force . howbeit in the kingdom of Coray he maintain as yet great garrison , as well to keep his honour , as to constrain the chinians to sue for peace . the eight be , in that he curb and restrain person of ambitious and aspire mind , who ( as he conjecture ) after his death may work some innovation in the common wealth , or disturb the kingdom . the nine be , because he have on no side within four or five day journey of Miac6 , any mighty or industrious captain or governor . 44 ° the ten and last be , for that he have bring his yearly revenue to two million of gold . by these course and mean , we be in good hope that firm peace will be establish in all these kingdom , and also that a fit way will be prepare , for the conversion of all the great lord unto christian religion .