this one Spaniard , which be neither soldier nor sailor , but one that be come among the rest from manilla , and have be in the hospital there a long time before , and be a very simple soul , and such a one as can answer to very little that he be ask , concern the state of the country . here we ride at anchor all that night , and perceive that the Spaniard have disperse their band into 2 or 3 part , and keep great watch in several steed with fire and shoot off their piece . this island have much plain ground in it in many place , and many fair and straight tree do grow upon it , fit for to make excellent good mast for all sort of ship . there be also mine of very fine gold in it which be in the custody of the Indians . and to the southward of this place , there be another very great island , which be not subdue by the Spaniard , nor any other nation . the people which inhabit it be all negro ; and the island be call the island of negro : and be almost as big as England , stand in 9 degree : the most part of it seem to 335 A . D . 1588 . 50 or 60 Spaniard show themselves . a new ship of the king in building . they man out a frigate after we . a hospitali in manilla . mine ofvery fine gild in the island of Panama . the island oj Negros in < ) degree . their departure from the philippinas . Batochina . 11 or 12 small island in 3 degree 10 min . to the southward . island in 4 degree southward of the dine . the death of eaptaine Havers . . be very low land , and by all likelihood be very fruitful . the 29 day of January about six of the clock in the morning we set sail , send our boat before until it be two of the clock in the afternoon , pass all this time as it be through a straight betwixt the say 2 island of Panama , and the island of negro , and about 16 league off we espy a fair open , trending southwest and by south , at which time our boat come aboard , and our general send commendation to the spanish captain which we come from the evening before by the Spaniard which we take , and will he to provide good store of gold : for he mean for to see he with his company at manilla within few year , and that he do but want a big boat to have land his man , or else he will have see he then : and so cause he to be set on shore . the 8 day of February by 8 of the clock in the morning we espy a island near Gilolo , call batochina , which stand in one degree from the equinoctial line northward . the 14 day of February we fall with n or 12 very small island , lie very low and flat , full of tree , and pass by some island which be sink and have the dry sand lie in the main sea . Theise island near the malucoe , stand in 3 degree and 10 min . to the southward of the line . on the 17 day , one John Gameford a Cooper die , which have be sick of a old disease a long time . the 20 day we fall with certain other island which have many small island among they , stand 4 degree to the southward of the line . on the 21 day of February , be Ash - wednesday captain Havers die of a most fervent and pestilent ague , which hold he furious some 7 or 8 day , to the no small grief of our general and of all the rest of the company , who cause two falcon and one Sacre to be shoot off , with all the small shot in the ship , who after he be shroud 336 in a sheet and a prayer say , be heve over board with great lamentation of we all . ' Moreover , present after his death my self with diverse other in the ship fall marvelous sick , and so continue in very great pain for the space of three week or a month by reason of the extreme heat and untemperatnesse of the climate . the first day of March have pass through the strait of Java minor and Java major , we come to a anchor under the southwest part of Java major : where we espy certain of the people which be fish by the sea side in a bay which be under the island . than our general take into the shipboat certain of his company , and a negro which can speak the morisco tongue , which he have take out of the great saint Anna , make towards those fisher , which have espy our boat run on shore into the wood for fear of our man : but our general cause his negro to call unto they : who no soon hear he call , but present one of they come out to the shore side and make answer . our general by the negro inquire of he for fresh water , which they find , and cause the fisher to go to the king and to certify he of a ship that be come to have traffic for victual , and for diamond , pearl , or any other rich jewel that he have : for which he shall have either gold or other merchandise in exchange . the fisher answer that we shall have all manner of victual that we will request . thus the boat come aboard again . within a while after we go about to furnish our ship thorough with wood and water . about the eight of march two or three canoas come from the town unto we with egg , hen , fresh fish , orange , and lymes , and bring word we shall have have victual more plentiful , but that they be so far to be bring to we where we rid . which when our general hear he weigh anchor and stand in near