by I | be command : but when we come into England ( if God so favour we ) your master shall know your honesty : in the mean space be void of these suspicion , for , God i call to witness , revenge be no part of my thought . they give he thank , desire to go into the harbour with the ship , which he grant . so there be ten leave upon the isle , and the last of October we enter the harbour . our master at our last be the three time . 409 here have take careful ! notice of every creek in the river , in a very convenient place , upon sandy oaze , run the ship on ground , lay our anchor to seaward , and with our run rope more she to stake upon the shore , which he have fasten for that purpose ; where the ship remain till our departure . the three of November our boat with water , wood , and as many as she can carry , go for the isle of penguin : but be deep , she dare not proceed , but return again the same night . then Parker , smith , Townesend , purpet , with five other , desire that they may go by land , and that the boat may fetch they Penguin isle when they be against the isle , it be scarce a mile scarce a mile from the shore . the captain bid they do what they ne ^ think best , advise they to take weapon with they : for ( say he ) although we have not at any time see people in this place , yet in the country there may be savage . they answer , that here be great store of deer , and ostrich ; but if there be savage , they will devour they : notwithstanding the captain cause they to carry weapon , caliver , sword , and target : so the sixth of November they depart by land , and the Hine man lose , boat by sea ; but from that day to this day we never hear of our man . the 11 while most of our man be at the isle , only the captain and master with six a great mul - other be leave in the ship , there come a great multi - w ^ swith ' tude savage to the ship , throw dust in the air , wizard , or leap and run like brute beast , have vizard on face like unto their face like dog face , or else their face be dog dog face . face indeed . we great fear lest they will set our ship on fire , for they will sudden make fire , whereat we much marvel : they come to windward of our ship , and set the bush on fire , so that we be in a very stink smoke : but as soon as they come within our shot , we shoot at they , and strike one of they in the thigh they all present flee , so that we never hear nor see more of they . hereby we judge that these canibal have slay our 9 man . when we consider what 410 last voyage of Thomas candish a . d . J592 - they be that thus be slay , and find that they be the principali man that will have murder our captain and master , with the rest of their friend , we see the just judgement of God , and make supplication to his divine majesty to be merciful unto we . while we be in this harbour , our captain and master go with the boat to discover how far this river do run , that if need shall enforce we to leave our ship , we may know how far we may go by water . so they find , that far than 20 mile they can not the river of go with the boat . at their return they send the boat P ° rtDestr ^ to the isle or penguin ; whereby we understand that passabie the penguin dry to our heart content , and that the boat . multitude of they be infinite . This Penguin have the shape of a bird , but have no wing , only two stump in the place of wing , by which he swim under water with as great swiftness as any fish . they live upon smelt , whereof there be great abundance upon this coast : in eat they be neither fish nor flesh : they lie great egg , and the bird be of a reasonable bigness , very near twice so big as a duck . all the time that we be in this place , we fare pass well with egg , penguin , young seal , young guile , beside other bird , such as i know not : of all which we have great abundance . in this place we find a herb call scurvygrasse , which we fry the great with egg , use train oil in stead of butter . this herb do so purge you blood , that it take away all kind gcurvygrasse of swell , of which many die , and restore we to perfect health of body , so that we be in as good case as when we come first out of England . we stay in this they stay in harbour until the 22 of December , in which time we have week in port dry 20000 penguin ; and the captain , the master , desire - and my self have make some salt , by lay salt water pretty de - upon the rock in hole , which in 6 day will be t0 ma ^ e kern . thus God do feed we even as it be with ’ manna from heaven . the 22 of December we depart with our ship for the isle , where with great difficulty , by the skilful industry 411 the isle of Placencia in Brasill . of our master we get 14000 of our bird , and have almost lose our captain in labour to bring the bird aboard : and have not our master be very expert in the set of