hundred league . the 3 day of January by six of the clock in the morning we have sight of one of the island of ladrone the island of call the island of Guana , stand in 13 degree Ih ^ I ^ adrma towards north , and sail with a gentle gale before in 13 degree wmde , by i or 2 of the clock in the afternoon , andtwothird . vree be come up within 2 league of the island , where commodity we meet with 60 or 70 sail of canoas full of savage , adrone ^ w ^° come to sea unto we ’ and bring with they ‘ in their boat plantan , cocos , potato root , and fresh fish , which they have catch at sea , and hold they up unto we for to truck or exchange with we ; which when we perceive , we make fast little piece of old iron upon small cord and fish line , and so vex the iron unto their canoas , and they catch hold of they and take off the iron , and in exchange of it they will make fast unto the same line either a potato root , or a bundle of plantan , which we hale in : and thus our company exchange with they until they have satisfy themselves with as much as do content they : yet we can not be rid of they . for afterward they be so thick about the ship , that it stem and break 1 or 2 of their canoas : but the man save themselves be in every canoa 4 , 6 , or 8 person all naked and excellent the colour and swimmer and diverse . they be of a tawny colour and 5people of the marvellous fat , and big ordinary of stature than the isle of la - most part of our man in England , wear their hair drone . marvelous long ; yet some of they have it make up and tie with a knot on the crown , and some with 2 ^ knot , much like unto their image which we see they etr image . carvej jn wood , anj stand in the head of their artificial boat like unto the image of the devil . their canoas eamas - be as artificial make as any that ever we have see : 328 consider they be make and contrive without any edgetool . they be not above half a yard in breadth and in length some seven or eight yard , and their head and sterne be both alike , they be make out with raft of cane and reed on the starrebordside , with mast and sail : their sail be make of mat of sedge , square or triangle wise : and they sail as well right against the wind , as before the wind : these savage follow we so long , that we can not be rid of they : until in the end our general command some half dozen harquebusses to be make ready ; and himself strike one of they and the rest shoot at they : but they be so yare and nimble , that we can not discern whether they be kill or no , because they can fall backward into the sea and prevent we by dive . the 14 day of January lie at hull with our ship all the middle watch , from 12 at night until four in the morning , by the break of day we fall with a headland of the isle of the philippinas , which be call Cabo deal Spirito Santo which be of very great bigness and length , high land in the midst of it , and very low land as the cape lie east and west , trending far into the sea to the westward . this cape or island be distant from the isle of Guana , one of the ladrone , 310 league . we be in sail of this course eleven day with scant wind and some foul weather , bear no sail two or three night . this island stand in 13 degree , and be a place much people with heathen people , and all woody through the whole land : and it be short of the chief island of the philippinas call manilla about 60 league . manilla be well plant and inhabit with Spaniards to the number of six or seven hundred person : which dwell in a town unwalled , which have 3 or 4 small block house , part make of wood , and part of stone be indeed of no great strength : they have one or two small galley belong to the town . it be a very rich place of gold and many other commodity ; and they have yearly traffic from Acapulco in Nueva canoas sail right against the wind . the nimbleness of the people of the ladrone . Cabo del Spirito Santo , one of the isle of the philippinas inn 13 degree . from Guana a isle of the ladrone to Cabo deal Spirito Santo be $ 10 league . the description of the town of manilla . trade from Acapulco to manilla . 329 silver exchange weight for weight for gold . the island of Capul at which our man stay 9 day . one of the chief governors of the island come aboard we . Espanna , and also 20 or 30 ship from China and from the Sanguelos , which bring they many sort of merchandise . the merchant of China and the Sanguelos be part moor and part heathen people . they bring great store of gold with they , which they traffic and exchange for silver , and give weight for weight . Theise Sanguelos be man of marvelous capacity in devise and make all manner of thing , especial in all handy craft and science : and every one be so expert , perfect , and skilful in his faculty , as few or no christian be able to go beyond they in that which they take in hand . for draw and embroider upon satin , silck , or lawn , either beast , foul , fish or worm , for liveliness and perfectness , both in silk , silver , gold , and pearl , they excel . also the 14 day at night we enter the strait between the island of Luzon