piece . Francis pretty , Thomas Andrew , Steven gunner , and Richard rise : which have our shot ready and retire our self unto a cliff , until the boat come again , which be present after they have carry the rest 46 Spaniard aboard . there be six and forty of the enemy ‘ slaine ^ 0 ™ s ^ a ^ ne by we , whereof they have drag some into ane ' bush , and some into old house , which we find afterward . we lose twelve man in manner follow . 1 Zacharie Saxie , 2 Neales Johnson , 3 William Geirgifield , 4 Nicolas Hendie , 5 Henry Cooper , k slay by the enemy . 1 Robert Maddock , kill with his piece . 2 Henry mawd , burn . 1 Edward the gunner man , 1 drown 2 Ambrose the musician , i ' 1 Walter tilliard , 2 Edward Smith , > take prisoner . 3 Henry aselye , i the self same day be the second of June , we go the second on shore again with seventie man , and have a fresh skir - skirmish with mjsh with the enemy , and drive they to retire , be a t e pamar shilling . hundred Spaniards serve with musket , and two hundred Indians with bow , arrow and dart . this do , the chief set fire on the town and burn it to the ground , tbw - ntnpuna have in it to the number of three hundred house : ‘ and short after make havoc of their field , orchard and garden , and burn four great ship more which be in building on the stock . the three of June the content which be our viceadmiral be hale on ground , to grave at the same place in despite of the Spaniard : and also our pinnace t , . , which the Spaniard have burn , be new trim . etPmtk e five day of June we depart out of the road 25 of May . of Puna , where we have remain eleven day , and 318 turn up for a place which be call Rio dolce , where we water : at which place also we sink our rear - admiral call the huge gallant for want of man , the Hugh be a bark of forty ton . arkeofo the ten day of the same month we set the indian on shore , which we have take before in a balsam as we be come into the road of Puna . the eleven day we depart from the say Rio Rio dolce . dolce . the twelve of June we double the equinoctial line , and continue our course northward all that month . the first of Julie we have sight of the coast of Nueva Espanna , be four league distant from land in the latitude of ten degree to the northward of the line . the nine of Julie we take a new ship of the burden of 120 ton , wherein be one Michael Sancius , who our general take to serve his turn to water along the coast : for he be one of the best coaster in the south sea . This Michael Sancius be a Pro - Michael vensal , bear in Marseils , and be the first man that Ancius a tell we news of the great ship call the Santa arst ian ' Anna , which we afterward take come from the philippinas . there be six man more in this new ship : we a great new take her sail , her rope , and firewood , to serve our burn . turn , set she on fire , and keep the man . the ten we take another bark which be go the second with advice of we and our ship all along the coast , barheofadvise as Michael Sancius tell we : but all the company that 1 ' be in the bark be flee on shore . none of both these ship have any good in they . for they come both from sonsonate in the province of Guatimala ; sonsonate in the new ship , for fear we shall have take she in the road , and the bark , to carry news of we along ' the coast ; which bark also we set on fire . abarkeburnt . the 26 day of July we come to a anchor at 10 fathom in the river of Copalita , where we make account the river of to water . and the same night we depart with 30 319 Aguatulco in 15 degree and 40 minute northward . a barkebumt . anile . cacoas . Aguatulco a town of 100 house burn . cacao go for money in Nueva Espanna . our general enter two mile into the main land with 30 man . man in the pinnace , and row to Aguatulco , which be but two league from the aforesaid river ; and stand in 15 degree 40 minute to the northward of the equinoctial line . the 27 in the morning by the break of day we come into the road of Aguatulco , where we find a bark of 50 ton , which be come from sonsonate lade with cacaos and anile which they have there land : and the man be all flee on shore . we land there , and burn their town , with the church and customhouse which be very fair and large : in which house be 600 bag of anile to dye cloth ; every bag whereof be worth 40 crown , and 400 bag of cacaos : every bag whereof be worth ten crown . Theise cacaos go among they for meat and money . for 150 of they be in value one rial of plate in ready payment . they be very like unto a almond , but be nothing so pleasant in taste : they eat they , and make drink of they . This the owner of the ship tell we . i find in this town before we burn it , a flasket full of box of balm . after we have spoil and burn the town , wherein there be some hundred house , the owner of the ship come down out of the hill with a flag of truce unto we , which before with the rest of all the townsman be run