451 prematica . 452 examination of spanish pilot a . d . .. 1586 . the same in english . the examination of the master and pilot which sail in the fleet of Spain to the west Indies : write in the spanish tongue by Pedro Dias a spanish pilot take by sir Richard Grinville 1585 . first they make suit unto the pilot major ( who at this present be call Alonzo de chiavez ) that he will admit they to examination , because they be natural Spaniard , and sufficient for the same . hereupon the pilot major command the party to the witness be examine , to give information that he be a mariner , ° ffive or , ixe and well practise in those part , about which he desire ° x ‘ to be examine . and then immediate he bring five or six pilot before examine to give testimony that he be a good mariner , and sufficient to become a pilot , that he be a Spaniard bear , and that he be not of the race of the moor , Jew or negro . have make this information , he present it unto the pilot ad - the pilot major . and the pilot major see the information to be good , will the king public reader king reader . of navigation ( who be now Roderigo Zamorano ) to admit he to his lecture . whither there do resort fourteen or fifteen person that desire to be examine : and they they hear the come to a certain house which the king reader have rea ^ eri appoint unto he for the same purpose , at eight of the clock in the morning : and then they stay two hour , for two and two hour likewise in the afternoon : in one of mrneth . 453 their disputation of the art of navigation before the king reader who be their moderator . the hall of examination . the manner oj the young pilot examination . which hour Zamorano read unto they , and in the other they ask one another many particular concern the art of navigation in the presence of the say king reader : and he that answer not to the purpose the say reader instruct more perfect , and tell he how everything be . and this exercise continue two month , during which time the examinate must not fail to be present twice in a day , as be aforesaid . and have hear the king reader those two month , they resort then unto the hall of examination which be in the contractation house , where there be assemble the pilot major and diverse other pilot , to the number of 25 at the least ; who all sit there in order , the pilot major demand of he that will be examine , of what part of the Indies he desire to be examine : whereto the examinate answer , that he will be examine concern Nueva Espanna , or of number de dios and Tierra firma . and other that be not experience in those part , crave to be examine of Santo Domingo , Puerto rico , and Cuba . then the pilot major command the examinate to spread a sea - chart upon the table , and in the presence of the other pilot to depart or show the course from the bar of Sant Lucar to the canarie - island , and from thence to the Indies , till he come to that place whereof he be to be examine , and then also to return back to the bar of Sant Lucar in Spain , from whence he depart . also the pilot major ask he , if when he sail upon the sea , he be take with a contrary wind , what remedy he be to use , that his ship be not too much turmoil upon the sea ? and the examinate answer he aswell as he can . then one of the other pilot oppose he about the rule of the sun and of the north - star , and how he ought to use the declination of the sun at all time of the year : who the examinate be bind to answer in every thing that he demand . then another ask he of the sign and mark of those 454 land which lie in his way to that haven whereof he be examine . and then another demand , that if his mast shall be break by tempest , what remedy he will use ? other ask he , if his ship shall take a leak , to the hazard of the life of himself and his company , what remedy he will find to stop the same with least danger ? other ask he , what remedy , if his rudder shall chance to fail ? other oppose he about the account of the moon and of the tide ? other ask he if a pirate shall take he and leave he destitute of his chart , his astrolabe , and his other instrument serve to take the height of the sun and of the star , what course he will take in that extremity ? other demand other question needful for a mariner to know , which desire to be a pilot . unto all which the examinate be very attentive , and answer to every particular . after they have all ask he so much as they think expedient , they bid he depart out of the hall , to the end that every one of they may several be swear upon a book , that they will speak the truth . than they put into a certain vessel of silver stand there for the same purpose so many bean , and so many peason as there be pilot within the hall : and every one put his hand into the vessel in order , he that think the party examine to be sufficient , take up a bean , and he that think he not sufficient , take up a pease . and after that all have take out what they please , the pilot major look what voice the examinate have : and if he find he to have as many voice for he as against he , he command he to make another voyage : but if he have more voice for he then against he , than they give he letter testimoniali of his examination sign by the pilot major , by the1 king reader , and the secretary , and