seal with the seal of the contractation house . and upon the receipt of these letter testimoniali , the new pilot give a present unto the pilot major , and the king reader , for their glove and hen , every one 455 the manner of their election . letter testimoniali of every new pilot examination and approbation , under the hand of the pilot major , the king reader , and the secretary , and seal of the contractation house . the order of the contracta - tion house . accord to his ability , which be ordinary some two or three ducat . # and than he may take upon he to be pilot in any ship whatsoever , unto that place for which he be examine : and if he find in the Indies any ship under the charge of a pilot not before examine , he may put he out of his office , and may himself take charge of that ship for the same wage that the other pilot agree for . the pilot wage for make a voyage outward and homeward be accord to the burden of the ship . if she be of 100 ton , he have 200 or 250 ducat : and if she be of 400 or 500 ton , he take for his wage 500 or 550 ducat : and if she be big , he have a great allowance : over and beside all which , he have every day while he remain on land , four real for his diet . and the great ship be always commit unto the more ancient pilot , because they be of great experience and better skill , than the young sort which new take upon they to be pilot . the pilot undertake no far travel nor care , but in direct the course or navigation : for the master of the ship take charge of the freight and prepare their ship , and to pay the mariner , and to do all thing needful for the ship ; for the pilot come not unto the ship , until the visitor come to visit the same , to see whether he have all thing necessary for the voyage . the visitor be four man which be appoint by the king , and these be man of great understanding : and they come to visit the ship before they take in their lade , to see whether they be well prepare to make the voyage . and after the ship be lade , they return again to visit they the second time , to see whether they have all thing necessary , accord to the order , of the contractation house : and whether they have all their mariner , victual , powder , shot , and ordinance , and all other thing necessary for the voyage . and if they want any thing , they charge they upon grievous penalty , , to provide the same before they set out of the haven . the ship that go to the Indies be wont each of they to have with they a notary , who charge be to keep a note of remembrance of all the merchandise which be lade in the ship , and to take the mark thereof , thereby to deliver the commodity in the ship to their particular owner , after they have finish their voyage , and he serve likewise to make will , and other instrument , which be wont to be make by a notary , if any man chance to fall sick . and his wage in each voyage be as much as the wage of two mariner . the general of the fleet use continual , after thefirstbarke he be arrive in the Indies , to send into Spain a bark ° f Aviso . of Aviso , to advertise the king of the state of his arrival ; and after the fleet be ready to come home , he dis - patcheth another pinnace of Aviso to certify they how secon ^ the fleet be now ready to set sail , with other particularity . there go with the fleet two great ship , ' the one as admiral , the other as vice - admiral , of the burden of 400 or 500 ton , which carry nothing but victual and soldier for the waft of the rest of the fleet , and these be pay out of the merchandise which come in the fleet , after the rate of one in the hundred , and sometime at one and a half in the hundred . there be in the contractation house of Sivil a table which serve for a Aranzel , or table of rate or taxation , write in letter of gold , wherein the value of all kind of merchandise , which be embark for the Indies , be set down . lie this table a man may know how many botija g ® or jar make a ton of wine , or how many pack , or how many quintal , or how many barrel , or how many chest make a ton . and all merchandise have their rate set down , to pay the king his custom and the master his due fraught . a table of rate , etc set up in the contractation house . 457 and therein be set up in write that no master may carry any passenger to the Indies , without licence , especial not learn man , nor any fryer , or clergyman , nor any body else without licence of the king : nor any stranger not bear in the kingdom of Spain . moreover , that they may not carry away any merchandise not comprise in the foresay order , under pain of death : and that all good which they carry with they , they ought to carry the same register ; under pain of death . furthermore , that no master nor pilot may carry any chart , nor astrolabe , nor cross - staff , nor regiment , without they be sign and seal by the pilot major Alonzo de chiavez , and the cosmographer the king reader Rodrigo Zamorano . moreover , that go in company with the fleet , they do and obey all such thing , as their general shall command they , under pain of death . write by i Pedro Dias bear in the isle of it Palma one of the canary , upon the request and gratification of m . Richard Hakluyt , in February 1586 . end of volume xi .