unto their magistrate , they engorge themselves with their body . howbeit , their spial in the mean time descry from the top of a high mountain the duke of Austria , the king of Bohemia , the patriarch of Aquileia , the duke of Carinthia , and ( as some report ) the earl of Baden , with a mighty power , and in battle array , approach towards they , that accurse crew immediate vanish , and all those tartarian vagabond retire themselves into the distress and vanquish land of Hungary ; who as they come sudden , so they depart also on the sudden : which their celerity cause all man to stand in horror and astonishment of they . but of the say fugitive , the prince of Dalmatia take eight : one of which number the duke of Austria know to be a english man , who be perpetual banish out of the realm of England , in regard of certain notorious crime by he commit . this fellow , on the behalf of the most tyrannical king of A . D . 1243 . the Tartar , have be twice , as a messenger and interpreter , with the king of Hungary , menace and plain foretell those mischief which afterward happen , unless he will submit himself and his kingdom unto the Tartar yoke . well , be allure by our prince to confess the truth , he make such oath and protestation , as ( i think ) the devil himself will have be trust for . First therefore he report of himself , that present after the time of his banishment , namely about the 30 . year of his age , have lose all that he have in the city of Aeon at dice , even in the midst of winter , be compel by ignominious hunger , wear nothing about he but a shirt of sack , a pair of shoe , and a hair cap only , be shave like a fool , and utter a uncouth noise as if he have be dumb , he take his journey , and so travel many country , and find in diverse place friendly entertainment , he prolong his life in this manner for a season , albeit every day by rashness of speech , and inconstancy of heart , he endanger himself to the devil . at length , by reason of extreme travail , and continual change of air and of meat in Caldea , he fall into a grievous sickness , insomuch that