, with their bow , and other engine . of the hide of beast be tan , they use to shape for themselves light , but yet impenetrable armour . they ride fast bind unto their horse , which be not very great in stature , but exceed strong , and maintain with little provender . they use to fight constant and valiant with javelin , mace , battle - ax , and sword . but special they be excellent archer , and cunning warrior with their bow . their back be slight arm , that they may not flee . they withdraw not themselves from the combat , till they see the chief standard of their general give back . vanquish , they ask no favour , and vanquish , they show no compassion . they all persist in their purpose of subdue the whole world under their own subjection , as if they be but one man , and yet they be more than million in number . they have 60000 . Courriers , who be send before upon light horse to prepare a place for the army to encamp in , will in the space of one night gallop three day journey . and sudden diffuse themselves over a whole province , and surprise all the people thereof unarm , provide , disperse , they make such horrible slaughter , that the king or prince of the land invade , can find people sufficient to wage battle against they , and to withstand they . they delude all people and prince of region in time of peace , pretend that for a cause , which indeed be no cause . sometime they say , that they will make a voyage to Colen , to fetch home the three wise king into their own country ; sometime to punish the avarice and pride of the roman , who oppress they in time past ; sometime to conquer barbarous and northern nation ; sometime to moderate the fury of the german with their own meek mildness ; sometime to learn warlike feat and stratagem of the french ; sometime for the find out of fertile ground to suffice their huge multitude ; sometime again in derision they say , that they intend to go on pilgrimage to saint James of Galicia . in regard of which sleight and collusion certain undiscreet governor conclude a league with they , have grant they free passage through their territory , which league notwithstanding be violate , be a occasion of ruin and destruction unto the foresay governor etc