part of a epistle write by one yvo of Narbona unto the archbishop of Bourdeaux , contain the confession of a Englishman as touch the barbarous demeanour of the Tartar , which have live long among they , and be draw along perforce with they in their expedition against Hungary : record by Matthew Paris in the year of our lord 1243 . the lord therefore be provoke to indignation , by reason of this and other sin commit among we Christians , be become , as it be , a destroy enemy , and a dreadful avenger . this i may just affirm to be true , because a huge nation , and a barbarous and inhumane people , who law be lawless , who wrath be furious , even the rod of God anger , overrun , and utter waste infinite country , cruel abolish all thing where they come , with fire and sword . and this present summer , the foresay nation , be call Tartars , depart out of Hungary , which they have surprise by treason , lay siege unto the | | Neust . it . very same two town , wherein i my self abode , with many thousand of soldier : neither be there in the say 5 ° town on our part above 50 . man of war , who , together with 20 . crossbow , the captain have leave in garrison . all these , out of certain high place , behold the enemy vast army , and abhor the beastly cruelty of Antichrist his complice , signify forthwith unto their governor , the hideous lamentation of his christian subject , who sudden be surprise in all the province adjoin , without any difference or respect of condition , fortune , sex , or age , be by manifold cruelty , all of they destroy : with who carcase , the tartarian chieftain , and their brutish and savage follower , glut themselves , as with delicious cate , leave nothing for vulture but the bare bone . and a strange thing it be to consider , that the greedy and ravenous vulture disdain to pray upon any of the relic , which remain . Oide , and deform woman they give , as it be , for daily sustenance , unto their cannibal : the beautiful devour they not , but smother they lament and scritch , with force and unnatural ravishment . like barbarous miscreant , they quell virgin unto death , and cut off their tender pap to present for dainty