command certain i ship , merchandise , ware , and good , find in certain haven , to be deliver unto they . howbeit , as touch other good , which be perhaps perish or want by infortunate dissipation or destruction , and for the which the say messenger of you demand satisfaction to be make unto they within a certain time by we limit : may it please your honour to understand , that in the absence of our say sovereign lord the king , be as yet far distant from we , we can in no wise limit or set down any such term of time . notwithstanding , at the prosperous return of our sovereign , we be determine to commune with he about this matter . of who answer so soon as we be certify , we purpose to signify his intention unto you by our letter . since also ( right reverend and mighty lord ) your say messenger be content , for the present , to accept of our offer aforesaid , as indeed by all reason they ought thereat to rest content , especial whereas by this mean they shall the more speedy attain unto the effect of their purpose ( to the short and wish execution and performance of which offer , we will , by god help , endeavour , to the utmost of our ability ) may it be your will and pleasure , that as in the kingdom of England , your merchant and subject be courteous entreat : even so the merchant and liege people of our sovereign lord the king and of his kingdom peaceable frequent your part , either in regard of traffic or of any other just occasion , may there in like manner friendly be use , and with your merchant and subject suffer to communicate , and to have intercourse of traffic , enjoy the commodity of the ancient league . by this also the fervent zeal and affection which you bear unto the royal crown of England shall undoubted appear : albeit between the famous house of England and of Prussia , the band of unfeigned love and friendship have be successive confirm and keep inviolable in time note well . past . and thus ( right reverend and mighty lord ) • wishing unto you increase of honour and prosperity , we take our leaf . write at London the five of October , in the year of our lord 1403 . by the chancellor , the treasurer , and other lord of the hono : counsel of the king of England and France , be personal present at London . A . D . 1404 . 1403 .