the 1407 . town of Dantzik , and John crolowe , for the behalf of your subject of Prussia , and Tidman de meule , and John Epenscheid for the behalf of Livonia , be assemble as messenger and commissioner about the redress and reformation aforesaid , do then and there demand in certain article , of our ambassador and messenger abovenamed 25034 . noble and half a noble , for the grievance and damage offer ( as it be then say ) to your subject of Prussia , and 24082 . noble , 12 . S . 8d . in recompense of the damage offer unto those your subject of Livonia . and when the substance of those article about the grievance and loss aforesaid be by the say ambassador and messenger thorough examine and discuss , by their general consent it be final agree , that your subject , in consideration of all and singular the foresay grievance and damage offer unto they by our people , shall within three year after the feast of easter next ensue , at three equal payment receive from we , namely they of Prussia , 8957 . noble , and they of Livonia 22496 . noble , six penny , half penny , farthing , and no more , so that we our self think good to condescend thereunto . howbeit , forasmuch as certain other article of your subject of Prussia , and also certain article in the behalf of our subject contain grievous complaint in they , be propound before the ambassador and messenger aforesaid , for the attain of reformation in regard of the damage and grievance offer on both part , can not as then , for the great obscurity of diverse of the say article , and also for want of sufficient proof at the last meeting appoint and hold by the foresay ambassador at the town of Hage in holland , sufficient to be examine , discuss , and define , it be agree upon by the ambassador and messenger of both part , that from the 15 . day of October then last expire unto the feast of easter now next ensue , and from thenceforth within one whole year immediate follow , the plaintiffs of both part shall thorough declare before our chancellor