the day above name , in the year of our lord 1407 . Fr . Wernherus de Tettingen , commander in Elbing , general vice - master and lieutenant in the room of the master general of the dutch knight of the order of saint marry etc of late decease . the letter of Henry the 4 . king of England etc unto Ulricus de Jungingen master general of Prussia , 1408 . wherein he do ratify and accept the last agreement make at Hage in holland . HEnry etc unto the honourable and religious personage Fr . ulricus de Jungingen master general of the dutch knight of saint marry etc our most dear friend , greeting and daily increase of our accustom amity and friendship . we do by these present give your honour to understand , that our faithful and well - beloved William esturmy knight , and master John Kington clerk , our ambassador and messenger send of late on our behalf , unto the presence of your predecessor for the redress of certain grievance and damage be contrary to justice offer against we and our liege subject by the people and subject of your predecessor , and against they also by our subject as it be aforesaid , in friendly manner to be procure , of late return out of the part of Alemain make relation unto we and to our counsel , that have confer with your forename predecessor about the foresay affair , the particular follow be at length conclude : namely first of all , that at a certain day and place they shall meet in holland with his ambassador and messenger , to hold a friendly conference between they about the redress and reformation of the grievance and damage aforesaid : and that they shall by the equal weight of diligent examination ponder , and in the balance of justice discuss and define all and singular the foresay grievance and damage inflict on both part . howbeit at length after sundry prorogation then make and continue on this behalf , our ambassador and messenger aforesaid upon the 28 . of August last pass , assemble themselves for our part at the town of Hage in holland , the hon . and 0f ^ ug ^ t2 discreet personage Arnold heket burgomaster of