: we answer ( under correction of your majesty more deliberate counsel ) that it be far more expedient for both part to have the say prohibition continue then release , until such time as satisfaction be perform on both side unto the party endamage , not in word only , but actual 8c real in deed , or by some course of law or friendly composition . for there be no equal nor indifferent kind of consort or trade between the impoverish party and he that be enrich , between the party which have obtain justice and he that have obtain none between the offender and the party offend : because they be not move with like affection . for the remembrance of injury easy stir up inconsiderate motion of anger . also , such a kind of temperature or permixtion , as it be , by way of contrariety breed more bitterness than sweetness , more hate than love : whereupon moor grievous complaint aswell unto your highness as unto our self , may be occasion . the lord know , that even now we be too much weary and disquiet with the importunate and instant complaint of our subject , insomuch that we can at this present by any convenient mean release or dissolve the say prohibition , before we be sufficient inform by your majesty ambassador , of the satisfaction of our endamage subject . Furthermore , whereas your majesty request , concern your subject that shall come unto the part of Sconia , be that we will defend they under our protection : be it know unto your highness , that for diverse consideration we reasonable Margaret move , be provoke by the queen of Denmark ^ denm an ber peop ^ e > be also urge thereunto full sore ' against our will , for the repel and avoid of injury , we have send forth our army against they . howbeit for a certain time a truce be conclude on both part , so that our people be actual return home . far be it from we also , that our subject be occupy in war , shall in any sort willing molest or reproach any stranger , of what land or nation soever , not be our profess enemy . for this shall be to oppress the innocent in stead of the guilty , to condemn the just for the unjust : than which nothing can be more cruel , nor a revenge of great impiety . in very deed ( most gracious prince and lord ) we be move with right hearty sympathy and compassion for any inconvenience which may happen in your regiment : wish from the bottom of our heart , that all affair may right prosperous and happy succeed , about the royal person and regiment of your most excellent majestic , and that continual . the like whereof we hope from you : most humble commend our self , and our whole order unto your highness . give at our castle of Marienburgh , the 16 . day the month of July , in the year of our lord 1404 .