certain note unperfect write by Richard Johnson servant to master Richard chancellor , which be in the discovery of Vaigatz and Nova Zembla , with Steven Burrowe in the serchthrift 1556 . and after - i $ 56 ward among the samoede , who devilish rite he describe . Norway . roast Etf Lofoot . Finmarke . Wardhouse . Lappia . the Serie - irst , after we depart out of England we fall with Norway , and on that cost lie northbern or Northbergen , and this people be under the king of Denmark : but they differ in their speech from the Dane , for they speak norsh . and north of Northbern lie the isle of roast and Lofoot , and these island pertain unto Finmarke , and they keep the law and speak the language of the islander . and at the eastermost part of that land be a castle which be call the ward house , and the king of Denmark do fortify it with man of war : and the russes may not go to the westward of that castle . and east southeast from that castle be a land call Lappia : in which ’ land be two manner of people , that be to say , the lappians , and the scrickfinne , which scrickfinne be a wild people which neither know God , nor yet good fames - order : and these people live in tent make of deer skin : and they have no certain habitation , but continue in herd and company by one hundred and two hundred . and they be a people of small stature , and be clothe in deer skin , and drink nothing but water , and eat no bread but flesh all raw . and than the lappians . lappians be a people adjoin to they and be much like to they in all condition : but the emperor of Russia have of late overcome many of they , and they be in subjection to he . and this people will say that they believe in the russes God . and they live in tent as the other doe . and southeast and by south from Lappia 345 Corelia . lie a province call Corelia , and these people be call Kerilli . and south southeast from Corelia lie a Novogardia . country call Novogardia . and these three nation be the russes , under the emperor of Russia , and the russes keep the