ten thousand pound of hemp , so it be dress ready to their hand , year . have two to turn the wheel , and two to wind up . therefore i have agree with these two boy to serve the worshipful company four year a piece . one of they wind up and be very apt to spin : therefore i will have two other young man russes to spin , if they can find good surety for their truth . i have be in hand with these two young man that come out of the Trinity , and they with i , but under seven pound a year they will not serve , nor Thomas Bunting that be Roger Bunting his servant . therefore i will have three russes at the least to spin , five of they will be as good as these three , and will not be so chargeable all , as one of these will be . i think it be good that our Nassada be somewhat strengthen in her floor on both side with plank of five or six inche thick , from the stem to the stern , as i have write to Thomas Hawtrey at 395 white hawk in white bear prohibit without licence . master Gray journey to Lampas . 1558 . vologda . also if you shall so think meet , your wax and tallow shall be lade in two dosnicke , for they be meet to go aboard the ship : i do intend to set up a house at Boroseva over against the place whereas the ship shall ride , your advice therein i expect , it shall not cost above three roble , and yet if we will , there shall be two warm room in it . as for other matter at this present i have not to trouble you withal , and if it will please you i will be glad to hear some good news of master Jenkinson . thus Jesus be with you and be his guide . Postscriptum . as for these our hawk they be not white , but white and mail , but indeed be jarfawkon . Theise day past our Olen die . so this year our master of the company be like to have none , nor any white bear . neither may any pass out of the realm without a special licence from the emperor . i intend God willing to go to Lampas , if i do i will take four or five kersey with i , but as for money there be small store here to carry . you , Richard grey .