small boast have be make : which give occasion of more circumspection and diligence . 14 if the wind and weather will serve , it be think good rather to go by the Wardhouse then to come in and anchor there , lest any male engine , or danger may be the rather attempt against we , our good and ship as above . 15 it be think good that Richard Johnson , late servant to m . chancellor , shall be send home in this next return , to instruct the company of the state of the country , and of such question as may be demand of he , for our better advertisement and 377 resolution , in such doubt as shall arise here : and that he shall have the room of the captain in such sort , as master Jenkinson be in this present cocket assign unto . and if Johnson can not , may not , nor will not return and occupy the say place , than any other person to be prefer thereunto , as by the discretion of our say captain , with consent of our agent , shall be think meet and apt to supply the same . 16 provide always , that the ship return be not disfurnish of one such able man , as shall occupy the captainship in like order , as be , and have be in such case appoint , as reason and good order require . 17 item that all other former order , rule , and devise , make and provide for the good order of our ship , ware , and good , be not repugnant , contrary or diverse , to these article , and the content of the same , shall be , and stand in full force and effect , to be in all respect observe and keep of all and every person and person , who the same do or shall touch or concern . in witness of the premise faithful to be observe and keep , the owner and master of the say four ship , together with the say captain , to these seventeen article , contain in two sheet of paper , have subscribe their hand . give in London , the three of May , in the year of our lord God 1557 . fl owner of the primerose . Andrew judde . William Chester . Anthony Hickman . Edward Casteline . fl owner of the John Evangelist . Andrew judde . William Chester . fl owner of the anne . John dimocke . fl owner of the Trinity . R . T .