another letter to the foresay party . 1560 . this letter before write be the copy of one send you by Thomas Alcock , trust that he be with you long since . the 26 day of the last month we receive a letter from he , date in Stockholme in Sweden the 14 day of January , and we perceive by his letter that he have talk with a dutch man that come late from the Moscow , who inform he that our friend master Antony Jenkinson be return to the Moscow in September last pass , but how far he have be , or what he have do , he can not tell . also he write that one John Lucke a joiner be take by the liefelander , and put in prison . as yet we have not hear from the say John luck , nor know not whether he be release out of prison or not . we suppose that by he you write some letter which as yet be not come to our hand : so that we think he be yet in prison , or Stockholme . John luck take prisoner in lieflande . 4 ° 7 otherwise dispatch out of the way . the fifteen day of December we receive a letter from Christopher Hodson , date in the Moscow the 29 of July , by the way of dansk : which be in effect a copy of such another receive from he in our ship . you shall understand that we have lade in three good ship of we these kind of ware follow : to wit , in the the swallow . swallow of London , master under God Steven Burrow , 34 fardel N ° 136 broad short clothes , and four fardel N ° 58 Hampshire kersey : and 23 pipe of bastard and secke , and 263 piece of raisin and 4 hogshead N ° 154 piece of round pewter , and ten hogshead and poncheon of prune , and one dryfatte with almond . the fillip and in the fillip and marry , master under God Thomas and Marie . 25 fardel N ° 100 broad clothes , and three fardel N ° 42 Hampshire kersey , and thirty pipe of secke and bastard , and 100 piece of raisin . and in the Jesus . the Jesus of London , master under God Arthur Pette , 10 fardel N ° 40 broad short clothes , and twenty seven pipe of bastard and secke , as by the invoice herewith enclose may appear : also you shall receive such necessary as you do write to be send for the rope maker : trust that you shall have better success with they which you shall send we in these ship , then with the