a letter of master Richard Gray one of the first agent of the Moscovie company to master Henry lane at Moscow , write in i558 - colmogro the 19 of February 1558 . worshipful sir , after hearty commendation etc you shall understand that this Lent come Lampas a to Lampas such a number of man of diverse nation great mart fir w £ th ware } as have not be see these ten year . tk ^ North thither come many out of Ugori : therefore i will have be there my self , and also have receive such money as be owe we in ware by Kerill his brother and Osep boscovo . for as you well know , thence they will go with their ware to the Moscow , and make we payment with delay , as they have do these other year pass . Colobone and his partner be depart towards Lampas with seven sled lade with victual . other also be go to that Mart . as touch the bring of money with you , it will be good , for i assure you since our come to this country have not so many person go to the sea , as will do this year . trust that God will send good store of train oil , i will cause as much cask to be in a readiness as i can , if you shall think it meet to send some money before . all 394 our old hemp be spin and wrought in ten cable from fifteen inche to ten the least , and thirteen hauser from six inche to three inche : and all may weigh white eight and twenty thousand pound weight and upward . there be in hemp ockam five thousand pound two hundred weight in twelve sack at the least : the flax that come down in the nassada with those seven podes that come last be all spin with a good part of that hemp that come last . God send more short , for all that be here and that be come in the three other sled , will be dispatch by the four week in Lent . within these few day i buy thirteen podes , seven pound of hemp that cost two roble , twenty eight altines , four penny , which together with that that be buy before , shall be lay in dip and sound line , for it be very good . there be spend above fifty barrel of tar already : you shall what quanti - understand that these eight workman will spin ^ afhempeZ . and lay above fourscore and