rest which you have send we yet : for we as yet have sell none of they . and whereas we write unto you in our former letter , that we will send you a hundred ton of salt , by reason it be so dear here we do send you but nine ton and a half , for it cost here ten penny the bushel the first penny : namely in the swallow 6 ton and a half , in the fillip and marry one ton and a half , and in the Jesus one ton and a half . the 4 hogshead of round pewter go in the swallow and in the fillip and marry N ° 154 piece , as be aforesaid . we send you three ship , trust that you have provide accord to our former writing good store of lade for they . if you have more ware then will lade the ship , let it be train 408 oil that you leave behind : the price be not here so good as it be : it be worth here 9 pound the ton . we think it good you shall let the small ship bring as much of the train as she can carry : and that the master of the ship do look well to the rummage , for they may bring away a great deal more than they do , if they will take pain in the rummage : and bestow the train by it self , and the wax and tallow by it self : for the leakage of the train do foul the other ware much . as for Allard the skinner , if you think good , he may come home in these ship . we have no doubt but that you Henry lane , if you mind to come home now in these ship as you request , will leave such good order there with our servant as shall be for our most profit and their preferment , if they do their duty diligent and true . if our friend master Antony Jenkinson be return , and mean to come away in these ship to declare his mind and opinion of his travail , if need require and he be so mind he may return thither by land and be there by the fine of Januarie or before . but as we be uncertain whether he be return or not : so we know not what he have do , nor what benefit may rise hereafter of his travail . therefore in this we remit it to his and your good discretion . we send you Thomas Hawtrey which be our servant for year : our mind be he shall be place , where he may do best service . also we send