you Nicholas chancellor to remain Nicholas there , who be our apprentice for year : our mind be chancellor . he shall be set about such business as he be most fit for : he have be keep at write school long : he have his algorisme , and have understanding of keep of book of reckon . we send you now but 100 kersey : but against the next year , if occasion serve , we will send you a great quantity , accord as you shall advise we : one of the pipe of secke that be in the swallow , which have 2 round compass upon the 409 the salt of Russia be not so good as bay salt . fox skin white , black , and russet vendible in England . May ^ . 1560 . bung , be to be present to the emperor : for it be special good . the neat weight of the 10 puncheon of prune be 4300 . 2 three 1 pound . it be write particular upon the head of every puncheon : and the neat weight of the fat of almond be 500 livre . two quarter . the raisin , prune , and almond you be best to dispatch away at a reasonable price , and principal the raisin , for in keep of they will be great loss in the weight , and the fruit will decay . we think it good that you provide against the next year for the come of our ship 20 or 30 bullock kill and salt , for beef be very dear here . therefore you be best to save some of this salt that we do send you in these ship for the purpose . the salt of that country be not so good . in this you may take the opinion of the master of the ship . Foxe skin , white , black , and russet will be vendible here . the last year you send none : but there be mariner that buy many . if any of the mariner do buy any trifle fur or other commodity , we will they shall be register in our purser book , to the intent we may know what they be . we desire to know how the emperor take the letter which we send in our ship , as a answer to the letter that come in his name and under his seal for the six thousand daller . thus we rest , commit you to God , from London the five day of May 1560 . for lack of time the governor have not firm this letter : which be the copy of the other two letter firm by they . you , William mericke . you , blaze Sanders .