among my stuff which they have . they ask i then , for what cause i go home over land ? i declare unto they , that the winter be a warm season , and have intelligence that the freeze sea be not much freeze , and suppose this summer it will be navigable , i be only send to provide a ship to be send to pass the say sea to discover Cataia : which if God grant we may do , it will not only be a commodity to the realm of England , but unto all christian land , by the riches that may be bring from thence , if the history be true that be write thereof . much other 398 communication i have with they concern the same voyage . than he demand of i what ware we bring into Russia , and what we carry from thence . i declare the same unto they . than they burden i , that we bring thither thousand of ordinance , as also of harness , sword , with other munition of war , artificer , copper , with many other thing : i make they answer , that we have bring thither about one hundred shirt of mail , such old thing new scour as no man in England will wear . other talk they have with i concern the trade of mos - covia too long to commit to writing . at my come hither here be ambassador from the town of dansk , Lubeck , and Hamburgh , as also out of Liefland to desire this king to be their captain and head in their intend voyage , which be to stop - an attempt to all such ship as shall go out of England for Mos - t ^ mos covia . whereunto the king grant , and immediate cwia they they depart to prepare their ship . so that i be Hans town afraid that either these our enemy , or the great war wonderful easterthat we have with France and Scotland will be a occasion i ™ ®- that you shall have no ship at Colmogro this year . to conclude , although i have no token to deliver they , that the token take from i be send unto , yet i will declare unto they that i have token for they , with the mischance . and thus i commit you to almighty God with the rest of the company , who keep you in health to his holy will and pleasure . by you to command Thomas Alcocke .