Theise last 30 day journey be without habitation of house : therefore traveller lodge in their own tent , carry with they to eat , their several provision : and for dryness there be many well of fair water at equal bait place not far distant daily to be have . from Boghar to Taskent easy travel with good , be 14 day by land . from Taskent to occient 7 day . from occient to Cascar 20 day . This Cascar be the head town or city of another prince , lie between Boghar and Cathaia , call reshit can . from Cascar to Sowchick 30 day journey , which sowchick be the first border of Cathay . from Sowchick to Camchick 5 day journey , and from camchick to Cathay be 2 month journey , all the way be inhabit , temperate , and well replenish with innumerable fruit , and the chief city in that whole land be call Cambalu , which be yet 10 day journey from Cathay . beyond this land of Cathay , which they praise to be civil and unspeakeable rich , be the country name in the tartarian tongue cara - calmack inhabit with black people : but in Cathay , the most part thereof stretch to the sun rise , be people white and of fair n 481 2 h Angrim . Mandeville speak hereof . or kiss faith . small people . Pechora but six day journey by land or water from Ob . complexion . their religion also , as the Tartar report , be Christian , or after the manner of Christians , and their language peculiar , differ from the tartarian tongue . there be no great and furious bear in travel through the wale aforesaid , but wolf white and black . and because that wood be not of such quantity there , as in these part of Russia , but in manner rather scant then plentiful , as be report , the bear breed not that way , but some other beast ( as namely one in Russe call Barse ) be in those coast . This Barse appear by a skin of one see here to sell , to be near so great as a big lion spot very fair and therefore we here take it to be a leopard or tiger . note that 20 day journey from Cathay be a country name Angrim , where live the beast that bear the best musk , and the