the copy of a letter send to the emperor of Moscovie , by Christopher Hodsdon and William Burrough , anno 1570 . often mighty emperor , etc whereas sir William Garrard and his fellowship the company of english merchant , this last winter send hither to the narve three ship lade with merchandise , which be leave here , and with it Christopher Hodsdon one of the say fellowship , and their chief doer in this place , who when he come first hither , and until such time as he have dispatch those ship from hence , be in hope of good to lade twelve or thirteen sail of good ship , against this ship , wherefore he write unto the say sir William Garrard and his company to send hither this spring the say number of thirteen ship . and because that in their come hither we find the freebooter on the sea , and suppose this year that they will be very strong , he therefore give the say sir William and his company advise to furnish the say number of ship so strong , as they shall be able to withstand the force of the freebooter : whereupon they have according to his advice send this year thirteen good ship together well furnish with man and munition , and all other necessary for the war , of which 13 . ship William Burrough one of the say fellowship be captain general , unto who there be give in charge , that if he meet with any the dansk freebooter , or whatsoever robber and thief that be enemy to your highness , he shall do his best to apprehend and take they . it so happen that the ten day of this month the say William with his fleet , meet with six ship of the freebooter near unto a island call Tuttee , which be about 50 . verst from narve , unto which freebooter he with his fleet give chase , and take of they the admiral , 167 A . D . 1570 five ship of freeboter take . wherein be leave but three man , the rest be flee to shore in their boat among the wood upon tutty , on which ship he set fire and burn she . he also take four more of those ship which be now here , and one ship escape he : out of which four ship some of the man flee in their boat and so escape , other be slay in fight , and some of they when they see they can not escape , cast themselves willing into the sea and be drown . so that in these five ship be leave but 83 . man . the say Wil . Borough when he