come hither to narve , find here Christopher Hodsdon aforenamed , both the say Christopher and William together , in the name of sir William Garrard and the rest of their whole company and fellowship , do present unto your highness of those freebooter take by our ship 82 . man , which we deliver here unto knez Voivoda , the 13 . of this month . one man of those freebooter we have keep by we , who name be Hans snarke a captain . and the cause why we have do it be this : when we shall have deliver he with the rest of his fellow unto the voivodaes officer , there be of our Englishman more than 50 . which fall on their knee unto we , request that he may be reserve in the ship , and carry back into England : and the cause why they so earnest entreat for he , be , that some of those our Englishman have be take with freebooter , and by his mean have their life save , with great favour beside , which they find at his hand . wherefore if it please your highness to permit it , we will carry he home with we into England , wherein we request your majesty favour : notwithstanding what you command of he shall | be observe . we have also send our servant to your highness with such bestelling and write as we find in those ship : whereby your majesty may see by who , and in what order they be set out , and what they pretend , which write we have commend unto Knez yorive 168 your majesty Voivoda at Plesco , by our servant . and have request his furtherance for the safe delivery of they to your majesty hand : which write when you have peruse , we desire that they may be return unto we by this our servant , as speedy as may be : for these ship which we now have here will be soon dispatch from hence , for that we have not good to lade above the half of they . and the cause be , we have this winter ( by your majesty order ) be keep from trafficking , to the company great loss . but hope your [ i . 402 . i majesty will hereafter have consideration thereof , and that we may have free liberty to traffic in all part of your majesty country , accord to the privilege give unto we , we pray for your majesty health , with prosperous success to the pleasure of God . from narve the 15 of July , anno 1570 . your majesty most humble and obedient , Christopher Hodsdon . William Borough .