appoint by the clergy in Mosko . also in the year of our lord 1557 . then say deponent be at the place Kegor , in the month of June , the 29 . day be saint Peter day , at which time be a great assembly of people at a mart there , the russes , keril and lappians on the one side subject to the say mighty prince the emperor of Russia , and the norwegian 205 or norse and people of Finmarke subject to the king of Denmark on the other part , they do barter and exchange fish for other commodity . the deputy for the ruff have the chief government of the say mart , and take toll of those people the be subject to his master , and the captain of Wardhouse have then the government of the people subject to his master the king of Denmark . he say also , that between the abbey Pechingo , and the abbey of saint Nicholas in Russia , upon the border of the say coast of Lappia , he have be upon the shore at diverse place , where fresh river fall into the sea , where be common take fresh salmon , all which place he do know for certain , that they be farm out to the subject of the say emperor , and he the say emperor receive yearly the rent for they . and further he say that it have be further credible report unto he , that there be not any such river or creek of fresh water which fall out of the say country of Lappia into the sea , between the say abbey Pechingo , and the bay of saint Nicholas , but they be all and every of they farm out , and the emperor receive the rent for they . the second item , whether as well before , as also within the interroga - memory of man , till the time of the grant of the say letter patent any of the english merchant ( save the merchant of the say society ) subject of this realm of England , have common exercise or frequent business or trade in the say village or town call the narve , Kegor , Pechingo , and Cola , or in any of they , or in any port or territory of the say emperor of Russia . thejeponent to tbis interrogatory the deponent answer , that answer . the subject of reajme before the grant of the say letter patent do not common exercise , neither frequent or trade to any of the say place call the narve , Kegor , Pechingo or Cola , or to any of they .