in England , whereof some excellent clothes yet remain : but the art be now lose , and not to be find in the realm . 6 they have a cunning in Persia to make in buskin of spanish leather flower of many kind , in most lively colour , and these the courtier do wear there : to learn which art be no harm . 7 if any dier of China , or of the east part of the world , be to be find in Persia , acquaint yourself with he , and learn what you may of he . 8 you shall find anile there , if you can procure the herb that it be make of , either by seed or by plant , to carry into England , you may do well to endeavour to enrich your country with the same : but withal learn you the make of the anile , and if you can get the herb , you may send the same dry into England , for possible it grow here already . 9 return home with you all the material and substance that they die withal in Russia , and also in Persia , that your company may see all . io in some little pot in your lodging , i wish you to make daily trial in your art , as you shall from time to time learn aught among they . two set down in write whatsoever you shall learn from day to day , lest you shall forget , or lest God shall call you to his mercy : and by each return i wish you to send in write whatsoever you have learn , or at the least keep the same safe in your coffer , that 25 ° commission to pet and Jackman aj > . 1580 . come death or life your country may enjoy the thing that you go for , and not lose the charge , and travel bestow in this case . 12 learn you there to fix and make sure the colour to be give by log wood : so shall we not need to buy woad so dear , to the enrich of our enemy . 13 inquire of the price of leckar , and all other thing belong to die . 14 in any wise set down in write a true note from whence every of they do come , and where , and in what country each of they do grow , i mean where the natural place of each of they be , as how near to such a city , or to such a sea , or to such a portable river in Russia , Persia , or elsewhere . 15 if before you return you can procure a singular good workman in the art of turkish carpet make , you shall bring the art into this realm , and also thereby increase work to your company .