of arrogancy , since true i may say it ) i have here set it open to the view , with such exactness and truth , and so place every thing aright in 210 burrough ’ s epistle dedicatory a . d . .... c - I598 ' true latitude and longitude , ( account the longitude from the meridian of London , which i place in 21 . degree ) as till this time no man have do the like : neither be any man able by learning only , except he travail , as i have do . for as it may be true say of navigation and hydrography , that no man can be cunning in the one which want convenient knowledge in the other : and as neither of they can be have without the help of astronomic and cosmography , much less without these two ground of all art , arithmetic and geometric : so none of the best learned in those science mathematical ! , without convenient practice at the sea can make just proof of the profit in they : so necessary depend art and reason upon practice and experience . albeit there be diverse both learned and unlearned , little or nothing experience , which in talk of navigation will enter deep and speak much of and against error use therein , when they can reform they . such also have write thereof , pretend singular great knowledge therein , and will so be account of , though in very deed not worthy the name of good and sufficient pilot . to who i think it shall not be amiss in defence of rule bud upon reason , and in practice allow , thus much to say for answer . it be so , that there be rule use in navigation which be not perfect true : among which the strait line in sea - cardes , represent the 32 . point of the compass or wind , be not hold to be the least , but note of such talker for principali , to condemn the occupier thereof for ignorant : yet have the famous and learned Gerardus Mercator use they in his universal map . but such as condemn they for false , and speak most against their use can give other that shall serve for navigation to better purpose and effect . experience ( one of the key of knowledge ) have teach i to say it . wherein with my ability , together with some part of my study , i be the rather move ( in this my plot ) to make some trial unto your majesty : for that 211 i perceive that such attempt of new discovery ( whereunto this noble island be most apt situate ) be by your royal maintenance so willing further : beseech your highness so to accept of these my travail , as a pledge of my well willing to my country , and of my loyal service to your majesty , who healthful happy life and reign God continue which be almighty . amen . your majesty most humble subject William Burrough .