Biggat , or one of they to make his course and direction from time to time during the whole voyage , and all the fleet be to follow and observe the same without stray or break of company at any time upon the penalty before specify . 5 the appoint of the ship for admiral and viceadmiral , and those man to consult and agree upon the course and direction of the voyage , as aforesaid , have be do by the consent and with the like of you all , and therefore we doubt not but that you will all careful and willing observe the premise . 6 item , we have think good to put you in mind , that at such time as you may convenient from time to time , you do assemble and meet together , to consider , consult , and determine upon such article as you shall 3 ° 4 instruction for russian fleet a . d . 1582 . think necessary to be propound touch your best safety and defence against all force that may be offer you in this voyage , as well outward bind , and while you shall remain in the road and bay of saint Nicholas , as also homewards bind , and that which you shall agree upon , or that which most of you shall consent unto , cause it to be set down in write for record , which may serve for a act among your self to bind you all to observe the same . 7 we have appoint James woodcock in the small bark to attend upon you , and to receive his direction from you . you be therefore to remember well what conference and talk have be have with you here before your go touch you say bark , to what purpose she may best serve , and the manner how to employ she , and thereupon to give your order and direction unto he , as the time and place shall require . 8 item , if you shall understand as you be outward bind , that the enemy be go before you to saint Nicholas , remember what advice have be give you for your stay at Berozova Ustia , till you have by espial view and Berozova understand the force , and the manner of their abode at Ustia . that place . 9 and if in the sea either outward or homeward , or in the time of your abode at anchor at saint Nicholas , you shall be assault by force of any , as enemy whatsoever , you be to defend