a speciali note gather by the excellent venetian cosmographer m . John Baptista Ramusius out of the arabian geographic of Abilfada Ishmael , concern the trending of the ocean sea from China northward , along the coast of Tartaric and other unknown land , and then run westwards upon the northern coast of Russia , and so far to the northwest . descrivendo poi il predetto abilfada Ishmael i luoghi della terra habitabile , che circuendo il mar Oceano tocca , dice cosi . rivoltasi 1 ’ Oceano da levante verso la region dell cine , and v & alia volta di Tramontana , et passata final - mente la detta region , see ne giunge a Gogi and Magogi , cio and alii confini de gli ultimi tartari , and di quivi ad 412 akune terre che sono incognite : et correndo sempre per ponente , passa sopra li confini settentrionali della Rossia , et va alia volta di maestro . the same in english . the aforesaid abilfada Ishmael describe afterward the habitable place of the earth , which the ocean sea in his circuit touch , say in this manner follow . the ocean sea turn from the east towards the country of the chinaes , and stretch towards the north , and at length have pass the say country , it reach unto the Gogi and Magogi , that be , to the confine of the uttermost Tartar , and from thence , unto certain unknown country : and run still westward it pass upon the northern coast of Russia , and from thence it run towards the northwest , ( which it do indeed upon the coast of Lappia . ) by this most notable testimony it appear , that the ocean sea compass and environ all the east , Northeast , and north part of Asia and Europe . the emperor private or household officer . the chief officer of the emperor household be these which follow . the first be the office of the Boiaren Conesheva , or master of the horse . which contain no more than be express by the name , that be , to be overseer of the horse , and not Magister equitum , or master of the horseman . for he appoint other for that service , as occasion do require , as before be say . he that bear that office