not forcible take as before time they have be by the emperor officer or people of authority , 354 dr . Giles Fletchers ambassage a . d . 1588 . either for the use of the say emperor or of his officer . but in case they have need of the say commodity , the same to be take at reasonable price , and for ready money . 6 that then say company be not charge hereafter with the answer of such debt as be make by any Englishman not be of the society . 7 that the emperor authorize people shall not hereafter repute any Englishman resiant in that country , to be any factor , servant , or dealer in the say company affair , but such as the agent shall inregister by name , within the office where custom be enter in all such place of the land where the say company have residence to traffic . 8 that the name of such as shall so be inregistre be no long continue in record , nor themselves repute as factor or dealer for the say company , than the agent shall think good . but in case the say agent in his discretion shall think meet to strike out of the register any name of such as have be employ in the company service , the say person to be hold as private , and who act in bargain or otherwise , shall not charge the say company . 9 that if any english man within the country of Russia be suspect for any notorious crime , as felony , treason , etc the same be not straightway set upon the * Pudkey , nor otherwise torment , till such time * it be rest as he shall be convict by plain and evident proof : t0 which be do , the whole proceed to be send over to the queen of England . 10 that then say privilege with the addition , shall be publish in all town and part of the emperor dominion , where the say company have traffic . 11 that the say company shall be permit to use a sole trade through the emperor country , by the river Volga into Media , Persia , Bogharia , and the other the east country . 12 whereas there be claim of the say company 355 the sum of 23553 . mark of debt , make by certain of their factor for