the say company , for payment whereof , their whole stock be in danger of arrest , by public authority : further also 2140 . rubble for custom and houserent , he obtain a rebatement of eighteen thousand , one hundred fifty and three mark of the say debt . the say ambassador m . Giles Fletcher , as i understand , have draw a book entitle , of the ruff common wealth , contain : first , a cosmographical description of the country , which have these chapter . 1 of the length and breadth of the country of Russia , with the name of the shire . 2 of the soil and climate . 3 of the native commodity of the country . second , a description of their policy contain in these chapter , viz . 1 of the constitution or state of the ruff common wealth . 2 of their parliament , and manner of hold they . 3 of the ruff Nobili tie and mean whereby it be keep in a under , proportion agreeable to that state . 4 of the manner of govern their province or shire . 5 of the emperor privy counsel . 6 of the emperor custom and their revenue , with the practise for the increase of they . 7 of the ruff commonalty and their condition . 8 of their public justice and manner of proceed therein . 9 of the emperor force for his war , with the chief officer , and their salary or pay . 10 of their manner of muster , armour , and provision for victuali . 11 of their order , march , charge , and their martial discipline . 356 12 of their colony and policy in maintain their purchase by conquest . 13 of their borderer with who they have most to do in war and peace . 14 of their church office and degree . 15 of their liturgy or form of church service . 16 of their manner of administer the sacrament . 17 of the doctrine of the ruff church . 18 of the manner of solemnize their marriage . 19 of the other ceremony of the ruff church . A . D . 1588 . third , the Oeconomie or private behaviour of the Russe contain these chapter . 1 of the emperor household officer , and order of his house . 2 of the private behaviour and manner of the ruff people .