master Horsey have receive the letter and request of the emperor , provide for his journey over land , . and depart from Moscow the lift day of September , thence unto otver , to torshook , to great Novogrod , to Vobsky , and thence to nyhouse in Livonia , to Wenden , and so to Riga : ( where he be beset , and bring forthwith before a Cardinali call ragevil , but yet suffer to pass in the end : ) from thence to Mito , to golden , and Libou in Curland , to memel , to konings - burgh in Prussia , to Elbing , to Danzig , to Stetine in Pomerland , to Rostock , to Lubeck , to Hamborough , to Breme , to Emden , and by sea to London . be arrive at her majesty royal court , and have deliver the emperor letter with good favour , and gracious acceptance , he be forthwith again command to repass into Russia , with other letter from her majesty to the emperor , and prince Boris Pheodorowich , answer the emperor letter , and withal request the favour and friendship , which his father have yield to the english merchant : and hereunto be he earnest also solicit by the merchant of London themselves of that company , to deal in their behalf . be thus dispatch from London by sea , he arrive in Moscow , the 20 . of April 1586 . and be very honorable welcome . and 345 m . horsei voyage from Moscow to England overland . 1586 . for you merchant behoof , obtain all his request , be therein special favour by you noble prince Boris pheodorowich , who always affect m . Horsey with speciali like . and have obtain privilege for the merchant , he be recommend from the emperor again , to the queen of England his mistress , by who the prince Boris , in token of his honourable and good opinion of the queen majesty , send her highness a royal present of sable , Luzarns , cloth of gold and other rich thing . so that the company of english merchant , next to their thankfulness to her majesty , be to account m . horsei pain their speciali benefit , who obtain for they those privilege , which in twenty year before will not be grant . the manner of m . horsei last dispatch from the emperor , because it be very honourable , i think good to record . he be free allow post horse for he and his servant , victual and