at this time , be Boris pheodorowich Godonoe , brother to the empress . of horse for service in his war ( beside other for his ordinary use ) he have to the number of ten thousand which be keep about Moscow . the next be the lord steward of his household at this time , one Gregory Vasilowich Godonoe . the three be his treasurer , that keep all his monei , jewel , plate , etc now call Stephan Vasilowich Godonoe . the 413 A . D . 1588 . alcune terre incognite . Confini settentrionali della Rossia . the country of China . the coast of the uttermost Tartar . certain unknown country . the northern coast of Russia . the northwest . master of the horse . the L . steward . the L . treasurer . controller . four his controller , now Andreas petrowich clesinine . chamberlame the five his chamberlain . he that attend that office at this time , be call Estoma Bisabroza Pastelnischay . taster . the sixth his taster , now theodor Alexandrowich , and harbinger . Ivan Vasilowich Godonoe . the seven his harbinger , which be three noble man , and diverse other gentleman that do the office under they . these be his ordinary officer , and office of the chief account . gentleman of of gentleman , beside they that wait about his the chamber . chamber , and person ( call Shilsey Strapsey ) there be the Gard . two hundred , all nobleman son . his ordinary guard be two thousand hagbutter ready with their piece charge , and their match light , with other necessary furniture continual day and night : which come not within the house , but wait without in the court or yard , where the emperor be abide . in the night time there lodge next to his bedchamber the chief chamberlain , with one or two more of best trust about he . a second chamber off , there lodge six other of like account for their trust and faithfulness . in the third chamber lie certain young gentleman , of these two hundred , call Shilsey Strapsey , that take their gnome . turn by forty every night . there be groom beside that watch in their course , and lie at every gate and door of the court , call Estopnick