the ambassage of m . Giles Fletcher , doctor of the civil law , send from her majestic to Theodor the emperor of Russia , anno 1588 . n the year 1588 . be send ambassador from her highness into the country of Russia , Giles Fletcher doctor of the civil law , as well to treat with the new emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , about league and amity , in like manner as be before with his father Ivan Vasilowich , as also for the reestablish and reduce into order in 353 z the decay trade of our Englishman there . who notwithstanding at his first arrival at the Moscow , find some part of hard entertainment , by mean of certain rumour concern the late naval victory which be there report to have fall on the spanish side , as also for some dislike conceive against the privilege trade of our english merchant . yet in the end he obtain of the emperor many good and equal condition , and be courteous and honourable dismiss by he . the principali point which he entreat of , and be grant unto he by the say emperor , be these : 1 a continuation of league and amity between her highness and the say emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , in like manner as be before with his father Ivan Vasilowich . 2 a confirmation and reestablishment of the former privilege of the company of our english merchant , which be infringe and annul in the principal point , with diverse necessary addition to the same , for the better order of their trade in those country hereafter , viz . that the state of the privilege grant before in the name of some private and particular man , be alter in that point , and the same grant by the name and stile of their incorporation , viz . to the fellowship of english merchant for the discovery of new trade . 3 that upon every surmise and light quarrel , the say privilege be not revoke and annul , as before time it have be . 4 that justice shall be administer to the say company and their agent without delay , upon such as shall offer they any despite or injury , or shall exact or impose upon they any payment , taxation or imposition whatsoever , contrary to the freedom of the say grant . 5 that the good and commodity of the say company , be