that i promise to have a care of 420 letter from Boris PHEODOROWICH a . d . 159 ° . they , and for the queen majesty of England sake , i will take her merchant into my protection , and will defend they as the emperor select people under the emperor commission : and by my appointment all his majesty officer and authorize people shall be careful over they . the emperor gracious favour towards they be never such as it be now . and where you write that at the port the emperor officer sell their wax by commission at a set rate give they , far above the value , and that they enforce your merchant to accept it , they deny that they take any such course , but say they barter their wax for other ware , and also put their wax to sale for ready money to your merchant , accord to the worth thereof , and as the price go in the custom house here . it have be heretofore dear , and now be sell as good cheap as in any other place , and as they can best agree : they enforce no man to buy it , but rather keep it : therefore your merchant have no just cause to make any such report . i have express give order , that there shall be no such course use to enforce they , but to buy accord to their own will , and to tarry at the port or to depart at their pleasure . and as touch the custom already past , and debt demand at your merchant hand , whereof you write : our lord great emperor and great duke Theodore Ivanowich of all Russia of famous memory have show his majesty especial favour and love , for the great love of his well - beloved sister queen of England , and by my petition and mediation , whereas there be commandment give to take marsh whole debt of your merchant and factor , it be moderate to the half , and for the other half , commandment give it shall not be take , and the merchant bill to be deliver they . and to the end hereafter that her majesty merchant move no contention betwixt our lord the emperor and great duke of Russia , and his well - beloved sister queen Elizabeth , his majesty desire order to be give , that english merchant in great favour with the emperor . half the debt of Antony Marsh remit . 421 your merchant do deal just in their traffic , and plain without fraud or guile . and i will be a favourer of they above all other , under his majesty authority : Ann . dam themselves shall see it . write in our great lord the I59O > emperor city of Moscow in the month of July , 7 ° 99 - 1590 .