seven thousand person sufficient provide for such a expedition , we pass prosperous through many province , and at length attain unto Constantinople . where do reverence unto the emperor Alexius , we see the church of sancta Sophia , and kiss diverse sacred relic . depart thence through Lycia , we fall into the hand of the arabian thief : and after we have be rob of infinite sum of money , and have lose many of our people , hardly escape with extreme danger of our life , at length we joyful enter into the most wish ci tie of 291 Jerusalem . where we be receive by the most reverend , age , and holy patriarch Sophronius , with great melody of cymbal and with torchlight , and be accompany unto the most divine church of our saviour his sepulchre with a solemn procession aswell of Syrians as of Latines . here , how many prayer we utter , what abundance of tear we shed , what deep sigh we breathe forth , our lord Jesus Christ only know . wherefore be conduct from the most glorious sepulchre of Christ to visit other sacred monument of the city , we see with weep eye a great number of holy church and oratory , which Achim the sultan of Egypt have late destroy . and so have bewail with sad tear , and most sorrowful and bleed affection , all the ruin of that most holy city both within and without , and have bestow money for the re - edify of some , we desire with most ardent devotion to go forth into the country , to wash our self in the most sacred river of Jordan , and to kiss all the step of Christ . howbeit the thievish arabian lurk upon every way , will not suffer we to travel far from the city , by reason of their huge and furious multitude . wherefore about the spring there arrive at the port of Joppa a fleet of ship from Genoa . in which fleet ( when the christian merchant have exchange all their ware at the coast town , and have likewise visit the holy place ) we all of we embark , commit our self to the sea : and be toss with many storm and tempest , at length we arrive at Brundisium : and so with a prosperous journey travel through Apulia towards Rome , we there visit the habitation of the holy apostle Peter and Paul , and do reverence unto diverse monument of holy martyr in all place throughout the city . from thence the archbishop and other prince of the empire travel towards the right hand for Alemain , and we decline towards the left hand for France , depart asunder , take our leaf with unspeakable thanks and courtesy . and so at length , of 292 thirty horseman which go out of Normandy fat , lusty , and frolic , we return thither scarce twenty poor pilgrim of we , be all footman , and consume with leanness to the bare bone . A . D . c . 1097 .