the voyage of Ingulphus abbot of Croiland unto Jerusalem , perform ( accord to Florentius Wigorniensis ) in the year of our lord , 1064 , and describe by the say Ingulphus himself about the conclusion of his brief history . A . D . 1064 . densis , natus in anglia , and a parentibus Anglicis , quip urbis pulcherrimae A . D . 1051 . A . D . 1064 , accord to florentine ifigomieneie . 288 iv 289 t A . D . io64 . the same in english . IIngulphus a humble servant of reverend Guthlac and of his monastery of Croiland , bear in England , and of english parent , at the beautiful ! city of London , be in my youth , for the attain of good letter , place first at Westminster , and afterward send to the university of Oxford . and have excel diverse of my equal in learning of Aristotle , i inure my self somewhat unto the first and second rhetoric of Tully . and as i grow in age , disdain my parent mean estate , and forsake my own native soil , i affect the court of king and prince , and be desirous to be clad in silk , and to wear brave and costly attire . and lo , at the same time William our sovereign king 290 now , but then earl of Normandy , with a great troup of follower and attendant come unto London , to confer with king Edward the confessor his kinsman . 1051 . into who company intrude my self , and proffer my service for the performance of any speedy or weigh tie affair , in short time , after i have do many thing with good success , i be know and most entire belove by the victorious Erle himself , and with he i sail into Normandy . and there be make his secretary , i govern the earl court ( albeit with the envy of some ) as my self please , yea who i will i abase , and prefer who i think good . when as therefore , be carry with a youthful heat and lusty humour , i begin to be weary even of this place , wherein i be advance so high above my parentage , and with a inconstant mind , and affection too too ambitious , most vehement aspire at all occasion to climb high : [ ii i . 10 . ] there go a report throughout all Normandy , that diverse archbishop of the empire , and secular prince be desirous for their soul health , and for devotion sake , to go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem . wherefore out of the family of our lord the earl , sundry of we , both gentleman and clerk ( principali of who be my self ) with the licence and good will of our say lord the earl , speed we on that voyage , and travail thirty horse of we into high Germany , we join our self unto the archbishop of Mentz . And be with the company of the bishop