Mention make of one Hardine of England one of the chief personage , and a leader among other of two hundred sail of ship of Christians that land at Joppa in the year of our lord God 1102 . the same in english . [ ii i . 13 . ] while the Saracen continue their siege against Joppa , two hundred sail of christian ship arrive at Joppa , that they may perform their devotion at Jerusalem . the chief man and leader of these Christians be report to have be : Bernard Witrazh of the land of Galatia , Hardine of England , Otho of roges , Haderwerck one of the chief noble man of Westphalia , etc This christian power through God speciali provision , arrive here for the succour and relief of the distress and besiege Christians in Joppa , the three day of July , 1102 . and in the second year of Baldwine king of Jerusalem . whereupon the multitude of the Saracen , see that the christian power join themselves bold , close by they even face to face in a lodging hard by they , the very next night at midnight , remove their tent , and pitch they more than a mile off , that they may the next morning be advise whether they shall return to Ascalon , or by often assault vex the citizen of Japhet . chronicon Hierosolymitanum , eodem libro 9 cap . 12 . continue this history of these two hundred sail of ship , and show how by their prowess chief , the multitude of the Saracen be in short space vanquish and overthrow : the word be these ; ab ipso verb die tertiae feriae dum sic in superbia and elatione svae multitudinis immobiles Saraceni persisterent , and multis armorum terroribus Christianum populum vexarent , 299 the same in english . yet notwithstanding , after the say three day of July , the Saracen persist high mind and insolent , by reason of their great multitude , and much annoy the christian people with their many forceable and terrible weapon ; whereupon , on the sixth day of July early in the morning king Baldwine issue out of Japhet , his trumpet and cornet yield a great and loud sound , and with a very strong army as well of horseman as footman , who on every side make great shout and outcry , with fierce and sharp battle set on the main power of their enemy . the Christians also who arrive in the navy , rear great clamour and noise , with loud voice and shouting in horrible wise together , with king Baldwine assault likewise with strong battle the babylonian , and afflict they with most sore and deadly wound , until the Saracen be weary with fight , nor able long to endure and hold out against the valour of the christian , flee towards Ascalon . and other of they hope to escape from they that pursue they , leap into the sea , and be swallow up in the wave thereof . and so the city of Joppa with the inhabitant thereof be free 300 of their enemy . there be slay this day three thousand Saracen , and but a few of the christian perish .