the voyage of Henry earl of Derbie , after duke of Hereford , and last Henry the four king of England , to Tunis in Barbary , with a army of Englishman write by Polidore Virgil . page . 1389 . Ranci interim per inducias nacti ocium , ac simul Genuensium precibus defatigati , bellum in afros , qui omnem oram insulasque Italiae latrociniis infestas reddebant , suscipiunt . richardus quoque rex angliae rogatus auxilium , mittit Henricum comitem Derbiensem cum electa anglicae pubis manu ad id bellum faciendum . igitur Franci Anglique viribus and animus consociatis in africam trajiciunt , qui ubi littus attigere , eateniis a Barbaris descension prohibiti sunt , quoad anglorum sagittariorum virtute factum est , ut aditus pateret : in terram egressi recta Tunetam urbem regiam petunt , ac obsident . Barbari timore affection de pace ad eos legatos mittunt , quam nostris dare placuit , ut soluta certa pecuniae summa ab omni deinceps Italiae , galliaeque ora manus abstinerent . ita peractis rebus post paucos menses , quam eo itum erat , domum repediatum est . the same in english . the french in the mean season have get some leisure by mean of their truce , and be solicit and urge by the entreaty of the genuois undertake to wage war against the moor , who rob and spoil all the coast of Italy , and of the island adjacent . likewise Richard the second , king of England , be sue unto for aid , send Henry the earl of Derbie with a choice army of english soldier unto the same warfare . wherefore the english and french , with force and mind unite , sail over into Africa , who when they approach unto the shore be repel by the 45 ° barbarian from land , until such time as they have passage make they by the valour of the english archer . thus have land their force , they forthwith march unto the royal city of Tunis , and besiege it . whereat the barbarian be dismay , send ambassador unto our Christian chieftain to treat of peace , which our man grant unto they , upon condition that they shall pay a certain sum of money , and that they shall from thenceforth abstain from piracy upon all the coast of Italy and France . and so have dispatch their business , within