another voyage to the isle of Candia and Chio make by the ship the Matthew Gonson , about the year 1535 , accord to the relation of John Williamson , than Cooper in the same ship , make to m . Richard Hackluit in the year 1592 . the Matthew Gonson go into turquoise . he good ship call the Matthew Gonson , of burden 300 ton , whereof be owner old m . William Gonson , paymaster of the king navy , make her voyage in the year 153 5 . in this ship go as captain Richard grey , who long after die in Russia . master William Holstocke afterward controller of the queen navy go then as purser in the same voyage . the master be one John Pichet , servant to old m . William Gonson , James rumnie be master mate . the master cooper be John Williamson citizen of London , live in the year 1592 , and dwell in sant Dunston parish in the east . the m . gunner be John Godfrey of bristol . in this ship be 6 gunner and 4 trumpeter , all which four trumpeter at our return homeward go on land at Messina in the hand of Sicilia , as our ship ride there at anchor , and get they into the galley that lie near unto we , and in they go to roam . the whole number of our company in this ship be about 100 man , we be also furnish with a great boat , which be able to carry 10 ton of water , which at our return homeward we tow all the way from Chio 68 until we come through the strait of Gibraltar into the main ocean . we have also a great long boat and a skiff . we be out upon this voyage eleven month , yet in all this time there die of sickness but one man , who name be George forest , be servant to our carpenter call Thomas Plummer . in a great lygier book of one William eym , servant unto sir William Bowyer Aiderman of London , bear date the 15 of November 1533 , and continue until the 4 of July 1544 . i find that he the say William Eyms be factor in Chio , not only for his master , but also for the duke of Norfolk grace , and for many other worshipful merchant of London , among who i find the account of these especial , to wit , of his say master , sir William Bowyer , of William and Nicholas Wilford merchant - tailors of London , of Thomas Curtis pewterer , of John Starky mercer , of William ostrige merchant , and of Richard field draper . and further i find in the say ligier book , a note of the say eym , of all such good as he leave in the hand of Robert buy in Chio , who become his master factor in his room , and another like note of particular of good that he leave in the hand of Oliver lesson , servant to William and Nicholas Wilford . and for proof of the continuance of this trade until the end of the year 1552 . i find annex unto the former note of the good leave with Robert buy in Chio , a letter be date the 27 of November 1552 inn London .