trade thither be the only cause why the christian ruler be displace : for when they pay not their yearly tribute , they be put out by force . touch the ship that must go , she must observe this order , she must be a ship of countenance , and she must not touch in any part of Spain , for the time be dangerous , nor take in any lade there : but she must lade in England , either good of our own , or else of stranger , and go to Genoa or Legorno , where we may be well entreat , and from thence she must make her money to buy wine , by ex - 116 change to Candia , for there both custom and exchange be reasonable : and not do as the Math . Gonson and other ship do in time past , who make sale of their [ ii i . 117 . ] ware at Messina for the lade of their wine , and pay for turn their white money into gold after four and five in the hundred , and also do hazard the loss of ship and good by carry away their money . thus by the aforesaid course we shall trade quiet , and not be subject to these danger . also from Legorno store ° f h ™ ? 5 to Castilia de la mar , which be but 16 mile from Naples , j * fas ~ and the ready way to Candia , you may lade hoop , mare for which will cost carolin of Naples 27 and a half the Candia . thousand , which be ducat two and a half of Spain . and in Candia for every thousand of hoop you shall have a but of malmsey clear of all charge . insomuch that a ship of the burden of the Matthew Gonson will carry four hundred thousand hoop , so that one thousand ducat will lade she , and this be a usual trade to Candia , as m . Michael lock can testify . Furthermore , it be not unknown to you , that the oil which we do spend in England for our cloth , be bring out of Spain , and that very dear , and in England we can sell they under 28 pound and 30 pound the ton : i say we may have good oil , and better cheap in diverse place within the strait . wherefore if you think good to take this voyage in hand , i will inform you more particular when you please . in the mean time i rest your worship to command . you at your pleasure jasper Campion .