to the worshipful m . William winter . t may please your worship to understand , that as concern the voyage to Chio , what great profit will be get , both for merchant , and also for owner of ship ( as it be well know in those day when the Matthew Gonson , the Trinity Fitzwilliams , and the saviour of Bristol , with diverse other ship which trade thither yearly , and make their voyage in ten or twelve month , and the long in a year ) m . Francis Lambert , m . John brook , and m . Drauer can true inform you hereof at large . and by reason that we have not trade into those part these many year , and the Turk be grow mighty , whereby our ship do not trade as ir5 Gaspar Campion married - in Chio 24 year . they be wont , i find that the venetian do bring those commodity hither , and do sell they for double the value that we our self be accustom to fetch they . wherefore , as i be inform by the above name man , that there be none so fit to furnish this voyage as your self : my request be that there may be a ship of convenient burden prepare for this voyage , and then i will satisfy you at large what be to be do therein . and because the Turk , as i say before , be wax strong , and have put out the christian ruler , and place his own subject , we may doubt whether we may so peaceable trade thither as we be wont : therefore i dare undertake to obtain a safeconduct , if my charge may be bear to go and come . of the way how this may be do , m . lock can satisfy you at large . Moreover , i can inform you more of the trade of that country , than any other , for that i have , be in those part these thirty year , and have be marry in the very town of Chio full four and twenty year . Furthermore , when one of our ship come thither , they bring at the least six or eight thousand carsy , so that the custom thereof be profitable for the prince , and the return of they be profitable to the common people : for in barter of our ware , we take the commodity which the poor of that town make in their house : so that one of our ship bring the prince and country more gain than six ship of other nation . the want of this our