, and Imperiali decree , concern our most inviolable league with they , so it will please our imperial majesty to grant and confirm the like privilege , and princely decree to the aforesaid queen . wherefore accord to our humanity and gracious ingraft disposition , the request of her majesty be accept of we , and we have grant unto her majesty this privilege of we agreeable to reason and equity . and we straight command all our beglerbeg , and zanziacbeg our servant , and our Reyz , that be to say , our judge , and all our customer in all place , haven and passage , that as long as this league and amity with the condition , and article thereof , be keep and observe on the behalf of the aforesaid queen . 1 Oure Imperiali commandment and pleasure be , that the people and subject of the same queen , may safe and secure come to our princely dominion , with their good and merchandise , and lading , and other commodity by sea , in great and small vessel , and by land with their carriage 185 and cattle , and that no man shall hurt they , but they may buy and sell without any hindrance , and observe the custom and order of their own country . [ ii i . 144 . ] 2 item , if the aforesaid people and merchant shall at any time in the course of their journey and deal by any mean take , they shall be deliver and enlarge , without any excuse or cavillation . 3 item , if their ship purpose to arrive in any of our port and haven , it shall | be lawful for they so to do in peace , and from thence again to depart , without any let or impediment . 4 item , if it shall happen that any of their ship in tempestuous weather shall be in danger of loss and perish , and thereupon shall stand in need of our help , we will , and command that our man and ship be ready to help and succour they . 5 item , if they shall | be willing to buy any victual for their money , no person shall withstand they , but they shall buy the same without any disturbance to the contrary . 6 item , if by any casualty their