and equity , may no less be condemn . that therefore consider , which of our part be ordain in this cause which may be to the good like of your highness , we be most especial to request of your imperiali majesty , that through the default and disorder of a sort of evil and wicked dispose person , you will not withdraw your gracious favour from we , neither to hinder they traffic of our subject , which by virtue of your highness sufferance , and power of your licence be permit to trade into your dominion and country , or that either in their person or good they be prejudice in their travel by land or by water , promise unto your greatness most faithful , that the good whereof your subject by great wrong and violence have be spoil , shall whole again be restore , if either by the life or possession of the robber it may any way be bring to pass : and that hereafter ( as now be teach by this [ ii i . 14 . 6 . ] evil example ) we will have speciali care that none under the title of our authority shall be suffer to commit any the like wrong or injury . neither they which have commit these evil part have any power under your highness safeconduct grant unto our subject , but from some other safeconduct , whether it be true or feign , we know not , or whether they buy it of any person within the government of Marseils : but under the colour thereof they have do that , which the truth of our deal do utter abhor . notwithstanding howsoever it be , we will sure measure their evil proceed with most sharp and just correction , and that it shall repent they of the impeachment of our honour , as also it shall | be a example of our indignation , that other may dread at all time to commit the like offence . wherefore that our amity may be continue , as if this unfortunate hap have never chance , and that the singular affection of our subject towards your imperiali majesty vow , and daily more and more desire , may be conserve and defend , we thereunto do make our humble suit unto your greatness : and for so great goodness towards we and our people grant , do most humble pray unto the almighty creator of heaven and earth , ever to maintain and keep your most renown majesty in all happiness and prosperity . date at our palace of Greenwich the 26 . of June , anno 1581 .