272 be another weight call Pois Gerrin , which be 150 . ll of Marseils weight , by which be sell all thing to eat : but spice be sell by the former weight . - from Alexandria to Cairo be three day journey , , Cairo three but you must take a janissarie with you : and to go ie j ^ wy up thither by water it be 8 . day journey . royal or dria jand Spain be currant money there , and be the best money you can carry . and 4 . royal be worth 13 . Medins , and 2 . Medins , be 3 . asper . pistolet and crown of France and dollar will go , but of all royal be best . rice be not permit to go out of the land , but be keep for a victuali . but with a present to the buy and ermine some may pass . all sort of spice be garble after the bargain be make , and they be moor which you deal withal , which be good people and not ill dispose . and after you be search and have leave to pass , you must present depart out of the port , and if you do not , they will search you again . and you must depart in the day , for in the night the castle will not suffer you to depart . the duty to the consul be 2 . in the hundred , for his aid , and meat and drink and all . and the port of Alexandria be good when one be within it with good anchor and cable . silver be better currant than gold in Alexandria , but both be good . common the Caravans come thither in October from Mecca to Cairo , and from thence to Alexandria , where the merchant be that buy the spice , and therefore the spice be bring most to Alexandria , where each christian nation remain at the consul house . yet oftentimes the Christians go up to Cairo to buy drug and other commodity there , as they see cause . and the commodity there vendible be all sort of kersy , but the most part blow , and of clothes all colour except mingle colour and black . Pepper be usual sell for 24 . ducat the quintal , five 273 sister ginger for 14 . ducat . you must take canvas to make bag to put your commodity in from Alexandria , for there be none . there be also fine flax , and good store of buff hide .