copy in English , which i send to the end you may be the better inform of my demand by this our Chaus Mahomet , with who in all thing you be to confer of matter expedient , for the honour of her majesty country , and the commodity , and liberty of poor captive , which if the viceroy do well consider , accord to his wisdom , as the grand signior do thereof , he shall well perceive it not only a great honour to his master as aforesaid , to continue this amity with her majesty , but chief to the whole estate of his kingdom exceed profitable , which by this mean shall be abundant serve with the chief commodity they want , with many other thing of more importance to the grand signior his contentation , not herein to be mention . for i know the viceroy experience wisdom can well consider thereof , in such sort as he will not deny to accomplish his master commandment , and our earnest 279 the inventory of our ship and good sink and take by the galley of Alger . request in so small a matter as this we require , whereof i expect no refusal ! : for thereby he shall increase his honour with the grand signior , be in credit with her majesty , be void of trouble which hereafter by future suit against he may happen , and his galley free of such doubtful issue as do chance , fight with our ship . which , as it be well know to all the world , have so great heart as never cowardly to yield to their enemy . and that therefore in that respect ( after the proverb , like esteem of their like ) they be the more of such a valiant prince as be their viceroy and his courageous soldier to be in all friendship cherish and better esteem . if the captain bassa have be return from Capha , i will in like manner have procure his letter , which for that he be not , i doubt nothing but that the grand signior will suffice . thus commend your self and these proceed to the almighty his merciful direction , i bid you most hearty well to fare . from my mansion Rapamat nigh Pera , this 30 . of march 1585 .