the Jew and M & ngfir of his good shall make it good , so the Jew take great ckrisaan ' care of the christian and his good that lie in his house , for fear of punishment . 271 a Englishman call Thomas Williams , which be m . John tiptons man , lie about trade of merchandise in the street call the Soca of the Jew . this be another officer . other small custom you pay beside , which may be at two in the hundred : and fir consullage you pay two in the hundred . [ ii i . 177 . ] note concern the trade in Alexandria . Lexandria in Egypt be a free port , and when a man come within the castle , present the Ermyn send aboard to have one come and speak with he , to know what good be aboard : and then he will set guard aboard the ship to see all the good discharge . and then from the ermine you go to the * buy , only for that he will inquire news of you , and so from thence to the consul house where you lie . the venetian have a consul themselves . but all other nation go to the french nation consul , who will give you a chamber for your self apart , if you will so have it . the custom inward of all commodity be ten in the hundred , and the custom be pay in ware also that you buy : for the same ware in barter you pay also ten in the hundred , at the lade of the ware . but if you sell for money , you pay no more custom but the ten aforesaid , and one and a half in the hundred , which be for the custom of the good you lade for the say money , for more custom you pay not . but for all the money you bring thither , you pay nothing for the custom of the same . and if you sell your ware for money , and with the same money buy ware , you pay but two in the hundred for the custom thereof . and if you steal any custom , if it be take , you pay double custom for that you steal . the weight of Alexandria be call Pois forforeine , which be a kintal in that place , which make at Marseils 109 . U . of Marseils weight , at 15 ounce the pound , which be 103 . ll of 16 . ounce to the livre . there