a commandment for Aleppo . when my letter shall come unto you , know that the queen of England her ambassador by supplication certify how that before this time we have give our commandment that the sum of 70 ducat , and other merchandise belong to one William Barret in Aleppo , now dead , say he be a venetian , shall be give to the venetian . and if they do find that he be not a venetian , my will be that they shall send all his good and merchandise to our port into my treasury . but because that man be a Englishman , the ambassador require that the say good might not be 290 diminish , but that they may be restore to one of their Englishmen . this business be signify unto we in the nine hundred ninety and four year of Mahomet , and in the month of may the io day . this business [ two - i . 184 . ] pertain to the Englishman , who have in their hand our privilege , accord to which privilege be in their hand let this matter be do . against this privilege do nothing , ask nothing of they , but restore to every one his good . and i command that when my commandment shall come unto you , you do according to it . and if it be accord as the ambassador certify , and that they have the privilege , peruse the same , look that nothing be commit against it and our league , and let none trouble they contrary to it , restore they their good accord to justice , and take heed diligent in this business : if another strange merchant be dead , and his good and merchandise be take , if he be neither venetian , nor Englishman , let not his good perish among you . before this time one of our chause call Cerkes Mahomet chaus be send with our commandment to send the money and merchandise of a dead merchant to our port , and hitherto no letter or news be come of this matter , for which you shall be punish . wherefore beware , and if he that be dead be neither Venetian nor Englishman in verity , do not loose the good of the say dead merchant , under the name of a venetian or Englishman , do not to the discommodity of my treasury , for after it will be hard to recover it .