master Newberie his letter from ormus , to m . John Eldred and William shall | we at balsara . right well - beloved and my assure good friend , i hearty commend i unto you , hope of your good health , etc to certify you of my voyage , after i depart from you , time will not permit : but the 4 of this present we arrive here , and the 10 day i with the rest be commit to prison , and about the middle of the next month , the captain will send we all in his ship for goa . the cause why we be take , as they say , be , for that i bring letter from don Antonio . but the truth be , Michael Stropene be the only cause , upon letter that his brother write he from Aleppo . God know how we shall be deal withal in goa , and therefore if you can procure our master to send the king of Spain his letter for our releasement , you shall do we great good : for they can with justice put we to death . it may be that they will cut our throat , or keep we long in prison : god will be do . all those commodity that i bring hither , have be very well sell , if this trouble have not chance . you shall do well to send with all speed a messenger by land from Balsara to Aleppo , for to certify of this mischance , although it cost thirty or forty crown , for that we may be the soon release , and i shall | be the better able to recover this again which be now like to be lose : i pray you make my hearty commendation , etc from out of the prison in ormuz , this 21 of September , 1583 . [ ii i . 248 . ] [ he second 457 he second letter to the foresay master John Eldred and William shale . he bark two day of the Jew be arrive here past , by who i know you do write , but your letter be not like to come to my hand . this bringer have show i here very great courtesy , wherefore i pray it > u show he what favour you may . about the middle of the next month i think we shall depart from hence , god be our guide . i think Andrew will go by land to Aleppo , wherein i pray you further he what you may : but if he shall not go , than i pray you dispatch away a messenger with as much speed as possible you may . i can say no more , but do for i as you will i shall do for you in the like cause , and so with my very hearty commendation , etc from out of the prison in ormuz , this 24 day of September , t583 - you , John Newberie .