, master of the say galley , three hundred , at seven asper , four thousand , five hundred , fourscore and nineteen pound . the getti , boatswain thereof , three hundred , at six asper , be three thousand , nine hundred , forty and two pound . the Oda Bassi , purser , three hundred , at five asper , make three thousand , two hundred , and fourscore pound . the Azappi soldier two thousand six hundred at four asper , whereof the six hundred do continual keep the galley , two and twenty thousand , seven hundred fourscore and six pound . the mariers Bassi master over the shipwright and kalker of the navy , nine , at 20 . asper the piece , amount to three thousand fourscore and four pound , four shilling . the master Dassi shipwright and kalker , one thousand at fourteen asper , which amount by the year , to thirty thousand , six hundred threescore pound . summa totalis of daily payment amount by the year sterling , one million , nine hundred threescore eight thousand , seven hundred thirty five pound , nineteen shilling eight penny , answer quarterly without default , with the sum of four hundred fourscore twelve thousand , one hundred fourscore and four pound four shilling eleven penny , and be for every day five thousand three hundred fourscore and thirteen pound , fifteen shilling ten penny . annuity of land never improve , five time more in value then their sum mention , give by the say grand signior , as follow . to the viceroy for his Timar or annuity 60 . thousand gold ducat . to the second bassa for his annuity 50 . thousand ducat . to the three bassa for his annuity 40 . thousand ducat . to the four bassa for his annuity 30 . thousand ducat . to the five bassa for his annuity 20 . thousand ducat . to the captain of the janissary 20 . thousand ducat . to the jeu Merhorbassi master of his horse 15 . thousand ducat . to the captain of the pensioner 10 . thousand ducat . to the captain of his guard 5 . thousand ducat . summa totalis 90 . thousand livre . sterling . beside these above specify , be