the return of master William Harborne from Constantinople over land to London , 1588 . depart from Constantinople with 30 . person of my suit and family the 3 . of August . pass through the country of Thracia , now call Romania the great , Valachia and Moldavia , where arriving the 5 . of September i be accord to the grand signior his commandment very courteous entertain by Peter his positive prince , a greek by profession , with who be conclude that her majesty subject there traffic shall pay but three upon the hundred , which as well his own subject the letter of as all other nation answer : who letter to her majes - the prince of tje be extant . whence i proceed into Poland , where ^ riie ^ queene Chanceler send for i the 27 . of the same letter of the month . and after most honourable entertainment chancellor of impart with i in secret manner the late pass and Poland to the present occurrent of that kingdom , and also he write to l ^ ueene . majesty . thence i haste unto Elbing , where the 12 . of October i be most friendly welcome by the senate of that city , who i find and judge to be faithful devote to her majesty service , who letter likewise unto the same be present i . no less at Dantzik the 27 . of that month i be courteous receive by one of the buroughmaster accompany with two other of the senate , and a civil doctor their secretary . after go through the land of Pomer i rest one day at Stetin , where , for that you duke be absent , nothing ensue . at Rostoke i pass through the city without any stay , and at Wismar receive like friendly greeting as in the other place : but at Lubeck , for that i come late and depart early in the morning , i be not visit . at Hamburg the 19 of November , and at stoad the nine of December in like manner i be salute by a boroughmaster and the secretary , and in all these place they present i prince of MOLDAVIA ’ S privilege a . d . 1588 . sundry sort of their best wine and fresh fish , every of they with a long discourse , congratulate , in the name of their whole senate , her majesty victory over the Spaniard , and my safe return , conclude with offer of their ready service to her future dispose . yet the dantzik after my departure thence cause the merchant to pay custom for the good they bring with they in my company , which none other town neither infidel nor Christians on the way ever demand . and notwithstanding the premise , i be most certain inform of sundry of our nation there resident that most of the [ ii i . 290 . ] hanse - town upon the sea coast , especial Dantzik , Lubeck , and Hamborough have lade and be ship for Spain , great provision of corn , cable , rope , powder , saltpeter , hargubuss , armour , iron , lead , copper , and all other munition serve for the war . whereupon i gather their feign courtesy proceed rather for fear then of any good affection unto her majesty service , Elbing and stoad only except , which of duty for their commodity i esteem well affect .