the most gracious and most glorious , the wise among woman , and choose among those which triumph under the standard of Jesus Christ , the most mighty and most rich governor , and most rare among womankind in the world , the most gracious queen of England , which follow the step of the virgin mary , who end be prosperous and perfect , accord to your heart desire . i send your majesty so honourable and sweet a salutation of peace , that all the flock of nightingale with their melody can attain to you like , much less this simple letter of i . the singular love which we have conceive one towards the other be like to a garden of pleasant bird : and the lord God vouchsafe to save and keep you , and send your majesty a happy end both in this world and in the world to come . after the arrival of your honourable present from the court of your majesty , your highness shall understand that they come in such a season that every minute minister occasion of long consolation by reason of the come of your majesty ambassador to the triumphant court of the emperor , to our so great contentment as we can possible wish , who bring a letter from your majesty , which with great honour be present unto we by our eunuk , the paper whereof do smell most fragrant of camfor and ambargriese , and the ink of perfect musk ; the content whereof we have hear very attentive from point to point . i think it therefore expedient , that , accord to our mutual affection , in any thing whatsoever may concern the country which be subject to your majesty , i never fail , have information give unto i , in whatsoever occasion shall be minister , to gratify your majesty to my power in any reasonable and convenient matter , that all your subject business and affair may have a wish and happy end . for i will always be a solicitor to the most mighty emperor “ 7 this sultana be mother to Mehemet which now reign as emperor . A . D . * 594 - > 594 - for your majesty affair , that your majesty at all time may be folly satisfy . peace be to your majesty , and to all such as follow right the way of God . write the first day of the moon of Rabie livol in the year of the prophet , 1002 .