, date , almond , and malassos or sugar syrup . and for all our be here in the heat of the summer , yet none of our company perish by sickness . our ship be lade , we draw into the sea for a western wind for England . but be at sea , a great leak fall upon the lion , so that we be drive to Lancerota , and Forteventura , where , between the two hand , we come to a road , whence we put on land out of our say ship 70 . chest of sugar upon Lancerota , with some dozen or sixteen of our company , where the inhabitant suppose we have make a wrongful prize of our caravel , sudden come with force upon our people , among who i my self be one , take we prisoner , and spoil the sugar : which thing be perceive from our ship , they man [ ii two . 9 ] out three boat , think to rescue we , and drive the Spaniard to flight , whereof they slay eighteen , and take their governor of the hand prisoner , who be a very age gentleman about 70 . year of age . but chase the enemy so far , for our recovery , as powder and arrow want , the Spaniard perceive this , return , and in our man retire they slay six of they . 139 then a parley grow , in the which it be agree , that we the prisoner shall be by they restore , and they receive their old governor , give we a testimony under his and their hand , what damage we have there receive , the which damage be here restore , and make good by the king of Spain his merchant upon our return into England . after we have search and mend our leak , be return aboard , we come under sail , and as we be go to the sea on the one side of the hand , the cacafuego and other ship of the king of Portugal armada enter at the other , and come to anchor in the road from whence we be but new depart , and shoot off their great ordinance in our hear . and here by the way it be to be understand that the Portugal be much offend with this our new trade into Barbary , and both in our voyage the year before , as also in this they give out in England by their merchant , that if they take we in those part , they will use we as their mortali enemy , with great threat and menace . but by God and good providence we escape their hand . from this hand shape our course for England , we be seven or eight week before we can reach the coast of England . the first port we enter into be the haven of plymouth , from whence within short time we come into the Thames , and land our merchandise at London , about the end of the month of October , 1552 .