the second voyage to Barbary in the year 1552 . set forth by the right worshipful sir John York , sir William Gerard , sir Thomas wroth , master Frances Lambert , master Cole , and other ; write by the relation of master James Thomas then page to master Thomas Windham chief captain of this voyage . he ship that go on this voyage be three , whereof two be of the river of Thames , that be to say , the lion of London , whereof master Thomas Windham be captain and part owner , of about a hundred and fifty ton : the other be the buttolfe about fourscore ton , and a Portugal caravel buy of certain portu - gals in Newport in Wales , and freight for this voyage , of sum sixty ton . the number of man in the fleet be a hundred and twenty . the master of the lion be one John Kerry of Mynhed in Somersetshire , his mate be David Landman . the chief captain of this small fleet be master Thomas Windham a Norffolke gentleman bear , but dwell at marshfield - parke in Somerset shire . this fleet depart out of king - rode near Bristol about the begin of May 1552 . being on a Monday in the morning : and the Monday fortnight next ensue in the evening come to a anchor at their first port in the road of Zafia , or Asafi on the coast of Barbary , stand in 32 . degree of latitude , and there put on land part of our merchandise to be convey by land to the city of Morocco : which be do , and have refresh our self with victual and water , we go to the second port call Santa Cruz , where we discharge the rest of our good , be good quantity of linen and woollen cloth , corail , amber , jet , and diverse other thing well accept by the moor . in which road we find a french ship , which not know whether it be war or peace between England and France , draw her self as near under the town wall as she can possible , crave aid of the town for her defence , if need be , which in deed see we draw near , shoot at we a piece from the wall , which come over the lion our admiral , between the main mast and her foremast . whereupon we come to a anchor , present come a pin aboard we to know what we be , who understand that we have be there the year before , and come with the good english leave of their king in merchant wise , be full satisfy , and give we good leave to bring our good peaceable year before on shore , where the viceroy , who name be Sibil be xyfo . Manache , within short time after come to visit we , and use we with all courtesy . but by diverse occasion we spend here very near three month before we can get in our lade , which be sugar