the success of this voyage in part appear [ U . two . 56 . ] by certain brief relation extract out of the second voyage of sir John Hawkins to the west Indies , make in the say year 1564 . which i think good to set down for want of further instruction , which hitherto i can not by any mean come by , albeit i have use all possible endeavour for the obtain of the same : take they therefore in the mean season as follow . after John Hawkins , with the Jesus of Lubeck a ship of 700 . ton , and the Salomon , a ship of 7 score , the tiger a bark of 50 , and the swallow of 30 ton , be all well furnish with man to the number of one hundred threescore and ten , as also with ordi nance and victuali requisite for such a voyage , depart out of Plymouth the 18 day of October in the year of our lord 1564 . with a prosperous wind : at which depart , in cut the foresail , a marvellous misfortune happen to one of the officer in the ship , who by the pully of the sheet be slay out of hand be a sorrowful beginning to they all . and after their set out 10 league to the sea , he meet the same day with the minion a ship of the queen majesty , the minion whereof be captain David carlet , and also her consort Qu * ™ - the John baptist of London be bind to Guinea likewise , who hail one the other after the custom of the sea , with certain piece of ordinance for joy of their meeting : which do , the minion depart from he to seek her other consort the Merline of London , which be a stern out of sight , leave in m . Hawkins company the John Baptist her other consort . thus sail forward on their way with a prosperous wind until the 21 of the same month , at that time a 263 ne fire and sink of the Merline bind fin - guinea . great storm arise , the wind be at Northeast about 9 of the clock at night , and continue so 23 hour together , in which storm m . Hawkins lose the company of the John Baptist aforesaid , and of his pinnace call the swallow , the other 3 ship be sore beat with the storm . the 23 day the swallow , to his not small rejoice , come to he again in the night 10 league to the northward of cape Finister , have put roomer and not be able to double the cape , in that there rise a contrary wind at Southwest . the 25 the wind continue contrary , he put into a place in Galicia call ferol , where he remain 5 day and appoint all the master of his ship a order for the keep of good company . the 26 day the