the relation of one William Rutter to m . Anthony Hickman his master touch a voyage set out to Guinea in the year 1562 , by sir William Gerard , sir William Chester , m . Thomas lodge , the say Antony Hickman , and Edward Castelin : which voyage be also write in verse by Robert baker . cape verde . Rio de Sestos . the minion . orshipfull sir , my duty remember , this shall to declare unto you the discourse of this our voyage , since our departure out of England from Dartmouth ; at which time i give you to understand of our departure , which be the 25 of February 1562 . then have a prosper ous wind we depart from thence , and sail on our voyage until we arrive at Cavo verde the 20 of march , make no abode there , but sail along the coast to our first appoint port Rio de sestos , at which port we arrive the three of April in the morning , have the sight of a Frenchman , who assoon as he perceive we , set sail and make to the sea : in the mean time we come to a anchor in the road : and after that he have espy our flag , perceive we to be Englishman , he bear with the shore , and hail our ship with his ordinance , at which time we the merchant of both the ship be in the river in traffic , and have understanding of the negro that he have be there three day before our come : so we conclude together , that if he send his pinnace to traffic , we will not suffer he , until we have take further order with their captain and merchant . in the afternoon the pinnace come into the river , who man we will to make no traffic until we have talk further with their captain , who we will that night to come aboard our admiral ; which be do . at which say time m . Burton and John Munt go aboard the minion where the Frenchman be , and there conclude that they 258 shall tarry by we eight day , and suffer we quiet to traffic , wherewith they be not well please . whereupon the next morning they depart from we , sail alongst the coast to the eastward towards Potis , which he do to hinder our traffic that way : wherefore the merchant