certain article deliver to m . John Lok , by sir William Gerard knight , m . William winter , m . Benjamin Gonson , m . Anthony Hickman , and m . Edward Castelin the 8 of September 1561 , touch a voyage to Guinea . a remembrance for you m . Lok at your coming to the coast of guinie . tion . irst , when God shall send you thither , to procure , as you pass alongst the coast , to understand what river , haven , or harborough there be ; and to make your self a plat thereof , set those place which you shall think materiali in your say plat , with their true eleva - also you shall learn what commodity do belong to the place where you shall touch , and what may be good for they . it be think good , that have a fort upon the coast of Mina in the king of habaans country , it will serve to great purpose : wherefore you be especial send to consider where the fort may be best place , and upon what ground : wherein be to be note these thing follow . 1 . that the ground so serve , that it join to the sea on the one part , so as ship and boat may come the english merchant intend to fortify in Ghinea , in the king of habaans country . to lade and unlade . 2 . what mould of earth the ground be of . 3 . what timber or wood may be have , and how it will be carry . 4 . what provision of victual may be have in the country : and what kind of our victual will best serve to continue . 5 . the place must be natural strong , or such as 253 may be make strong with a small charge , and afterward keep with a few man . 6 . how water may be provide , if there be none to be have in the ground where the fort shall stand , or near to it . 7 . what help be to be have from the people of the country , either for the build of it , or for the defence thereof . [ ii two . 53 . ] to move the king of Haban a far off , for ma ^ n8 a f ° rtJ and to note owe he will like it ; ' but use your communication so , that although there may fall out good cause for the do of it , yet he do not understand your meaning . search the country so far as you may , both alongst the coast , and into the land . to learn what become of the merchant that be leave at Benin . the matter which shall be of importance to be note we nothing doubt that you will omit , wherefore we refer the order of these aflaire to your good discretion . also we pray you as occasion shall serve that you aid and help our factor , both with your counsel ! and otherwise ; and thus God send you safe to return . William Gerrard , William winter , Benjamin Gonson , Anthony Hickman , Edward Castelin .