the place where the Jew have their abode , and be the fair place , and quiet lodging in all the city . after i have repose my self 3 . day , i have access to the king presence , deliver my message and her majesty letter , and be receive with all humanity , and have favourable audience from time to time for three year : during which space i abide there in his court , as her majesty agent and Ligier : and whensoever i have occasion of business i be admit either to his majesty himself , or to his vice Roy , who name be alcay Breme Saphiana , a very wise and discreet person , and the chief about his majesty . the particular of my service , for diverse good and reasonable cause , i forbear here to put down in writing . after leave obtain , and a honourable reward bestow by the emperor upon i , i depart from his court at Morocco the 18 . of August 1588 . towards a garden of he , which be call shersbonare , where he promise i i shall stay but one day for his letter : howbeit , upon some occasion i be stay until the 14 . of September at the king charge , with 40 . or 50 . shot attend upon i for my guard and safety . from thence at length i be conduct with all thing necessary to the port of Santa Cruz , be six day journey from Morocco , and the place where our ship do common take in their lade , where i arrive the 21 . of the same month . in this port i stay 43 . day , and at length the second of November i embarked my self , and one Marshok reiz a captain and 427 a gentleman , which the emperor send with i upon a ambassage to her majesty : and after much torment and foul weather at sea , yet newyear day i come on land at saint Ives in Cornwall , from whence passing by land both together up towards London , we be meet [ ii two . 118 . i without the city with the chief merchant of the Barbary company , well mount all on horseback , to the number of 40 . or 50 . horse , and so the ambassador and my self be both in coach , enter the city by torchlight , on Sunday at night the 12 . of January 1589 .