the ambassage of master Henry Roberts , one of the swear esquire of her majesty person , from her highness to mulai Hamet emperor of Morocco and the king of Fesse , and sus , in the year 1585 : who remain there as Liger for the space of 3 . year . write brief by himself . Pon a incorporation grant to the company of Barbary merchant resident in London , i Henry Roberts one of her majesty swear esquire of her person , be appoint her highness messenger , and agent unto the aforesaid mulai Hamet emperor of Morocco , king of Fesse , and Sus . and after i have receive my commission , instruction , and her majesty letter , i depart from London the 14 . of August in the year 1585 . in a tall ship call the ascension , in the company of the minion and Hopewell , and we all arrive in safety at Azafi a port of Barbary , the 14 . of September next follow . the Alcaide of the town ( be the king officer there , and as it be mayor of the place ) receive i with all humanity and honour , accord to the custom of the country , lodge i in the chief house of the town , from whence i dispatch a messenger ( which in their language they call a Trottero ) to advertise the emperor of my arrival : who immediately give order , and send certain soldier for my guard and conduct , and horse for my self , and mule for my own and my company carriage . thus be accompany with m . Richard Evans , Edward Salcot , and other english merchant resident there in the country , with my train of moor and carriage , i come at length to the river of tensist , which be within four mile of Morocco : and there by the water side i pitch my tent under the olive tree : where i meet 426 with all the english merchant by themselves , and the french and flemish , and diverse other Christians , which attend my come . and after we have dine , and spend out the heat of the day , about four of the clock in the afternoon we all set forward towards the city of Morocco , where we arrive the say day , be the 14 . of September , and i be lodge by the emperor appointment in a fair house in the Judaria or jury , which be