a particular note of the indian fleet , expect to have come into Spain this present year of 1591 . with the number of ship that be perish of the same : accord to the examination of certain Spaniard late take and bring into England by the ship of London . he fleet of Nova Hispania , at their first gather together and set forth , be two and fifty sail . the admiral ! be off six hundred ton , and the vice admiral ! of the same burden . four or five of the ship be of nine hundred and 1000 ton a piece , some five hundred , and some four hundred and the least of two hundred tun . of this fleet 19 be cast away , and in they 2600 man by estimation , which be do along the coast of Nova Hispania , so that of the same fleet there come to the Havana but 33 sail . the fleet of terra firma be , at their first departure from Spain , fifty sail , which be bind for number de dios , where they do discharge their lade , and thence return to Cartagena , for their health sake , until ! the time the treasure be ready they shall take in , at the say number de Dios . but before this fleet depart , some be go by one or two at a time , so that only 23 sail of this fleet arrive in the Havana . i 33 sail of Nova Hispania . at the Havana ! 23 sail of terra firma . there meet 12 sail of San Domingo . 9 sail of the Hunduras . the whole 77 ship , join and set sail all together at the Havana , the 17 of July , accord to our account , and keep together until they come into the height of thirty five degree , which be about the ten 54 of August , where they find the wind at Southwest change sudden to the north , so that the sea come out of the southwest , and the wind very violent at north , they be put all into great extremity , and then first lose the general of their fleet , with 500 man in she ; and within three or four day after , a other storm rise , there be five or six other of the big ship cast away with all their man , together with their vice - admiral . and in the height of 38 . degree , about the end of August , grow another great storm , in which all the fleet save 48 . sail be cast away : which 48 . sail keep together , until they come in sight of the island of Corvo and Flores , about the five or sixth of September , at which time a great storm separate they : of which number fifteen or sixteen be after see by these Spaniard to ride at anchor under the Tercera ; and twelve or fourteen more to bear with the island of S . Michael ; what become of they after that these Spaniards be take can yet be certify ; their opinion be , that very few of the fleet be escape , but be either drown or take . and it be otherways of late certify , that of this whole fleet that shall have come into Spain this year , be one hundred twenty [ H . two . 1764 and three sail , there be arrive as yet but five and twenty . this note be take out of the examination of certain Spaniard , that be bring into England by six of the ship of London , which take seven of the above name indian fleet , near the island of azore .