cast about , and new charge all our ordinance , and come upon they again , will they to yield , or else we will sink they : whereupon the one will have yield , which be shoot between wind and water ; but the other call he traitor . unto who we make answer , that if he will not yield present also , we will sink he first . and thereupon he understanding our determination , present put out a white flag , and yield , and yet refuse to strike their own sail , for that they be swear never to strike to any Englishman . we then command their captain and master to come aboard we ; which they do . and after examination and stow they , we send certain of our own man aboard they , and strike their sail , and man their ship : find in they both 126 person live , and 8 dead , beside those which they themselves have cast overboard . so it please God to give we the victory be but 42 man and a boy , whereof 2 be kill and 3 wound : for the which good success we give God the only praise . Theise two rich prize lade with 1400 chest of quicksilver with the arm of Castille and Leon fasten upon they , and with a great quantity of bull or indulgence , and guild missal or service book , with a hundred ton of excellent wine , we bring short after into the river of Thames up to black - wall . by the take of this quicksilver , about 1400 chest , the king of Spain lose for every quintali of the same a quintail of silver , that shall have be deliver he by the master of the mine there , which amount to 600000 pound . 104 the take of the ‘ Madre de Dios ’ a . d . .... I592 * more by take of his bull , to wit , two million and 72 thousand for live and dead person for the province of Nova Hispania , lucatan , Guatimala , the Honduras , and the Phillipinas , tax at two real the piece . and more for eighteen thousand bull tax at four real , amount all to 107700 pound . summa totalis 707700 livre . more there be take ten fardel of gild missal and breviaries send for the king account . so the hindrance that the king receive by the loss of his bull and quicksilver amount as be abovesaid : beside the lack of his wine , about 100 ton , whereby his fleet be disappoint of a great part of their provision .