the letter of the queen most excellent majestic send by one Laurence Aldersey unto the emperor of Aethiopia , 1597 . A . D . 130 to the most invincible and puissant king of the Abassens , the mighty emperor of Aethiopia the high and the low . ELizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc to the most high and mighty emperor of Aethiopia greeting . whereas it be a matter requisite and well beseem all king and prince of what land or nation soever , be they never so much dissever in place or differ in custom and law , to maintain and preserve the common society of mankind , and , as occasion shall be offer , to perform mutual duty of charity and benevolence : we for that cause conceive most undoubted hope of your princely fidelity and courtesy , have give unto this our subject Laurence Aldersey intend to travel into your dominion , these our letter to be deliver without fail unto your highness , to the end they may be a testimony of our good will towards you and of our say subject his departure from England . who , after his travel in many foreign country , be as yet inflame with a desire more thorough to survey and contemplate the world , and now at length to undertake a long and dangerous journey into your territory and region : both the say Laurence think , and our self also deem , that it will very much avail he , as well for his own safety as for the attain of your favour , if , be protect with our broad seal , he may transport unto your highness a testimony of our love affection and of his departure from hence . for sithence almighty God the high creator and governor of the world have allot unto king and prince his vicegerent over the face of the whole earth , their design portion and limit to be rule and administer by they ; and by this his gift have establish among they a certain law of i3i A . D . ’ 597 - brotherly kindness , and a eternal league by they to be observe : it will not ( we hope ) seem unpleasant unto your highness , when you shall have intelligence of our love letter send so huge a distance over sea and land , even from the far realm of England unto you in Aethiopia . on the other side our self shall take great solace and delight , when as by the relation of our own subject , the renown of your name shall be bring unto we from the fountain of Nilus , and from those region which be situate under the southern Tropike . may it please you therefore of your princely clemency to vouchsafe so much favour on this our subject , that he may , under the safeguard and protection of your name , enter into your highness dominion , and there remain safe and free from danger . which favour and courtesy we do likewise most earnest request at the hand of other prince , through who signory our say subject be to pass ; and we shall esteem it as do unto our self and for our honour sake . neither do we require any great favour in this behalf , than we be upon the like occasion most ready to grant unto the subject of all prince and the people of all nation , travel into our dominion . give at London the five day of November , in the thirty and nine year of our reign : and in the year of our lord I597 -