the manner of the take of two spanish ship lade with quicksilver and the pope bull , bind for the west Indies , by m . Thomas white in the amity of London . 1592 . he 26 of July 1592 , in my return out of Barbary in the ship call the amity of London , be in the height of 36 degree or thereabouts , at four of the clock in the morning we have sight of two ship , be distant from we about three or four league : by seven of the clock we fetch they up , and be within gunshot : who boldness , have the king of Spain arm display , do make we judge they rather ship of war , then lade with merchandise . and as it appear by their own speech , they make full account to have take we : it be a question among they , whether it be best to carry we to saint Lucar , or to Lisbon . we wave each other a main . they have place themselves in warlike order one a cable length before another , we begin the fight . in the which we continue , so fast as we be able to charge and discharge , the space of five hour , be never a cable length distant either of we from other . in which time we receive diverse shot both in the hull of our ship , mast , and sail , to the number of 32 great , beside 500 musket shoot and harquebuss a crock at the least , which we tell after the fight . and because we perceive they to be stout , we think good to board the Biscaine , which be on head the other : where lie aboard about a hour , and ply our ordinance and small shot ; in the end we stow all his man . now the other in the flyboat , think we have enter our man in their fellow , bare room with we , mean to have lay we aboard , and so to have entrap we betwixt they both : which we perceive , fit our ordinance 103 so for he , as we quit our self of he , and he board his fellow : by which mean they both fall from we . then present we keep our loose , hoist our topsail , and weather they , and come hard aboard the flyboat with our ordinance prepare , and give she our whole broad side , with the which we slay diverse of their man ; so as we may see the blood run out at the scupper hole . after that we