the preface of m . Rene Laudonniere . here be two thing , which accord to my opinion have be the principali cause , in consideration whereof aswell they of ancient time , as those of our age have be induce to travel into far and remote region . the first have be the natural desire which we have to search out the commodity to live happy , plentiful , and at ease : be it whither one abandon his natural country altogether to dwell in a better , or be it that man make voyage thither , there to search out and bring from thence such thing as be there to be find , and be in great estimation and in most request in our country . the second cause have be the multitude of people too fruitful in generation , which be no long able to dwell in their native soil , have enter upon their neighbour limit , and oftentimes pass further have pierce even unto the uttermost region . after this sort the north climate , a fruitful father of so many nation have oftentimes send forth this way and that way his valiant people , and by this mean have people infinite country : so that most of the nation of Europe draw their originali from these part . contrariwise the more southern region , because they be too barren by reason of their insupportable heat which reign in they , need not any such send forth of their inhabitant , and have be oftentimes constrain to receive other people more often by force of arm then willing . all Africa , Spain , and Italy can also testify the same , which never so abound with people that they have need to send they abroad to inhabit elsewhere : as on the contrary Scythia , Norway , Gotland , and France have do . the posterity of which nation remain yet not only in Italy , Spain and Africa , but also in fruitful and fair Asia . nevertheless i find 446 that the roman proceed further , or rather add unto these two chief cause aforesaid , ( as be most curious to plant not only their ensign and victory , but also their law , custom , and religion in those province which they have conquer by force of arm ) have oftentimes by the decree of their sovereign senate plant of send forth inhabitant , which they call colony ( think - colomese by this way to make their name immortali ) even to the unfurnish of their own country of the force which shall have preserve the same in her perfection : a thing which hinder they much more , then advance they to the possession of the universal monarchy , whereunto their intention do aspire . for it come to pass that their colony here and there be miserable sack by strange people do utter ruin and overthrow their empire . the brink of the river of Rhine be yet red , those of Danubius be no