a letter of Francis Vazquez de Coronado , governor of Nueva Galicia , to the lord don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy of Nueva Espanna . Dated in saint Michael of culiacan the 8 . of march , 1539 of the hard passage from saint Michael of culiacan to Topira . the description of that province , and of another near unto the same , very rich in gold and precious stone . the number of the people which Vazquez carry with he in his journey thither ; and how great friar Marcus of Ni ^ a be honour by the Indians of Petatlan . y the help of God i mean to set forward from this city of saint Michael of culiacan towards Topira the 10 . of April : neither can i any soon set forward , because the powder and match which your lordship send i , can be bring thither before that time , and i think it be now in Compostella . beside this , i be to pass many league over mighty high mountain , which reach up to the sky , and over a river , which at this present be so big and swell , that it can in no place be wade over . 118 and if i depart at the time aforesaid , they say we may wade over it . they tell i that from hence to Topira be not above 50 . league ; and i have learn since that it be above four score league . i do not remember that i have write to your lordship the information which i have of Topira : and though i have write thereof unto Topira . you , yet because that since that time i have learn something moor , i think it meet to signify the same unto your lordship in these my letter . it may please your honour therefore to understand , that they tell i , that Topira be a very populous province , lie between two river , and that there be above 50 . inhabit town therein . and that beyond the same there be another - another country great than it , the name whereof the Indians Sreater can not tell i , wherein there be great store or victual of Maiz , french peason , Axi or Pepper , Melon , and gourd , and great store of hen of the country . the people wear on their body gold , emerald , and other precious stone , and be serve common in gold and silver , wherewith they cover their house : and the chief man wear great chain of gold well wrought , about their neck , and be apparel with paint garment , and have store of wild cow ; and they say they enter not into their country , because themselves have no great store of people : those Indians be many in