have in her certain pitch and 30 tun of canary wine whereof we reserve 4 or 5 ton to our self , dismiss they without any further damage . Thence ( have the isle of remain there a day ) we set sail to the island of Curazao . Curazao , where we remain a day and a night , and take in fresh water , at what time by the inhabitant of that island ( be few of they Spaniard , and the most part Indians ) 14 of our man be treacherous hurt , but none slay . and from thence we depart for the main land southwards , to a certain bay , and there we abide 3 day , but nothing of any reckon be cape de la there achieve . from thence we arrive at cape de Vela ' la Vela , where grow a contention between our captain m . Andrew Barker , and his master Philip Roche , upon comparison make between they concern the knowledge of navigation , and about other quarrel , which quarrel afterward be a occasion of further mischief . Tulu . hence we sail to the bay of Tulu ( which be about 18 league southwestward from Carthagena ) where we take a frigate and certain treasure therein to the value of 500 pound , namely bar of gold , and lingot of silver , and some quantity of corriento or coin in rial of plate , and certain green stone call emerald , whereof one very great , be set in gold , be find tie secret about the thigh of a friar . here have stay three day , and now be pursue by spanish man of war , we depart with the say treasure , and leave the frigate behind we , all 84 Andrew Barker which treasure at that instant be commit to the keep of our captain Andrew Barker . from thence we pass to number de dios , and so forth to the mouth of the river of Chagre 18 league distant from number de dios towards the northwest . there we land io of our man , who travel up into the wood three or four day to seek the Simerons , ( which be certain valiant negro flee from their cruel master the Spaniard , arid be become mortali enemy , ready to join with the english and french against they ) but in their search they can