of a friar be deliver out of prison ( which cost he all the merchandise he bring with he in his ship ) and so return with dead fraught to the sum of 200 pound that afterward Andrew Barker discharge . in recompense of which injury ( for that no suit prevail against the inquisition of Spain ) and also to recover his loss of the Spaniard themselves , at his own charge with the help of his friend he furnish two bark for the west Indies , the great of which bark be call the ragged staff , himself be captain , and Philip Roche master thereof , the other name the bear have one William Coxe of Limehouse for her master and captain . and thus all our company be embark at Plimmoth on Whitsonday in the begin of June , we set forward , and in our course we meet with a ship of London , and afterward with another ship , but take nothing from either of they . our first arrival be at one of the island of cape Verde , name Del sal , vz . the isle of salt , where we take certain fish Isla del sal . call tortoise : and there we remain one night and half the day follow . and from thence we come to the isle of Maio , be distant from Isla del sal , 14 or 15 league , where we take in fresh water and traffic with certain Portugal inhabit in it that place , of who we have some victual for knife and bead : and there we remain one day and one night : but our trumpeter be treacherous slay by those Portugal , in revenge of which murder we set two village on fire two of their small village . from this island urnt - we shape our course over the main ocean towards the isle of the west Indies , and arrive happy at the island of Tnmdad . Trinidad , and have conference with certain Indians inhabitant thereof , who give we very friendly and courteous entertainment : and here we set up a pinnace which we carry forth in the ragged staff , and traffic with the foresay Indians for victual . and after we have spend six day in this place we the isle of depart , and arrive next at the isle of Margarita , Margarita . where we take a small spanish ship