a advertisement to the reader . in this breviary , the name only be comprise of such , as be lead with the general fame of Guiana , have endeavour to discover and possess it . the whole history be long and can sudden be translate or english at large , as we in these elegy find they . it may perhaps seem strange and incredible , that so many cavallero shall all fade in this one attempt , since in many part of the Indies , far small number in short time have perform as great matter , and subdue mighty kingdom : i have therefore think it good here to allege those reason , which by circumstance may be gather to have be chief impediment to the Spaniard in this intend search and conquest . the first may be the remoteness or distance of their place of rendezvous , from el Dorado : which appear to be four , Nuevo reyno , the mouth of Amazones or Orellana , Cubagua or the coast of the Caracas , and Trinidad . 1 from Moiobamba , where Orellana have his headspring , to his mouth , the Spaniard account it 2000 league . Raleana rise near the say mountain in Moiobamba , and tribute his water to the sea , not far from the other : Guiana be environ with these 2 fresh - 499 A . D . 1596 . water - sea , where their distance be great from their rise , and be beside guard with impassable mountains which enclose and defend it on all part , except topiawaries country . it be no marvel then , if the vigour , heart , and life of those Spaniard , who seek it from Nuevo Reyno , be allay and spend , before they come near to it , in those long , desolate and uncomfortable way . 2 from Cubagua to seek it by sea in vessel of any burden , be a work of far great labour , than to sail direct from Spain . and to pass over land be a matter of great difficulty , by reason that the indian nation inhabit between the coast of the Caracas and Guiana , be weary and harry with the daily incursion of the Spaniard , have now turn their abuse patience into fury , refuse to suffer any force of man to be lead through their country . for the Spaniard travel in those part , when they find not gold answerable to their expectation , overlay they with cruelty , tyrannic , and thraldom : forbear neither man , woman , friend , nor