a petition make by certain of the company of the delight of Bristol unto the master of the say ship Robert Burnet , one of the consort of m . Chidley , be in the strait of Magellan the 12 . of February 1589 . e have think good to show unto you ( be our master ) our whole mind and grief in write : that whereas our captain Matthew hawlse , and Walter street do begin to take into the captain cabin this 12 . of Febr . both bread and butter , ( such as be put in for the provision of the ship and company ) only to feed themselves , and a few other , which be of their mess : mean thereby rather to starve we , than to keep we strong and in health : and likewise upon the same , he have take into his cabin certain furniture , as sword , caliver , and musquet : we therefore not well know their intent herein , except by certain word cast out unware , we may conjecture , , that your death , which God forbid , by they have be determine : do all most humble desire you be our master , and have charge of the ship , and we , this present voyage commit unto you , to consider : first , that by god visitation we have lose 16 . man , and that so much the rather because they be not allot such necessary provision , as be in the ship to be have . also to consider the great loss of 15 . of our man with our , boat at penguin - yland within the strait of Magellan : and of 7 . good and serviceable man beside near port famine : and of three anchor , and our carpenter . over and beside all these calamity to consider how you have ( without all reason and conscience ) be overthwart , disgrace , and outcountenance by your mate street , and Matthew hawlse : also what danger you now be subject unto , your death have be so often xi 385 2 b conspire , and what danger we shall be in , if it be ( which God forbid ) effect . Furthermore , to weigh with your self the great want of many necessary in our ship : namely that we have but 6 . sailor , ( beside your self and your mate street , who we dare not trust , ) also that we have but