the sixth chapter show that the traffic and plant in those country , shall be unto the savage themselves very beneficial and gainful . now to the end it may appear that this voyage be not undertake altogether for the peculiar commodity of our self and our country ( as general other trade and journey be ) it shall fall out in proof , that the savage shall hereby have just cause to bless the hour when this enterprise be undertake . First and chief , in respect of the most happy and gladsome tiding of the most glorious gospel of our saviour Jesus Christ , whereby they may be bring from falsehood to truth , from darkness to light , from the high way of death to the path of life , from superstitious idolatry to sincere Christianity , from the devil to Christ , from hell to heaven . and if in respect of all the commodity they can yield we ( be they many more ) that they shall but receive this only benefit of Christianity , they be more than full recompense . but hereunto it may be object , that the gospel must be free preach , for such be the example of the apostle : unto who although the authority and example before allege of emperor , king and prince , aswell before Christ time as since , may sufficient satisfy : yet for further answer , we may say with saint Paul , if we have sow unto you heavenly thing , do you think it much that we shall reap your carnali thing ? and withal , the workman be worthy of his hire . Theise heavenly tiding which those labourer our countryman ( as messenger of god great goodness and mercy ) will voluntary present unto they , do far exceed their earthly riches . Moreover , if the other inferiout worldly and temporali thing which they shall receive from we , be weigh in equal balance , i assure my self , that by equal judgement of any indiff - ” 9 Corinth . 9 This barge can be unjust , where both party be gainer . the english voyage ent person , the benefit which they then receive , shall tarre surmount those which they shall depart withal unto we . and admit that they have ( as they have not ) the knowledge to put their land to some use : yet be bring from brutish ignorance to civility and knowledge , and make then to understand how the ten part of their land may be so manure and employ , as it may yield more commodity to the necessary use of man life , than the whole now do : what just cause of complaint may they have ? and in my private opinion , i do very think that God do create land , to the end that it shall by culture and husbandry yield thing necessary for man life . but this be not all the benefit which they shall receive by the Christians : for , over and beside the knowledge how to till and dress their ground , they ' shall be reduce from unseemly custom to honest manner , from disorder riotous rout and company to a well govern common wealth , and withal , shall teach mechanical occupation , art , and liberali science : and which stand they most upon , they shall|be defend from the cruelty of their tyrannical ! and blood suck neighbour the cannibal , whereby infinite number of their life shall|be preserve . and last , by this mean many of their poor innocent child shall be preserve from the bloody knife of the sacrificer , a most horrible and detestable custom in the sight of God and man , now and ever heretofore use among they . many other thing can i here allege to this purpose , be it not that i do fear lest i have already more than half tire the reader . the seven chapter show that the plant there , be not a matter of such charge or difficulty , as many will make it seem to be . now therefore for proof , that the plant in these part be a thing that may be do without the aid of the prince power and purse , contrary to the allega-120 cion of many malicious person , who will neither be actor in any good action themselves , nor so much as afford a good word to the set forward thereof : and that worse be , they will take upon they to make molehill seem mountain , and fly elephant , to the end they may discourage other , that be very well or indifferent affect to the matter , be like unto Esop dog , which neither will eat hay himself , nor suffer the poor hungry ass to feed thereon : i say and affirm that God have provide such mean for the furtherance of this enterprise , as do stand we in stead of great treasure : for first by reason that it have please God of his great goodness , of long time to hold his merciful hand over this realm , in preserve the people of the same , both from slaughter by the sword , and great death by plague , pestilence , or otherwise , there be at this day great number ( god he know ) which live in such penury and want , as they can be content to hazard their life , and to serve one year for meat , drink and apparel only , without wage , in hope thereby to amend their estate : which be a matter in such like journey , of no small charge to the prince . Moreover , thing in the like journey of great price and cost as victuali ( whereof there be great plenty to be have in that country without money ) and powder , great artillery , or corselet be not needful in so plentiful and chargeable manner , as the show of such a journey may present : for a small quantity of all these , to furnish the fort only , will suffice until such time as diverse commodity may be find out in those part , which may be think well worthy a great charge . also the peculiar benefit of archer which God have bless this land withal before all other nation , will stand we in great stead among those naked people . another help we have also , which in such like case be a matter of marvellous cost , and will be in this journey procure very easy ( that be to say ) to transport yearly 121 [ three . i78 . i aswell our people , as all other necessary needful for they into those part by the fleet of merchant , that yearly venture for fish in newfoundland , be not far distant from the country mean to be inhabit , who common go with empty vessel in effect , save some little fraught with salt . and thus it appear that the soldier wage , and the transportation may be defray for far less sum of money than the detractor of this enterprise have give out . again , this intend voyage for conquest , have in like manner many other singular privilege wherewith God have , as it be , with his holy hand bless the same before all other . for after once we be depart the coast of England , we may pass straightway thither , without danger of be drive into any the country of our enemy , or doubtful friend : for common one wind serve to bring we thither , which seidome fail from the middle of Januarie to the middle of may , a benefit which the mariner make great account of , for it be a pleasure that they have in a few or none of other journey . also the passage be short , for we may go thither in thirty or forty day at the most , have but a indifferent wind , and return continual in twenty or four and twenty day at the most . and in the same our journey , by reason it be in the ocean , and quite out of the way from the intercourse of other countries , we may safe trade and traffic without peril of piracy : neither shall our ship , people , or good there , be subject to arrest or molestation of any pagan potentate , turkish tyrant , yea , or christian prince , which heretofore sometime upon slender occasion in other part have stay our ship and merchandize , whereby great number of our countryman have be utter undo , diverse put to ransom , yea , and some lose their life : a thing so fresh in memory as it need no proof , and be well worthy of consideration . beside , in this voyage we do not cross the burn line , whereby common both beverage and victuali be 122 corrupt , and man health very much impair , neither do we pass the freeze sea , which yield sundry extreme danger : but have a temperate climate at all time of the year , to serve our turn . and last , there need no delay by the way for take in of fresh water and fuel , ( a thing usual do in long journey ) because , as i say above , the voyage be not long , and the fresh water take in there , our man here in England at their return home have find so wholesome and sweet , that they have make choice to drink it before our beer and ale . behold here , good countryman , the manifold benefit , commodity and pleasure heretofore unknown , by God especial blessing not only reveal unto we , but also as it be infuse into our bosom , who though hitherto like dormouse have slumber in ignorance thereof , be like the cat that be loath for their prey to wet their foot : yet if now therefore at the last we will awake , and with willing mind ( set frivolous imagination aside ) become industrious instrument to our self , questio nlesse we shall not only hereby set forth the glory of our heavenly father , but also easy attain to the end of all good purpose that may be wish or desire . and may it not much encourage we to hope for good success in the country of these savage , be a naked kind of people , void of the knowledge of the discipline of war , see that a noble man , be but a subject in this realm ( in the time of our king Henry the second ) by name Strangbow , than earl of Chepstow in south wale , by himself and his ally and assistant , at their own proper charge pass over into Ireland , and there make conquest of the now country , and then kingdom of Lynester , at which time it be very populous and strong , which history our own chronicle do witness ? and why shall we be dismay more than be the Spaniard , who have be able within these few year to conquer , possess and enjoy so large a 123 2. Decad. lib . ^ . fol . 77. of the west Indies , in english . Cano a be a kind of boat . 3. Decad. lib . 1. folio 97. about the year of our lord 1511. conquest of the west Indies , folio 43. and 45. English . the english voyage tract of the earth , in the west Indies , as be between the two tropics of cancer and Capricorn , not only in the main firm land of America , which be 47. degree in latitude from south to north , and do contain 2820. English mile at the least , that the king of Spain have there in actuali possession , beside many goodly and rich island , as Hispaniola , now call saint Domingo , Cuba , Jamaica , and diverse other , which be both beautiful and full of treasure , not speak any whit at all , how large the say land be from east to west , which in some place be account to be 1500. English mile at the least from east to west , between the one sea and the other . or why shall our noble nation be dismay , more than be Vasques nun de Valboa , a private gentleman of Spain , who with the number of 70. Spaniards at Tichiri , give a overthrow unto that mighty king Chemaccus , have a army of a hundred canoas and 5000. man , and the say Vasques nun not long after , with his small number , do put to flight king chiape his whole army . likewise Hernando Cortes , be also but a private gentleman of Spain , after his departure from the island of Cuba and Acuzamil , and enter into the firm of America , have many most victorious and triumphant conquest , as that at Cyntla , where be accompany with less than 500 Spanish footman , thirteen horseman and six piece of ordinance only , he overthrow 40000. Indian . the same Cortes with his say number of Spaniard , take prisoner that mighty emperor Mutezuma in his most chief and famous city of Mexico , which at that instant have in it above the number of 50000. Indian at the least , and in short time after obtain not only the quiet possession of the say city , but also of his whole empire . and in like manner in the country of Peru , which the king of Spain have now in actuali possession , Francisco Pysarro , with the only aid of Diego de Almagro , 124 and Hernando Luche , be all three but private gentleman , be the principali person that first attempt discovery and conquest of the large and rich country of Peru , which through the aid of the almighty , he bring to pass and achieve in the tambo of caxa-malca , ( which be a large place of ground , enclose with wall ) in which place he take the great and mighty prince Atabalipa prisoner , amid the number of 60000. Indian his subject , which be ever before that day account to be a warlike kind of people , which his great victory it please God to grant unto he in the marvellous year of our lord God 1533. he not have in his victorie-company above the number of 210. Spaniard , whereof there be not pass threescore horseman in all : after the take of which prince Atabalipa , he offer unto Pyzarro for his ransom , to fill a great large hall full of gold and silver , and such gold and silver vessel as they then use , even as high as a man may reach with his arm . and the say prince cause the same hall to be mark round about at the say height , which ransom Pyzarro grant to accept . and after , when as this mighty prince have send to his vassal and subject to bring in gold and silver for the fill of the hall , as aforesaid , as namely to the city or town of Quito , Paciacama and Cusco , as also to the Calao of Lima , in which town , as their own writer do affirm , they find a large and fair house , all slate and cover with gold : and when as the say hall be not yet a quarter full , a mutiny arise among the Spaniard , in which it be common give out , that the say prince have politic offer this great ransom under pretence to raise a much more mighty power , whereby the Spaniard shall be take , slay and overthrow : whereupon they grow to this resolution , to put the say prince to death , and to make partition of the gold and silver already bring in , which they present put in execution . And come to make perfect inventory of the same , as well for the emperor than king of 125 Spain , his five part , as otherwise , there be find to be already bring in into the say hall , the number of 132425. pound weight of silver , and in gold the number of 1828125. pezo , which be a riches never before that nor since see of any man together , of which there do appertain to the emperor for his five part of gold 365625. pezo , and for his five part of silver 26485. pound weight , and to every horseman eight thousand pezo of gold , and 67. pound weight of silver . Every soldier have 4550. pezo of gold and 280. pound weight of silver . Every captain have some 30000. some 20000 pezo of gold and silver , proportional answerable to their degree and call , accord to the rate agree upon among they . Francis Pizarro as their general , accord to his decree and call proportional , have more than any of the rest , over and beside the massy table of gold which Atabalipa have in his litter , which weigh 25000. pezo of gold : never be there before that day soldier so rich in so small a time , and with so little danger . and in this journey for want of iron , they do shoe their horse , some with gold , and some with silver . this be to be see in the general history of the west Indies , where as the do of Pizarro , and the conquest of Peru be more at large set forth . to this may i add the great discovery and conquest which the prince of Portugal have make round about the west , the south , and the east part of Africa , and also at calicut , and in the east Indies , and in America , at Brasile and elsewhere in sundry island , in fortify , people and plant all along the say coast and island , ever as they discover : which be right weigh and consider , do minister just cause of encouragement to our countryman , not to account it so hard and difficult a thing for the subject of this noble realm of England , to discover , people , plant and possess the like goodly land and rich country not far from we , but near adjoin 8c offer themselves unto we 126 ( as be aforesaid ) which have never yet heretofore be in the actuali possession of any other christian prince , than the prince of this realm . all which ( as i think ) shall not a little animate and encourage we to look out and adventure abroad , understand what large country and island the Portugal with their small number have within these few year discover , people and plant , some part whereof i have think it not amiss , brief in particular to name both the town , country and island , so near as i can upon the sudden call they to remembrance : for the rest i do refer the reader to the history , where more at large the same be to be see . first , they do win and conquer from the prince of Barbary the island of Geisera and town of Arzila , not past a 140. mile distant from their metropolitan and chief city of Fesse : and after that they win also from the say prince the town of Tanger , Ceuta , Mazigam , Azamor , and azaffi , all alongst the sea coast . and in the year of our lord , 1455. Alouis de Cadomosta a gentleman venetian , be he that first discover for their use cape Verd , with the island adjoin , of which he then people and plant those of Bonavista and Sant Iago discover also the river Senega , otherwise call Niger , and cape Roxo and Sierra Leone , and in a few year after they do discover the coast of Guinea , and there people and build the castle of Mina : then discover they further to the country of melegette , Benin , and Congo , with the hand of Principe , da Nobon , saint Matthew , and saint Thomas under the equinoctial line , which they people , and build in the say island of S. Thomas the haven town or port of Pavosan . after that , about the year of our lord , 1494. one Bartholomew Dias be send forth , who be the first man that discover and double that great and large cape call de bon Esperanze , 8c pass the current that run upon the say coast , on the southeast part of Africa , between the say main land 8c the island of S. Laurence , otherwise call of the ancient , madam - 127 Ceffala accomt to be the place where the noble and wise king Salomon do fetch his gold . the english voyage gascar , he discover to you harbour name the river of the infant . after that since the year of our lord God , 1497. and before the full accomplishment of the year of Christ , 1510. through the travail and discovery of Vasques de Gama , Peter Alvares , Thomas Lopes , Andrew Corsale , John de Empoli , Peter Sintra , Sancho de Toar , and that noble and worthy gentleman Alonzo de Albuquerque , they do discover , people , and plant at Ceffala , be upon the east side of Africa , in the twenty degree of latitude of the south pole , and direct west from the hand of S. Laurence ( at which port of Ceffala , diverse do affirm that king Salomon do fetch his gold ) as also upon the say east side of Africa , they do afterward discover , people , and plant at Mozambique , Quiola , Monbaza , and melinde , two degree of southerly latitude , and so up to the strait of Babel-Mandell at the enter of the red sea , all upon the east coast of Africa , from whence they put off - at the cape of guarda fu , and past the great gulf of Arabia , and the Indian sea east to Sinus Persicus , and the island of ormus , and so pass the large and great river Indus , where he have his fall into the main ocean , in 23. degree and a half , under the tropic of cancer , of septentrionali latitude , they make their course again direct towards the south , and begin to discover , people , and plant upon the west side of the hither India at goa , mangalor , Cananor , Calecut and Cochin , and the island of Zeilarn . and here i think good to remember to you , that after their plant upon this coast , their force grow so great that they be able to compel all the moor , the subject of the mighty emperor of the Turk to pay tribute unto they , ever as they pass the gulf of Arabia , from the port of Mecca in Arabia fcelix , where Mahomet lie bury , or any of the other port of the say land , ever as they pass to and from the haven of Cochin , Calecut and Cananor , and by their martial manner of discipline practise in those part , the great 128 and mighty prince the sophy emperor of the persian , and profess enemy to the Turk , come to the knowledge and use of the caliver shoot , and to interlace and join footman with his horseman , si thence which time the persian have grow to that strength and force , that they have give many mighty and great overthrow to the Turk , to the great quiet of all Christendom . and from the island of Zeilarn aforesaid , they also discover more east in pass the gulf of Bengala , and so pass the notable and famous river of Ganges , where he have his fall into the main ocean , under the tropic of cancer , and to the cape of Malaca , and unto the great and large island of Sumatra , Java major , Java minor , Mindanao , Palobane , celebe , Gilolo , Tidore , Mathin , Borneo , Machian , terenate , and all other [ three . 181. ] the island of Molucques and spicery , and so east alongst the coast of Cathaia , to the port of China , these be the Zaiton and Quinsay , and to the island of Zipango and Japan , situate in the east , in 37. degree of septentrionali from England . latitude and in 195. of longitude . these be their at these noble and worthy discovery . here also be not to be island have forget , that in the year of our lord , 1501. that famous and worthy gentleman Americus Vespucius do the ’ discover , people , and plant to their use the hold and fame of the fort which they have in Brasill , of who ( he be queen most but a private gentleman ) the whole country or firm efce^ent Maland of the west Indies , be common call and know ™ by the name of America . i do great doubt lest i seem over tedious in the recital of the particular discovery and conquest of the east and west Indies , wherein i be the more bold to urge the patience of the reader , to the end it may most manifest and at large appear , to all such as be not acquaint with the history , how the king of Portugal , who country for popularity and number of people , be scarce comparable to some three shire of England , and the king of Spain likewise , who natural country do not great abound with people , both vin 129 i which prince by mean of their discovery within less than 90. year past , have as it appear both mighty and marvellous enlarge their territory and dominion through their own industry by the assistance of the omnipotent , who aid we shall not need to doubt , see the cause and quarrel which we take in hand tend to his honour and glory , by the enlargement of the christian faith . to conclude , since by christian duty we stand bind chief to further all such act as do tend to the increase the true flock of Christ by reduce into the right way those lose sheep which be yet astray : and that we shall therein follow the example of our right virtuous predecessor of renown memory , and leave unto our posterity a divine memoriali of so godly a enterprise : let we i say for the consideration allege , enter into judgement with our self , whether this action may belong to we or not , the rather for that this voyage through the mighty assistance of the omnipotent God , shall take our desire effect ( whereof there be no just cause of doubt . ) then shall her majesty dominion be enlarge , her highness ancient title just confirm , all odious idleness from this our realm utter banish , diverse decay town repair , and many poor and needy person relieve , and estate of such as now live in want shall be embetter , the ignorant and barbarous idolater teach to know Christ , the innocent defend from their bloody tyrannical neighbour , the diabolical custom of sacrifice humane creature abolish . all which ( no man doubt ) be thing grateful in the sight of our saviour Christ , and tend to the honour and glory of the Trinity . bee of good cheer therefore , for he that can err have say : that before the end of the world , his word shall be preach to all nation , which good work i trust be reserve for our nation to accomplish in these part : wherefore my dear countryman , be not dismay : 13° for the power of God be nothing diminish , nor the love that he have to the preach and plant of the gospel any whit abate . shall we then doubt he will be less ready most mighty and miraculous to assist our nation in this quarrel , which be chief and principal undertake for the enlargement of the christian faith abroad , and the banishment of idleness at home , than he be to Columbus , Vasques , nun , Hernando Cortes , and Francis Pizarro in the west : and Vasques de Gama , Peter Alvares , and Alonso de Albuquerque in the east ? let we therefore with cheerful mind and courageous heart , give the attempt , and leave the sequel to almighty God : for if he be on our part , what force it who bee against we ? thus leave the correction and reformation unto the gentle reader , whatsoever be in this treatise too much or too little , otherwise unperfect , i take leave , and so end . 