the second chapter show , that it be lawful and necessary to trade and traffic with the savage : and to plant in their country : and divide plant into two sort . a nd first for traffic , i say that the Christians may lawful travel into those country and abide there : who the savage may not just impugn and forbid in respect of the mutual society and fellowship between man and man prescribe by the law of nation . for from the first beginning of the creation of the world , and from the renew of the same after Noes flood , all man have agree , that no violence shall be offer to ambassador : that the sea with his haven shall be common : that such as shall fortune to be take in war , shall be servant or slave : and that stranger shall not be drive away from the place or country whereunto they do come . if it be so then , i demand in what age , and by what law be the same forbid or deny since ? for who doubt but that it be lawful for christian to use trade and traffic with infidel or savage , carry thither such commodity as they want , and bring from thence some part of their plenty ? a thing so common and general practise , both in these our day , and in time past , beyond the memory of man , both by Christians and infidel , that it need no further proof . vni 97 g the principali cause why this voyage be undertake . [ Iii . 169. ] the english voyage and forasmuch as the use of trade and traffic ( be it never so profitable ) ought not to be prefer before the plant of Christian faith : i will therefore somewhat entreat of plant , ( without which , Christian religion can take no root , be the preacher never so careful and diligent ) which i mean to divide into two sort . the first , when Christians by the good like and will assent of the savage , be admit by they to quiet possession . the second , when Christians be unjust repulse , do seek to attain and maintain the right for which they do come . and though in regard of the establishment of christian religion , either of both may be lawful and just exercise : ( whereof many example may be find , as well in the time of Moses and Josua , and other ruler before the birth of Christ , as of many virtuous emperor and king sithence his incarnation : ) yet do i wish , that before the second be put in practice , a proof may be make of the first , save that for their safety as well against the savage , as all other foreign enemy , they shall first well and strong fortify themselves : which be do , then by all fair speech , and every other good mean of persuasion to seek to take away all occasion of offence . as let they to understand , how they come not to their hurt , but for their good , and to no other end , but to dwell peaceable among they , and to trade and traffic with they for their own commodity , without molest or grieve they any way : which must not be do by word only but also by deed . for albeit , to maintain right and repel injury , be a just cause of war : yet must there hereof be heedful care have , that whereas the savage be fearful by nature , and fond otherwise , the Christians shall do their best endeavour to take away such fear as may grow unto they by reason of their strange apparel , armour , and weapon , or such like , by quiet and peaceable conversation , 98 and let they live in security , and keep a measure of blameless defence , with as little discommodity to the savage as may be : for this kind of war will be only defensive and not offensive . and questionless there be great hope and likelihood , that by this kind of mean we shall bring to pass all effect to our desire purpose : consider that all creature , by constitution of nature , be render more tractable and easy win for all assay , by courtesy and mildness , then by cruelty or roughness : and therefore be a principle teach we by natural reason , it be first to be put in ure . for albeit as yet the Christians be not so thorough furnish with the perfectness of their language , either to express their mind to they , or again to conceive the savage intent : yet for the present opportunity , such policy may be use by friendly sign , and courteous token towards they , as the savage may easy perceive ( be their sense never so gross ) a assure friendship to be offer they , and that they be encounter with such a nation , as bring they benefit , commodity , peace , tranquillity and safety . to further this , and to accomplish it in deed , there must be present unto they gratis , some kind of our petty merchandize and trifle : as look glass , bell , bead , bracelet , chain , or collar of bugle , crystal , amber , jet , or glass etc for such be the thing , though to we of small value , yet account by they of high price and estimation : and soon will induce their barbarous nature to a like and a mutual society with we . Moreover , it shall be requisite either by speech , if it be possible , either by some other certain mean , to signify unto they , that once league of friendship with all love conversation be admit between the Christians and they : that than the christian from thenceforth will always be ready with force of arm to assist and defend they in their just quarrel , from all invasion , spoil and oppression offer they by any tyrant , [ in . 170. ] the second kind of plant mg. the english voyage adversary , or their next borderer : and a benefit be so much the more to be esteem , by how much the person upon who it be bestow stand in need thereof . for it appear by the relation of a countryman of we , namely David Ingram , ( who travel in those country xi . month and more ) that the savage general for the most part , be at continual war with their next adjoin neighbour , and especial the cannibal , be a cruel kind of people , who food be man flesh , and have tooth like dog , and do pursue they with ravenous mind to eat their flesh , and devour they . and it be not to be doubt , but that the Christians may in this case just and lawful aid the savage against the cannibal . so that it be very likely , that by this mean we shall not only mighty stir and inflame their rude mind glad to embrace the love company of the christian , proffer unto they both commodity , succour , and kindness : but also by their frank consent shall easy enjoy such competent quantity of land , as every way shall be correspondent to the christian expectation and contentation , consider the great abundance that they have of land , and how small account they make thereof , take no other fruit thereby then such as the ground of it self do natural yield . and thus much concern the first sort of plant , which as i assure hope , so i most hearty pray may take effect and place . but if after these good and fair mean use , the savage nevertheless will not be herewithal satisfy , but barbarous will go about to practise violence either in repel the christian from their port and safelanding , or in withstand they afterward to enjoy the right for which both painful and lawful they have adventure themselves thither : then in such a case i hold it no breach of equity for the Christians to defend themselves , to pursue revenge with force , and to do whatsoever be necessary for the attain of their safety : for it be allowable by all law in such distress , to resist violence with violence : and 100 for their moor security to increase their strength by building of fort for avoid the extremity of injurious deal . wherein if also they shall not be suffer in reasonable quietness to continue , there be no bar ( as i judge ) but that in stout assembly the Christians may issue out , and by strong hand pursue their enemy , subdue they , take possession of their town , city , or village , and ( in avoid murderous tyrannic ) to use the law of arm , as in like case among all nation at this day be use : and most especial to the end they may with security hold their lawful possession , lest happy after the departure of the christian , such savage as have be convert , shall afterward through compulsion and enforcement of their wicked ruler , return to their horrible idolatry ( as do the child of Israel , after the decease of Joshua ) and continue their wicked custom of most unnatural sacrifice of humane creature . and in so do , doubtless the Christians shall no whit at all transgress the bond of equity or civility , forasmuch as in former age , ( yea , before the incarnation of Christ ) the like have be do by sundry king and prince , governor of the child of Israel : chief in respect to begin their plant , for the establishment of God word : as also since the nativity of Christ , mighty and puissant emperor and king have perform the like , i say to plant , possess , and subdue . for proof whereof , i will allege you example of both kind . we read in the old testament , how that after Noes flood be cease , restauration of mankind begin only of those few of Noes child and family as be by God preelect to be save in the ark with he , who seed in process of time , be multiply to infinite number of nation , which in diverse sort divide themselves to sundry quarter of the earth . and forasmuch as all their posterity be mighty increase , follow not the perfect life of Noe their predecessor , God choose out of the multitude a peculiar people to himself , to who after - ioi ward be under the government of Moses in mount Sinai , he make a grant to inherit the land of Canaan , call the land of promise , with all the other rich and fertile country next adjoin thereunto . nevertheless , before they come to possession thereof , have be afflict with many grievous punishment and plague for their sin , they fall in despair to enjoy the same . but be encourage and comfort by their ruler , ( man of God ) they proceed , arm themselves with all patience , to suffer whatsoever it shall please God to send : and at last attain to the land , they be encounter with great number of strong people , and mighty king . Josua 4. notwithstanding , Josua their leader replenish with the spirit of God , be assure of the justness of his quarrel , gather the chief strength of the child of Israel together , to the number of 40000. with who he safe pass the huge river Jordan , and have before Josua 6. scent privy spy for the discovery of the famous city Jerico , to understand the certainty of the citizen estate , he forthwith come thither , and environ it round about with his whole power the space of seven day . in which respite , perceive none of the gentile dispose to yield or call for mercy , he then command ( as God before have appoint ) that both the city Jerico shall be burn , yea , and all the inhabitant , as well old as young , with all their cattle shall be destroy , only except Rahab , her kindred and family , because she before have hide secret the messenger of Josua , that be send thither as spy . as for all their gold , silver , precious stone , or vessel of brass , they be reserve and consecrate to the lord treasury . Josua 8. in like manner he burn the city hay , slay the inhabitant thereof , and hang up their king . but for so much as the gebionite ( fear the like event ) send Josua 9 ambassador unto Josua to entreat for grace , favour , and peace : he command that all their life shall be save , and that they shall be admit to the come - 102 pany of the child of Israel . yet understand afterward they wrought this by a policy , he use they as drudge to hew wood and to carry water , and other necessary for his people . thus begin this valiant captain his conquest , which he pursue and never leave [ three . 171. ] till he have subdue all the Hethites , Amorites , Cananite , Judg. 11.13 . Peresites , h evite , and Jebusites , with all their prince and king , be thirty and one in number , and diverse other strange nation , beside who land and dominion he whole divide among God people . after that Josua be decease , Juda be constitute lord over the army , who receive like charge from God , pursue the proceed of the holy captain Josua , and utter vanquish many gentile , idolater , and adversary to the child of Israel , with all such ruler or king as withstand he , and namely Adonibezek the Judg. 1. most cruel tyrant : who thumb and great toe he cause to be cut off , for so much as he have do the like before unto seventie king , who be his prisoner , he force to gather up their victual underneath his table . in this God show his justice to revenge tyrannic . we read likewise , that Gideon a most puissant and noble warrior so behave himself in follow the worthy act of Josua and Juda , that in short time he not only deliver the child of Israel from the hand of the multitude of the fierce madianite , but also subdue they and their tyrant , who land he cause God people to possess and inherit . i can recite diverse other place out of the scripture , which apt may be apply hereunto , be it not i do endeavour my self by all mean to be brief . now in like manner will i allege some few induction out of the authentical write of the ecclesiastical historiographer , all tend to the like argument . and first to begin withal , we do read : that after our saviour Jesus Christ have suffer his passion , the apostle be inspire with the holy ghost , and the knowledge of all strange language , do immediate disperse themselves to 103 a gpodnotefinal conqueror to be mercifiull . Judg. 6. 7. ad . the english voyage 1583 - sundry part of the world , to the preach of the gospel . yet not in so general a manner , but that there remain some far remote country unvisited by they , among the which it be report that India the great , call the uttermost India , as yet have receive no light of the word . ruffinuslib . i . but it come to pass , that one Metrodorus a very learned ca ? ' 9 - and wise philosopher in that age , be desirous to search out unknown land , do first discover the same , find it wonderful populous and rich , which upon his return be publish , and for certain understand , there be another grave philosopher of Tyrus call Meropius , be a christian , who do resolve himself ( follow the example of Metrodorus ) to travail thither , and in a short time assist but with a few , in a small vessel arrive there , have in his company two young youth , Edesius and Frumentius , who ( be his scholar ) he have thorough instruct both in liberali science , and christian religion . now after that Meropius somewhile stay there , have ( as he think ) sufficient understanding of the Indian whole estate : he determine to depart , and to bring notice thereof unto the emperor , who he mean to exhort to the conquest of the same . but by misfortune he be prevent , for be in the midst of his course on the sea homeward , a sore tempest arise , and perforce drive he back again , to a unknown port of the say land : where he by the Meropius most cruel barbarous Indian on the sudden be slay slay . with all his company , except the two young scholar aforesay , who the barbarous Indian , by reason they be of comely stature and beautiful personage , take , Edesius and and forthwith present they to their king and queen : frumentius which both be very well like of , the king courteous entreat , and ordain Edesius to be his butler , and the Indian . „ : , . „ ... r ’ - Frumentius his becretarie , and in rue year by reason or their learning and civil government , they be have in great favour , honour , and estimation with the prince . but the king depart this life , leave the queen his 104 wife with her young son to govern , and give free scope and liberty to the two Christians , at their best pleasure to pass to their native soil , allow they all necessary for the same . yet the queen who high favour they be very sorrowful they shall depart , and therefore most earnest entreat they to tarry and assist she in the government of her people , till such time as her young son grow to ripe year , which request they fulfil . and Frumentius excel Edesius far in all wisdom , rule both the queen and her subject at his discretion , whereby he take occasion to put in practise privy , that the foundation of christian religion may be plant in the heart of such as with who he think his persuasion may best prevail , and that soon will give ear unto he : which be bring to pass accord , he then with his fellow Edesius take leave of the queen to return to his native country . and so soon as he be arrive there , he reveal to the emperor Constantine , the effect of all those event : who both commend his deed and whole allow thereof , by the advice and good like of Athanasius then bishop of Alexandria , do arm and set forth a convenient power for the aid of Frumentius , in this his so godly a purpose . and by this mean come the emperor afterward by fair promise , and by force of histone , testi-arme together , unto the possession of all the Indian fi how that country . the author of this story Ruffinus receive c°nstantl ™ the truth hereof from the very mouth of Edesius come - eniarge his panion to Frumentius . dominion by moreover Eusebius in his historic ecclesiastical ! in subdue of infidel and idolatrous nation . Eusebius deavour by all mean to subject all such remote hib . i . de vita barbarous and heathen nation , as then inhabit the C^‘ four quarter of the world . for ( as it be write ) the eod . emperor thorough aid with a puissant army of lib . cap . 39 Frumentius in great favour with you queen of the Indian . a other great work of God begin by a man ofmeane birth . Ruffinus the author of this story . [ Iii . 172. ] Euseb. in his ecclesiastical precise term , and in diverse place make mention how Constantine the great not only enlarge his empire bv the subdue of his next neighbour , but also en - 105 valiant soldier who he have before persuade to christian religion , in proper person himself come even unto this our country of England , then call the island of Britain , bend from he full west , which he whole conquer , make tributary , and settle therein Christian faith , and leave behind he such ruler thereof , as to his wisdom seem best . from thence he turn his force towards the north coast of the world , and there utter subdue the rude and cruel nation of the scythian , whereof part by friendly persuasion , part by main strength , he reduce the whole to Christian faith . afterwards he determine with himself to search out what strange people inhabit in the uttermost part of the south . and with great hazard and labour , make his journey thither , at last become victor over they all , even to the country of the blemmyans , and the remote . / ethiopian , that now be the people of presbyter John , who yet till this day continue and bear the name of Christians . in the east likewise , what nation soever at that time he can have notice of , he easy win and bring in subjection to the empire . so that to conclude , there be no region in any part of the world , the inhabitant whereof be Gentiles , though unknown unto he , but in time he overcome and vanquish . this worthy beginning of Constantine , both his son succeed his room , and also diverse other emperors afterward to their uttermost endeavour follow and continue , which all the book of Eusebius moor Theodoret in at large set forth . Theodoretus likewise in his eccle-eccle . lib . 5. siasticall history make mention how Theodosius the caf . 20. virtuous emperor employ earnest all his time , as well in conquer the gentile to the knowledge of the holy gospel , utter subvert their profane temple and abominable idolatry , as also in extinguish of such Theodoretus usurp^ns tyrant as with paganism withstand the plant-cap°^e . eodern king of christian religion . after ’ who decease his lib . son Honorius and Arcadius be create emperor , 106 1583. the one of the east , the other of the west , who with all stout godliness most careful imitate the forestep of their father , either in enlarge their territory , or increase the christian flock . Moreover , it be report by the say author , that Theodosius junior the emperor , no whit inferior in virtuous life to any of the above name prince , with great study and zeal pursue and prosecute the gentile , subdue their tyrant and country , and utter destroy all their idolatry , convert their soul to acknowledge their only Messiah and creator , and their country to the enlargement of the empire . to be brief , who so list to read Eusebius Pamphilus , Socrates Scholasticus , Theodoritus , Hermia , sozoman , and Euagrius Scholasticus , which all be most sage ecclesiastical ! writer , shall find great store of example of the worthy life of sundry emperor , tend all to the confirmation of my former speech . and for like example of late time , ( yea even in the memory of man ) i shall not need to recite any other than the conquest make of the west and east Indies by the king of Spain and Portugal ! , whereof there be particular mention make in the last chapter of this book . herein have i use more copy of example then otherwise i will have do , save that i have be in pl^ce , where this manner of plant the christian faith have be think of some to be scarce lawful , yea , such as do take upon they to be more than mean learn . to these example can encage join many more , but whosoever be not satisfy with these few , may satisfy himself in read at large the author last above recite . thus have i ( as i trust ) prove that we may just trade and traffic with the savage , and lawful plant and inhabit their country . 