the voyage of m. Charles Leigh , and diverse other to cape Briton and the isle of Ramea . he Hopewell of London of the burden of 120 ton , whereof be m. William Crafton , and the chancewel of London of the burden of 70 ton , whereof be m. Steven Bennet , bind unto the river of Canada , set to sea at the sole and proper charge of Charles Leigh and Abraham Van Herwick of London merchant ( the say Charles Leigh himself , and Steven Van Herwick brother to the say Abraham , go themselves in the say ship as chief commander of the voyage ) depart from gravesend on Friday morning the 8 of April 1597^ and after some hindrance , arrive at Falmouth in Cornewal the 28 of the say month put to sea again . and with prosperous wind the 18 of may we be upon the bank of Newfoundland . the 19 we lose the chancewel . the 20 we have sight of land and enter within the bay of Assumption , where our man contrary to my knowledge fight with a french ship : and afterward in the same bay we meet with our consort . whereupon we present put to sea again : and the next day we arrive at caplen bay , where we remain by extremity of foul weather , and to mend a pin of 7 or 8 ton ( which be give we at Farrillon by m. Wil. sayer of Dartmouth the admiral of that place ) until the last of may . on which day depart from thence in the afternoon we put in to Rogneuse to seek shallop but can find none . the first of June we set sail from Rogneuse , and the second we put room to a bay under the northside of cape Raz be enforce in by a extreme storm . the 4 we set sail , and this day we see a great island of ice . the 5 at night we lose the Chancewell in a fog at the mouth of the bay of Placentia . the 11 at sun set we have sight of cape Briton . and the 12 by 166 reason of contrary wind we cast anchor under the north-east end of the isle of Menego to the north of cape isle of Briton in 16 fathom reasonable ground . in that place we catch great store of cod , which be large and better fish than any in Newfoundland . the 13 we weigh anchor again , and be becalm about a league from the shore we fall to fish where the cod do bite at least 20 fathom above ground , and almost as fast as we can hale they into the ship . the 14 we come to the 2 island of bird , some 23 league from Menego : 2 island where there be such abundance of bird , as be almost °fstrdes-incredible to report . and upon the less of these island of bird , we see great store of morss or sea ox , store of which be a sleep upon the rock : but when we approach near unto they with our boat they cast themselves into the sea and pursue we with such fury as that we be glad to flee from they . the 16 we arrive at Brian island , which lie 5 league west from the island of bird . about this island there be as great abundance of cod as in any place can be find . in little more than a hour we catch with 4 hook 250 of they . here we catch also a great Turbut which be a ell long and a yard broad : which be so great that the hook can not hold she into the ship : but when she be above water she bend the hook and escape . in this i ” Bryans Island we find exceed good ground both for corn and meadow , and great store of wood , but of small grow . for forne and spring of fresh water we find none in all the island , meadow . but some stand pool of rain water . the same day at night we weigh anchor again . the 17 we have stormy weather . the 18 we come to the isle of Ramea , where then be ! e of we appoint to meet with ' our consort . and approach - ramea-ing near unto the harbour of Halabolina we cast anchor in 3 fathom water and send our great boat into the harbour , with the master mate and some dozen more of the company : who when they come in , find 4 ship . namely 2 of saint Malo in Britaigne , and two of Sibiburo adjoin to saint John de luz be the french 167 [ three . 196. ] king subject , who they suppose to have be of Spain , and so affirm unto we . whereupon we go present into harbour , find but eleven foot and a half of water upon the bar and a mighty great current in , when we have cast anchor we send present to speak with the master of all the ship : but those only of saint Malo come aboard , who we entertain very friendly , and demand of whence the other two ship be . they say as they think of saint John de Luz or Sibiburo . than we present send our boat for the master of both the say ship , to request they to come aboard , and to bring with they their charter party and other evidence , to the end we may know of whence they be . at which message one of the say master come aboard , with the pilot and master mate of the other ship : who when we have examine , they say that they be of Sibiburo , and the french king subject . we request they for our better security in the harbour peaceable to deliver up their powder and munition : promise they that if we find they to be the french king subject it shall be keep in safety for they without diminish . but they will not consent thereunto : whereunto we reply , that unless they will consent thereunto we will hold they to be our enemy . they not consent , we send the boat well man to fetch their powder and munition from aboard their ship : but straight command our man not to touch any thing else in the ship upon their further peril : which they promise to perform . when they come aboard the say ship which be more together , they be resist by force of arm , but quick they get the victory : which do , they fall present to pillage of the bask , contrary to their promise : whereupon we send another to forbid they ; but when he come to they , none be more ready of pillage than he . whereupon i go my self , and take away from our man whatsoever they have pillage , and give it again to the owner : only i send aboard our own ship their powder 168 and munition to be keep in safety until we know far what they be . when i have do , i give the bask possession of their ship again and tell they they shall not loose the value of one penny if they be the french king subject . than i carry away all our man , and also take with i two or three of the chief of they , and when i come aboard go to examine of they , and by circumstance find one of the ship to belong to France : whereupon i tell the master of the say ship , that i be thorough satisfy that he be of France and so dismiss he in peace . of the other ship we have great presumption that she be of Spain , but have no certain proof thereof , wherefore we dismiss they likewise in peace . after i have thus dismiss they , our ship company fall into a mutiny , and more than half of they resolve to carry one of those ship away . but they be prevent of their evil purpose by aid which the say ship receive from their countryman in the other another har-harborough : for the next morning , which be then in twenty of June , very early there be gather it together out of all the ship in both harborough , at the least 200 Frenchman and Briton , who have plant upon the shore three piece of ordinance against we , and have prepare they self in all readiness to fight with we , which so soon as we have descry they give the onset upon we with at least a hundred small shot out of the wood . there be also in a readiness to assault we about three hundred savage . but after we have skirmish a skirmish while with they , we procure a parley by one of the man between the of saint Malo , who ship row hard by we : in which andus . parley they require some of our man to come on shore unto they : whereupon we request m. Ralph hill and the boatswain mate to go on shore to they : who when they have they detain as prisoner ; and then require the powder and munition , which we have of the bask in possession ; which we surrender unto they in safety as our intent always be , which do , there a new treason come aboard unto we one captain Charles , who be of the briton . 169 captain of the great ship of saint Malo , which ride in the other harbour : who challenge our great boat which we have at Farrillon to be he . and while we be in talk with he about the two bask which at first we think to be Spaniards , we have almost be betray . for the say captain Charles with half a dozen more of his company keep themselves aboard of our ship and hold we in a talk , while thirty or forty other shall have enter our ship unaware from one of the ship of saint Malo , which profess to be our friend , and unto who we show all courtesy . but our perceive their treacherous intent , threaten to set fire on the say ship , which be then thwart our hawse , from which they will have enter . by which resolution of we god do discourage they from effect their mischievous purpose . now the say captain Charles when he see himself prevent of his wicked intent , take his boat present to go on shore , and promise that all thing shall be end in peace between we , and that he will send we our two man again . but when he be on shore he present send for our great boat which he claim to be he , and withal command we out of the harbour ; but he send not our man as he promise , we be now the weak side do not only deliver his boat but also deter - [ three . 197. ] mine to be go and then request they to help we with our anchor which be on shore ; but they will not . than we desire they to cut the bent of the cable upon the anchor on shore ( for we dare not send our boat lest they shall have keep from we both our boat and man ) which they promise to do for we , as also to send our man ; but when they be on shore , they will do neither . we therefore see their falsehood in every thing , dare no long tarry for fear of far treachery ; wherefore we conclude to cut our cable in the hawse ; which we do , and so depart the harbour about 9 of the clock , leave two of our man with our cable and anchor , and 20 fathom of a new hawser behind we . and as we be go away , they make great show of friendship , 170 * 597-and drink unto we from the shore ; but more for fear then love , and request we to come on shore for our man , who than they deliver . the same morning in pass over the bar before the harborowe mouth , and ar °f by that time that we have all our man aboard , our ship come on ground upon the sand ; where we lay some 8 ' hour : during which time , at low water we trim our ship without board , and by the great providence of God find our leak which then we stop . about six of the clock at night we get our ship on float again , and that night anchor within part of the bar , which then because of the wind we can not pass . but it please God to send we fair weather all that night , and the next fnm day by noon we have get our ship clean over the bar . the 21 day after we get over the bar the wind arise at east and eastsoutheast , we blow right into the bay : which if it have come before we be clear of the bar , we have both ship and man perish in the sand . the same day , because the wind keep we within the bay , we go to the isle Blanch , where the ship of the other harbour isle Bland or have their stage : but it be at least two league from thewjllielse-their ship : where we hope by friendship to procure a shallope and assurance of our cable and anchor again . but when we have approach near the shore with our ship , and weave they with a white flag , they in stead of come unto we , send their message by a bullet out of a piece of great ordinance , which they have place on shore of purpose against we ; so that they will neither speak with we , nor permit we to come near they . thus we depart , and will have put to sea that night : but there be much wind at east , which keep we within the bay , and enforce we to come to a anchor under isle blanch . the next morning be the 22 , we put to sea , and about 12 of the clock the same day , the wind be at north-east and foul weather , the master say he can not ply up to Grande cost , because of the leeshore , and the wind . against we , and therefore ask what we shall do . i qa ? e Briton . ask then how far we have to the river of cape 171 Briton : he say a little way . then say i , if it be not far , we be best to go thither to trade with the savage while the wind be contrary , and to take in water and balist , which we want . to which the master say , that if i will he will carry we thither . i think it to be the best course , say i be content , so far forth as that from thence we take the first fair wind for grande cost . hereupon the master will he at the helm to keep his course southeast and southeast and by south . present after i ask he how many league we have to the say river , and from the say river to grande cost . he then say that we have 40 league to the river , and from the river to Grande cost 120 league . hereupon i say i will not consent to go so far out of our way , but will he to keep his direct course for Grande cost ; which he do . within one half hour afterward the 23 day the gunner and company of the ship present i and the master with a request in write to return for England or to go for the island of azore for a man of war , for they will not proceed on their voyage to Grande cost ; and therefore do what i can they turn the helm homeward . the their arrival 14 of June we send our boat on shore in a great bay in the hie of upon the jsje of cape Briton for water . the 25 we ape nton . arrjvej on west side of the isle of Menego , where we leave some cask on shore in a sandy bay , but can not tarry for foul weather . the 26 we cast anchor in another bay upon the main of cape Briton . the 27 about ten of the clock in the morning we meet with the chance - eight man of the Chancewell our consort in a shallope ; who tell we that their ship be cast away upon the within cape main of cape Briton , within a great bay eighteen Briton . league within the cape , and upon a rock within a mile of the shore , upon the 23 of this month about one of the clock in the afternoon : and that they have clear their ship from the rock : but be bilge and full of water , they present do run she up into a 172 sandy bay , where she be no soon come on ground , but present after there come aboard many shallop with store of french man , who rob and spoil all they can lay hand on , pillage the poor man even to their very shirt , and use they in savage manner : whereas they shall rather as Christians have aid they in that distress . which news when we hear , we bless God , who by his divine providence and unspeakable mercy have not only preserve all the man , but bring we thither so miraculous to aid and comfort they . so present we put into the road where the Chancewell lie ; where be also one ship of Sibiburo , who man that help to pillage the Chancewell be run away into the wood . but the master thereof which on they have deal very honest with our man stay in his ship , and come aboard of we : who we use well , not take j any thing from he that be he , but only such thing l as we can find of our own . and when we have dispatch our business , we give he one good cable , one old cable and a anchor , one shallop with mast , sail , and other furniture , and other thing which belong to the ship . in recompense whereof he give we two hogshead of sider , one barrel of pease , and 25 score of fish . the 29 betimes in the morning we depart from that road towards a great biskaine some 7 league off of 300 tun , who man deal most dogged with the chancewels company . the same night we anchor at the mouth of the harbour , where the biskain be . the 30 betimes in the morning we put into the harbour ; and approach near their stage , we see it uncover , and so suspect the ship to be go : whereupon we send our pinnace on shore with a dozen man , who when they come , find great store of fish on shore , but all the man be flee : neither can they perceive whether the ship shall be go , but as they think to sea . this day about twelve of the clock we take a savage boat which our man pursue : but all the savage run away into the 173 the savage of Cape briton come aboard of our ship . Cibo a harbour in the isle of Cape briton . new port. port ingle . the english voyage wood , and our man bring their boat on board . the same day in the afternoon we bring our ship to a anchor in the harbour : and the same day we take three hogshead and a half of train , and some 300 of green fish . also in the evening three of the savage , who boat we have , come unto we for their boat ; to who we give coat and knife , and restore they their boat again . the next day be the first of July , the rest of the savage come unto we , among who be their king , who name be Itarey , and their queen , to who also we give coat and knife , and other trifle . Theise Savages call the harbour Cibo . in this place be the great multitude of lobster that ever we hear of : for we catch at one hawle with a little draw net above 140. the four of July in the morning we depart from Cibo . and the five we cast anchor in a reasonable good harbour call new port under a island some eight league from Cibo , and within three league from the english port . at this place in pursue certain shallop of a ship of rochel , one of they come aboard , who tell we , that the biskainer who we seek , be in the english port with two biskainer more , and two ship of rochel . thereupon we send one of our man in the rocheller shallop to parley with the admiral and other our friend in the english port , request they aid for the recovery of our thing , which the other ship call the Santa maria of S. Vincent ( whereof be master Johannes de heart , and pilot Adam de lauandote ) have rob from the Chancewell . to which they answer , that if we will come in unto they in peace , they will assist we what they may . this answer we have the sixth day : and the seven in the fornoone we arrive in the english port , and cast anchor aloof from the other ship : which do , i go aboard the admiral , to desire the performance of his promise : who send for Johannes de heart , who be content to restore most of our thing again : whereupon i go aboard his ship to have 174 they restore . this day and the eight i spend in procure such thing as they have rob ; but yet in the end we want a great part thereof . than we be brief with they , and will they either to restore we the rest of our thing which they have , or else we will both enforce they to do it , and also have satisfaction for our victual and merchandise which by their mean be lose in the Chancewell . the nine in the morning we prepare our ship to go near unto they . whereupon their admiral send his boat aboard , and desire to speak with i : than i go aboard unto he , and desire to have our thing with peace and quietness , proffer to make he and the master of the two ship of rochel our umpire , and what they shall advise i will stand unto . hereupon he go aboard the other ship to make peace ; but they will hear no reason , neither yet condescend to restore any thing else which they have of we . than i desire that as i come in peace unto they , they will so set i aboard my ship again : which they deny to do , but most unjust detain i and Stephen van Herwicke who be with i . a while after our shallop come with four man to know how i do , and to fetch i aboard : but so soon as she come to the admiral ship side , his man enter , and take she away , detain our man also as prisoner with we . then present all the three biskainer make towards our ship , which be not careless to get the wind of they all : and have by the mercy of God obtain the same , she then stay for they : but when they see they have lose their advantage , they present turn their course , make as great haste in again as they do out before . afterwards i attempt twice to go aboard , but be still enforce back by the two other biskainer , who seek our life : so that in the end the master of the admiral be enforce to man his great boat to waft we : and yet notwithstanding they bend a piece of great ordinance at we : for we be to pass by they unto our ship : but 175 we rescue our shallop under our master great boat ; and by that mean pass in safety . the next morning be the ten of the month , we purpose if the wind have serve our turn , to have make they to [ three . 199. ] repent their evil deal , and to restore we our own again , or else to have sink their ship if we can . but the wind serve not our turn for that purpose ; they depart but carry we to sea : so that the same morning we to°ke our course towards the bay of saint Laurence in ‘ Newfoundland : where we hope to find a spanish ship , which as we have intelligence , do fish at that place . S. Peter the thirteenth day we have sight of saint Peter island . Islands . and the fourteen day be foggy and misty weather , while we make towards the land , we send our shallop before the ship to discover danger : but in the fog , through the man negligence which be in she , she lose we : yet we keep on our course , think that although we can not see they , yet they may see our ship : and coming into sixteen fathom water we cast anchor , suppose our self to be near the shore : and in the evening it please God to give we for the space of one quarter of a hour clear weather , by which we find our self to be imbay , and also have sight of our shallop , which be at the point of a land about one league from we . the same night we go further into the same bay , where we have very good ride . the fifteen we go on shore , and in that place find foot of dear , and before we return we kill one . the eighteenth we depart towards saint Laurence : the same evening we have sight of saint Laurence , and send off our boat in the night with our master and sixteen man to surprise the a spanish . Spaniard , which lie in little saint Laurence ; who pre - shlp take . sent upon the entrance of our man surrender up their ship and good . the nineteenth in the morning before day , the master of our ship with two more , and three Spaniard , take a boat and come forth to meet our ship , but be foggy , he cast anchor by the mouth of the harbour ( think in fair weather to put out to our ship , which through the current and foggy weather be put five or six league to leeward : and while they be at anchor in the boat they be surprise again by certain bask of saint John de Luz who be in great saint Laurence hard by . Theise bask with their force ( have receive intelligence by one of the Spaniard , who sleep on shore , escape unto they overland ) on the sudden surprise the say boat with our master and other : and then present make unto the ship ; but our man aboard defend they off . in the end they threaten that unless they will yield , they will kill m. Crafton and our other man before m. Crafton . their eye . so at last upon m. craftons entreaty and our man , to save their life , they yield up the ship again , upon condition , that they shall not injury any of our man , but shall let they all with their weapon peaceable depart : yet when our man have yield , they break their covenant , proffer they great violence , threaten to kill they , disarm they , strip their clothes from their back , and use they more like dog than man . after they have thus rob our man of their prize and weapon , they present tow the ship with their boat out of that harbour into great saint Laurence , where their own ship do ride , and within less than a hour after they have carry our prize away , our ship arrive in the bay : where after we have be a while at anchor , our shallop come aboard unto we , with most part of our sixteen man , who tell we the whole story before recite , as also that captain Laurence have carry away our master , and Stephen van Herwicke prisoner , and turn the rest of our man on shore in the wood , without either meat , drink , or almost any apparel . the 20 all our man come aboard , except the two prisoner : and the same day we take with our boat three of the Spaniard shallop , with five hogshead of train oil in each of they , and in one boat four Spaniard ; but the man of the other two shall lop flee on shore . the same day also we take vni 177 m the master of one of the ship which be in the harbour with three other of his man , who we detain prisoner to ransom m. Crafton and Stephen van Herwick . the 22 captain Laurence send they aboard , and we also release all our prisoner , except one Spaniard , who be boatswain of the spanish ship , who we keep with we : and the same day we set sail from thence . the 24 we have advice of our Spaniard of certain the harbour leaguer which be in the harbour of cape S. mary . °Marie § whereupon the same night , be within five or six ' league of the harbour , i send off our two shallop with thirty man to discover the harbour , and to surprise the enemy . the 25 in the morning we approach the harbour with our ship , and in the mouth thereof we espy three shallop , two whereof be we , and the three of a ship of rochel , which they have surprise with four man in she : who tell they that there be but two ship in the harbour , whereof one be of rochel , and the other of bell isle . and as we be discourse with the rocheller , we have sight of the ship : whereupon we send our boat aboard the rocheller to certify he that we be his friend , and to request he not to hinder our fight with the enemy . this message be send , we make all the haste we can unto the ship of bell isle , which first begin with we with three great shot , one whereof hit our maintopsaile , but both the other miss we . and we also send one unto they : then be approach near unto they ten or twelve of we go in a shallop to enter they , and we carry also a warp with we to make fast unto their ship , whereby our ship may the better come up to aid we . and when we board they in our boat , they [ three . 200. ] betake themselves to their close fight , play chief upon we with shot and pike out at two port , between which we enter very dangerous , escape near danger both by shot and pike . some of our man be wound , but no great harm be do . and i own piece in enter , be shoot out of my hand into 178 the sea ; which shoot also burst one side of the ladder , by which i enter . we have not long be aboard , but through the help of God we cause they to yield unto our mercy . there be of they in the ship above forty A briton ship man , most whereof we send aboard of our ship , there ial°°tunnes ’ to be keep in hold , with order to our chirurgeon to dress the wound man , one of which be wound unto death . that do , we have then time to view our prize , which we find of great defence , and a notable strong ship , almost two hundred tun in burden , very well appoint , and in all thing fit for a man of war . they have also fourteen or fifteen man more , which be then absent from the ship ; otherwise we shall have have the hot fight . the same day we get our sail to the yard , and our top mast on end , and rig the ship what we can . the 26 day we get some oil aboard , and there we tarry until the second of August , fit our self for the sea , and get fish aboard as weather serve we . during our abode there we divide our man , and appoint to each ship their company , my self and my friend be resolve to take our passage in the prize ; wherein when we be ship , and the company , there arise great enmity against we by the other ship , which afterward be quiet . the second day of August , have take in water and wood , we put to sea from that harbour in company of the Hopewell , with purpose to go direct to parlican , which be a harbour in the north part of Newfoundland , where we expect another prize . but when we come to sea we find our sail so old , our rope so rot , and our provision of bread and drink so short , as that we be constrain to make our resolution direct for England : whereupon we draw out our reason the four day of August , and send they aboard the Hopewell , to certify they the cause of our resolution for England : whereat they be general offend , think and say , that we in the prize go about to cousin and deceive they . to conclude , they send we 179 word that they will keep we company for England . but i have give William Crafton commission before to go for the island of the azore , and there to spend his victual for a man of war . the next day be the five of August , have a fair wind , we put off from the coast of Newfoundland , and keep our course direct for England , the Hopewell keep we company until midday , whenas have lose we in a fog , she shoot off two piece of ordinance , and we answer she with three : afterward we speak not with she , suppose that she go for the island . the 27 of August , draw near the coast of England , we sound and find ground at seventy fathom . some of the mariner think we be in Bristol channel , and other in silly channel : so that through variety of judgement , and evil marinership we be fain to dance the hay four day together , sometime run to the north-east , sometime to the southeast , then again to the east , and eastnortheast . thus do we spend fair wind , and lose our time until the last of August . and then it please God that we fall with the island of Lundy within the channel of Bristol ; from whence we shape our course : and after diverse danger , the three of September we meet with the Tramontane of the queen off of Dartmouth ; to the captain whereof we give certain thing that he have need of . the five of September i land on the outside of the isle of wight , and within few day after it please God to bring the ship in safety to London , where she be make prize as belong to the enemy of this land . 