the description of the west Indies in generail , but chief and particular of Florida . America unknown to all antiquity . hat part of the earth which at this day we call the four part of the world , or America , or rather the west India , be unknown unto our ancestor by reason of the great distance thereof . in like manner all the western island and fortunate isle be not discover but by those of our age . howbeit there have be some which have say that they be discover in the 448 time of Augustus Caesar , and that Virgil have make mention thereof in the sixth book of his TEneidos , when he say , there be a land beyond the star , and the course of the year and of the sun , where Atlas the porter of heaven sustain the pole upon [ three . 305. ] his shoulder : nevertheless it be easy to judge that he mean not to speak of this land , whereof no man be find to have write before his time , colon or counterfeit - lumbe . neither yet above a thousand year after . Christopher Christopher Colon do first light upon this land in the year 1592. and five year after Americus go thither by the Americus ves-commandement of the king of Castille , and give unto puciusofwhom it his own name , whereupon afterward it be call ' ’ ' America . this man be very well see in the art of navigation and in astronomic : whereby he discover in his time many land unknown unto the ancient geographer . this country be name by some , the land of bresill , and the land of parrot . it stretch it self , accord unto Postell , from the America take the name . thefirst generail part of America . Cabota in the year 1597 have discover .. - . — .. .. all this tract one pole to the other , save at the strait of Magelan , for the crown whereunto it reach 53. degree beyond the equator , of England . i will divide it for the better understanding into three principali part . that which be towards the pole arcticke on the north be call new France , because that in the year 1524. John Verrazzano a florentine be send by king Francis the first , and by madam the regent his mother unto these new region , where he go on land , and discover all the coast which be from the Tropic of Cancer , to wit , from the eight and twenty unto the fifty degree , and father unto the north . he plant in this country the ensign and arm of the king of France : so that the Spaniard themselves which be there afterward , have name this country terra Francesca . the same then extend itself in latitude from the 25. degree unto the 54. towards the north : and in longitude from 210. unto 330. the eastern part thereof be call by the late writer the land of Norumbega , which begin at the bay of Gama , viii 449 2 f the second general part of America . the three general part of America . viuegaignon . Florida with a ample description thereof . the english voyage which separate it from the isle of Canada , whither Jaques Carthier sail the year 1535 - about the which there be many hand , among which be that which be name terra de Labrador stretch toward Greenland . in the western part there be many know country , as the region of Quivira , Civola , Astatlan , and Terlichichimici . the southern part be call Florida , because it be discover on Palme-sunday , which the Spaniard call Pascha Florida . the northern part be altogether unknown . the second part of all America be call new Spain . it extend from the Tropic of Cancer in twenty three degree and a half , unto the nine degree . in the same be situate the city of Themistitan , and it have many region , and many island adjoin unto it , which be call the Antilles , whereof the most famous and renown be Hispaniola and Isabel , with a infinite number of other . all this land , together with the bay of Mexico , and all the hand aforesaid , have not in longitude past seventie degree , to wit , from the two hundred and forty , unto three hundred and ten : it be also long and narrow as Italy . the three part of America be call Peru , it be very great , and extend it self in latitude from the ten degree unto the three and fifty beyond the equator , to wit , as i have say before , unto the strait of Magelan . it be make in fashion like to a egg , and be very well know upon all side . the part where it be large have threescore degree , and from thence it wax narrow and narrow towards both the end . in one part of this land villegaignon plant right under the Tropic of Capricorn , and he call it France antarctic , because it draw towards the pole antarctic , as our France do towards the arctic . new France be almost as great as all our Europe . howbeit the most know and inhabit part thereof be Florida , whither many Frenchmen have make diverse voyage at sundry time , insomuch that now it be the 45° best know country which be in all this part of new France . the cape thereof be as it be a long head of land stretch out into the sea a hundred league , and run direct toward the south : it have right over against it five and twenty league distant the isle of Cuba otherwise call Isabel , towards the east the isle of Bahama and Lucaya , and towards the west the bay of Mexico . the country be flat , and divide with diverse river , and therefore moist , and be sandy towards the sea shore . there grow in those part great quantity of pinetree , which have no kernel in the the tree of apple which they bear . their wood be full of oak , Florida , Walnuttrees , black cherrietree , mulberry tree , lentisks , and chestnut tree , which be more wild than those in France . there be great store of cedar , cypress , bay , palm tree , holly , and wild vine , which climb up along the tree and bear good grape . there be there a kind of meddler , the fruit whereof be better these be per-then that of France , and big . there be also plumtree , which bear very fair fruit , but such as be not gavage call very good . there be raspass , and a little berry which Tunas . we call among we blue , which be very good to eat . there grow in that country a kind of root which they call in their language hasez , whereof in necessity they make bread . there be also there the tree call Esquine , which be very good against the pock and other contagious disease . the beast best know in this the beast of country be stag , hind , goat , deer , leopard , Tlonda . ounce , lusern , diverse sort of wolf , wild dog , [ three . 306. ] hare , cony , and a certain kind of beast that diflrer-eth little from the lion of Africa . the fowl be Thefouk oj turkeycock , partridge , parrot , pigeon , ringdove , Florida . turtle , blackbirde , crow , tarcel , falcon , lay nerd , herons , crane , stork , wild goose , malards , cormorant , hernshawe , white , red , black and grey , and a infinite sort of all wild foul . there be such abundance of crocodile , that oftentimes in swim man crocodile . be assail by they ; of serpent there be many sort . 451 the mountains of appalatcy . store of die and colour . the disposition and manor of the floridians . the wear of their hair . their exercise and pastime . run for game . shoot . play at the ball . the english voyage there be find among the savage good quantity of gold and silver , which be get out of the ship that be lose upon the coast , as i have understand by the savage themselves . they use traffic thereof one with another . and that which make i the rather believe it , be , that on the coast toward the cape , where common the ship be cast away , there be more store of silver then towards the north . nevertheless they say , that in the mountain of appalatcy there be mine of copper , which i think to be gold . there be also in this country great store of grain and herb , whereof may be make excellent good die and painting of all kind of colour .