a relation of the reverend father friar Marco [ he . 366. ] de Nifa , touch his discovery of the kingdom of Cevola or Cibola , situate about 30. degree of latitude , to the north of Nueva Espanna . Chap. 1. Frier Marco de ni ? a depart from saint Michael in the province of culiacan , stand in 24. degree of northerly latitude : and come to the town of Petatlan , receive many courtesy of the Indian there . depart from thence , he have information of many island , and of a great country inhabit with civil people ; he come to Vacupa : where during his abode , he hear news of Cevola , and of the state of the 7. city , and of other province , and of the rich island of pearl , which extent northward upon the coast . Frier Marco de ni ? a of the order of saint Francis , for the execution of the instruction of the right honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy and captain general for the emperor majesty in new Spain , depart from the town of saint Michael in the province of culiacan on Friday the 7. of march , in the year 1539 have for my companion Frier Honoratus , and carry with i Stephan a negro , belong to Andrew Dorantez , and certain of those Indian which the say lord viceroy have make free , and buy for this purpose : who Francis Vazquez de Coronado governor of Nueva Galicia deliver i , and with many other Indian of Petatlan , and of the town call Cuchillo , which be some 50. league from Petatlan , who come to the valley of culiacan , show themselves to bee exceed glad , because they be certify by the i2 the english voyage Indian which have be set free , who the say governor have send before to advertise they of their liberty , that none of they from thenceforth shall be make slave , and that no man shall invade they , nor use they bad ; signify unto they , that the emperor majesty have will and command that it shall be so . with the foresay company i go on my voyage until i come to the town of Petatlan , find all the way great entertainment , and provision of victual , with rose , flower , and other such thing , and bower which they make for i of chalk and bough plait together in all place where there be no house . in this town of Petatlan i rest 3. day , because my companion Honoratus fall so sick , that i be constrain to leave he there behind . then , accord to my say instruction , i follow my journey as the holy ghost do lead i , without any merit of i , have in my company the say Stephan the negro of Dorantez , and certain of the Indian which have be set at liberty , and many of the people of the country , which give i great entertainment and welcome in all place where i come , and make i bower of tree , give i such victual as they have , although they be but small : because ( as they say ) it have not rain there in 3 year , and because the Indian of this country seek mean rather to hide themselves , than to sow corn , for fear of the Christians of the town of S. Michael , which be wont to make inroad even to that place , and to war upon they , and to carry they away captive . in all this way , which may be about 25. or 30. league from that part of Petatlan , i see nothing worthy the note , save that there come to seek i certain Indian from the island , where Fernando Cortes the mark of the valley have be , of who i be inform , that it be a island , and not firm land , as some suppose it to be . they come to you firm land upon certain raft of wood : and from the main to the island be but half a league by sea , little more or less . likewise cer-126 take Indian of another island great than this come a greatisland , to visit i , which island be far off , of who i be inform that there be 30. other small island , which be inhabit , but have small store of victual , save 2. new island of which have Maiz or corn of the country . Theise in - California dian have about their neck many great shell which be rtchmpearle . mother of pearl . i show they pearl which i carry with i for a show , and they tell i that there be in the island great store of they , and those very great : howbeit i see none of they . i follow my voyage through a desert of 4. day journey , have in my company both the Indian of the island , and those of the mountain which i have pass , and at the end of this desert i find other Indian which marvel to see i , because they have no knowledge of any Christians , have no traffic nor conversation with those Indian which i have pass , in regard of the great desert which be worse desert fiure between they . Theise Indian entertain i exceed daiesj°urne^-courteously , and give i great store of victual , and seek to touch my garment , and call i Hayota , which in their language signify a man come from heaven . Theise Indian i advertise by my interpreter , accord to my instruction , in the knowledge of our lord God in heaven , and of the emperor . in these country and in all place else by all way and mean possible , i seek in - [ he . 367. ] formation where any country be of moor city and people of civility and understanding , than those which i have find : and i can hear no news of any such : howbeit they tell i , that four or five day journey within the country , at the foot of the mountain , there be a large and mighty plain , wherein they tell i , ™ s be the that there be many great town , and people clad in Cotton : and when i show they certain metal which i ' carry with i , to learn what rich metal be in the land , they take the minerali of gold and tell i , that thereof be vessel among the people of that plain , and that they carry certain round green stone hang at their nostril , and at their ear , 127 Vacupa a town 40. league from the bay of California . the english voyage and that they have certain thin plate of that gold , wherewith they scrape off their sweat , and that the wall of their temple be cover therewith , and that they use it in all their household vessel . and because this valley be distant from the sea-coast , and my instruction be not to leave the coast , i determine to leave the discovery thereof until my return ; at which time i may do it more commodious . thus i travel three day journey through town inhabit by the say people , of who i be receive as i be of those which i have pass , and come unto a town of reasonable bigness , call Vacupa , where they show i great courtesy , and give i great store of good victual , because the soil be very fruitful , and may be water . this town be forty league distant from the sea and because i be so far from the sea , it be two day before passion Sunday , i determine to stay there until easter , to inform my self of the island , whereof i say before that i have information . and so i send certain Indian to the sea by three several way , who i command to bring i some Indian of the seacoast and of some of those island , that i may receive information of they : and i send Stephan Dorantez the negro another way , who i command to go direct northward fifty or threescore league , to see if by that way he may learn any news of any notable thing which we seek to discover , and i agree with he , that if he find any knowledge of any people and rich country which be of great importance , that he shall go no further , but shall return in person , or shall send i certain Indian with that token which we be agree upon , to wit , that if it be but a mean thing , he shall send i a white cross of one handful long ; and if it be any great matter , one of two handful long ; and if it be a country great and better than Nueva Espanna , he shall send i a great cross . So the 12 say Stephan depart from i on Passion-sunday after dinner : and within four day after the messenger of Stephan return unto i with a great cross as high as a man , and they bring i word from Stephan , that i shall forthwith come away after he , for he have find people which give he information of a very mighty province , and that he have certain Indian in his company , which have be in the say province , and that he have send i one of the say Indian . this Indian tell i , that it be thirty day fr°m Vacupa journey from the town where Stephan be , unto the ayes^6 first city of the say province , which be call Cevola . jOumey . he affirm also that there be seven great city in this province , all under one lord , the house whereof be make of lime and stone , and be very great , and the least of they with one loft above head , and some of two and of three loft , and the house of the lord of the province of four , and that all of they join one unto the other in good order , and that in the gate of the principali house there be many turques-stone cunning wrought , whereof he say they have there great plenty : also that the people of this city go very well apparel : and that beyond this there be other province , all which ( he say ) be much great than these seven city . i give credit to his speech , because i find he to be a man of good understanding : but i defer my departure to follow Stephan Dorantes , both because i think he will stay for i , and also to attend the return of my messenger which i have send unto the sea , who return unto i upon easter day , bring with they certain inhabitant of the sea-coast , and of two of the island . of who i understand , that the island above mention be scarce of victual , as i have learn before , and that they be inhabit by people , which be greatpearles shell of pearl upon their forehead , and they say that tmd much gold they have great pearl , and much gold . they in - isk °f form i of four and thirty island , lie one near ichare’^ unto another : they say that the people on the sea-coast in number . ix 129 1 have small store of victual , as also those of the island , and that they traffic one with the other upon raft . this coast stretch northward as be to be see . Theise Indian of the coast bring i certain target make of cow-hydes very well dress , which be so large , that they cover they from the head to the very foot , with a hole in the top of the same to look out before : they be so strong , that a crossbow ( as i suppose ) will not pierce they . [ Iii . 368. ] Chap. 2. he have new information of the seven city by certain Indian call pintado , and of three other kingdom call Marata , Acus , and Totonteac , be country very rich in turquese and hide of cattle . follow his voyage through those country , he take possession thereof for the emperor majesty , and of the Indian be much honour and serve with victual . the same day come three Indian of those which i call pintado , because i see their face , breast and arm paint . Theise dwell far up into the country towards the east , and some of they border upon the seven city , which say they come to see i , because they have hear of i : and among other thing , they give i information of the seven city , and of the other province , which the Indian that Stephan send i have tell i of , almost in the very same manner that Stephan have send i word ; and so i send back the people of the sea-coast : and two Indian of the island say they will go with i seven or eight day . so with these and with the three pintado above mention , i depart from Vacupa upon Easter Tuesday , the same way that Stephan go , from who i receive new messenger with a cross of the bigness of the first which he send i : which hasten i forward , 13° and assure i that the land which i seek for , be the great and best country in all those part . the say messenger tell i particular without fail in any one point , all that which the first messenger have tell i , and much more , and give i more plain information thereof . so i travel that day be easter Tuesday , and two day more , the very same way that Stephan have go : at the end of which 3 day they tell i , that from that place a man may travel in thirty day to the city of Cevola , which be the first of the seven . neither do one only tell i thus much , but very many ; who tell i very particular of the greatness of the house , and of the fashion of they , as the first messenger have inform i . also they tell i , that beside these seven city , there be 3. other kingdom which be call Marata , Acus , and Totonteac . i inquire of they wherefore they travel so far from their house ? they say that they go for Turqueses , and hide of cow , and other thing ; and that of all these there be great abundance in this country . likewise i inquire how , and by what mean they obtain these thing ? they tell i , by their service , and by the sweat of their brow , and that they go unto the first city of the province which be call Cevola , and that they serve they in till their ground , and in other business , and that they give they hide of ox , which they have in those place , and turquese for their service , and that the people of this city wear very fine and excellent turquese hang at their ear and at their nostril . they say also , that of these turquese they make fine work upon the principali gate of the house of this city . they tell i , that the apparel which the inhabitant of Cevola wear , be a gown of cotton down to the foot , with a button at the neck , and a long string hang down at the same , and that the sleeve of these gown be as broad beneath as above . they say , they gird themselves with girdle of turquese , and that over these 131 the english voyage coat some be good apparel , other hide of cow very well dress , which they take to be the best apparel of that country , whereof they have there great quantity . likewise the woman go apparel , and cover down to the foot . Theise Indian give i very good entertainment , and curious inquire the day of my departure from Vacupa , that at my return they may provide i of food and lodging . they bring certain sick folk before i , that i may heal they , and seek to touch my apparel , and give i certain cow-hydes so well trim and dress , that by they a man may conjecture that they be wrought by civil people , and all of they affirm , ithat they come from Cevola . the next day i follow my journey , and carry with i the pintado , i come to another village where i be well receive by the people of the same : who likewise seek to touch my garment , and give i as particular knowledge of the land aforesaid , as i have receive of those which meet i before : and also tell i , that from that place certain people be go with Stephan Dorantez four or five day journey . and here i find a great cross , which Stephan have leave i for a sign , that the news of the good country increase , and leave word , that with all haste they shall send i away , and that he will stay for i at the end of the first desert that he meet with . here i set up two cross , and take possession accord to my instruction , because that the country seem better unto i then that which i have pass , and that i think it meet to make a act of possession as far as that place . in this manner i travail five day , always find inhabit place with great hospitality and entertainment , and many turquese , and ox-hides , and the like report concern the country . here i understand , that after two day journey i shall find a desert where there be no food ; but that there be certain go before to 132 build i lodging , and to carry food for i : whereupon i hasten my way , hope to find Stephan at the end thereof , because in that place he have leave word that he will stay for i . before i come to the desert , i meet with a very pleasant town , by a pleasant reason of great store of water convey thither to water the same . here 1 meet with many people both man and woman clothe in cotton , and some cover with oxe-hydes , which general they take for better apparel than that of cotton . all the people of this village go in caconado , that be to say , with Turqueses hang at their nostril and ear : which turquese they call Cacona . among other , the lord of this village come unto i , and two of his brethren very well apparel in cotton , who also be in caconado , each of they have his collar of turquese about his neck : and they present unto i many wild beast , as cony , quail , Maiz , nut of pine tree , and all in great abundance , and ofier i many turquese , and dress oxe-hydes , and very fair vessel to drink in , and other thing : whereof i will receive no whit . and have my garment of grey cloth , which in Spain be call farago^a , the lord of this village , and the other Indian touch my gown with their hand , and tell i , that of such cloth there be great store in Totonteac , and that the store of woolpeople of that country wear the same . whereat i clot^and laugh , and say that it be nothing else but such fofgnteac 0 apparel of cotton as they wear . and they reply : we will have thou think that we understand , that that apparel which thou wear , and that which we wear be of diverse sort . understand thou , that in Cevola all the house be full of that apparel which we wear , but in Totonteac there be certain little beast , from who they take that thing wherewith such apparel as thou wear , be make . i pray they to inform i more plain of this matter . and they tell i that the say beast be about the bigness of the two 133 collar ofturquese two or three time double . the english voyage branch or spaniel which Stephan carry with he , and they say that there be great store of that cattle in Totonteac . Chap. 3. he enter into a desert , and the Indian suffer he to want nothing necessary . follow his voyage , he come into a fertile valley , and have certain knowledge give he ( as he have before ) of the state of Cevola and of Totonteac ; and that the coast of the sea in 35. degree trend much to the westward : and also of the kingdom of Marata and Acus . the next day i enter into the desert , and where i be to dine , i find bower make , and victual in abundance by a river side : and at night i find bower and victual in like sort , and after that manner i find for 4. day travel : all which time the wilderness continue . at the end of these four day , i enter into a valley very well inhabit with people . at the first village there meet i many man and woman with victual , and all of they have turquese hang at their nostril and ear , and some have collar of turquese like those which the lord of the village before i come to the desert , and his two brethren wear : save that they wear they but single about their neck , and these people wear they three or four time double , and go in good apparel , and skin of ox : and the woman wear of the say turquese at their nostril and ear , and very good waistcoat and other garment . here there be as great knowledge of Cevola , as in Nueva Espanna of temis-titan , and in Peru of Cuzco : and they tell we particular the manner of their house , lodging , street and marketplace , as man that have be oftentimes there , and as those which be furnish from thence with thing necessary for the service of their household , as those also have do , which i already have pass . i tell they it be impossible that the house shall be 134 make in such sort as they inform i , and they for my better understanding take earth or ash , and pour water thereupon , and show i how they lay stone upon it , and how the building grow up , as they continue lay stone thereon , until it mount aloft . i ask they whether the man of that country have wing to mount up unto those loft : whereat they laugh , and show i a ladder in as good sort as i my self be able to describe it . than they take a staff and hold it over their head , and say that the loft be so high one above another . likewise here i have information of the woollen cloth [ three . 370. ] of Totonteac , where they say be house like those of Cevola , and better and more in number , and that it be a great province , and have no governor . here i understand that the coast of the sea trended much towards the west : for unto the entrance of this first desert which i pass , the coast still stretch northward : and because the trending of the coast be a thtsgradu-thing of great importance , i be desirous to know and see it : and i see plain , that in 35. degree the e^e^ees'at coast stretch to the west , whereat i rejoice no the least . less , then of the good news within land , and so i return back to proceed on my journey . through the foresay valley i travail five day journey , which be inhabit with goodly people , and so abound with victual , that it suffice to feed above three thousand horseman : it be all well water and like a garden : the burroughs and town be half and a quarter of a league long , and in all these village , i find very ample report of Cevola , whereof they make such particular relation unto i , as people which go yearly thither to earn their live . here i find a man bear in Cevola , who tell i that he come thither , have escape from the governor or lieutenant of the town ; for the lord of these seven city live and abide in one of those town call Ahacus , and in the rest he appoint lieutenant Ahacus . 135 the english voyage under he . this townsman of Cevola be a white man of a good complexion , somewhat well in year , and of far great capacity than the inhabitant of this valley , or then those which i have leave behind i . he say that he will go with i , that i may beg his pardon : and of he i learn many particular : he tell i that Cevola be a great city , inhabit with great store of people , and have many street and marketplace : and that in some part of this city there be certain very great house of five story high , wherein the chief of the city assemble themselves at certain day of the year . he say that the house be of lime and stone , accord as other have tell i before , and that the gate , and small pillar of the principali house be of Turqueses , and all the vessel wherein they be serve , and the other ornament of their house be of gold : and that the other six city be build like unto this , whereof some be big : and that Ahacus be the chief of they . he say that towards the southeast there be a kingdom call Marata , and that there be wont to be many , and those great city , which be all build of house of stone , with diverse loft ; and that these have and do wage war with the lord of the seven city , through which war this kingdom of Marata be for the most part waste , although it yet continue and maintain war against the other . likewise he say , that the kingdom call Totanteac lie towards the west , which he say be a very mighty province , replenish with infinite store of people and riches : and that in the say kingdom they be woollen cloth like that which i wear , and other fine sort of woollen cloth make of the fleece of those beast which they describe before unto i : and that they be a very civil people . Moreover he tell i , that there be another great province and kingdom call Acus ; for there be Acus , and Ahacus with a aspiration , which be the principali of the seven city : and Acus without a aspiration be a kingdom and province of it self . he tell i 136 also , that the apparel which they wear in Cevola be after the same manner as they before have certify i , and that all the inhabitant of the city lie upon bed raise a good height from the ground , with quilt and canopy over they , which cover the say bed : and he tell i that he will go with i to Cevola and far also , if i will take he with i . the like relation be give unto i in this town by many other , but not so particular . i travel three day journey through this valley : the inhabitant whereof make i exceed great cheer and entertainment . in this valley i see above a thousand ox-hides most excellent trim and dress . and here also i see far great store of turquese and chain make thereof , then in all place which i have pass ; and they say , that all come from the city of Cevola , whereof they have great knowledge , as also of the kingdom of Marata , and of the kingdom of Acus and Totonteac . Chap. 4. of a very great beast with one horn upon his forehead ; and of the courtesy which the Indian show Frier Marcus of Niga , in his voyage . also how cruel Stephan Dorantez and his companion be use upon their arrival at Cevola , by the lord thereof . here they show i a hide half as big again mlghtie as the hide of a great ox , and tell i that it be the skin of a beast which have but one horn upon ' he forehead , 8c that this horn bend towards he [ three . 371. ] breast , and that out of the same go a point right forward , wherein he have so great strength , that it will break any thing how strong so ever it be , if he run against it , and that there be great store of these beast in that country . the colour of the hide be of the colour of a great goatskin , and the hair be a finger thick . here i have messenger from Stephan which bring i word , that by this time he be come to 137 the far part of the desert , and that he be very joyful , because the far he go , the more perfect knowledge he have of the greatness of the country , and send i word , that since his departure from i , he never have find the Indian in any lie ; for even unto that very place he have find all in such manner as they have inform he , and hope that he shall find the like at his arrival in the valley which he be go unto , as he have find in the village before pass . i set up cross , and use those act and ceremony , which be to be do according to my instruction . the inhabitant request i to stay here three or four day , because that from this place there be four day journey unto the desert , and from the first entrance into the same desert unto the fifteen dale city of Cevola be 15 great day journey more ; also that they will provide victual for i and other the end of they . i r . r t .... , , desert to necessary for that voyage . likewise they tell i , Cevola or that with Stephan the negro be go above 300 Clvola . man to bear he company , and to carry victual after he , and that in like sort many of they will go with i to serve i , because they hope to return home rich . i thank they , and will they to set thing in order with speed , and so i rest there three day , wherein i always inform my self of Cevola , and of as many other thing as i can learn , and call many Indian unto i , and examine they several , and all of they agree in one tale , and tell i of the great multitude of people , and of the order of the street , of the greatness of the house , and of the strength of the gate , agree altogether with that which the rest before have tell i . after three day many assemble themselves to go with i , 30 of the principal of who i take , be very well apparel , and with chain of turquese , which some of they wear five or six time double , and other people to carry thing necessary for they and i , and so set forward on my voyage . 138 thus i enter into the second desert on the 9 of may , the second de-and travel the first day by a very broad and beat way , and we come to dinner unto a water , where the Indian have make provision for i : and at night we come to another water , where i find a house which they have full make up for i , and another house stand mad where Stephan lodge when he pass that way , and many old cottage and many sign of fire which the people have make that travel to Cevola by this way . in this sort i travel 12 day journey be always well provide of twelve day victual , of wild beast , hare , and partridge of the doarney-same colour and taste with those of Spain although they be not so big , for they be somewhat less . here meet we a Indian the son of one of the chief man that accompany i , which have go before with Stephan , who come in a great fright , have his face and body all cover with sweat , and show exceed sadness in his countenance ; and he tell i that a day journey before Stephan come to Cevola he send his great mace make of a gourd by his messenger , as he be always wont to send they before he , that he may know in what sort he come unto they , which gourd have a string of bell upon it , and two feather one white and another red , in token that he demand safe conduct , and that he come peaceable . and when they come to Cevola before the magistrate , which the lord of the ci tie have place there for his lieutenant , they deliver he the say great gourd , who take the same in his hand , and after he have spy the bell , in a great rage and fury he cast it to the ground , and will the messenger to get they pack with speed , for he know well enough what people they be , and that they shall will they in no case to enter into the city , for if they do he will put they all to death . the messenger return and tell Stephan how thing have pass , who answer they , that it make no great matter , and will needs proceed on his voyage till he come to 139 the city of Cevola : where he find man that will not let he enter into the town , but shut he into a great house which stand without the city , and straightway take all thing from he which he carry to truck and barter with they , and certain turquese , and other thing which he have receive of the Indian by the way , and they keep he there all that night without give he meat or drink , and the next day in the morning this Indian be a thirst , and go out of the house to drink at a river that be near at hand , and within a little while after he see Stephan run away , and the people follow he , and slay certain of the Indian which go in his company . and when this Indian see these thing , he hide himself on the bank of the river , and afterward cross the high way of the desert . the Indian that go with i hear these news begin incontinent to lament , and i think these heavy and bad news will cost i my life , neither do i fear so much the loss of my own life , as that i shall not be able to return [ three . 372. ] to give information of the greatness of that country , where our lord God may be glorify : and straightway i cut the cord of my budget which i carry with i full of merchandise for traffic , which i will not do till then , nor give any thing to any man , and begin to divide all that i carry with i among the principali man , will they not to be afraid , but to go forward with i , and so they do . And go on our way , within a day journey of Cevola we meet two other Indian of those which go with Stephan , which be bloody and wound in many place : and assoon as they come to we , they which be with i begin to make great lamentation . Theise wound Indian i ask for Stephan , and they agree in all point with the first Indian say , that after they have put he into the foresay great house without give he meat or drink all that day and all that night , they take from Stephan all the thing which he carry with he . the next day when 140 the sun be a lance high , Stephan go out of the house , and some of the chief man with he , and sudden come store of people from the city , who assoon as he see he begin to run away and we likewise , and forthwith they shoot at we and wound we , and certain dead man fall upon we , and so we lay till night and dare not stir , and we hear great rumour in the city , and see many man and woman keep watch and ward upon the wall thereof , and after this we can not see Stephan any more , and we think they have shoot he to death , as they have do all the rest which go with he , so that none be escape but we only . Chap. 5. the situation and greatness of the city of Cevola , and how friar Marcus take possession thereof and of other province , call the same . the new kingdom of saint Francis , and how after his departure from thence be preserve by God in so dangerous a voyage , he arrive at Compostella in Nueva Galicia . have consider the former report of the Indian , and the evil mean which i have to prosecute my voyage as i desire , i think it not good wilful to loose my life as Stephan do : and so i tell they , that God will punish those of Cevola , and that the viceroy when he shall understand what have happen , will send many Christians to chastise they : but they will not believe i , for they say that no man be able to withstand the power of Cevola . and herewithal i leave they , and go aside two or three stone cast , and when i return i find a Indian of i which i have bring from Mexico call Marcus , who weep and say unto i : father , these man have consult to kill we , for they say , that through your and Stephans mean their father be slay , and that neither man nor woman of they shall remain unslain . 141 A.D. 1539 - then again i divide among they certain other thing which i have , to appease they , whereupon they be somewhat pacify , albeit they still show great grief for the people which be slay . i request some of they to go to Cevola , to see if any other Indian be escape , with intent that they may learn some news of Stephan ; which i can not obtain at their hand . when i see this , i say unto they , that i purpose to see the city of Cevola , whatsoever come of it . they say that none of they will go with i . at the last when they see i resolute , two of the chief of they say they will go with i ; with who and with my Indian and interpreter i follow my way , till i come within sight of Cevola , which be situate on a plain at the foot of a round hill , and make show to be a fair city , and be better seat than any that i have see in these part . the house be build in order , accord as the Indian tell i , all make of stone with diverse story , and flat roof , as far as i can discern from a mountain , whither i ascend to view the city . the people be somewhat white , they wear apparel , and lie in bed , their weapon be bow , they have emrald and other jewel , although they esteem none so much as turquese , wherewith they adorn the wall of the porch of their house , and their apparel and vessel , and they use they in stead of money through all the country . their apparel be of cotton and of ox hide , and this be their most commendable and honourable apparel . they use vessel of gold and silver , for they have no other mettle , whereof there be great use and more abundance than in Peru , and they buy the most rich same for turquese in the province of the pintado , where ” and der^n t^iere be say to mine °f great abundance . of other the province of kingdom i can not obtain so particular instruction . the pintado . diverse time i be tempt to go thither , because i know i can but hazard my life , and that i have offer unto God the first day that i begin my journey : in the end i begin to be afraid , consider in what danger i 142 shall put my self , and that if i shall dye , the knowledge of this country shall be lose , which in my judgement be the great and the best that hitherto have be discover : and when i tell the chief man , what a goodly city Cevola seem unto i , they answer i [ three . 373. ] that it be the least of the seven city , and that Toton - Totonteac the teac be the great and best of they all , because it have so many house and people , that there be no end of they . pnv-tnce . have see the disposition and situation of the place , i think good to name that country el Nuevo reyno de san Francisco : in which place i make a great heap of stone by the help of the Indian , and on the top thereof i set up a small slender cross because i want mean to make a great , and say that i set up that cross and heap in the name of the most honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa viceroy and captain general of Nueva Espanna , for the emperor our lord , in token of possession , accord to my instruction . which possession i say that i take in that place of all the seven city , 8c of the kingdom of Totonteac , of Acus , and of Marata . thus i return with much more fear than victual , he retume . and go until i find the people which i have leave behind i , with all the speed that i can make , who i overtake in two day travel , and go in their company till i have pass the desert , where i be a desert . not make so much of as before : for both man and woman make great lamentation for the people which be slay at Cevola , and with fear i hasten from the people of this valley , and travel ten league a valley . the first day , and so i go daily eight or ten league , without stay until i have pass the second desert . a second and though i be in fear , yet i determine to go to desert . the great plain , whereof i say before , that i have information , be situate at the foot of the mountain , and in that place i understand , that this plain be inhabit for many day journey towards the east , but i dare not enter into it , consider , that if hereafter ! 43 we shall inhabit this other country of the seven city , and the kingdom before mention , that then i may better discover the same , without put my self in hazard , and leave it for this time , that i may give relation of the thing which i have now see . at the entrance of this plain 1 see but seven town only of a reasonable bigness , which be a far off in a low valley be very green and a most fruitful soil , out of which run many river . i be inform that there be much gold in this valley , and that the inhabitant work it into vessel and thin plate , wherewith they strike and take off their sweat , and that they be people that will not suffer those of the other side of the plain to traffic with they , and they can not tell i the cause thereof . here i set up two cross , and take possession of the plain and valley in like sort and order , as i do at other place before mention . and from thence i return on my voyage with as much haste as 1 can make , until i come to the city of saint Michael in the province of culiacan , think there to have find Francis Vazquez de Coronado governor of Nueva Galicia , and find he not there , i proceed on my journey Compostella in till i come to the city of Compostella , where i find 21. degree of i wr | te not here many other particularity , because latitude . , .. , . r t i i they be impertinent to this matter : 1 only report that which i have see , and which be tell i concern the country through which i travel , and of those which i have information of . 