another testimony take out of the 60 chapter of the foresay history of Ferdinando Columbus , concern the offer that Bartholomew colombus make to king Henry the seven on the behalf of his brother Christopher . ornato adunque 1 ’ ammiraglio dallo scoprimento di Cuba and the Giamaica , trond nella Spagnuola Bartolomeo Colon suo fratello , quello , che era gia andato a trattare accordo col re d ’ inghilterra sopra lo scoprimento dell Indie , come di sopra habiam detto . questo poi , ritornando see verso Castiglia con capitoli conceduti , haveva inteso a Parigi dal re Carlo di Francia 1 ’ ammiraglio suo fratello haver gia scoperte encage ’ Indie : per che gli sovenne per poter far il Viaggio di cento scudi . et , Avenga che per cotal nuova egli si fosse molto affrettato , per arrivar baptize ’ ammiraglio in Spagna , quando non dimeno giunse a siviglia , egli era gia tornato all Indie continue ’ 17 navigii . Perche , per asseguir quanto ei gli havea lasciato , di subito all principio dell ’ anno del 1494 sen ’ ando a i re Catholici , menando seco don Diego Colon , mio fratello , and i ancora , accioche servissimo di paggi all serenissimo principe don Giovanni , il qual viva in gloria , si come havea commandato la catholica Reina donna Isabel , che alhora era in Vagliadolid . tosto adunque i noi giungemmo , i re chiamarono don Bartolomeo , and mandaronlo alia Spagnuola contre navi , etc the same in english . CHristopher Columbus the admiral be return from the discovery of Cuba and Jamayca , find in Hispaniola his brother Bartholomew Columbus , who before have be send to entreat of a agreement with the king of England for the discovery of the Indies , as we 139 [ three . 4 . } have say before . This Bartholomew therefore return unto Castille , with the capitulation grant by the king of England to his brother , understand at Paris by Charles the king of France , that the admiral his brother have already perform that discovery : whereupon the french king give unto the say Bartholomew a hundred french crown to bear his charge into Spain . and albeit he make great haste upon this good news to meet with the admiral in Spain , yet at his come to Sivil his brother be already return to the Indies with seventeen sail of ship . wherefore to fulfil that which he have leave he in charge in the begin of the year 1494 he repair to the catholic prince , take with he Diego Colon my brother and i also , which be to be prefer as page to the most excellent prince don John , who now be with God , accord to the commandment of the catholic queen lady Isabella , which be then in Validolid . assoon therefore as we come to the court , the prince call for don Bartholomew , and send he to Hispaniola with three ship , etc