the whole number of the enterpriser . also , that all trade of merchandise which shall be use to and from those part , which by this discovery shall be find out , shall appertain only to the adventurer which first shall disburse their money for this discovery , with prohibition to all other her majesty subject , and other merchant to deal in the say part , 148 without the consent of the first adventurer , upon loss of ship and good , and punishment of their person , that so shall adventure in trade of merchandise : or otherwise by imprisonment at the company pleasure . that no person shall hereafter adventure in this discovery as adventurer for the profit mention in the first article , but such only as do disburse their money in this first preparation : and they shall not adventure hereafter any great sum , then ratable accord to their proportion of this their first adventure . also , the profit which by this discovery shall be attain unto , either by land which may be conquer , or otherwise get : as also such profit which by this discovery shall be obtain by mine , or otherwise get , that each one shall have his part rate and rate like , accord to the proportion of their first adventure , and not otherwise . the adventurer in this first preparation shall , at their own free will and liberty , choose whether they will supply hereafter any further charge or not : if there do fall out any such occasion to require the same . and yet withal shall for ever hold to they the freedom of the trade which shall grow in any of these part : notwithstanding their say refusal to bear any further charge . that in the patent which be to be obtain , be grant , that all her majesty subject may transport themselves thither that shall be content to go . and that the Patentee or his assign may ship thither from time to time , so many and such person , man , woman , and child , as they shall think meet . and the same person to inhabit or remain there at their pleasure , any law to the contrary notwithstanding , with express prohibition , as be mention in the three article , against all other , which shall go thither without the licence of the patentee or his assign first obtain . that it shall not be lawful for any of her majesty subject , or any other to inhabit or traffic within 149 A . D . 1583 . [ Iii . 189 . i one hundred league any way of the place , where the general shall have settle his chief being or residence . IJ9I . the fieete of Canada . Cape raze . the isle of S . Peter . Cape de Rey . the isle of aponas .