home . here our man take certain sea - oxen , but nothing such number as they may have have , if they have come in due season , which they have neglect . the ship call the marigold fall with cape saint Francis in Newfoundland the eleven of Julie , and from thence we go into the bay Rogneuse , and afterward double cape Razo , and sail towards the strait of saint Peter ( which be the entrance between Newfoundland and Cape briton , ) be unacquainted with the place , beat up and down a very long time , and yet miss it , and at length over shot it , and fall with cape Briton . the english here diverse of our man go on land upon the very man land upon Qapej where , at their arrival they find the spit of ape rtton . Savages which have roast meat a little before . and as they view the country they see diverse beast and fowl , as black fox , deer , otter , great fowl with red leg , pengwyn , and certain other . but have find no people here at this our first land we go again on shipboorde , and sail far four league to the west of Cape briton , where we see they go on many seal . and here have need of fresh water tn “ n we go again on shore . And pass somewhat more ? ' into the land , we find certain round pond artificial make by the savage to keep fish in , with certain wear in they make to take fish . to these pond we repair to fill our cask with water . we have not be 158 long here , but there come one savage with black long the people of hair hang about his shoulder who call unto we , tfie trey weave his hand downward towards his belhe , use our man these word , calitogh calitogh : as we draw towards he one of our man musket unaware shoot off : whereupon he fall down , and rise up sudden again he cry thrice with a loud voice Chiogh , chiogh , chiogh . thereupon nine or ten of his fellow run right up over the bush with great agility and swiftness come towards we with white staff in their hand like half pike , and their dog of colour black not so big black dog . as a greyhound follow they at the heal ; but we retire unto our boat without any