hurt at all receive . howbeit one of they break a hogshead which we have fill with fresh water , with a great branch of a tree which lie on the ground . upon which occasion we bestow half a dozen musket shoot upon they , which they avoid by fall flat to the earth , and afterward retire themselves to the wood . one of the savage , which seem to be their captain , wear a long mantle of beast skin hang on one of his shoulder . the rest be all naked except their privity , which be cover with a skin tie behind . after they have escape our shot they make a great fire on the shore , belike to give their fellow warn of we . the kind of tree that we note to be here , be goodly oak , fir tree of a great height , a kind of tree call of we quickbeame , and cherry tree , and diverse other kind to we unknown , because we stay not long with diligence to observe they : and there be great show of rosin , pitch , and tarre . we find in both the place where we go on land abundance of raspese , strawberry , hurt , and herb of good smell , and diverse good for the skurvie , and grass very rank and of great length . we see five or six boat sail to the southwestwardes of Cape briton , which we judge to be Christians , which have some trade that way . we see also , while we be on shore , the manner of their * 59 a secret trade to the southwest of Cape briton . a . d . the english voyage J593 ’ .. hang up of their fish and flesh with withe to dry in the air : they also lie they upon raft and hurdle and make a smoke under they , or a soft fire , and so dry they as the savage use to do in Virginia . sounding to while we lie four league south of Cape briton southwest we sound and have sixty fathom black ozy ground . ward of cape sail thence westward nine or ten league off Briton . the shore , we have twenty four fathom red sand , and [ three . 193 . ] small whitish stone . we continue our course so far to the southwest , that we bring our self into they they sail 50 latitude of fourty four degree and a half ,