: we go also seven of we on shore and find there exceed fair great wood of tall fir tree , and hear and see store of land and sea fowl , and see the foot of diverse beast in the sand when we be on shore . from the easter end we go to the norther side of the island , which we perceive to be but narrow in respect of the length thereof . and after we have search two day and a night for the whale which be wound which we hope to have find there , and miss of our purpose , we return back to the south - 164 ward , and be within one league of the island of Penguin , which lie south from the eastermost part of Natiscotec some twelve league . from the isle of Penguin we shape our course for cape de Rey and have sight of the island of Cape briton : then return we by the isle of saint Pedro , and so come into the bay of Placentia , and arrive in the easterside thereof some ten league up within the bay among the fisherman of saint [ three . 195 . ] John de Luz and of Sibiburo and of Biskay , which be to the number of threescore and odd sail , whereof eight ship only be Spaniard , of who we be very well use and they wish hearty for peace between they and we . there the man of saint John and Sibiburo man bestow two pinnace on we to make up our voyage with fish . than we depart over to the other side of the bay , where we arrive in a harbour which be call Pesmarck , and there make our stage and fish so long , that in the end the savage come , and in the night , when our man be at rest , cut both our pinnace and our ship boat away to our great hindrance of our voyage , yet it be our good fortune to find out our pinnace and get they again . then for fear of a shrewd turn of the savage , we depart for cape saint marie , and have pass cape Raz , we pass northward fourteen league and arrive in Farrillon , and find there two and twenty sail of Englishman , we make up our fish voyage to the full in that harbour the twenty four of August to our good content : and depart thence we arrive first in comb and stay there a seven night , and afterward in Hungrod in the river of Bristol by the grace of God the 24 of September . 1594 .