the three voyage of discovery make by captain Jaques Cartier , 1540 unto the country of Canada , Hochelaga , and Saguenay . king Francis the first have hear the report of captain Cartier his pilot generail in his two former voyage of discovery , as well by write as by word of mouth , touch that which he have find and see in the Wester ne part discover by he in the part of Canada and Hochelaga , and have also see and talk with the people , which the say Cartier have bring out of those country , whereof one be king of Canada , who name be Donnacona , and other : which after that they have be a long time in France and Britain , be baptize at their own desire and request , and die in the say country of Britain . and albeit his majesty be advertise by the say Cartier of the death and decease of all the people which be bring over by he ( which be ten in number ) save one little girl about ten year old , yet he resolve to send the say Cartier his pilot thither again , with John Francis de la Roche , knight , lord of Roberval , who he appoint his lieutenant and governor in the country of Canada and Hochelaga , and the say Cartier captain generail and leader of the ship , that they may discover more than be do before in the former voyage , and attain ( if it be possible ) unto the knowledge of the country of Saguenay , whereof the people bring by Cartier , as be declare , make mention unto the king , that there be great riches , and very good country . and the king cause a certain sum of money to be deliver to furnish out the say voyage with five ship : which thing be perform by the say monsieur Roberval and Cartier . after that they have agree together to rig the say five ship at saint Malo in Britain , where the two 263 ten savage bring into France . John Francis de la Roche , lord of Roberval . great riches and very good soil in Saguenay , which be beyond you fault . 23 . of may , 1540 the great mischief of lose the season . the english voyage former voyage have be prepare and set forth . and the say Monsieur Roberval send Cartier thither