aswell to the chief commander , as to the owner of the say ship . which cross and unkind deal , although it very much discontent i , notwithstanding the scarcity of time be such , that i can have no opportunity to go unto sir Walter Ralegh with complaint : for the ship be then all in readiness to go to the sea , will have be depart before i can have make my return . thus both governor , master , and sailor , regard very small the good of their countryman in Virginia ; determine nothing less than to touch at those place , but whole dispose themselves to seek after purchase and spoil , spend so much time therein , that summer be spend before we arrive at Virginia . and when we be come thither , the season be so unfit , 8c weather so foul , that we be constrain of force to forsake that coast , have not see any of our planter , with loss of one of our ship - boat , and 7 of our chief man : and also with loss of 3 of our anchor and cable , and most of our cask with fresh water leave on shore , not possible to be have aboard . which evil 8c unfortunate event ( as well to their own loss as to the hindrance of the planter in Virginia ) have not chance , if the order set down by sir Walter Ralegh have be observe , or if my daily 8c continual petition for the performance of the same may have take any place . thus may you plain 405 perceive the success of my five and last voyage to Virginia , which be no less unfortunate end then froward begin , and as luckless to many , as sinister to my self . but i will to God it have be as prosperous to all , as noisome to the planter ; and as joyful to i , as discomfortable to they . yet see it be not my first cross voyage , i remain content . And want my wish , i leave off from prosecute that whereunto i will to God my wealth be answerable to my will . thus commit the relief of my discomfortable company the planter in Virginia , to the merciful help of the almighty , who i most humble beseech to help and comfort they , accord to his most holy will and their good desire , i take my leave : from my house at newtowne in Kylmore the 4 of February , 1593 . your most wellwishing friend , John white .