to the worshipful and my very friend master Richard Hakluyt , much happiness in the lord . ir , as well for the satisfy of your earnest request , as the performance of my promise make unto you at my last be with you in England , i have send you ( although in a homely stile , especial for the contentation of a delicate ear ) the true discourse of my last voy - age into the west Indies , and part of America call Virginia , take in hand about the end of February , in the year of our redemption 1590 . and what event [ three . 288 . ] happen unto we in this our journey , you shall plain perceive by the sequel of my discourse . there be at the time aforesaid three ship absolute determine to go for the west Indies , at the speciali charge of m . John watte of London Marchant . but when they be full furnish , and in readiness to make their departure , a general stay be command of all ship throughout England . which so soon as i hear , i present ( as 1 thought it most requisite ) acquaint sir Walter Ralegh therewith , desire he that as i have sundry time afore be chargeable and troublesome unto he , for the supply and relief of the planter in Virginia : so likewise , that by his endeavour it will please he at that instant to procure licence for those three ship to proceed on with their determine voyage , that thereby the people in Virginia ( if it be god ’ s pleasure ) may speedy be comfort and relieve without further charge unto he . whereupon he by his good mean obtain licence of the queen majesty , and order to be take , that the owner of the 3 ship shall be bind unto sir Walter Ralegh or his assign , in 3000 pound , that those 3 ship in consideration of their release - 404 mean shall take in , and transport a convenient number of passenger , with their furniture and necessary to be land in Virginia . nevertheless that order be not observe , neither be the bond take accord to the intention aforesaid . but rather in contempt of the aforesaid order , i be by the owner and commander of the ship deny to have any passenger , or any thing else transport in any of the say ship , save only my self and my chest ; no not so much as a boy to attend upon i , although i make great suit , 8c earnest intreaty