and very valiant . that which here i say , i learn by two other relation of Indian dwell near unto they . i mean to set forward at the time before mention , and i carry with i 150 . horseman , and twelve spare horse , and 200 . footman , crossebowman , and gunner . i take also with i live hog , sheep , and all such thing as i can get for money : assure your lordship that i mean not to return to Mexico , until i be able to inform your honour more perfect , what the state of that place be : and if i find aught that we may do good in , i will stay there , until i have advertise your lordship , that you may command what you will have do : and if it fall out so unlucky , 119 [ three . 364 . i these may seem to be the pintado mention by Frier Marco de Niza in his 2 . Chap . the english voyage A . D . J539 - that there be nothing of importance , i will seek to discover too . league far , wherein ( i hope in God ) there will be something find in which your lordship may employ all these gentleman , and those which shall come hither hereafter . i think i can choose but stay there : and the water , the season , and disposition of the country , and other accident will direct i what be best to be do . Frier Marco de Ni ^ a enter a good way into the country , accompany with Stephan Dorantez , the 7 . of February last pass : when i depart from they , i leave they with above 100 Indian of Petatlan , and from the time of their come thither they great honour the father , show he all the courtesy they can possible . i can send you , nor describe unto you his entrance among they better than i have do in all my relation which i write in my letter from Compostella , and i signify unto you all thing to the full from the city of saint Michael : and though there be but the ten part of those thing , it be a great matter . herewithal i have send your lordship a letter , which i receive from the say father : the Indian tell i , that all the people of the country do great reverence he : and i believe he may travel many league far in that sort . he say , that if he find any good country , he will write to i thereof : i will not go thither without inform your lordship of my journey . i hope in God , that by one way or other we shall discover some good thing .