Cibola which mine and silver mine : and the king of the country 15 4 °°- is of mighty king , and he will not become subject to his majesty . there be certain Spaniard send to westward . that king from the viceroy in a ambassage : it be think that they be slay , for we can hear no news of they . the other news that i can certify you off at this instant be , that there be a judge of the city of Guadalajara call don Nunno de villa Inscensia late marry . also the king attorney of Guadalajara marry his daughter of 8 . year old with a boy of 12 . year old . but the viceroy say that he have a warrant from his majesty , that if any judge whatsoever dwell in that kingdom of Guadalajara shall marry any son in that jurisdiction , that than the say viceroy be to deprive he of his office . and therefore he go about to deprive the judge and the king attorney of their office . whereupon the people of that province will 205 a dangerous rebellion in Guadalajara a province of Nova Hispania . the english voyage not thereunto consent , nor suffer they to be dismiss of their office , nor to be arrest , nor carry prisoner to Mexico . when the viceroy have intelligence thereof , and that the country do resist his commandment , and will not suffer they to be apprehend , he send certain captain with soldier to go and apprehend the judge , the king attorney , and as many as do take their part . So the citizen of Guadalajara withstand the viceroy force , and put themselves in defence ; and be up in arm against the viceroy : yet they do not rebel against the king , but say : God save king Philip , and will submit themselves to his majesty , but not to the viceroy . so that all the kingdom of Guadalajara be up in arm , and be all in a mutiny against we of Mexico . i beseech almighty God to remedy it , and that it may be qualify in time : or else all nova Spania will be utter spoil . i write this thing , because it be public know in all place . and thus i rest , from Mexico the 30 . of May 1590 . Bartholomew canon .