Santo Domingo . and as we sail to cape Tiburon , three league to the westward of Santo Domingo we take a boat of fifteen ton , which have certain jar of maloss or unrefined sugar , with three man ; which man with their boat we carry with we to cape Tiburon , which , in respect of service do unto we in furnish we with fresh water , we dismiss . thus contrary to other Englishman course we shape we to the southward of Jamaica , and our shallop with Jamaica . 12 man range the coast but find nothing . Thence we range the three island of the caimanes , and land at grand Caiman , be the westermost , where we find no people , but a good river of fresh water ; and there we mw turn up threescore great tortoise ; and of they we take our choice , to wit , fifteen of the female , which caima „ t be the best and full of egg , whereof two serve a 191 the english voyage hundred man a day . and there with stone we may kill turtle dove , wild goose , and other good fowl at our pleasure . Thence we come to cape de Corrientes on Cuba to water , and from thence to cape S . Antonio , and so go over for the Tortugas , without take of any new prize : and thence cut over to Rio de puercos on the coast of Cuba . there we take a small bark of twenty ton , with four man and forty live hog , with certain dry pork cut like leather jerkin along , and dry hog tongue and neat tongue , and 20 ox hide . then pass thence , within four day we take a ship of 80 ton lade with hide , indico , and salsa perilla , north of a headland call corugna : thence the current set we to the east to the old chanel . there we take a frigate of 20 ton , have certain piece of spanish broad cloth and other small pillage : there continue off the matan $ as 12 day , with the wind so westerly that we can hardly recover Havana in the month of May . here we take two boat lade with tortoise , which we sink , save some of the tortoise , and set the man on shore . then at length we recover up to Havana , where we come so near to the fort , that for one hour fight they overreach we with their long ordinance . then come