the voyage make to the bay of Mexico by m . William king captain , m . Moore , m . how , and m . Boreman owner , with the Salomon of 200 ton , and the jane Bonaventure of 40 ton of sir Henry palmer , from Ratcliff the 26 of January 1592 . he Salomon be man with a hundred man , all mariner , and the jane with six and twenty , all like wise mariner . we come first to the down in Kent , and never strike sail in pass thence , until we come to cape S . Vincent on the coast of Portugal . from thence we shape our course to Lancerota one of the canary island , where we land threescore man , and fetch a caravel out of a harbour on the south side , and from a small island we take a demy - canon of brass in despite of the inhabitant , which play upon we with their small shot at our first land : of who we slay three ; and give they the repulse . Thence we go to the grand 190 Canaria , where we board a bark lie at anchor : out of which we be drive by great store of shot from the island . from thence we direct our course for the west Indies , and fall with the isle of Dominica about the ten of April . there at a water place we take a ship of a hundred ton come from guiny , lade with two hundred and seventy negro , which we carry with we to saint Juan de Puerto Rico , and there come through el passaje , we give chase to a frigate which go in to saint Juan de Puerto Rico , and in the night we send in our shallope with fourteen man . and out of the harbour we take away a english ship of seventy ton , lade with threescore ton of canary - wine , in despite of the castle and two new bulwark , be within caliver shoot . Theise two prize we carry away to the westermost part of the island , and put the negro , except fifteen , all on land in a spanish caravel which the jane Bonaventure take : and we carry away one of the former prize , and set fire on the other . we pass thence by the isle of Mona , where we water , and refresh our self with potatos and plantans , and so come to the isle of Saona : and from thence arrive at the mouth of the river of