a voyage of master William Parker of plymouth gentleman , to Margarita , Jamaica , Truxillo , Puerto de Cavallos situate within the bay of Honduras , and take by sir Anthony Shirley and he , as likewise up Rio dolce : with his return from thence , and his valiant and happy enterprise upon campeche the chief town of Yucatan , which he take and sack with six and fifty man , and bring out of the harbour a frigate lade with the king tribute , and surprise also the town of Sebo . n the year 1596 , master William Parker of Plymouth gentleman be furnish with a tall ship and a bark at his own charge , the ship call the prudence of one hundred and twenty ton , wherein himself go captain , and the bark call the adventure of five and twenty ton , whereof be captain one Richard Hen , depart from the foresay haven of Plymouth in the month of November , have one hundred man in his company . the first place where we touch in the west Indies be the isle of Margarita on the coast of Tierra firma , where we take a spanish gentleman and other , who for his ransom set at liberty master James Willis , and five other Englishman which be prisoner in Cumana , who otherwise be never like to have come from thence . thus pass from thence , we sail over to the isle of Jamaica , where the second of march we meet with sir Anthony Shirley , who before our come have take the chief town in the island , and be now almost in a readiness to depart . and here consort our self with he , we depart from Jamaica 277 Margarita . six english man redeem . Truxillo the sixth of march , and resolve to set upon the strong assail . town of Truxillo near the mouth of the bay of the Honduras . and have sail to cape de Corrientes upon Cuba , to seek a bark of i for our better strength ; but not find she , we go for the cape of Honduras , where we purpose to entrap the watch , and so to have sack the town of Truxillo . but the watch discover we , make great fire , and the town present shoot off a great piece , and answer with fire . notwithstanding , the next day be the one and thirty of march , we bring our ship under the fort , and land our man : but it be a vain pur - [ three . 603 . ] pose , for the town be invincible by nature , and stand