the same eight thousand Indian . the multitude of the Spaniard which flee upon my first assault by ten of the clock in the morning assemble together renew their strength , and set furious upon i and my small company . in which assault i lose some six of my man , and my self be shoot under the left breast with a bullet , which bullet lie still in the chine of my back . be thus put unto our shift we devise on the sudden a new stratagem : for have diverse of the townsman a new prisoner , we tie they arm in arm together , and strata & m . place they in stead of a barricado to defend we from the fury of the enemy shot . and so with ensign display , take with we our six dead man , we retire with more safety to the haven , where we take a frigate which ride ready fraught with the king tribute in silver and other good commodity , * which be * to the value present to be transport to saint Juan de ullua , and 5 °°° bring the same and our Periago or Canoa to my ship , * own ‘ which lie in two fathom water six league from the town , be not able to come any near for the shold upon that coast . over against the place where our ship an Indian road , stand a town of 300 or 400 Indian call Sebo , town take . 279 which we likewise take , where we find champeche - wood good to dye withal , with wax , and honey . this do we leave this coast , and turn up to cape de Cotoche again , and ankor every day at noon , because of the brize , and in turn up i lose my bark call the adventure , which be take by 2 frigate of war , which be man out from campeche : wherein captain hen and thirteen of my man be take , and afterward execute , as since we understand by some spanish prisoner that be take in those part . after we have stay five week on this coast , we shape our course for Havana , where find nothing , we disemboqued , and come along by the isle of Bermuda , and cross over to the bank near cape race in 22 fathom : and from thence sail for England , we fall with silly about the first of July , and within two day after arrive at Plymouth , where we find the right honourable the earl of Essex set forth with a great fleet for the isle of the azore .