[ in . 698 . ] certain brief testimony concern the mighty river of Amazones or Orellana , and of the most wonderful downfall or cataract of water at the head thereof , name by the Spaniard el Pongo : together with some mention of the rich and stately empire of Dorado , call by sir Walter Ralegh and the natural inhabitant Guiana , and of the golden country of paytity near adjoin , with other memorable matter : take out of Josephus de Acosta his natural and moral history of the west Indies . the first testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 2 . cap . 6 . ut when we entreat of river , that which some man call the river of Amazones , other Marannon , other the river of Orellana , do just put to silence all the rest , whereunto our Spaniards have go and sail . and i stand in doubt , whether i may call it a river or a sea . this river run from the mountain of Piru , from which it gather infinite store of water , of rain , and river , which run along , gather it self together , and pass through the great field and plain of Paytiti , of Dorado , and of the Amazon , and fall at length into the ocean sea , and enter into it almost over against the isle of Margarita and Trinidad . but it grow so broad , especial towards the mouth , that it make in the midst many and great isle : and that which seem incredible , sail in the middle chanel 16 1590 . of the river , man can see nothing but the sky and the river , although man say that there be hill near the bank thereof , which can not be ken , through the greatness of the river . we understand by very good mean the wonderful breadth and largeness of this river , which just may be call the emperor of river , to wit by a brother of our company , which be a boy be there , and sail it whole through , be personal present in all the success of that strange entrance , which Pedro the Orsua make , and in the mutiny and perilous conspiracy of that wicked Diego de Aguirre , out of all which trouble and danger the lord deliver he , to make he one of our society . the second testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 3 . cap . 20 . a among all the river not only of the west Indies but also of the whole world , the chief be the river of Marannon or of the Amazon , whereof i have speak in the second book . the Spaniard have diverse time sail along this river , with determination to discover country , which , accord to report , be of great riches , especial that which they call Dorado , and Paytiti . the adolantado or admiral Juan de Salinas make a very notable entrance , although to small profit . it have a salt