a extract out of the discourse of one Lopez Vaz a Portugal , touch the fight of m . Fenton with the spanish ship , with a report of the proceed of m . John drake after his depart from he to the river of plate . five ship of this fleet cast away on the coast of Spain . [ he . 727 - ] Pon the relation of Pedro Sarmiento concern the streit of Magellan , that they may be fortify , and for that the king hear , that there be ship in England prepare for the same streit , he command Diego flores de Valdes a noble man of Spain , to pass thither with 23 ship , and 3500 man to stop the passage of the Englishman . there go in this fleet the governor of Chili , with 500 old soldier that come out of Flanders : but this be the unhappy fleet of ship that ever go out of Spain : for before they come from the coast of Spain a storm take they , and cast away five of the fleet and in they above 800 man , and the 92 rest come into Cadiz . but the king send they word that they shall proceed : and so there go out on the voyage 16 of the ship , for two more of their fleet be much spoil by the storm which they have . in these sixteen ship Pedro Sarmiento be send to be governor in the strait , and have assign unto he 500 man to stay there with he , and he carry with he all kind of artificer to make he fort , and other necessary , with great store of ordinance and other munition . this fleet because it be late , do winter on the this fleet coast of Brasil , in the river of Jenero : and from thence they go when the winter be pass , and about the jen ’ er ^ r ° J height of 42 degree they have a sudden storm , so that Diego Flores beat it up and down 22 day , in which time he lose one of the best ship he have , which have in her 300 man and 20 woman , that go to inhabit the streit : and in this ship also be most part of the munition which shall have be leave in the streit , so in the end the storm grow to be so great , that the ship be not able to endure it any long , but be put back unto a island call Santa Catelina : and there he find a bark wherein be some friar go for the m . Fenton river of