certain note of the voyage to Brasill with the minion of London aforesaid , in the year 1580 . write by Thomas grig purser of the say ship . he third day of November in the year abovesaid we depart in the minion of London from Harwich , from which time no great thing worth the knowledge or regard of other happen until the 22 . of December the next month , which day for our own learning and use we ob - serve the set of the sun ne , which be west southwest , we then be under the line equinoctial , where we find the air very temperate , and the wind for the most part southeast and east southeast . the same day we also observe the rise of the moon , be one day after the full , which rise at east north - east . the first land that we fall with upon the coast of the isle of . Brasill be the island of saint Sebastian , where we arrive Sebastian . g Jay of JanUary in the year 1581 . the 16 . day Thomas Babington , and other in our pinnace , go a shore to Guaybea , where they meet with John whithall his father and mother in law , who have receive letter from thence to be deliver at Santos , come aboard , and then we weigh and set sail , and the theykof . 28 . day we arrive at the island of Santa Catelina , Catelina . near the entrance of Santos . our course from saint Sebastian be southwest and by west , and betwixt the southwest and by west , and west southwest . [ Iii . 705 . ] this island of Santa Catelina seem at the first to be a part of the island of Girybia . we anchor at nine fathom black osie ground . upon the island there grow many palmito - tree , but no fresh water be there to be find . the three day of February we arrive before the town 34 of Santos , and be there well receive and entertain off they arrive the captain , the king officer , and all the people . at Santos . the four day we take into our ship a beef alive , which serve for the victual of the ship , and the refresh of our man , and to make we the merry at Shrovetide . the eight day we deliver to m . John