to consider , that ( after the loss of so many man and all the casualty aforesaid , as we be take in of water by port famine , our boatswain , the hooper , and William magoth be on shore ) Matthew hawlse do hallow to have they in all the haste come on - bord : say therewithal ! these word : he that will come in this voyage , must not make any reckon to leave two or three man on shore behind he , whereas we have so late lose all the foresay man , have then but six sailor leave we on - bord . also the say Matthew hawlse do carry a pistol for the space of two day secret under his gown , intend therewithal ! to have murdered Andrew Stoning , and William Combe , as by confession of hawlse his man , William Martin , it be manifest : for the say William Martine report unto two of his friend , viz . Richard Hungate , and Emanuel dornel , that he kneel upon his knee one whole hour before Matthew hawlse in his own cabin , desire he , for god cause , not to kill either of they , especial because the say Stoning and Martin come both out of one town . also the say hawlse , at our second time of water in the place aforesaid , come into the gunner room to speak with you ( your self with the master gunner Thomas brown , and his mate William Frier be then present ) demand of you , if he shall send certain man to port famine be two league from the ship by land . Thomas Browne answer he [ he . 842 . ] present , that he shall send none , for fear least the wind may arise , and by that mean we shall loose 388 so many of our man more : to who Matthew hawlse reply that it be not material , for that he have make choice of a company for the very same purpose , who name be Emmanuel dornel , Richard Hungate , Paul carry , John Davis , Gabriel Valerosa , a Portugal , and Peter a Britain , and the Spaniard which we have take in at the same place , at our first time of water . and thus we end , desire God to send we well into our native country . in witness whereof we have subscribe our name . Thomas brown , gunner , John Morrice , etc