Part of the great Charter granted by king Edward the first to the Barons of the Cinque portes, in the sixt yeere of his reigne 1278. for their good services done unto him by sea: wherein is mention of their former ancient Charters from Edward the Confessor, William the Conqueror, William Rufus, Henry the second, king Richard the first, king John, and Henry the third continued unto them.
Dward by the grace of God king of England, lord of Ireland, & duke of Gascoigne, to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earles, Barons, Justices, Shirifs, Provosts, Officers, & to all Bay-liffes and true subjects greeting. You shall knowe that for the faithfull service
that our Barons of the five Ports hitherto to our predecessors kings of England, & unto us lately in our armie of Wales have done, and for their good service to us and our heires kings of England, truly to be continued in time to come, we have granted & by this our Charter confirmed for us and our heires, to the same our Barons and to their heires, all their liberties and freedomes. So that they shall be free from all toll, and from all custome; that is to say from all lastage, tallage, passage, cariage, 293
Edward the confessor.
rivage, asponsage, and from all wrecke, and from all their sale, carying and recarying through all our realme and dominion, with socke and souke, toll and theme. And that they shall have Infangthefe, and that they shall be wreckefree, lastagefree, and lovecopfree. And that they shall have Denne and Strande at great Yarmouth, according as it is contayned in the ordinance by us thereof made perpetually to bee observed. And also that they are free from all shires and hundreds: so that if any person will plead against them, they shall not aunswere nor pleade otherwise then they were wont to plead in the time of the lord, king Henrie our great grandfather: And that they shall have their findelles in the sea and in the land: And that they be free of all their goods and of all their marchandises as our freemen. And that they have their honours in our court, and their liberties throughout all the land wheresoever they shall come. And that they shall be free for ever of all their lands, which in the time of Lord Henrie the king our father they possessed: that is to say in the 44. yere of his reign, from all maner of summonces before our Justices to any maner of pleadings, journeying in what shire soever their lands are. So that they shall not be bound to come before the Justices aforesaid, except any of the same Barons doe implead any man, or if any man be impleaded. And that they shall not pleade in any other place, except where they ought, and where they were wont, that is to say, at Shepeway. And that they have their liberties and free-domes from hencefoorth, as they and their predecessors have had them at any time better, more fully and honourably in the time of the kings of England, Edward, William the first, William the second, Henrie the king our great grandfather, and in the times of king Richard, and king John our grandfathers, and lord king Henrie our father, by their Charters: as the same Charters which the same our Barons thereof have, and which we have seene, doe reasonably testifie. And we forbid that no man unjustly trouble them nor their marchandise upon our
29+
forfeyture of ten pounds. So nevertheless, that when the same Barons shall fayle in doing of Justice or in receiving of Justice, our Warden, and the wardens of our heires of  the Cinque Portes, which for the time shall be, their Ports and liberties may enter for to doe their full Justice.
So also that the sayd Barons and their heires, do unto us and to our heirs kings of England by the yeare their full service of 57. shippes at their costs by the space of fifteene 57- "f dayes at our somounce, or at the somounce of our heires.
We have granted also unto them of our speciali grace that they have Outfangthefe in their lands within the Ports king 1^. dayes aforesayd, in the same maner that Archbishops, Bishops, at their mne Abbots, Earles and Barons, have in their manours in the .countie of Kent. And they be not put in any Assises, Juries, or Recognisances by reason of their forreine tenure against their will: and that they be free of all their owne wines for which they do travaile of our right prise, that is to say, of one tunne before the mast, and of another behind the maste. We have granted furthermore unto the said Barons for us and our heires, that they for ever have this liberty, that is to say, That we or our heires shall not have the wardship or mariages of their heires by reason of their landes, which they holde within the liberties and Portes aforesayde, for the which they doe their service aforesayd: and for the which wee and our progenitors had not the wardships and mariages in time past. But we our aforesayd confirmation upon the liberties and freedomes aforesayde, and our grants following to them of our especiall grace, of newe have caused to be made, saving alwaies in al things our kingly dignitie: And saving unto us and to our heires, plea of our crowne, life and member. Wherefore we will and surely command for us and our heires that the aforesaid Barons and their heires for ever have all the aforesaid liberties and freedomes, as the aforesaid Charters do reasonably testifie. And that of our especial grace they have outfangthefe in their lands within the Ports aforesaid after the maner that Archbishops, Bishops,
295
Abbots, Earles and Barons have in their manours in the county of Kent. And that they be not put in Assises, Juries, or Recognisances by reason of their forreine tenure against their will. And that they bee free of their owne wines for which they travaile of our right price or custome, that is to say of one tunne of wine before the maste, and of another tunne behinde the maste. And that likewise for ever they have the libertie aforesayde: that is to say: That wee and our heires have not the wardships or mariages of their heires by reason of their landes which they holde within the liberties and Portes aforesayd, for which they doe their service aforesaid, and for which wee and our predecessors the wardships and mariages have not had in times past. But our aforesayd confirmation of their liberties and freedomes aforesaid and other grants following to them of our especiall grace of new we have caused to bee made. Saving alwayes and in all things our regall dignity. And saving unto us and our heires the pleas of our crowne of life and member as is aforesayd. These being witnesses, the reverend father Robert of Portuens Cardinali of the holie Church of Rome, frier William of Southhampton Prior povincial of the friers preachers in England, William of Valencia our uncle, Roger of the dead sea, Roger of Clifford, Master Robert Samuel deane of Sarum, Master Robert of Scarborough the Archdeacon of East Riding, Master Robert of Seyton, Bartholomew of Southley, Thomas of Wayland, Walter of Hoptan, Thomas of Normannel, Steven of Pennes-ter, Frances of Bonava, John of Lenetotes, John of Metingham and others. Given by our hand at Westminster the fourteenth day of June, in the sixth yeare of our reigne.
