The voyage of Henry Earle of Derbie, after Duke of Hereford, and lastly king of England, by the name of Henry the fourth, An. Dom. 1390. into Prussia and Lettowe, against the infidels, recorded by Thomas of Walsingham.
Ominus Henricus Comes de Derbie per idem tempus profectus est in le Pruys, ubi cum adjutorio marescalli dictae patriae, & cujusdam Regis vocati Wytot devicit exercitum Regis de Lettowe, captis qua-tuor ducibus, & tribus peremptis, & amplius quam trecentis, de valentioribus
exercitus supradicti pariter interemptis. Civitas quoque vocatur II Will, in cujus castellum Rex de Lettowe nomine Skirgalle confugerat, potenti virtute dicti Comitis maxime, atque suorum capta est. Namque qui fuerunt de familia sua primi murum ascenderant, & vexillum ejus super muros, caeteris vel torpentibus vel ignorantibus, posuerunt. Captaque sunt ibi vel occisa quatuor millia plebanorum, fratre Regis de Poleyn inter caeteros ibi perempto, qui adversarius nostri fuit. Obsessumque fuit castrum dictae Civitatis per quinque hebdomadas: Sed propter infirmitates, quibus vexabatur exercitus magistri de Pruys & de Lifland noluerunt diutius expectare. Facti sunt Christiani de gente de Lettowe octo. Et magister de Lifland duxit secum in suam patriam tria millia captivorum.
fl Alias Vilna.
An. Dorn.
139°.
3°4
A Bout the same time L. Henry the Earle of Derbie travailed into Prussia, where, with the helpe of the Marshall of the same Province, and of a certaine king called Wytot, hee vanquished the armie of the king of Lettowe, with the captivitie of foure Lithuanian Dukes, and the slaughter of three, besides more then three hundred of the principali common souldiers of the sayd armie which were slaine. The Citie also which is called Wil or Vilna, into the castle whereof the king of Lettow named Skirgalle fled for his savegard, was, by the valour of the sayd Earle especially and of his followers, surprised and taken. For certaine of the chiefe men of his familie, while others were slouthfull or at least ignorant of their intent, skaling the walles, advanced his colours thereupon. And there were taken and slaine foure thousand of the common souldiers, and amongst others was slaine the king of Poland his brother, who was our professed enemie. And the castle of the foresaid Citie was besieged for the space of five weekes: but by reason of the infirmities and inconveniences wherewith the whole armie was annoyed, the great masters of Prussia and of Lifland would not stay any longer. There were converted of the nation of Lettowe eight persons unto the Christian faith. And the master of Lifland carried home with him into his countrey three thousand captives.
