Carta Lubecensibus ad septennium concessa. Anno 41. Henrici 3.
Enricus dei gracia Rex Angliae, dominus Hibernia?, dux Normanniae, Aquitaniae, & Comes Andegaviae, omnibus Ballivis suis salutem. Sciatis nos ad instantiam dilecti & fidelis fratris nostri Ricardi Comitis Cornubiae in Regem Romanorum electi, suscepisse in protectionem & defensionem
nostram & salvum & securum conductum nostrum Bur-genses de Lubek in Alemania cum omnibus rebus & mercandisis quas in Regnum nostrum deferent, vel facient deferri. Et eis concessimus, quod de omnibus rebus & mercandisis suis nihil capiatur ad opus nostrum vel alterius contra voluntatem eorundem ; sed libere vendant & negocientur inde in Regno praedicto, prout sibi viderint expedire. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod dictis Burgen-sibus vel eorum nunciis in veniendo in terram nostram cum rebus & mercandisis suis, ibidem morando, & inde recedendo, nullum inferatis, aut ab aliis inferri permittatis impedimentum aut gravamen. Nec eos contra quietantiam praedictam vexetis, aut ab aliis vexari permittatis. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes per septennium durantes : Dum tamen iidem Burgenses interim bene & fideliter se habuerint erga praefatum electum fratrem nostrum. Teste meipso apud Westmonasterium undecimo die Maii Anno Regni nostri quadragesimo primo. Haec litera duplicata est, pro Bur-gensibus & mercatoribus Dacis, Brunswig, & Lubek.
324
The charter of Lubek granted for seven yeeres, obtained in the one and fortieth yeere of Henry the third.
HEnry by the grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandie and Aquitaine, and Earle of Anjou, to all his Bailifs sendeth greeting. Know ye that at the instant request of our welbeloved and trusty brother Richard Earle of Cornewal being of late elected king of the Romanes, we have received under our protection and defence, and under our safe and secure conduct, the citizens of Lubek in Alemain, with all their goods and wares, which they shall bring or cause to be brought into our kingdome. We have also granted unto them, that of all their goods and merchandize, nothing shal be seized unto the use of our selves, or of any other without their owne consent, but that they may freely sell and exercise traffike therewith, according as they shall thinke expedient. And therefore we straightly command you, that neither your selves do offer, nor that you permit any other to offer any impediment or molestation unto the said Burgers or unto their messengers, either at their comming into our land, with their goods and marchandize, in the time of their abode there, or at their departure from thence, and that yee neither molest them your selves, nor yet suffer them by others to be molested, contrary to the aforesaid Charter. In testimonie whereof, we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents, during the space of seven yeeres next following.
Provided, that the sayd Burghers doe in the meane time behave themselves well and faithfully towards our foresaid elected brother. Witnesse our selves at Westminster the eleventh day of March, in the one and fortieth yeere of our reigne.
This Letter was doubled, namely for the Burghers, and the Marchants of Denmarke, of Brunswig, and of Lubecke.
