Now as concerning the cities of the Hans.
Hamburg. T Nprimis the Hamburgers exhibited nine articles, wherein X they demaunded restitution for certaine damages offered, as they sayd, by the English men, the value of which losses amounted unto the summe of 9117. nobles, 20. pence. For the which, after due examination, there was promised restitution to the summe of 416. nobles,  5. shillings. Besides the two articles propounded against them of Scardeburg, the summe wherof was 231. pounds, 15.S. 8.d. concerning the which there was sentence given in England by the commissioners of our lord the king, the 34
execution wherof was promised unto the said Hamburgers by the ambassadors of England: leave and licence being reserved unto the sayd Hamburgers, of declaring or explaning certaine obscure articles by them exhibited, which declaration was to be made at the feast of Easter then next to come, or within one yeare next ensuing the said feast, unto the chancelor of England for the time being, and of prooving the sayd articles and others also, which have not as yet sufficiently bene proved. Which being done they are to have full complement and execution of justice.
Also by the Hamburgers there are demaunded 445. nobles from certaine of the inhabitants of Linne in England. Which summe, if it shalbe prooved to be due unto any English men, the Hamburgers are to rest contented with those goods, which they have already in their possessions.
Item, they of Breme propounded sixe articles, wherein Breme. the summe conteined amounteth unto 4414. nobles. And there was no satisfaction promised unto them. But the same libertie and licence was reserved unto them, in like maner as before unto the Hamburgers.
Item, they of Stralessund propounded 23. articles, Stralessund. wherof the summe amounted unto 7415. nobles, 2o.d. for the which there was promised satisfaction of 253.
nobles, 3-q. Also here is a caveat to be observed : that they of Stralessund had of English mens goods a great summe particularly to be declared, which will peradventure suffice for a recompense. And some of their articles are concerning injuries offered before 20, 22, 23, 24. yeres past. Also their articles are so obscure that they will never, or very hardly be able to declare or prove them. Howbeit there is reserved the very same liberty unto them, that was before unto the Hamburgers.
Item, they of Lubec propounded 23. articles, the Lubec. summe whereof extended unto 8690. nobles and an halfe: whereupon it was agreed, that they should have paied unto them 550. nobles. There was reserved the same libertie unto them, which was unto the men of Stralessund.
GnpeswM. Item, they of Gripeswold exhibited 5. articles, the summe whereof amounted unto 2092. nobles and an halfe. For the which there was promised satisfaction of 153. nobles and an half. And the said men of Gripeswold have of the goods of English men in possession, to the value of 22015. nobles, 18.S, as it is reported by them of Linne. And the same libertie is reserved unto them that was unto the Hamburgers.
Campen. Item, they of Campen propounded ten articles, the summe whereof extended unto 1405. nobles. There is no satisfaction promised unto them: but the same liberty is reserved unto them, which was unto the other above mentioned.
Item, the ambassadors of England demanded of the citizens of Rostok & Wismer, for damages & injuries by them committed against the subjects of the foresayd sovereigne king 32407. nobles, 2.s. ro.d. And albeit every of the foresayd cities sent one of their burgomasters unto the towne of Hage in Holland, to treat with the English ambassadours, it was in the end found out, that they had not any authority of negotiating or concluding ought at al. And therfore they made their faithfull promises, that every of the said cities should send unto our soveraigne Lord the king one or two procurator or procurators sufficiently instructed to treat & conclude with our said sovereigne lord the king about the damages and injuries aforesaid at the feast of the nativitie of Saint John the Baptist.
.