The names of the shippes of the fleete, and of their burden, together with the names of the Captaines, and Counsellors, Pilot Major, Masters of the ships, Marchants, with other officers, and Mariners, as hereafter followeth.
The first ship.
The Bona Esperanza, Admirall of the fleete, of 120. tunnes, having with her a pinnesse, and a boate.
Sir Hugh Willoughby, knight, Captaine general of the fleete.
William Gefferson, Master of the shippe.
Roger Wilson, his Mate.
William Gittons, Charles Barret, Gabriel Willoughby, John Andrews, Alexander Woodfoord, Ralph Chatterton, Marchants.
Mariners and officers, according to the custome, and use of the Seas,
John Brook, Master Gunner.
Nicholas Anthony, Boateswaine.
John Web, his Mate.
Christopher Banbrucke, Thomas Davison, Robert Rosse, Thomas Simpson, quarter Masters.
212
William White, James Smith, Thomas Painter, John
Smith, their Mates.
Richard Gwinn e, George Goiswine, Carpenters.
Robert Gwinne, Purser.
Laurence Edwards, his Mate, and Couper.
Richard Morgan, Cooke.
Thomas Nashe, his Mate.
William Light, John Brande, Cutbert Chelsie, George
Blage, Thomas Walker, Thomas Allen, Edward Smith, Edward Hunt, John Fawkner, Rowland Brooke.
Alexander Gardiner, Richard Molton, Surgeons, which two were taken in at Harwich.
Discharged at Harwich, by reason of sicknes, George  Blake, Nicholas Anthony.
For pickerie ducked at the yards arme, and so discharged Thomas Nash.
The Edward Bonaventure, of 160. tunnes, with her a The second pinnesse, and a boate.	s^'
Richard Chancelor, Captaine, and Pilot major of the fleete.
Stephen Borowgh, Master of the ship.
John Buckland, his Mate.
George Burton, Arthur Edwards, Marchants.
John Stafford, Minister.	John Stafford
James Dallaber, Nicholas Newborrow, John Segswike, Minister.
Thomas Francis, John Hasse, Richard Johnson, William
Kempe.
Mariners and officers, according to the custome and use of the Seas.
Robert Stanton, Master Gunner.
John Walker, his Mate.
James Long, John Cocks, Gunners.
Thomas Walter, Surgeon.
Peter Palmer, Boateswaine.
Richard Strowde, his Mate.
John Robinson, John Carowe, Thomas Stone, Roger
Lishbie, quarter Masters.
213
1553-	John Austen, Steward : Patricke Stevens, his Mate. Austen Jacks, Cooke. William Every, Cowper. Griffin Wagham, Carpenter. Thomas Stelston, Thomas Townes, John Robinson, John White, William Laurence, Miles Butter, John
M. William Burrough nowe comptroller of her Majesties navie.	Browne, William Morren, William Watson, Thomas Handcocks, Edward Pacie, Thomas Browne, Arthur Pet, George Phibarie, Edward Patterson, William Beare, John Potter, Nicholas Lawrence, William Burrough, Roger Welford, John Williams.
The third ship.	The Bona Confidentia of 90. tunnes, having with her a pinnesse, and a boate. Cornelius Durfoorth, Master of the shippe. Richard Ingram, his Mate. Thomas Langlie, Edward Kever, Henrie Dorset, Marchants. Mariners and officers, according to the use and custome of the Sea. Henrie Tailer, Master Gunner. George Thurland, his Mate. William Hamane, Boateswaine. John Edwards, his Mate. Thomas Kirbie, Henrie Dickenson, John Haye, William Shepwash, quarter Masters. John Reyne, Steward. Thomas Hante, Cooke. William Lassie, his Mate. Nicholas Knight, Carpenter. Peter Lewike, Nicholas Wiggleworth, John Moore, William Chapman, Brian Chester, William Barrie, Richard Wood, Clement Gibson, John Clarocke, Erasmus Bently, John Duriforth.
