Instructions given to the Masters and Mariners to be observed in and about this Fleete, passing this yeere 1557. toward the Bay of S. Nicolas in Russia, for this present Race to be made & returne of the same by Gods grace to the port of London, the place of their right discharge, as in the Articles ensuing is deduced.
Irst, it is accorded and agreed betweene the severall proprietaries and owners, masters and companies of the foure ships, surnamed the Primrose, the John Evangelist, the Anne and the Trinitie, and the Lieutenant, Consuls, assistants and companie of the Marchant adven
turers, that the above named foure ships shall in good order and conduct, saile, passe, and travaile together in one flote, ging, and conserve of societie, to be kept indissolubly and not to be severed, but united within continuall sight, so farre foorth as (by winde & weather) by possibilitie shall or may be without any separation  or departure of one from the other.
2	Item, it is agreed that the good ship named the Primerose, shalbe Admirall of this flote, and that Anthonie Jenkinson Gentleman, shalbe captaine thereof: and that all other the 3. ships shall ensue and folow her in all courses, and that no course nor waying (in
375
harborough especially) shall be made without advice, consent and agreement of the sayd Captaine, the Master, his mate, and two other officers of the said ship, or of three of them at the least.
3	Item, that the said Anthonie is and shalbe reputed & taken for Captaine general of the said flote together with all such orders, preeminences, priviledges and preferments as by the order of seas is due and accustomed to a Captaine during his abode and exercise of the same.
4	It is also ordeined, that if any one or moe of the said 3. ships shalbe out of sight either before or behinde the Admirall, that then the rest of the ships shall tacke or take off their sailes in such sort as they may meete and come together, in as good order as may be, to the intent to keepe the consortment exactly in all poynts.
5	It is constituted, that if any ships shalbe severed by mist or darke weather, in such sort as the one cannot have sight of the other, then and in such case the Admiral shall make sound and noise by drumme, trumpet, horne, gunne or otherwise or meanes, that the ships may come as nigh together, as by safetie and good order they may.
6	It is also to be observed, that every day once the other three shippes shall send and come aboord the Admirall, and there consult and determine of such matter and things as shall be for the assurance of their Navigation, and most expedition of the same.
7	Item, that notes & entries be daily made of their Navigations put in writing & memory, and that the yong Mariners and apprentices may be taught & caused to learne and observe the same.
8	It is accorded that the said Captaine shall have the principali rule and governement of the apprentices : And that not onely they, but also all other the sailers, shalbe attendant and obedient to him, as of duetie and reason appertaineth.
376
9	Also that no beere nor broth, or other liquor be spilt upon the balast, or other place of the ship, whereby any anoyance, stinke, or other unsavorinesse shall growe in the shippe to the infection or hurt of the persons in the same.
io Item, that the Captaine by discretion shall from time to time disship any artificer or English servingman or apprentice out of the Primrose into any of the other three ships, and in lieu of him or them, take any such apprentice as he shall thinke convenient and most meete to serve the benefite of the companie.
ii Item, that great respect be had to the Gunners and Cookes roomes, that all danger and perill of powder and fire may be eschewed and avoyded.
12	Item, that singular care and respect be had to the ports of the ship, aswell in Navigation as in harborow, and especially in lading and unlading of the shippes, that nothing be lacking or surcharged : and that the bookes may oftentimes be conferred and made to agree in eschuement of such losses, as may ensue.
13	Special foresight is to be had, that at the Wardhouse no treacherie, invasion, or other peril of molestation be done or procured to be attempted to our ships by any kings, princes, or companies, that do mislike this new found trade by seas to Russia, or would let & hinder the same: whereof no small boast hath bene made : which giveth occasion of more circumspection and diligence.
14	If the winde and weather will serve, it is thought good rather to goe by the Wardhouse then to come in and ancre there, lest any male engine, or danger may be the rather attempted against us, our goods and ships as above.
15	It is thought good that Richard Johnson, late servant to M. Chanceler, shall be sent home in this next returne, to instruct the company of the state of the Countrey, and of such questions as may be demanded of him, for our better advertisements and
377
resolutions, in such doubts as shall arise here : and that he shall have the roome of the Captaine in such sort, as Master Jenkinson is in this present cocket assigned unto. And if Johnson can not, may not, nor will not returne and occupie the said place, then any other person to be preferred thereunto, as by the discretion of our said Captaine, with consent of our Agents, shall be thought meete and apt to supply the same.
16 Provided alway, that the ships returning be not disfurnished of one such able man, as shall occupie the Captainship in like order, as is, and hath bene in such case appoynted, as reason and good order requireth.
17 Item that all other former orders, rules, and devises, made and provided for the good order of our ships, wares, and goods, being not repugnant, contrary or diverse, to these articles, and the contents of the same, shall be, and stand in full force and effect, to be in all respects observed and kept of all and every person and persons, whom the same doth or shall touch or concerne.
 In witnesse of the premisses faithfully to be observed and kept, the owners and Masters of the said foure ships, together with the said Captaine, to these seventeene articles, contained in two sheetes of paper, have subscribed their hands. Given in London, the third of May, in the yeere of our Lord God 1557.
fl Owners of the Primerose.
Andrewe Judde.
William Chester.
Anthony Hickman.
Edward Casteline.
fl Owners of the John Evangelist.
Andrew Judde.
William Chester.
fl Owner of the Anne.
John Dimocke.
fl Owner of the Trinitie.
R. T.
