The first voyage made by Master Anthonie Jenkinson, from the Citie of London toward the land of Russia, begun the twelfth of May, in the yeere 1557.
Irst by the grace of God, the day and yeere above mentioned, I departed from the sayd Citie, and the same day at Gravesend embarked my selfe in a good shippe, named the Primerose, being appointed, although unworthy, chiefe captaine of the same, and also of the
other 3 good ships, to say, the John Evangelist, the Anne, and the Trinitie, having also the conduct of the Emperour of Russia his ambassadour named Osep Nepea Gregoriwich, who passed with his company in the sayde Primerose. And thus our foure tall shippes being well appointed, aswell for men as victuals as other necessarie furniture, the saide twelfth day of the moneth of May, we weyed our ankers, and departed from the saide Gravesend, in the after noone, and plying downe the Thames, the wind being Easterly, and fayre weather, the 13 day we came a ground with the Primerose, upon a sand called the blacke taile, where we sate fast untill the 14 day in the morning, and then God be praysed, she came off: and that day we plyed downe as farre as our Ladie of Holland, and there came to an anker, the wind being Easterly, & there remayned untill the 20 day: then we weyed and went out at Goldmore gate, and from thence in at Balsey slade, and so into Orwel wands, where we came to an anker : but as we came out at the sayd Goldemore gate, the Trinitie came on ground on certaine rockes, that lye to the Northward of the said gate, and was like to be bilged and lost. But by the aide of God, at the last she came off againe, being very leake: and the 21 day the Primerose remaining at an anker in the wands, the
413
other three shippes bare into Orwel haven, where I caused the sayd Trinitie to be grounded, searched, and repaired. So we remayned in the said haven, untill the 28 day: and then the winde being Westerly, the three shippes that were in the haven, weyed and came forth, and in comming forth the John Evangelist came on ground upon a sand, called the Andros, where she remained one tide, and the next full sea she came off againe without any great hurt, God be praised.
The 29 day in the morning all foure ships weied in the Wands, and that tide went as farre as Qrfordnesse, where we came to an anker, because the wind was Northerly : And about sixe of the clocke at night, the wind vered to the Southwest, and we weyed anker, and bare cleere of the nesse, and then set our course Northeast & by North untill midnight, being then cleare of Yarmouth sands. Then we winded North and by West, June, and Northnorthwest, untill the first of June at noone, then it waxed calme, and continued so untill the second day at noone: then the winde came at Northwest, with a tempest, and much raine, and we lay close by, and caped Northnortheast, and Northeast and by North, as . the winde shifted, and so continued untill the third day at noone: then the wind vered Westerly againe, and we went North our right course, and so continued our way untill the fourth day, at three of the clocke in the afternoone, at which time the wind vered to the Northwest againe and blew a fresh gale, and so continued untill the seventh day in the morning, we lying with all our shippes close by, and caping to the Northwards : and then the wind vering more Northerly, we were forced to put roomer with the coast of England againe, and fell overthwart Newcastle, but went not into the haven, 8c so plied upon the coast the eight day 8c the ninth.
The tenth day the winde came to the Northnorthwest, 8c we were forced to beare roomer with Flamborow head, where we came to an anker, and there 414
remained untill the seventeenth day. Then the winde came faire, and we weyed, and set our course North and by East, and so continued the same with a mery winde untill the 21 at noone, at which time we tooke the sunne, and had the latitude in sixty degrees. Then we shifted our course, and went Northnorth east, and Northeast and by North, until the 25 day. Then we discovered certaine Islands, called Heilick Islands, lying Heilickls-from us Northeast, being in the latitude of sixtie sixe lands in 66 degrees, 40 minutes. Then we went north and by ^8™ 4° West, because we would not come too nigh the land, “ s' and running that course foure houres, we discovered, and had sight of Rost Islands, joining to the main Rost Islands. land of Finmarke. Thus continuing our course along the coast of Norway and Finmark, the 27 day we tooke the Sunne, being as farre shot as Lofoot, and had the latitude in 69 degrees. And the same day in the afternoone appeared over our heads a rainebow, like
a semicircle, with both ends upwarde. Note that there  is between the said Rost Islands & Lofoot, a whirle Malestrand a poole called Malestrand, which from halfe ebbe untill halfe flood, maketh such a terrible noise, that it shaketh ' the ringes in the doores of the inhabitants houses of the sayd Islands tenne miles oflf. Also if there com-meth any Whale within the current of the samej they make a pitifull crie. Moreover, if great trees be caried into it by force of streams, and after with the ebbe be cast out againe, the ends and boughs of them have bene so beaten, that they are like the stalkes of hempe that is bruised. Note, that all the coaste of Finmarke is high mountaines and hils, being covered all the yere with snow. And hard aboord the shoare of this coast, there is 100 or 150 fadomes of water in depth. Thus proceeding and sailing forward, we fell with an Island
called Zenam, being in the latitude of 70 degrees. Zenam Island. About this Island we saw many Whales, very monstrous, about our ships, some by estimation of 60 foot long: and being the ingendring time they roared and
415
cried terriblie. From thence we fell with an Island, Kettelwike called Kettelwicke.
Island. This coast from Rost unto Lofoot lieth North and south, and from Lofoot to Zenam Northeast and southwest, and from Zenam to Kettelwike Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest. From the said Kettelwike we sailed East and by North io leagues, and fell with a Inger sound, land called Inger sound, where we fished, being becalmed, and tooke great plenty of Cods. Thus plying along The North the coast, we fell with a Cape, called the North Cape, ^aPe- which is the Northermost land that wee passe in our voyage to S. Nicholas, and is in the latitude of 71 degrees and ten minutes, and is from Inger sound East, and to the Northwards 15 leagues. And being at this North Cape the second day of July, we had the sunne at North 4 degrees above the Horizon. The third day wee came to Wardhouse, having such mists Wardhouse, that we could not see the land. This Wardhouse is a Castle standing in an Island 2 miles from the maine of Finland, subject to the king of Denmarke, and the Eastermost land that he hath. There are two other
Cattell fed with fish.
The Monastery of Pechinchow.
Islands neere adjoining unto that, whereon the Castle of Wardhouse standeth. The inhabitants of those three Islands live onely by fishing, and make much stocke-fish, which they dry with frost: their most feeding is fish; bread and drinke they have none, but such as is brought them from other places. They have small store of cattell, which are also fed with fish. From Wardhouse we sailed Southsoutheast ten leagues, and fell with a Cape of land called Kegor, the Northermost part of the lande of Lappia. And betweene Wardhouse, and the said Cape is a great Bay, called DommeshafF, in the South part whereof is a Monasterie of Monkes of the Russes religion, called Pechinchow. Thus proceeding forward and sayling along the coast of the said land of Lappia, winding Southeast, the fourth day through great mists and darkenes we lost the company of the other three ships, and met not
416
with them againe, untill the seventh day, when we fell with a Cape or headland called Swetinoz, which is the entring into the Bay of S. Nicholas. At this Cape lieth a great stone, to the which the barkes that passed thereby, were wont to make offrings of butter, meale, and other victuals, thinking that unlesse they did so, their barkes or vessels should there perish, as it hath bene oftentimes seene: and there it is very darke and mistie. Note that the sixt day we passed Arzina reca by the place where Sir Hugh Willoughbie, with all the n™ his company perished, which is called Arzina reca, that is to say, the river Arzina.	loughbiewas
The land of Lappia is an high land, having snow frozen.
lying on it commonly all the yere. The people of the Countrey are halfe Gentiles: they live in the summer time neere the sea side, and use to take fish, of the which they make bread, and in the winter they remove up into the countrey into the woods, where they use' hunting, and kill Deere, Beares, Woolves, Foxes, and other beasts, with whose flesh they be nourished, and with their skinnes apparelled in such strange fashion, that there is nothing seene of them bare but their eies. The Lapplans They have none other habitation, but onely in tents, covered all removing from place to place, according to the season of the yeere. They know no arte nor facultie, but onely shooting, which they exercise dayly, as well men as women, and kill such beasts as serve them for their foode. Thus proceeding along the coast from Swetinoz aforesaid, the ninth day of July wee came to Cape Grace, being in the latitude of 66 degrees and 45 minutes, and is at the entring in of the Bay of S.
Nicholas. Aboord this land there is 20 or 30 fadoms water, and sundry grounds good to anker in. The The current current at this Cape runneth Southwest and Northeast. at£ateZrace' From this Cape wee proceeded along untill we came to Crosse Island, which is seven leagues from the sayd Cape Southwest: and from this Island, wee set over to the other side of the Bay, and went Southwest, and fell
II	417	2D
with an headland called Foxenose, which is from the The entering sayd Island 25 leagues. The entring of this Bay from Crosse Island to the neerest land on the other side is seven leagues seven leagues over. From Boxenose proceeding forward broad at the the twelfth day of the sayd moneth of July, all our least. foure ships arrived in safetie at the road of Saint Nicholas in the land of Russia, where we ankered, and had sailed from London unto the said roade seven hundred and fifty leagues. The Russian ambassadour and his com-fl. 312.] pany with great joy got to shore, and our ships here forthwith discharged themselves: and being laden againe, and having a faire winde, departed toward England the August. first of August. The third of the sayd moneth I with other of my company came unto the citie of Colmogro, being an hundred verstes from the Bay of Saint Nicholas, and in the latitude of 64 degrees 25 minutes. 1 tarried at the said Colmogro untill the fifteenth day: and then I departed in a little boate up the great river of Dwina, which runneth very swiftly, and the selfe same day Pinegs river, passed by the mouth of the river called Pinego, leaving it on our lefte hand fifteene verstes from Colmogro. On both sides of the mouth of this river Pinego is high land, great rockes of Alablaster, great woods, and Pineapple trees lying along within the ground, which by report have lien there since Noes flood. And thus proceeding forward the nineteenth day in the morning, The towne of I came into a town called Yemps, an hundred verstes Temps. from Colmogro. All this way along they make much tarre, pitch and ashes of Aspen trees. From thence I came to a place called Ustiug, an ancient citie the last day of August. At this citie meete two rivers: the one called Jug, and the other Sucana, both which fall into the aforesaid river of Dwina. The river Jug hath his spring in the land of the Tartars called Chere-mizzi, joining to the countrey of Permia: and Succana hath his head from a lake not farre from the citie of Ustiug. Vologda. Thus departing from Ustiug, and passing by the river Succana, we came to a towne called Totma.
418
About this place the water is verie shallow, and stonie, and troublesome for Barkes and boats of that countrey, which they call Nassades, and Dosneckes, to passe that way: wherein marchandise are transported from the aforesayd Colmogro to the citie of Vologhda. These descripvessels called Nassades, are very long builded, broade made, and close above, flatte bottomed, and draw not above foure foote water, and will carrie two hundred tunnes: they have none iron appertaining to them but all of timber, and when the winde serveth, they are made to sayle. Otherwise they have many men, some to hale and drawe by the neckes with long small ropes made fast to the sayd boats, and some set with long poles. There are many of these barks upon the river of Dwina: And the most part of them belongeth unto the ci tie of Vologhda: for there dwell many marchants, and they occupie the said boates with carying of salte from the sea side unto the sayd Vologhda. The twentieth of September I came unto Vologhda, which is a great citie, and the river passeth through the midst of the same. The houses are builded with wood of Firre trees, joyned one with another, and round without: the houses are foure square without any iron or stone worke, covered with birch barkes, and wood over the same: Their Churches are all of wood, two for every parish, one to be heated for Winter, and the other for Summer.
On the toppes of their houses they laye much earth, for feare of burning : for they are sore plagued with fire. This Vologhda is in 59 degrees, eleven minutes, and is from Colmogro, 1000 verstes.
All the way I never came in house, but lodged in the wildernesse, by the rivers side, and caried provision for the way. And he that will travell those wayes, must Good counsel! carie with him an hatchet, a tinder boxe, and a kettle, for t™™116™' to make fire and seethe meate, when he hath it: for there is small succour in those parts, unlesse it be in townes.
419
The first day of December, I departed from Vologhda in poste in a sled, as the maner is in Winter. And the way to Moscua is as followeth. From Vologhda to Commelski, 27 verstes, so to Olmor 25 verstes, so to Teloytske 20 verstes, so to Ure 30 verstes, so to Voshan-sko 30 verstes, then to Yeraslave 30 verstes, which standeth upon the great river Volga, so to Rostove, 50 verstes, then to Rogarin 30 verstes, so to Peraslave 10 verstes, which is a great towne, standing hard by a faire lake. From thence to Dowbnay 30 verstes, so to Godo-roke 30 verstes, so to Owchay 30 verstes, and last to the Mosco 25 verstes, where I arrived the sixt day of December. December.
There are 14 postes called Yannes betweene Vologhda and Mosco, which are accompted 500 verstes asunder.
The 10 day of December I was sent for to the Emperors Castle by the sayd Emperour, and delivered my letters unto the Secretary, who talked with me of divers matters, by the commandement of the Emperour. And after that my letters were translated, I was answered that I was welcome, and that the Emperour would give me that I desired.
The 25 day, being the day of the nativitie, I came into the Emperors presence, and kissed his hand, who sate aloft in a goodly chaire of estate, having on his heade a crowne most richly decked, and a stafFe of gold in his hand, all apparelled with golde, and garnished with precious stones.
There sate distant from him about two yardes his brother, and next unto him a boy of twelve yeares of age, who was inheritor to ye Emperor of Casan, conquered by  this Emperor 8 yeares past. Then sate his nobilitie round about him, richly apparelled with gold and stone. And after I had done obeisance to the Emperour, he with his own mouth calling me by my name, bade me to dinner, and so I departed to my lodging till dinner time, which was at sixe of the clocke, by candle light.
The Emperour dined in a fayre great hall, in the midst 420
whereof was a pillar foure square, very artificially made, about which were divers tables set, and at the uppermost part of the hall, sate the Emperour himselfe, & at his table sate his brother, his Uncles sonne, the Metropolitane, the young Emperour of Casan, and divers of his noble men, all of one side. There were divers Ambassadors, & other strangers, as well Christians as heathens, diversly apparelled, to the number of 600 men, which dined in the sayd hall, besides 2000 Tartars, men of warre, which were newly come to render themselves to the Emperour, and were appointed to serve him in his wars against the Lieflanders, but they dined in other hals. I was set at a litle table, having no stranger with me, directly before the Emperors face. Being thus set and placed, the Emperour sent me divers bowles of wine, and meade, & many dishes of meat from his own hand, which were brought me by a Duke, and my table served all in gold and silver, and so likewise on other tables, there were set bowles of gold, set with stone, worth by estimation 400 pounds sterling one cup, besides the plate which served the tables.
There was also a Cupbord of plate, most sumptuous and rich, which was not used : among the which, was a piece of golde of two yardes long, wrought in the toppe with towers, and dragons heads, also divers barrels of gold and silver, with Castles on the bungs, richly and artificially made. The Emperour and all the hall throughout was served with Dukes : and when dinner was ended, the Emperour called me by name, & gave me drinke with his own hand, & so I departed to my lodging.
Note, that when the Emperour drinketh, all the company stand up, and at every time he drinketh or tasteth of a dish of meate he blesseth himselfe. Many other things I sawe that day, not here noted.
The 4 of January, which was Twelftide with them, the Emperour, with his brother and all his nobles, all most richly apparelled with gold, pearles, precious stones, and
421
A.D.
I558-
costly furres, with a crowne upon his head, of the Tartarian fashion, went to the Church in procession, with the Metropolitan, and divers bishops and priests. That day I was before the Emperour again in Russe apparell, and the Emperour asked if that were not I, and his Chancelor answered yea. Then he bad me to dinner: then came he out of the church, and went with the procession upon the river, being all frozen, and there standing bare headed, with all his Nobles, there was a hole made in the ice, and the Metropolitan hallowed the water with great solemnitie and service, and did cast of the sayd water upon the Emperors sonne and the Nobility. That done, the people with great thronging filled pots of the said water to carie home to their houses, and divers children were throwen in, and sicke people, and plucked out quickly againe, and divers Tartars christened : all which the Emperour beheld. Also there were brought the Emperours best horses, to drink at the sayd hallowed water. All this being ended, he returned to his palace againe, and went to dinner by candle light, and sate in a woodden house, very fairely gilt. There dined in the place, above 300 strangers, and I sate alone as I did before, directly before the Emperour, and had my meat, bread and drinke sent me from the Emperour.
The citie of Mosco is great, the houses for the most part of wood, and some of stone, with windowes of yron, which serve for summer time. There are many faire Churches of stone, but more of wood, which are made hot in the winter time. The Emperors lodging is in a faire and large castle, walled foure square of bricke, high, and thicke, situated upon a hill, 2 miles about, and the river on the Southwest side of it, and it hath 16 gates in the walles, & as many bulwarks. His palace is separated from the rest of the Castle, by a long wall going north and south, to the river side. In his palace are Churches, some of stone and some of wood, with round towers fairely gilded. In the Church doores and within the Churches are images of golde : the chiefe markets for all 422
things, are within the sayd Castle, and for sundry things sundry markets, and every science by it selfe. And in the winter there is a great market without the castle, upon the river being frozen, and there is sold corne, earthen pots, tubs, sleds, &c. The castle is in circuit 2900 pases.
The countrey is ful of marish ground, & plaine, in woods and rivers abundant, but it bringeth forth good plenty of corne. This Emperour is of great power : for he hath conquered much, as wel of the Lieflanders, Poles, Lettoes, and Swethens, as also of the Tartars, & Gentiles, called Samoeds, having thereby much inlarged his dominions. He keepeth his people in great subjection : all matters passe his judgement, be they never so small. The law is sharpe for all offenders.
The Metropolitan dealeth in matters of religion, as himselfe listeth, whome the Emperour greatly honoreth.  They use the ceremonies, and orders of the Greeke Church. They worship many images painted on tables, and specially the image of S. Nicholas. Their Priests be maried, but their wives being dead, they may not marie the second time, and so become Monkes, whereof there are a great number in the land.
They have foure Lents in the yeere, and the weeke before Shrofetide, they call the Butter weeke, &c.
They have many sortes of meats and drinkes, when they banket and delight in eating of grosse meates, and stinking fishe. Before they drinke they use to blowe in the cup : their greatest friendship is in drinking: they are great talkers and lyers, without any faith or trust in their words, flatterers and dissemblers. The women be there very obedient to their husbands, & are kept straightly from going abroad, but at some seasons.
At my being there, I heard of men and women that drunke away their children, and all their goods at the Emperors taverne, and not being able to pay, having impauned himselfe, the Taverner bringeth him out to the high way, and beates him upon the legges: then they that
423
passe by, knowing the cause, and having peradventure compassion upon him, give the money, and so he is ransomed.
In every good towne there is a drunken Taverne called a Cursemay, which the Emperour sometime letteth out to farme, & sometimes bestoweth for a yeare or two on some duke or gentleman, in recompense of his service: and for that time he is Lord of all the towne, robbing and spoiling, and doing what pleaseth him: and then he being growen rich, is taken by the Emperor, and sent to the warres againe, where he shall spend all that which he hath gotten by ill meanes: so that the Emperour in his warres is little charged, but all the burden lieth upon the poore people.
They use sadles made of wood & sinewes, with the tree gilded with damaske worke, & the seat covered with cloth, sometimes of golde, and the rest Saphian leather, well stitched. They use little drummes at their sadle bowes, by the sound whereof their horses use to runne more swiftly.
The Russe is apparelled in this maner: his upper garment is of cloth of golde, silke, or cloth, long, downe to the foot, and buttoned with great buttons of silver, or els laces of silke, set on with brooches, the sleeves thereof very long, which he weareth on his arme, ruffed up. Under that he hath another long garment, buttoned with silke buttons, with a high coller standing up of some colour, and that garment is made straight. Then his shirt is very fine, and wrought with red silk, or some gold, with a coller of pearle. Under his shirt he hath linnen breeches, upon his legs, a paire of hose without feete, and his bootes of red or yellow leather. On his head hee weareth a white Colepecke, with buttons of silver, gold, pearle, or stone, and under it a blacke Foxe cap, turned up very broad.
When he rideth on horsebacke to the warres, or any journey, he hath a sword of the Turkish fashion, and his bowe and arrowes of the same maner. In the towne he
424
weareth no weapon, but onely two or three paire of knives, having the hafts of the tooth of a fish, called the Morse.
In the Winter time, the people travell with sleds, in towne and countrey, the way being hard, and smooth with snow: the waters and rivers are all frozen, and one horse with a sled, will draw a man upon it 400 miles, in three daies: but in the Summer time, the way is deepe with mire, and travelling is very ill.
The Russe, if he be a man of any abilitie, never goeth out of his house in the winter, but upon his sled, and in Summer upon his horse: and in his sled he sits upon a carpet, or a white Beares skinne: the sled is drawen with a horse well decked, with many Foxes and Woolves tailes at his necke, & is conducted by a litle boy upon his backe: his servants stand upon the taile of the sled &c.
A.D.
1557-
