A letter of Sigismond king of Polonia, written 1559. in the 39. yeere of his reigne to Elizabeth the Queenes most excellent Majestic of England, &c.
QIgismudus Augustus by the grace of God king of 0 Polonia, great Duke of Lituania, Russia, Prussia, Massovia, and Samogetia, &c. Lord and heire &c. to the most Noble Princesse Ladie Elizabeth by the same grace of God Queene of England, France and Ireland, &c. our deare sister and kinsewoman, greeting and increase of all felicitie. Whereas your Majestie writeth to us that you have received two of our letters, wee have looked that you should have answered to them both. First to the one, in which we intreated more at large in forbidding the voyage to Narve, which if it had bene done, we had bene unburdened of so often writing of one matter : and might have answered your Majestie much better to the purpose. Now we thus answere to your Majestie to those matters of the which you writte to us the 3 of October from Windsore. First, forasmuch as your Majestie at the request of our letters hath discharged the arrest of Marchants goods, and of the names of the men of Danske our subjects, which was set upon them by the commandement of your Majestie : and also have restored the olde and ancient libertie of traffique, we acknowledge great pleasure done unto us in the same : and also thinke it to bee done according to common agreement made in times past. Neither were we ever at any time of any other opinion touching your Majestie, but that wee should obtaine right and reason at your hands. Forasmuch as we likewise shall at all times be ready to grant to your Majestie, making any request for your subjects, so farre as shall stand with justice, yet neither will yee yeeld any thing to your Majestie in contention of love, benevolence, and mutuall office, but that we judge every good turne of yours to be recompensed by us to the utter-485
The trade to Narve forbidden by the K. of Poland.
The ancient covenants oj trafficke be-ttoeene England W Prussia.
most: and that shall we proove as occasion shall serve. Therefore we shall commaund the arrests, if any be made by our subjects (as it is unknowen to us) of merchants The olde liber- goods and English names to be discharged : and shall tie oftrafficke. conserve the olde libertie of trafficke, and all other things which shall seeme to apperteine to neighbourhood be-tweene us and your Majesty: so that none of the subjects of your Majesty hereafter presume to use the navigation to the Narve forbidden by us, and full of danger not onely to our parts, but also to the open destruction of all The meanes of Christians and liberali nations. The which as we have increase of the wr^fen afore so now we write againe to your Majesty ot the	f	O	•	J J
Moscovite.	know and feele of a surety, the Moscovite, enemy
to all liberty under the heavens, dayly to grow mightier by the increase of such things as be brought to the Narve, while not onely wares but also weapons heeretofore unknowen to him, and artificers & arts be brought unto him: by meane whereof he maketh himselfe strong to vanquish all others. Which things, as long as this voyage to Narve is used, can not be stopped. And we perfectly know your Majesty can not be ignorant how great the cruelty is of the said enemy, of what force he is, what tyranny he useth on his subjects, and in what servile sort they be under him. We seemed hitherto to vanquish him onely in this, that he was rude of arts, and ignorant of policies. If so be that this navigation to the Narve continue, what shall be unknowen to him ? Therefore we that know best, and border upon him, do admonish other Christian princes in time, that they do not betray their dignity, liberty and life of them and their subjects to a most barbarous and cruell enemy, as we can no lesse do by the duty of a Christian prince. For now we do foresee, except other princes take this admonition, the Moscovite puffed up in pride with those things that be brought to the Narve, and made more perfect in warlike affaires with engines of warre and shippes, will make assault this way on Christendome, to slay or make bound all that shall withstand him : which God defend. With
486
which our admonition divers princes already content themselves, and abstaine from the Narve. The others that will not abstaine from the sayd voyage shalbe impeached by our navie, and incurre the danger of losse of life, liberty, wife and children. Now therfore if the subjects of your Majesty will forbeare this voyage to Narve, there shalbe nothing denied to them of us. Let your Majesty well weigh and consider the reasons & occasions of our stopping of ships going to the Narve. In which stopping, our subjects of Danske be in no fault, as we have already written to your Majesty, neither use we their counsell in the same. In any other matter, if there be any fault in them against your Majesty or your subjects, we will gladly do justice upon them, that your Majesty may well understand that we be carefull of you and your subjects. Neither thinke we it meet to take Hamburgh, or any other place to judge the matter : for we have our councell & judgement seat at Rie, where your Majesty & your subjects, or any other, shal have justice administred unto them, with whom we have had ancient league and amity. And thus much we have thought good to let your Majesty understand. Fare ye well. Dated the sixt of December the 39 of our reigne.
Sigismundus Augustus Rex.
