The thirde voyage into Persia, begun in the yeere 1565-	l5f>5- by Richard Johnson, Alexander Kitchin,
and Arthur Edwards.
A letter of Arthur Edwards to M. Thomas Nicols, Secretarie to the worshipful company trading into Russia and other the North parts, concerning the preparation of their voyage into Persia.
Jeraslave a towns upon the riverofVolga.
Richard Johnson chiefe of the third voyage into Persia.
Aster Nicols, my bounden duetie remem-bred, with desire of God for the preservation of you and yours: you shall understand that the second of March I was sent by M. Thomas Glover (your Agent) unto Jeraslave, appointed to receive such goods as should come from
Vologhda, as also such kinde of wares as should be bought and sent from Mosco by your Agent, and M. Edward Clarke, thought meete for your voyage of Persia. And further, I was to provide for biscuit, beere, and beefe, and other victuals, and things otherwayes needful according to advise. Thus I remained here until the comming of your Agent, which was the 12. of May, who taried here three dayes, to see us set forwards on our voyage, and then he departed towards Colmogro, having appointed (as chiefe for your voyage of Persia) Richard Johnson. For my part I am willing, as also have bene & shalbe content to submit my selfe under him, whom the Agent shall appoint, although he were 44
such a one as you should thinke in some respects unmeete. Thirtie two packes of carseis are all of that kinde of cloth that we shall have with us. The other 18.
packs that should have gone, were sold in Mosco. What other goods are shipped for our voyage, you shall understand by your Agents letters. Whereas Edward Clarke (being an honest man) was appointed Agent for Persia, as one for those parts more fit then any I do know here, God hath taken him unto his mercie, who departed this present life the 16. of March last past. I wished of God for my part he had lived: for my desire was in his company to have travelled into Persia. Your barke or craer made here for the river of Volga and the Caspian sea is very litle, of the burthen of 30. tunnes at the most. It is handsomly made after the English fashion: but I thinke it too litle for your goods and provision of victuals. If the worshipful company would send hither a Shipwright, being skilfull to make one of the burden of 60. tunnes or more, drawing but sixe foote water at the most when it is laden, I thinke it should be profitable. For if your owne goods would not lade the same, here be Marchants that would bee glad and faine to give great fraight to lade their goods with us, whereby your charges would be much lessened: And so it may happen, the wages of your men hired here may be saved, and your servants and goods in farre greater assurance: for their boates here are dangerous to saile with and to passe the Caspian sea. There be Carpenters here that will doe well ynough having one to instruct them. Your wares bought here, and orders taken for those that goe for your voyage of Persia are yet unknowen unto me: wherefore I cannot (as I would at this present) write to you thereof. Yet, (as you do know) it was the Governors mind I should be acquainted with greater affaires then these. Howbeit I doubt not but I shall be informed of them
A barke of yi. tunnes made at Jeraslave
to passe the Caspian seas.
that are appointed, and all things shall be bought when they shall see time and have more laisure. Thus in hast (as appeareth) I commit you and yours into the hands of
almightie God; who preserve you in perfect health with increase of worship.
From Jeraslave the 15. of May 1565.
By yours to command here or elsewhere during life. Arthur Edwards.
Another letter of the said M. Arthur Edwards, 1566.	written the 26. of April 1566. in Shamaki
in Media, to the right worshipful Sir Thomas Lodge Knight and Aiderman: and in his absence to M. Thomas Nicols, Secretarie to the right worshipfull companie trading into Russia, Persia, and other the North and East partes, touching the successe of Richard Johnson in the third voiage into Persia.
WOrshipfull Sir, my bounden duetie remembred, with heartie prayer unto God for the preservation of you and yours in perfect health with increase of worship. It may please you that my last letter I sent They departed you was from Astracan the 26 of July 1565. From from Astracan whence Richard Johnson, my selfe, and Alexander Khchin, departed as the 30 of the same. And by meanes of contrary windes, it was the 23 of August before we came to our desired port named Nazavoe. There, after we had gotten your goods on land, with much labour and strength of men, as also windlesses devised and made, we haled your barke over a barre of beach or peeble stones into a small River, sending your ships apparell with other things to an house hired in a village thereby. And as soone as we might get camels, September. being the fift of September we departed thence, and came to this towne of Shamaki the 11. of the same: and the Presents to the . day folowing, we presented unto Abdollocan the king k^Qidolow~ of this countrey, one timber of Sables, one tunne or nest ‘ of silver cups parsill gilt, three Morses teeth, 4. Arshines of skarlet, 3. pieces of karseis, with 40. red foxes.
He received our presents with giving us thanks for our good wils, demanding if M. Jenkinson were in good health, and whether he would returne into these parts againe. He willed us also himselfe to sit downe before him the distance of a quoits cast from his tent, where he sate with divers of his counsaile and nobilitie, sending us from his table such meate as was before him: And after certaine talke had with us, he sayd, if he might perceive or know any maner of person to doe us any wrong, he would punish them in example of others, whereby we should live in quietnesse, and have no cause to complaine, giving us a litle house for the time, untill a better might be provided in such place as we should thinke most meete, never willing us to rise or depart, untill such time as we of our selves thought it convenient. At the taking of our leave, hee willed us to put our whole minds and requests in writing, that he might further understand our desires. But while we were about to doe so, God tooke this good king our friend out of this present life the 2. of October past. The want of him hath bene the cause that as yet wee cannot receive certaine debts. Howbeit, we doubt not but we shall recover all such summes of money as are owing us for this voyage. As for Thomas Alcocks debts they are past hope of recoverie, which had not bene lost if the king had lived. We trust in the place of him, God will send as friendly a king towards us: who by report (and as we be credibly informed,) shall bee his sonne named the Mursay: who since the death of his father, at our being with him, promised to shew us more friendship then ever we found: God grant the same.
Great troubles have chanced in these parts. Of those which were of the old kings counsell or bare any rule about him in these quarters, some are in prison, some are pinched by the purse, and other sent for unto the Shaugh. These troubles have partly bene the let that wares were not sold as they might, to more profite. Your Agent Richard Johnson bought foure horses, minding to have 47
A house given our men in Zhamaki by the king.
The death of Abdollocan the 2. of October 1565.
Mursay the new king of Media.
The death of Alexander Kitchin the 23. of October 1565.
The Caspian sea veryshoald in divers places.
sent to Casbin Alexander Kitchin, whom God tooke to his mercy the 23. of October last: and before him departed Richard Davis one of your Mariners, whose soules I trust the Lord hath received to his mercy. We are now destitute of others to supply their roumes. Foure Mariners were few enough to saile your barke, whereof at this present we have but one, whose name is William Smith, an honest yong man, and one that doeth good service here. For want and lacke of Mariners that should know their labours, we all were like to be cast away in a storme. For all the broad side of our barke lay in the water, and we had much adoe to recover it, but God of his mercy delivered us. Mariners here may doe you good service all the winter otherwayes : and merchants here will be gladder to ship their goods in us giving good fraight. One merchant at this present is content to pay 20. rubbles for twentie camels lading fraight to Astracan. Such barkes as must passe these seas, may not draw above five foote of water, because that in many places are very shallow waters. Wee mind hereafter to make the Russian boates more strong, and they shall serve our turnes very well.
And whereas some in times past tooke great paines, travell and care, and could not have their desire in the getting of the Shaughs letters or priviledge : Now, I trust (with Gods helpe) they may be obtained : which being had, will be beneficiall to the company, and great quietnes to those that shal remaine here, although heretofore things have chanced ill, as the like in other countries hath bene. But I doubt not, this priviledge once gotten and obtained, we shall live in quietnesse and rest, and shall shortly grow into a great trade for silkes both raw and wrought, with all kind of spices and drugs, and other commodities here, as to M. Anthonie Jenkinson is well knowen, who (I doubt not) hath long agoe throughly advertised the Companie thereof.
The trueth of the slaughter of Thomas Alcock your The murther-servant, is not certainly knowen. Some thinke it was ing<f Thomas by the meanes of a noble man, with whom your sayd Alcock' servant was earnest in demanding of your debts : upon whose words he was so offended, that he procured his death. But other doe thinke verily, that in riding from the Court without companie, false knaves lay in waite, thinking he had much about him, and so slew him.
I doubt not though this misfortune hath chanced, that things shall come well to passe, and that we shall be better beloved when we shall be more knowen.
Honest merchants are glad of our being here, and seeke to grow in acquaintance with us, being glad to further us in that they may, & have spoken in our favours to the chiefest of this Countrey : one being a noble man, with whom your Agent and I are entred into friendship, who is at this time in great favour with the Shaugh. He hath here and in other places of these parts set a good stay in things since the kings death : he is well knowen to M. Jenkinson, his name Cozamomet a is Cozamomet. Also another Duke named Ameddin-beck is our great friend : And his sister is the Shaughes wife. These two have promised your Agent by their lawe, not onely to procure to get the Shaughes privi-ledge, but also that I shall have the debts paied me of those that went from hence to Casbin, if we would send one with them. In consideration whereof, I was upon short warning (for want of a better) appointed by your Agent M. Richard Johnson, all excuses laied apart, presently to put my selfe in readinesse, and to depart in company with these noblemen : with charge, when God should send me to Casbin, to use my discretion with their advise, for the recovering of your debts and priviledge. I shall have with mee one interpreter and two bought servants : one of which partly understandeth this tongue, and may be put in trust whatsoever should become of me. I have received 6. The value of tumens in ready money, 200. shaughs is a tumen, atumen-
in	49	d
reckoning every shaugh for sixe pence Russe. I have further received two timbers of Sables, one to be sold, the other to bee given to Thomas the Shaugh : and have order further to give as I shall see good to those that shall further my suite, and as occasion serveth. And forasmuch as I am commanded to go, I shall willingly do my best, putting my trust in God that he will send me well to speed in this journey.
For all kind of wares bought or sold, you shal throughly be advertised by your Agent Richard Johnson, whose reckonings or accompts at no hands I might see or be privie unto. Your karseis were good and well sorted, they are and will be sold from 150. shaughs, to 160. the piece. Two hundred pieces were sold under, that needed not : one 100. pieces at 146. and 147. the piece but more would have bene given, if circumspection had bene used. They were sold to those noble men aforesayd, when as yet it was not knowen that I should have gone with them. They may stand us much in stead, as they have promised us their good wils in that they may doe. Here is at this time bought for England 11. packes of rawe silke, 25. and 26. batmans being in every packe : The batman being 7. pound, which may be 6. pound and a halfe of English waight, being bought here from 66. to 70. shaughes the batman. It is fine and good, litle course at this time was to be had. And where course silke might be had being at Grosin, we could not send thither : for that time was neglected at the first. When wee shall have lidgers here to remaine in Sommer, we may buy it at the first hand of the countrey people that bring it to sell hither, and to other places. I would to God the Companie could find the meanes to have a vent to make sales for the one halfe that we may buy here. The Companie may have for 30. or 40. thousand pounds yeerely. And as appeareth by your Agents wordes being at Varas, he and others sawe there so great abundance, that by report of divers, 5°
JOHNSON, KITCHIN AND EDWARDS a.d. 1566. you may bestow (if it were not for the Turkes) for a two hundred thousand pounds : besides silke of all colours died in graine, bound up in pound waights, I thinke 15. of our ounces to their pound waight, and here sold for 23. shaughs, at 6.d. the shaugh, may be ii.s. 6.pence.
From Astracan in 7. or 8. dayes, wee may saile with Gilan i-dayes our barke to a place named Gilan : the which place in time to come, (I thinke) shall serve our purpose best ’ to goe unto. Atom is there good cheape, being brought Atom. from thence hither to Shamaki, and sold here for two  bists their batman, which may be 5. pence in our money : and so I have bought to bee sent home 223. batmans for example. And at Gilan there is rawe silke enough for the companies stocke. I beleeve, if any great store of wares be sent from you, that must be the place : & from thence a man may travell in 4. Gilan dayes dayes to Casbin, and there make quicke and better sales, at which place your commodities are to be sold.
For there be the chiefe and best merchants, and divers other cities round about, to wit, Teveris, Ardouil, and Caishan, being the heart of the countrey, where there is more civilitie and merchants are better used. Concerning this point I have inquired of divers merchants both Russes and others that have bene in those parts, and found them all agreeing in one tale, and perceive the same to be true, and that all kind of wares come from thence into these parts. And from Casbin to Ormus, is about Gasbin 30. daies travelling with camels. I have written the prices of wares in my letter to the governour both for ajM camels. spices and some drugs which I do know.
Also you shall understand here is plentie of yew for bowstaves. I caused three horse loades to be bought us for to know the trueth : but they were cut out of season this moneth of April, the sap being in them. Three moneths I never left speaking to the Countrey men to bring some. Your Agent will send some home for example.
This day being the 26. of Aprili I departed towards Casbin : God give me a good houre and well to speed, with a mery heart in returning againe, as my hope is I shall. I have written my mind to M. Glover your Agent, what Russian wares I thinke best to be bought for this Countrey, and to send some one hither that hath the Russe tongue, for we have need. And the companie shall do well hereafter in taking of servants to be sent hither, to see that they be such as have discretion, and be something broken in the world, and seene in the trade of merchandise, and one (if they can get some such) as can speake the Portingall tongue, may do them as good service, as those that shall be here two yeeres before him : for then we may buy a slave that can speake this language and the Portingal tongue The secret do- also, which shall then interprete unto us in all your secret doings, not making the Russes privy : for they pany are sory that we ^oe trade into these partes, for we are better beloved then they are : because they are given to be drunkards, they are much hated of these people. It is to be wished that none should serve your worships in these parts that be given to that kind of vice : And that your chiefe Agent and Factor should be able to rule and governe himselfe, that no dishonestie should be imputed to him and us. By his evill usage he paied here 24 rubbles, being in this Countrey 4. tumens for a boy, that he was charged to have conveied away from a Tesicke one of this countrey men, who willed him to sweare that he knew not where the boy was become, and he should not pay it. If he were honest he might do your worships good service because of his Russian tongue.
Your London reds are not to be sent hither, for they will not give above 18. shaughes their arshine.
Orient reds of Here be reds of more orient colour, being Venice die. Temce die. The people are given much to weare cloth : the common people specially weare karseis, and the merchants of more wealth weare broad cloth. You shall doe well to send five or sixe broad clothes, some blackes, pukes, or other 52
sad colours, that may be affoorded at 20. shaughes the arshine, and not above. It is here reported that King Philip hath given the Turkes a great overthrow at Malta, and taken 70. or 80. of his chiere captains.
Thus wishing I had more time to write, I pray you to beare with this my scribled letter, and after you have red it, that M. Nicols may have a sight thereof.
By your servant to command,
Arthur Edwards.
Commodities to be caried out of England into Persia, with their prizes there.
' 1 1^"Arseis are sold there for 180. Shaughes: so AX. that a karsey is sold there in Persia for foure pound ten shillings: for every shaugh is sixe shaugh is pence English, and every Bist is two pence halfe-peny English, and in Russe money three pence.
- 2 Tinne is sold in Persia for 14. and 18. shaughes the batman. The batman containing as I have mentioned before.
3	Brasil is at 10. and 12. shaughes the batman.
4	Red cloth fine, at 25. and 30. shaughes the yard.
5	Copper at 20. and 25. shaughes the batman.
Commodities to be brought out of Persia for t1- 3 5 8-] England.
i TA Aw silke at 60. shaughs ye batman.
2	AX Pepper at 32. shaughs ye batman.
3	Ginger at 18. & 20. shaughs ye batman.
4	Nutmegs at 30. shaughs the batman.
5	Brimstone at 4 shaughs the great batman. The
5	great batman is 12. li. English.
6	Allom at 2. bists and a halfe the batman and lesse.
7	Rice at halfe a bist the batman.
8	Gals at halfe a bist the batman.
9	Cloves at 40. shaughs the batman.
_ 10 Yew for bow staves, at
.