The copy of a letter sent to the Emperour of Moscovie, by Christopher Hodsdon and William Burrough, Anno 1570.
Ost mightie Emperour, &c. Whereas Sir William Garrard and his felowship the company of English merchants, this last Winter sent hither to the Narve three ships laden with merchandise, which was left here, and with it Christopher Hodsdon one of the sayd felowship, and
their chiefe doer in this place, who when hee came first hither, and untill such time as hee had dispatched those ships from hence, was in hope of goods to lade twelve or thirteene sailes of good ships, against this shipping, wherefore he wrote unto the sayd Sir William Garrard and his companie to send hither this spring the sayd number of thirteene ships. And because that in their comming hither wee found the Freebooters on the sea, and supposing this yeere that they would be very strong, he therefore gave the said sir William and his Companie advise to furnish the sayd number of ships so strongly, as they should bee able to withstand the force of the Freebooters : whereupon they have according to his advise sent this yeere thirteene good ships together well furnished with men and munition, and all other necessaries for the warres, of which 13. ships William Burrough one of the said felowship is captaine general, unto whom there was given in charge, that if hee met with any the Danske Freebooters, or whatsoever robbers and theeves that are enimies to your highnesse, he should doe his best to apprehend and take them. It so hapned that the tenth day of this moneth the sayd William with his fleete, met with sixe ships of the Freebooters neere unto an Island called Tuttee, which is about 50. versts from Narve, unto which Freebooters he with his fleete gave chase, and tooke of them the Admirall, 167
A.D.
1570
Five ships of Freeboters taken.
wherein were left but three men, the rest were fled to shore in their boats amongst the woods upon Tuttee, on which ship he set fire and burnt her. He also tooke foure more of those ships which are now here, and one ship escaped him : out of which foure ships some of the men fled in their boates and so escaped, others were slaine in fight, and some of them when they saw they could not escape, cast themselves willingly into the Sea and were drowned. So that in these five ships were left but 83. men.
The said Wil. Borough when he came hither to Narve, finding here Christopher Hodsdon aforenamed, both the said Christopher and William together, in the name of sir William Garrard and the rest of their whole companie and felowship, did present unto your highnesse of those Freebooters taken by our ships 82. men, which we delivered here unto Knez Voivoda, the 13. of this moneth. One man of those Freebooters we have kept by us, whose name is Haunce Snarke a captaine. And the cause why we have done it is this: When wee should have delivered him with the rest of his felowes unto the Voivodaes officers, there were of our Englishmen more then 50. which fell on their knees unto us, requesting that he might be reserved in the ship, and caried back into England: and the cause why they so earnestly intreated for him, is, that some of those our Englishmen had bene taken with Freebooters, and by his meanes had their lives saved, with great favour besides, which they found at his hands. Wherefore if it please your highnesse to permit it, we will cary him home with us into England, wherein we request your majesties favour : notwithstanding what you command of him shalbe observed.
Wee have also sent our servant to your highnesse with such bestellings and writings as wee found in those shippes : whereby your Majestie may see by whom, and in what order they were set out, and what they pretended, which writings wee have commended unto Knez Yorive 168
your Majesties Voivoda at Plesco, by our servant. And have requested his furtherance for the safe deliverie of them to your majesties hands : which writings when you have perused, we desire that they may be returned unto us by this our servaunt, as speedily as may bee : for these ships which we now have here will be soone dispatched from hence, for that we have not goods to lade above the halfe of them. And the cause is, we have this winter (by your majesties order) bene kept from trafiqu-ing, to the companies great losse. But hoping your [I. 402.J majestie will hereafter have consideration thereof, and that we may have free libertie to trafique in all partes of your majesties Countries, according to the priviledge given unto us, we pray for your majesties health, with prosperous successe to the pleasure of God. From Narve the 15 of July, Anno 1570.
Your Majesties most humble and obedient, Christopher Hodsdon. William Borough.
