The request of an honest merchant to a friend of his, to be advised and directed in the course of killing the Whale, as followeth. An. 1575.
I pray you pleasure me in getting me perfect information of the matter hereunder specified.
FOr the provision and furniture for a shippe of 200 tunnes, to catch the Whale fish in Russia, passing from England. How many men to furnish the ship.
How many fishermen skilful to catch the Whale, & how many other officers and Coopers.
200
How many boats, and what fashion, and how many men in each boate.
What wages of such skilfull men and other officers, as we shall neede out of Biskay.
How many harping irons, speares, cordes, axes, hatchets, knives, and other implements for the fishing, and what sort and greatnes of them.
How many kettles, the greatnesse and maner of them, and what mettall, and whether they bee set on trivets or on furnaces for boiling of the traine oyle, and others.
What quantitie of caske, and what sort of caske, and what number of hoopes and twigges, and how much thereof to be staved for the traine.
What quantitie of victuals, and what kinde of victuals  for the men in all the ship for 4 moneths time.
For the common mariners and officers to governe the ship, we shall not neede any out of Biskaie, but onely men skilful in the catching of the Whale, and ordering of the oile, and one Cooper skilfull to set up the staved caske.
Also what other matters are requisite to be knowen, and done for the said voyage to catch the Whale, not here noted nor remembred.
These requests were thus answered, which may serve as directions for all such as shall intend the same voyage, or the like for the Whale.
A proportion for the setting forth of a ship of 200. tunne, for the killing of the Whale.
THere must be 55 men who departing for Wardhouse in the moneth of April, must bee furnished with 4 kintals and a halfe of bread for every man. 250 hogsheds to put the bread in.
150 hogsheds of Cidar.
6 kintals of oile.
8 kintals of bacon.
201
10 quarters of salt.
150 pound of candles.
8 quarters of beanes and pease.
Saltfish & herring, a quantitie convenient.
4 tunnes of wines.
Half a quarter of mustard seed, and a querne.
A grindstone.
800 empty shaken hogsheds.
350 bundles of hoopes, and 6 quintalines.
800 paire of heds for the hogsheds.
10 Estachas called roxes for harping irons.
10 pieces of Arporieras.
3 pieces of Baibens for the Javelines small.
2 tackles to turne the Whales.
A halser of 27 fadom long to turne ye whales.
15	great Javelines.
18	small Javelins.
50	harping irons.
6	machicos to cut the Whale withall.
2	doozen of machetos to minch the Whale.
2	great hookes to turne the Whale.
3	paire of Can hookes.
6	hookes for staves.
3	dozen of staves for the harping irons.
6	pullies to turne the Whale with.
10 great baskets.
10 lampes of iron to carie light.
5 kettles of 150 li. the piece, and 6 ladles.
1000 of nailes for the pinnases.
500 of nailes of Carabelie for the houses, and the wharfe.
18 axes and hatchets to cleave wood.
12 pieces of lines, and 6 dozen of hookes.
2 beetles of Rosemarie.
4 dozen of oares for the pinnases.
6 lanternes.
500 of Tesia.
202
WILLIAM BURROUGH’S DEPOSITION a.d.
1576.
Item, gunpouder & matches for harquebushes as shalbe needfull.
Item, there must be caried from hence 5 pinnases, five men to strike with harping irons, two cutters of Whale, 5 coopers, & a purser or two.
A note of certaine other necessarie things belonging to the Whalefishing, received of master W. Burrough.
A sufficient number of pullies for tackle for the Whale.
A dozen of great baskets.
4 furnaces to melt the Whale in.
6 ladles of copper.
A thousand of nailes to mend the pinnases.
500 great nails of spikes to make their house
3 paire of bootes great and strong, for them that shall cut the Whale.
8 calve skins to make aprons or barbecans.
