A letter from the Lord Boris Pheodorowich to the right honourable Lord William Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England.
Y the grace of God great Lord, King, and great Duke Theodor Ivanovich, governour of Russia, Volodimer, Mosco, and Novo-grod, King of Cazan and Astracan, Lord of Vobsco, and great Duke of Smolensco, Otver, Ughory, Perme, Viatsky, Bulgary, and other regions, Lord and great Duke
of all Novogrod in the low countreys, of Chernigo, of Liffeland, of Udorsky, Obdorsky, Condinsky, and all the countrey of Sibery, and commaunder of all the North parts, and Lord over the countrey of Iversky, and King of Grusinsky, and of the countreys of Kabar-dinsky, Cherchasky, and Duke of Igorsky, Lord and ruler of many Countreys more &c. His princely Majesties servant, Lord and Master of his horses, and high Steward of his house, President of the territories of Cazan and Astracan, Boris Pheodorowich Godonova, to the most honourable Counsellor of the most resplendent mightie great Lady Elizabeth Queene of England, France, and Ireland, William Burghley, Lord, and Knight of the Garter, high Treasurour of England, sendeth greeting.
I perceive by your letter that your merchants last 436
LETTER FROM BORIS PHEODOROWICH a.d.
shippes came home in saftie, and that you have received the letters sent by them, by the hands of Francis Cherie, M- Francis one from our Lord and great King of all Russia his Majesty, unto your Queenes most excellent Majesty, and one from me to her Highnesse, and one from my selfe to you : and the contents thereof you have caused to be read and well understood at large.
And whatsoever is therein written concerning Jerome Horsey, you have sought out the ground thereof, and that he is in great displeasure. And her Highnesse hath written in her letter concerning her Majesties merchants, that whereas I have taken them into protection, she taketh it very lovingly and kindely, that for her sake they have received so great kindnesse.
And touching the damages and hinderances which your merchaunts have sustained by meanes of the Emperours authorised people and officers, and that they were not permitted to traffike at libertie at the Sea port in the yeere 1589, for the space of three weekes, it hath beene against the Emperours Majesties will and pleasure, as also against mine. Where you desire and wish that [I. 5°5-l betweene our Emperours Majestie, and your Queenes Majestie, their love and amitie may not bee seperated at any time, but to continue : and you request mee that I should be good unto the English merchants, and to defend them from all such domages hereafter: your honours loving letter I have therein throughly considered : and as I have bene heretofore, so I will still continue to be a meane betwixt our Lorde and kings Majestie, and your great Lady the Queene her highnesse, for the mainteyning of brotherly love and amitie, most joyfully and willingly, as God knoweth, aswel hereafter as I have bene heretofore : praying you to doe the like also. Mine onely desire is for your most excellent Prin-cesse sake, to do all that lyeth in mee for the ayding, helping and protecting of her Majesties merchants, by the order and commaundement of our Lord and king his Majestie.
437
And to that ende, I have given order to all our authorised people to bee carefull over them, and to defende them in all causes, and to give them free libertie to trafficke at their owne willes and pleasures. It may bee that your merchants doe not certifie you the trueth of all things, nor make knowen unto your honour my readinesse to protect them : And howe my Letters and Commissions are sent to all authorised people for them, that they shoulde ayde and assist them according to the tenour or my Letters, to all others that bee in authoritie under the said Officers or otherwise.
Also your honour writeth of the debarring of your merchants at the Sea port from their accustomed libertie of enterchangeable trafficke and bartar. Touching which complaint search and inquisition hath bene made, and commaundement given, that your Queenes Majesties merchants at the Seaside, and in all places where the trade is, doe not sustaine any domage or hinderance hereafter, but that they shalbe at libertie without any hindering or letting, either in the Mosco, the Treasurehouse, or else where by any of our authorised people, but absolutely to bee at free libertie at their owne will and pleasure. And also I will continue to be their protectour and defendour in all causes, by our Lorde and kings Majesties order and commaundement: as it shalbe knowen and certified you by your people resident here in the Mosco.
Written in our Kings Majesties royall citie of Mosco from the beginning of the world 7101. yeere, in the moneth of January.
