A learned Epistle written 1581. unto the famous Cosmographer M. Gerardus Mercator concerning the river Pechora, Naramsay, Cara reca, the mighty river of Ob, the place of Yaks Olgush in Siberia, the great river Ardoh, the lake of Kittay called of the borderers Paraha, the Countrey of Carrah Colmak, giving good light to the discovery of the Northeast passage to Cathay, China and the Malucaes.
IT Inclyto & celebri Gerardo Mercatori, domino & amico singulari in manus proprias Duis-burgi in Clivia.
Um meminissem, amice optime, quanta, cum una ageremus, delectatione affi-cerere in legendis Geographicis scriptis Homeri, Strabonis, Aristotelis, Plinii, Dionis & reliquorum, laetatus sum eo quod incidissem in hunc nuncium, qui tibi has literas tradit, quem tibi com-
mendatum esse valde cupio, quique dudum Arusburgi hic ad Ossellam fluvium appulit. Hominis experientia, ut mihi quidem videtur, multum te adjuverit in re una, eaque summis a te votis expetita, & magnopere elaborata, de qua tam varie inter se dissentiunt Cos-mographi recentiores ; patefactione nimirum ingentis illius Promontorii Tabin, celebrisque illius & opulentae regionis sub Cathayorum rege per Oceanum ad Orientem brumalem. Alferius is est natione Belga, qui captivus aliquot annos vixit in Moscovitarum ditione, apud viros illic celeberrimos Yacovium & Unekium ; a quibus Antuerpiam missus est accersitum homines rei nauticae peritos, qui satis amplo proposito praemio ad illos viros se recipiant ; qui Suevo artifice duas ad eam patefac-45®
LETTER TO GERARDUS MERCATOR a.d. 1581.
tionem naves aedificarunt in Duina fluvio. Ut ille rem Dua naves proponit, quamquam sine arte, apposite tamen, & ut in satis intelligas, quod quaeso diligenter perpendas, aditus
ad Cathayam per Orientem proculdubio brevissimus est tionem Orien-&; admodum expeditus. Adiit ipse fluvium Obam tum talem.
terra per Samoedorum & Sibericorum regionem, tum mari per littus Pechorae fluminis ad Orientem. Hac experientia confirmatus certo apud se statuit navim mercibus onustam, cujus carinam non nimium profunde demissam esse vult, in Sinum S. Nicolai conducere in regione Moscovitarum, instructam illam quidem rebus omnibus ad eam patefactionem necessariis, atque illic  redintegrato commeatu, Moscoviticae nationis notissimos justa mercede asciscere : qui & Samoedicam linguam pulchre teneant, & fluvium Ob exploratum habeant, ut qui quotannis ea loca ventitant. Unde Maio exeunte constituit pergere ad Orientem per continentem Ugoriae ad Orientales partes Pechorae, Insulamque cui nomen
est Dolgoia. Hic latitudines observare, terram des- Dolgoialnsula. cribere, bolidem demittere, locorumque ac punctorum distantias annotare, ubi & quoties licebit. Et quoniam Pechorae Sinus vel euntibus vel redeuntibus commodissimus est tum subsidii tum diversorii locus propter glaciem & tempestates, diem impendere decrevit cognoscendis vadis, facillimoque navium aditu inveniendo : quo loco antehac aquarum altitudinem duntaxat ad quinque pedes invenit, sed profundiores canales esse non dubitat : deinde per eos fines pergere ad tria quatuorve milliaria nautica, relicta Insula quam Vaigats Insula Vai-vocant, media fere via inter Ugoriam & Novam Zem- sats' blam : tum Sinum quendam praeterire inter Vaigats S*”™ inter atque Obam, qui per Meridiem vergens pertingit ad ^Sats W
TT’^.r	n ° . .s .	» Obam vergens
terram Ugoriae, in quem confluunt exigui duo amnes per meridlem. II Marmesia atque Carah, ad quos amnes gens alia || Vel Naram-Samoedorum accolit immanis & eflerata. Multa in eo sey Cara tractu loca vadosa, multas cataractas invenit ; sed tamen reca' per quas possit Navigari. Ubi ad fluvium Obam perventum fuerit, qui quidem fluvius (ut referunt Samoedi)
451
Littus Oba incolitur ab Ostiis trium dierumitinere.
Yaks Oldish locus super Obam fluvium duodecim dierum itinere a mari.
Ardoh flumen influens in lacum Kit-thaym .• de quo in itinere ad Boghariam scribit Antonius Jenkin-
sonas.
septuaginta habet ostia, quas propter ingentem latitudinem multas magnasque concludentem Insulas, quas varii incolunt populi, vix quisquam animadvertat, ne temporis nimium impendat, constituit ad summum tria quatuorve tentare ora, ea prasserim quae ex consilio Incolarum, quos in itinere aliquot habiturus est, commodissima videbuntur, triaque quatuorve ejus regionis navigiola tentandis Ostiis adhibere, quam fieri potest ad littus proxime, (quod quidem sub itinere trium dierum incolitur) ut quo loco tutissime navigari possit, intelligat.
Quod si navim per fluvium Obam adverso amne possit impellere, prima si poterit cataracta, eaque, ut verisimile est, commodissima, ad eumque locum appellere, quem aliquando ipse cum suis aliquot per Sibericorum regionem terra adiit, qui duodecim juxta dierum itinere distat a Mari, qua influit in mare flumen Ob, qui locus est in continente, prope fluvium Ob cui nomen est Yaks Olgush, nomine mutuato ab illo magno Profluente flumini Ob illabente, tum certe speraret maximas se difficultates superasse. Referunt enim illic populares, qui trium duntaxat dierum navigatione ab eo loco abfuerunt (quod illic rarum est, eo quod multi ad unum duntaxat diem cymbas pelliceas a littore propellentes oborta tempestate perierunt, cimi neque a sole neque a syderibus rectionem scirent petere) per transversum fluminis Ob, unde spaciosum esse illius latitudinem constat, grandes se carinas praeciosis onustas mercibus magno fluvio delatas vidisse per Nigros, puta TEthiopes. Eum fluvium Ardoh illi vocant, qui influit in lacum Kittayum, quem Paraha illi nominant, cui contermina est gens illa latissimi fusa, quam Carrah Colmak appellant, non alia certe quam Cathaya. Illic, si necessitas postulabit, opportunum erit hybernare, se suosque reficere, resque omnes necessarias conquirere. Quod si acciderit, non dubitat interim plurimum se adjutum iri, plura illic quaerentem atque ediscentem. Veruntamen sperat aestate eadem ad Cathayorum fines se perventurum, nisi ingenti glaciei mole ad os fluvii
452
Obse impediatur, quae major interdum, interdum minor est. Tum per Pechoram redire statuit, atque illic hybernare : vel si id non poterit, in flumen Duinae, quo mature satis pertinget, atque ita primo vere proximo in itinere progredi. Unum est quod suo loco oblitus sum. Qui locum illum Yaks Olgush incolunt, a majoribus suis olim praedicatum asserunt, se in lacu Kitthayo dulcissimam campanarum harmoniam audivisse, atque ampla aedificia conspexisse : Et cum gentis Carrah Carrah Col-Colmak mentionem faciunt (Cathaya illa est) ab imo e!t Cath' pectore suspiria repetunt, manibusque projectis suspiciunt in coelum, velut insignem illius splendorem innuentes atque admirantes. Utinam Alferius hic Cosmographiam melius saperet, multum ad illius usum adjungeret, qui sane plurimus est. Multa praetereo, vir amicissime, ipsumque hominem te audire cupio, qui mihi spospondit se in itinere Duisburgi te visurum. Avet enim tecum conferre sermones, & procul dubio hominem multum adjuveris. Satis instructus videtur pecunia & gratia, in quibus aliisque officiis amicitiae feci illi, si vellet, mei copiam. Deus Optimus maximus hominis votis atque alacritati faveat, initia secundet, successus fortunet, exitum fcelicissimum concedat. Vale amice ac Domine singularis.
Arusburgi ad Ossellam fluvium 20. Februarii 1581.
Tuus quantus quantus sum Joannes Balakus.
To the famous and renowmed Gerardus Mer- [I- 511J cator, his Reverend and singular friend at Duisburgh in Cliveland, these be delivered.
CAlling to remembrance (most deare Friend) what exceeding delight you tooke at our being together, in reading the Geographicall writings of Homer, Strabo, Aristotle, Plinie, Dion, and the rest, I rejoyced not a little that I happened upon such a messenger as the bearer of these presents, (whom I do especially recom-
453
Two ships built upon the river of Dwina for the Northeast discoverie.
mend unto you) who arrived lately here at Arusburg upon the river of Osella. This mans experience (as I am of opinion) will greatly availe you to the knowledge of a certaine matter which hath bene by you so vehemently desired, and so curiously laboured for, and concerning the which the late Cosmographers do hold such varietie of opinions : namely, of the discoverie of the huge promo ntorie of Tabin, and of the famous and rich countreys subject unto the Emperor of Cathay, and that by the Northeast Ocean sea. The man is called *Alferius being by birth a Netherlander, who for certaine yeeres lived captive in the dominions of Russia under two famous men Yacovius and Unekius, by whom he was sent to Antwerp to procure skilfull Pilots and Mariners, (by propounding liberali rewards) to go unto the two famous personages aforesayd, which two had set a Sweden Shipwright on worke to build two ships for the same discoverie upon the river of Dwina. The passage unto Cathay by the Northeast (as he de-clareth the matter, albeit without arte, yet very aptly, as you may well perceive, which I request you diligently to consider) is without doubt very short and easie. This very man himselfe hath travelled to the river of Ob, both by land, through the countreys of the Samoeds, and of Sibier, and also by Sea, along the coast of the river Pechora Eastward. Being encouraged by this his experience he is fully resolved with himselfe to conduct a Barke laden with, merchandize (the keele whereof hee will not have to drawe over much water) to the Baie of Saint Nicholas in Russia, being furnished with all things expedient for such a discoverie, and with a new supply of victuals at his arrivall there, and also to hire into his companie certaine Russes best knowen unto himselfe, who can perfectly speake the Samoeds language, and are acquainted with the river of Ob, as having frequented those places yeere by yeere.
Whereupon about the ende of May hee is determined to saile from the Baie of S. Nicholas Eastward, by the
454
maine of Joughoria, and so to the Easterly parts of Pechora, & to the Island which is called Dolgoia. And Island of here also hee is purposed to observe the latitudes, to Dol&ia. survey and describe the countrey, to sound the depth of the Sea, and to note the distances of places, where, and so oft as occasion shall be offered. And forasmuch
as the Baie of Pechora is a most convenient place both for harbour and victuali, as well in their going foorth as in their returne home in regard of Ice and tempest, he is determined to bestow a day in sounding the Flats, and in searching out the best enterance for ships: in which place heretofore he found the water to be but five foote deepe, howbeit he doubteth not but that there are deeper chanels: and then hee intendeth to proceed on along those coasts for the space of three or foure leagues, leaving the Island called Vaigats almost in the middle Island of way betweene Ugoria and Nova Zembla: then also to Vaigats. passe by a certaine Baie betweene Vaigats and Ob, trend- Baie being Southerly into the land of Ugoria, whereinto fall
two small rivers called *Marmesia and Carah, upon the trending which rivers doe inhabite an other barbarous and savage Southerly: nation of the Samoeds. He found many Flats in that *Or,Naram-tract of land, and many cataracts or overfals of water, Cara yet such as hee was able to saile by. When hee shall ' come to the river of Ob, which river (as the Samoeds report) hath seventie mouthes, which by reason of the huge breadth thereof containing many and great Islands, which are inhabited with sundry sortes of people, no man scarcely can well discover, because he will not spend too much time, he purposeth to search three or foure at the most of the mouthes thereof, those chiefly which shall be thought most commodious by the advise of the inhabitants, of whom hee meaneth to have certaine with him in his voyage, and meaneth to employ three or foure boates of that Countrey in search of these mouthes, as neere as possibly he can to the shore, which within three dayes journey of the Sea is inhabited, that he may learne where the river is best navigable. If it
455.
The place up- so fall out that he may sayle up the river Ob against h streame, and mount up to that place which heretofore was ItL e accompanied with certaine of his friends, he passed unto dayes journey by land through the countrey of Siberia which is about from ye twelve dayes journey from the Sea, where the river Ob mouthes there- failed into the Sea, which place is in the Continent neere catted Yaks river Ob, and is called Yaks Olgush, borowing his Olgish. name from that mightie river which falleth into the river Ob, then doubtlesse hee would conceive full hope that hee had passed the greatest difficulties: for the people dwelling thereabout report, which were three dayes sayl- ing onely from that place beyond the river Ob, whereby the bredth thereof may be gathered (which is a rare matter there, because that many rowing with their boates of leather one dayes journey onely from the shore, have bene cast away in tempest, having no skill to guide themselves neither by Sunne nor Starre) that they have seene great vessels laden with rich and precious merchandize brought downe that great river by blacke or M. Jenkinson swart people. They call that river * Ardoh, which falleth ^Bo^har^ *nto	Kittay, which they call Paraha, where-
speaketh of the uPon bordereth that mighty and large nation which they river Ardok. call Carrah Colmak, which is none other then the nation of Cathay. There, if neede require, he may fitly Winter and refresh himselfe and his, and seeke all things which he shall stand in need of: which if it so fall out, he doubteth not but in the meane while he shall be much furthered in searching and learning out many things in that place. Howbeit, he hopeth that hee shall reach to Cathaya that very Sommer, unlesse he be hindered by great abundance of Ice at the mouth of the river of Ob, which is sometimes more, and sometimes lesse. If it so fall out, hee then purposeth to returne to Pechora, and there to Winter: or if he cannot doe so neither, then hee meaneth to returne to the river of Dwina, whither he will reach in good time enough, and so the next Spring following to proceed on his voyage. One thing in due place I forgate before.
45$
The people which dwell at that place called Yaks Olgush, affirme that they have heard their forefathers say, that they have heard most sweete harmonie of bels in the lake of Kitthay, and that they have seene therein stately and large buildings: and when they make mention of the people named Carrah Colmak (this countrey is Cathay) they fetch deepe sighes, and holding up their hands, they looke up to heaven, signifying as it were, and declaring the notable glory and magnificence of that nation. I would this Oliver were better seene in Cos-mographie, it would greatly further his experience, which doubtlesse is very great. Most deare friend, I omit many things, and I wish you should heare the man himselfe which promised mee faithfully that he would visite you in his way at Duisburg, for he desireth to conferre with you, and doubtlesse you shall very much further the man. He seemeth sufficiently furnished with money and friends, wherein and in other offices of curtesie 1 offered him my furtherance if it had pleased him to have used me. The Lord prosper the mans desires and forwardnesse, blesse his good beginnings, further his proceedings, and grant unto him most happy issue. Fare you well good sir and my singular friend. From Arusburg upon the river of Ossella, the 20. of February, 1581.
Yours wholy at commandement, John Balak.
MAster Anthonie Jenkinson in a disputation before her Majestie with sir Humfrey Gilbert for proofe of a passage by the Northeast to Cathaya, among other things alleageth this : videlicet, that there came a con-tinuall streame or currant through Mare glaciale, of such swiftnesse as a Colmak told him, that if you cast any thing therein, it would presently be caried out of sight towards the West, &c.
