A testimonie of the Northeasterne Discoverie made by the English, and of the profite that may arise by pursuing the same: taken out of the second volume of Navigations and Voyages, fol. 17. of the notable Cosmographer, M. John Baptista Ramusius, Secretarie to the State of Venice: Written in Italian in the yeere, 1557.
458
MOreover (having before spoken of divers particularities, in an excellent Map of Paulus Venetus) on that part subject to our North pole, where every writer and Cosmographer of these and of former times hitherto, have, and doe place the frozen Sea, and that the land stretcheth continually to 90. degrees, towards the pole : contrarywise, in this mappe is to bee seene, that the land extendeth onely a litle above Norway and Swethland, and then turning it selfe trendeth afterwards towards the Southeast and by East, unto the countrey of Moscovie and Russia, and stretcheth directly unto Cathay. And that this is true, the navigations which the English men have of late made, intending to discover Cathay, in the time of Edward the sixt, king of England, are very sufficient witnesses. For in the mids of their voiage, lighting by chance upon the coast of Moscovie (where they found then reigning John Vasiliwich Emperor of Russia, and great duke of Moscovia, who after he had, to his great delight and admiration, seene the English men, entertained them with exceeding great curtesies) found this sea to be navigable, and not frozen.
Which navigation to Cathay, although it be not as The great yet throughly knowen, yet if with often frequenting ^rtheLterne the same, and by long use and knowledge of those discoverie. seas it bee continued, it is like to make a wonderfull change and revolution in the state of this our part of the world.
[The testimonie
459
The testimonie of Gerardus Mercator in his last large Mappe of Europe, touching the notable discoveries of the English, made of Moscovie by the Northeast.
The same in English.
THe most famous navigation of the English men by the Northeast sea hath offered unto me a great occasion, and certaine direction for the reformation of the mappe of Europe : which discoverie hath the Northerne parts of Finmarke, Lapland, and Moscovie, laied out according to the just elevation and the quarters of the world. And further, the true observation of the latitude of the city of Mosco, made by the foresaid Englishmen, hath yeelded me an infallible rule, for the correcting of the situation of the inland countries : which notable helps being ministred unto me, I thought it my duetie to exhibite to the world this Mappe, more exact and perfect then hitherto it hath bene published.
460
Another testimonie of Joannes Metellus Sequanus concerning the same Navigation and Discoveries in his Preface prefixed before Osorius de rebus gestis Emanuelis Regis Portugalli^, written about the yeere, 1574.
The same in English.
BUt least all and the whole glory of discovering the Ocean sea should be ascribed to the Spaniards, the Englishmen about twentie yeeres past, by a new navigation into Moscovie, discovered the Northeast partes. For they by reason of the warres of Swethland being hindered from the traffique of the Moscovites and of the Narve in Liefland, opened a passage for themselves by the Ocean sea, beyond the Northerne latitude of 70. degrees : having in their course on the one side the coastes of Norway, Finmark, Lapland, Scrickfin and Biarmia: On the other side the coast of Gronland.
461
A.D. J574-	 Which voyage the Hollanders afterwarde entred into, but not without some conflict with the English. They cary thither old plate and course linnen cloth, and all kind of small Mercerie wares, serving for the apparelling of men and women, as linnen, and silke girdles, garters, purses, knives, and many such like things. And they bring away from the Moscovites, all kinde of precious Furres, and Salmons salted and dried in the smoke.
.