The voyage of Edgar the sonne of Edward which was the sonne of Edmund surnamed Ironside, brother unto K. Edward the confessor, (being accompanied with valiant Robert the sonne of Godwin) unto Jerusalem, in the yeere of our Lord 1102. Recorded by William of Malmesburie, lib. 3. histo. fol. 58.
Ubsequenti tempore cum Roberto filio A.D. 1102. Godwini milite audacissimo Edgarus Hierosolymam pertendit. Illud fuit tempus quo Turei Baldwinum regem apud Ramas obsederunt: qui cum obsidionis injuriam ferre nequiret, per medias hostium acies effugit, solius
Roberti opera liberatus praeeuntis, & evaginato gladio dextra levaque Tureos caedentis. Sed cum successu ipso truculentior, alacritate nimia procurreret, ensis manu excidit. Ad quem recolligendum cum se inclinasset, omnium incursu oppressus, vinculis palmas dedit. Inde Babyloniam (ut aiunt) ductus, cum Christum abnegare nollet, in medio foro ad signum positus, & sagittis terebratus, martyrium consecravit. Edgarus amisso milite regressus, multaque beneficia ab Imperatoribus Graecorum, & Alemannorum adeptus (quippi qui etiam eum retinere progeneris amplitudine tentassent) omnia pro natalis soli desiderio sprevit. Quosdam enim profecto fallit amor patriae, ut nihil eis videatur jucundum, nisi consuetum hauserint coelum. Und& Edgarus fatua cupidine illusus Angliam rediit, ubi (ut superius dixi) diverso fortunae ludicro rotatus, nunc remotus & tacitus, canos suos in agro consumit.
[The same
295
When the author was writing of this history.
The same in English.
AFterward Edgar being sonne unto the nephewe of Edward the confessour, travelled with Robert the sonne of Godwin a most valiant knight, unto Jerusalem. And it was at the same time when the Turkes besieged king Baldwin at Rama : who not being able to endure the straight siege, was by the helpe of Robert especially, going before him, and with his drawen sword making a lane, and slaying the Turkes on his right hande and on his left, delivered out of that danger, and escaped through the midst of his enemies campe. But upon his happie successe being more eager and fierce, as hee went forward somewhat too hastily, his sworde fell out of his hand. Which as he stouped to take up, being oppressed with the whole multitude, hee was there taken and bound. From whence (as some say) being carried unto Babylon or Alcair in Egypt, when he would not renounce Christ, he was tyed unto a stake in the midst of the market place, and being shot through with arrowes, died a martyr. Edgar having lost his knight returned, and being honoured with many rewards both by the Greekish and by the Germaine Emperour (who both of them would right gladly have entertained him stil for his great nobilitie) contemned all things in respect of his native soile. For in very deede some are so inveagled with the love of their countrey, that nothing can seeme pleasant unto them, unlesse they breath in the same aire where they were bred. Wherefore Edgar being misledde with a fond affection, returned into England ; and afterward being subject unto divers changes of fortune (as we have above signified) he spendeth*now his extreeme olde age in an obscure and private place of the countrey.
