The travailes of Gulielmus Peregrinus.
iter illud, non
Ulielmus Peregrinus, Poeta quidem per eam aetatem excellens, genere Anglus florebat, literarum, ut multi tunc erant, amator maximus, & qui bona tempora melioribus impenderat studiis. Hic cum accepisset, expeditionem in Saracenos per Regem Richardum parari, accinxit se ad 1 tantum ut miles, sed etiam peregrinus.
Vidit ea quae in Mari Hispanico fiebant, vidit quae in Syria & Palaestina commissa fuerunt, in Sultanum Babyloniae Regem, ac perfidos Saracenos. Omnia haec scripsit, & vivis depinxit coloribus, ita ut quasi prae oculis, totum poneret negotium, idemque Argumentum cum Richardo Canonico non infoeliciter, Heroico pertractavit carmine, opusque jam absolutum Huberto Cantuariorum Archiepiscopo, & Stephano Turnhamo Capitaneo rerum bellicarum expertissimo dedicavit, addito hoc titulo, Odeporicon Richardi Regis. Multaque alia edidisse Poetam talem non dubito, sed num extent illa ejus scripta, mihi non constat. Hoc tamen satis constat, eum fuisse in pretio, Anno A salutifero virginis partu 1200. sub Anglorum Rege Joanne.
344
William the Pilgrime, a very excellent Poet in those dayes and an Englishman borne, was of great fame, being much given to good letters, (as many then were) and bestowed his good time in the best kinde of studies. Hee understanding of the preparation of king Richard against the Saracens, prepared himselfe also for the same voyage, not onely as a Souldiour, but as a Pilgrime also. He sawe those things which happened in the Spanish Seas, and which were done in Syria and Palestina, against the Sultan the king of Babylon, and the trecherous Saracens. All which things he wrote and expressed them as it were in lively colours, as if they had bene still in doing before his eyes, and handled the same Argument in Heroicall verse which the forenamed Richard Canonicus did. And having finished his worke he dedicated it to Hubert Archbishop of Canterburie, and to Stephen Turneham a most expert Captaine of the warres, giving it this Title, The expedition of King Richard. And I doubt not but that so good a Poet as hee was published many other things, but whether they be extant yea or no, I know not: but this I know, that he was a man well accounted of, and flourished in the yeere after the birth of Christ 1200. under king John.
