A preparation of a voyage of King Henrie the fourth to the Holy land against the infidels in the yere 1413, being the last yere of his reigne : wherein he was prevented by death : written by Walsingham, Fabian, Polydore Virgile, and Holenshed.
N this foureteenth and last yere of king Henries reigne a councell was holden in the White friers in London, at the which among other things, order was taken for Order taken ships and gallies to be builded and made ready, and all other things necessary to be provided for a voyage, which he
meant to make into the Holy land, there to recover the city of Jerusalem from the infidels: for it grieved him to consider the great malice of Christian princes, that were bent upon a mischievous purpose to destroy one another, to the perill of their owne soules, rather then to make warre against the enemies of the Christian faith, as in conscience, it seemed to him, they were bound. We finde, sayeth Fabian in his Chronicle, that he was taken with his last sickenesse, while he was making his prayers at Saint Edwards shrine, there as it were, to take his leave, and so to proceede foorth on his journey. He was so suddenly and grievously taken, that such as were about him feared least he would have died presently: wherefore to relieve him, if it were possible, they bare
455
him into a chamber that was next at hand, belonging to the Abbot of Westminster, where they layd him on a pallet before the fire, and used all remedies to revive him. At length he recovered his speech, and perceiving himselfe in a strange place which he knew not, he willed to knowe if the chamber had any particular name, where-unto answere was made, that it was called Jerusalem. Then sayde the king, Laudes be given to the father of heaven : for now I knowe that I shall die here in this chamber, according to the prophesie of mee declared, that I should depart this life in Jerusalem.
Of this intended voyage Polydore Virgile writeth in manner following :
Ost haze Henricus Rex memor nihil homini debere esse antiquius, quam ad officium justitiae, quae ad hominum utilitatem pertinet, omne suum studium
conferre, protinus omisso civili bello, quo pudebat videre Christianos omni tempore turpiter occupari, de republica Anglica bene gubernanda, de bello in hostes communes [II. i. 72.] sumendo, de Hierosolymis tandem aliquando recipiendis plura destinabat, classemque jam parabat, cum ei talia agenti atque meditanti casus mortem attulit : subito enim morbo tentatus, nulla medicina sublevari potuit. Mortuus est apud Westmonasterium, annum agens quadragesimum sextum, qui fuit annus salutis humanae I4I3-
The same in English.
AFterward, King Henry calling to minde, that nothing ought to be more highly esteemed by any man, then to doe the utmost of his indevour for the performance of justice, which tendeth to the good and benefite of mankinde ; altogether abandoning civill warre (wherewith he was ashamed to see, how Christians at all times were dishonourably busied) entered into a more deepe consideration of well governing his Realme of 456
1413-England, of waging warre against the common enemie, and of recovering, in processe of time, the citie of Jerusalem, yea, and was providing a navie for the same purpose, whenas in the very midst of this his heroicall action and enterprise, he was surprised with death : for falling into a sudden disease, he could not be cured by any kinde of physicke. He deceased at Westminster in the 46 yeare of his age, which was in the yeere of our Lord, 1413.
