A discourse of the trade to Chio, in the yeere 1569. made by Gaspar Campion, unto master Michael Locke, and unto master William Winter, as by his letters unto them both shall appeare. Written the 14. of February.
Orshipfull Sir, &c. As these dayes past 1569.
I spake unto you about the procurement of a safe conduct from the great Turke, for a trade to Chio: The way and maner how it may be obtained with great ease shall plainly appeare unto you in the lines following. Sir, you shall under
stand that the Island of Chio in time past hath bene a Signiorie or lordship of it selfe, and did belong unto the Genowaies. There were 24. of them that governed the island which were called Mauneses. But in continuaunce of time the Turke waxed so strong and mightie, that they, considering they were not able to keepe it, unlesse they should become his tributaries, because the Island had no corne, nor any kind of vitailes to sustaine themselves, but onely that which must of necessitie come out of the Turkes dominions, and the sayd island being inclosed with the Turks round about, and but 12. miles from the Turks Continent, therefore the said Genowaies did compound and agree to be the Turkes tributaries, and to pay him 14000. thousand ducates yeerely. Alwayes provided, that they should keep their lawes both spirituali and temporali, as they did when the Hand [II. i. 115.] was in their owne hands. Thus he granted them their priviledge, which they injoyed for many yeeres, so that all strangers, and also many English men did trade thither of long continuance, and went and came in safety. The Prince In this meane time, the prince Pedro Doria (being a Pedro Doria Genouois) became a captaine to serve the Emperour with u °f 30 or 40 gallies against the Turke. And since that time divers other captaines belonging to Genoa have bene in Emperor.
The Mauneses put out of the Hand of Chio by the Turke.
The custome thorowout all Turkie is ten in every hundreth.
English men do buy more commodities of Chio then any other nation.
the service of king Philip against the Turke. Moreover, whensoever the Turke made out any army, he perceived that no nation did him more hurt then those Genouois, who were his tributaries. Likewise at the Turkes siege of Malta, before which place he lay a great while, with losse of his men, and also of his gallies, he found none so troublesome unto his force, as one Juanette Doria a Genouois, and divers others of the Hand of Chio, who were his tributaries. At which sight, he tooke such displeasure against them of Chio, that he sent certaine of his gallies to the Hand, for to seise upon all the goods of the 24 Mauneses, and to turne them with their wives and children out of the Hand, but they would let none other depart, because the Hand should not be unpeopled. So that now the Turke hath sent one of his chiefe men to rule there: whereby now it will be more easie for us to obtaine our safeconduct then ever it was before. For if the townesmen of Chio did know that we would trade thither (as we did in times past) they themselves, and also the customer (for the Turke in all his dominions doth rent his customes) would be the chiefest procurer of this our safeconduct for his owne gaine: which is no small matter: for we can pay no lesse then ten in the hundred thorowout the Turks whole dominion. Insomuch, that if one of our shippes should go thither, it would be for the customers profit 4000 ducats at least, whereas if we should not trade thither, he should lose so much. Also the burgesses, and the common people would be very glad of our trade there, for the Communally do get more by our countreymen then they do by any other nation whatsoever: for we do use to buy many of their silke quilts, and of their Scamato and Dimite, that the poore people make in that towne, more then any other nation, so that we would not so gladly trade, but the people of the countrey would be twise so willing. Wherefore they themselves would be a meanes unto their governour, by their petition to bring this trade to passe: giving him to understand that of
112
all nations in the world we do him least hurt, and that we may do his countrey great good in consuming those commodities which his countrey people make. Furthermore, it were farre more requisite that we should cary our owne commodities, then to suffer a stranger to cary them thither, for that we can affoord them better cheape then a stranger can. 1 write not this by hearesay of other men, but of mine own experience, for I have traded in the countrey above this 30 yeres, and have bene maried in the towne of Chio full 24 yeres, so that you may assure yourselfe that I will write nothing but truth. Now I will declare unto you the wares and commodities that are in the countreyes neere about Chio. There are Great store of very good galles, the best sort whereof are sold in sundrycom-England five shillings deerer then any other countrey	‘
galles. There is also cotten wooll, tanned hides, hides in the haire, waxe, chamlets, mocayares, grogerams, silke of divers countreyes, cordovan skinnes tanned white, to be made blacke, of them great quantity, and also course wooll to make beds. The natural commodities growing in the Hand it selfe are silke rawe, and masticke. Of these commodities there are laden yeerely ten or twelve great ships of Genoa, besides five or sixe that do belong to the towne of Chio, which ships are fraughted for Genoa, Messina, and Ancona. And now that the Mauneses and the chiefe merchants of Genoa are banished, the trade is cleane lost, by reason whereof merchandise must now of necessity be better cheape then they have bene in times past. But yet when all those ships did trade to the countrey, & also our ships, we never had lesse then three kintals of galles for a carsie, and in England we sold them for 35 and 36 shillings the hundred. And whereas now they are brought by the Venetians, they sell them unto us for three pound tenne shillings, and foure pound the hundred. Also we had three kintals of cotten wooll for a carsie, and solde the wooll in England for 50 shillings or 3 pound at the most, whereas now the Italians sell the same to us
v	113	h
Divers places where we may have sweete tiles fir our clothing farre cheaper then out of Spaine.
for 4 pound 10 shillings and 5 pound the hundred. In like maner chamlets, whereas we had three pieces, and of the best sort two and a halfe for a carsie, and could not sell them above 20 shillings and 22 shillings the piece, they sell them for 30 and 3 5 shillings the piece. Also grogerams, where we had of the best, two pieces and a halfe for a carsie, they sell them for foure shillings and foure shillings and sixe pence the yard. Carpets the smaller sort which serve for cupboords, we had three for a carsie : whereas we at the most could not sell them but for 20 shillings the piece, they sell them for 35 shillings the piece. And so all other commodities that the Venetians do bring, they sell them to us for the third part more gaines then we our selves in those dayes that we traded in those parts. Likewise the barrels of oile that they bring from Candia, we never could sell them above foure nobles the barrel!, where they sell them alwayes for 50 shillings & 3 pound the barrell. What great pity is this, that we should lose so good a trade, and may have it in our owne hands, and be better welcome to that countrey then the Venetians. Moreover, the Venetians come very little to Chio, for their most trade is into Alexandria. And for to assure you that we had these commodities in barter of our carsies, looke into your fathers books, and the books of Sir John Gresham, and his brethren, and you shall finde what I have sayd to be true.
Also you know, that we are forced to seeke oiles out of Spaine, and that for these many yeeres they have bene solde for 25 pound and 30 pound the tunne : whereas, if we can obtaine the foresayd safeconduct from the Turke, there are divers places in his dominions, where we may lade 500 tunnes, at 5 pound sterling the tunne. The places are Modon, and Coron, which are but twelve miles distant the one from the other, and do stand in our way to Chio, as you may plainly see by the Card. Also these are places where we may utter our owne commodities, and not onely these two places, 114
but many others, where we may have oiles, and be better used then we are in Spaine, where we pay very deare, and also are very evill intreated many wayes, as to you is not unknowen. So that by these meanes (if the marchants will) we may be eased, and have such a trade as the like is not in Christendome. Now, as for getting the safeconduct, if I were but able to spend one hundred pounds by the yeere, I would be bound to lose it, if that I did not obtaine the foresayd safeconduct. For I know that if the inhabitants of Chio did but thinke that wee would trade thither againe, they at their owne cost would procure to us a safeconduct, without any peny of charges to the marchants. So that if the marchants will but beare my charges to solicit the cause, I will undertake it my selfe. Wherefore I pray you speake to M. Winter and the other marchants, that this matter may take effect. And let me have your answere herein assoone as conveniently you may, for that the time of the yeere draweth nigh that this businesse must be done. Thus I commit you to God, and rest alwayes yours to command.
Yours as your servant Gaspar Campion.
.