The renuing and increasing of an ancient and commodious trade unto diverse places in the Levant seas, and to the chiefest partes of all the great Turks dominions, by the meanes of the Right worsh. citizens Sir Edward Osburne Aiderman, and M. Richard Staper marchant of London.
His trade into the Levant (as is before mentioned,
page 96 of this present volume, whereunto I referre the Reader) was very usuall and much
frequented from the yeere of our Lord 1511, till the yeere 1534, and afterward also, though not so commonly,
167
The voyage of John Wight, and Joseph Clements to Constantinople.
The first voyage of M. William Har-borne to Constantinople.
untill the yeere 1550, when as the barke Aucher under the conduct of M. Roger Bodenham made a prosperous voyage unto Sicilia, Candia, Sio, and other places within the Levant. Since which time the foresaid trade (notwithstanding the Grand Signiors ample privilege granted to M. Anthony Jenkenson 1553, and the strong and weighty reasons of Gaspar Campion for that purpose) was utterly discontinued, and in maner quite forgotten, as if it had never bene, for the space of 20 yeares and more. Howbeit the discreete and worthy citizens Sir Edward Osborne and M. Richard Staper seriously considering what benefite might grow to the common wealth by renuing of the foresaid discontinued trade, to the inlarging of her Majesties customes, the furthering of navigation, the venting of diverse general commodities of this Realme, and the inriching of the citie of London, determined to use some effectual! meanes for the reestablishing and augmenting thereof.
Wherefore about the yeere 1575 the foresaid R. W. marchants at their charges and expenses sent John Wight and Joseph Clements by the way of Poland to Constantinople, where the said Joseph remained 18 monethes to procure a safe conduct from the grand Signior, for M. William Harborne, then factor for Sir Edward Osborne, to have free accesse into his Highnes dominions, and obtained the same.
Which businesse after two yeres chargeable travell and suit being accomplished, the sayd M. Harborne the first of July 1578 departed from London by the sea to Hamburgh, and thence accompanied with Joseph Clements his guide and a servant, he travailed to Leopolis in Poland, and then apparelling himselfe, his guide, and his servant after the Turkish fashion (having first obteyned the king of Poland his safe conduct to passe at Camienijecz the frontier towne of his dominions next unto Turky) by good means he obteined favour of one Acmet Chaus the Turks ambassadour then in Poland, and readie to returne to Constantinople, to bee received into his com-
168
panie and carovan. And so the fourth of September 1578 he departed with the said Acmet from Leopolis in Poland, and travelling through Moldavia, Valachia, Bulgaria, and Romania, gratifying the Voiavodes with certaine courtesies, he arrived at Constantinople the 28 of October next insuing. Where he behaved himselfe so wisely and discreetely, that within few moneths after he obtained not onely the great Turkes large and ample priviledge for himselfe, and the two worshipfull persons aforesaid, but also procured his honourable and friendly letters unto her Majestie in maner following.
