A letter of the honorable M. Wil. Hareborne her majesties ambass. with the grand Signior to M. Tipton, appointing him Consul of the English in Algier, Tunis, & Tripolis of Barbarie.
Aster Tipton, I have received among others, yours of the 10. of November 1584. by Soliman Sorda, certifying the receipt of mine of the 24. of June 1584. with the 3. commandements, which not' being registred, let it now be done. Where you write the force of the privi-
lege to be broken by our ships in shooting, & therfore be lawfully taken, you are deceived, for of those taken 276
in them, hath the grand Signior now delivered us free, Wil. Moore, and Rob. Rawlings, & further promised the rest in like case, wheresoever they be, & that hereafter no violence shalbe shewed, considering ours be merchants ships which go peaceably in their voiage, & were ignorant of the orders of Algier, neither knew afar off, whether they were friends or the Christians gallies in league against us, of whom they most doubted, who not suffring our ships to come into these parts, wil make prize of the goods & captive the men, so as they are not to let them come nigh them: & since ours have not done contrary to the articles of the same privilege, wherein is no order for Algier prescribed us, as both by the originali now sent us, & also by the copy now sent you from London you may perceive, they according to right are as abovesaid to be set free, and their goods restored, which if it be not there accomplished as the grand Signior hath now commanded & most faithfully promised, neither yet in case of their denial, those offenders punished here, and our injuries redressed, we are to demand our Congie, & command our merchants her majesties subjects, to end their traffike here, which in our countrey commodities is prooved & found by the grand Signior to be so beneficial to his countries as we are assured so well thereof, as also for the honor which his ancestors never had of friendship w‘ so mighty a prince as is her majesty, he wil not but maintaine ye faith promised her, & the intercourse in due force. And where you say y‘ the grand Signor his letters, in the behalf of the French, were no more accepted there, then of a mean man, nor tooke no place, that is not material to us, our letters are after another sort much more effectuall. For our case & theirs be found far different, in y‘ they be not onely now out of favour with him, but also the commodities which they bring hither, as suger, paper, bracelets, ropes of bast almonds, &c. all which may be here wel spared, & we contrarily so wel esteemed, as he never denied us any thing since our
277
comming demanded, which neither their ambassador, nor the Venetian could have here, & therfore we rest per-swaded, knowing the wisdom of the Beglerbeg, who is advised by his friends from hence, of this our credite w‘ his master, he wil so respect his commandements, as to accomplish ye tenor therof according to our desire. And where you say y‘ the Janizers rule all there, I know right wel y* if things be not done as the grand Signior commandeth, his lieutenant must answer it. And therefore I am fully perswaded if he doe what he may they dare not resist him, for if they should, those rebels should not be unpunished of ye grand Signior. And though they speake their pleasures among themselves there, yet they be not so brutish, but they wel consider that their master ye grand Signior may not be gainsaid or mocked of any. For upon his word dependeth the life or death even of the chiefest, as I have seene since my comming hither. So whatsoever these Janizaries say, they will be better advised in their deedes then to withstand their Viceroy, if he himselfe wil use his lawfull power, which if hee doe not, hee cannot purge himselfe here of their evill proceedings against the grand Signiors friends: for the feet may not rule the bodie, but contrarywise, the head, the feete, and all the rest of the members. And for that neither for feare, affection or otherwise you omit as a faithfull true subject to her majestie to do your dutie, I do by my warrant going herewith charge you, & in her majesties name, to the uttermost to use your good and faithful endevour, as becommeth a true subject, & in all things that may concerne her majesties good service, assisting the Chaus with the rest of our messengers in counsel, travel, & what els shall be thought requisite for your good discharge of your dutie. And to ye end you may boldly proceed herein as also for the good opinion sir Edward Osborne & the company have of you, and I no lesse perswaded of youre wisedom, upright dealing, & good experience in those parts, do send you herewith the grand 278
Signiors & our patents for exercising the office of Consul there, in Tripolis & Tunis: by vertue of which authoritie you may without feare proceed as the office doeth chalenge in defence of our privilege, to redresse all injuries ofired our nation. Which if you cannot get reformed there of ye Beglerbies upon your complaint, I thereof advertised, shal doe it here, and to the uttermost maintaine you in al rightful causes whatsoever, doubt you not. And hereafter according to your advise, I wil and do give our ships order not to fight with any gallies of Alger, but to hoise out their skiffe and go aboord to shew them their safeconduct, & to present the captain with a garment, & you there in such like case are to take order that they do not forceably take any thing from them. Nothing doubting but the Viceroy (whose friehdship in her majesties behalfe I desire) will not onely performe the same your just request, & according to right, restore to libertie our men since the privilege taken, but also cause those y‘ tooke & sunke our ships to answere the value, which I have set downe truly, and rather with the least in the Inventorie translated into
Turkish, whereof the inclosed is the copy in English, which I send to the end you may be the better informed of my demand by this our Chaus Mahomet, with whom in all things you are to conferre of matters expedient, for the honor of her majesties country, & the commoditie, and libertie of poore captives, which if the Viceroy do wel consider, according to his wisedom, as the grand Signior doeth thereof, he shal wel perceive it not onely a great honour to his master as aforesaid, to continue this amitie with her majestie, but chiefly to the whole estate of his kingdom exceeding profitable, which by this means shall be abundantly served with the chiefest commodities they want, with many other things of more importance to the grand Signior his contentation, not herein to be mentioned. For I know the Viceroies experienced wisdom can wel consider thereof, in such sort as he wil not deny to accomplish his masters commandement, & our earnest 279
The Inventorie of our ships and goods sunke and taken by the gallies of Alger.
request in so smal a matter as this we require, whereof I expect no refusal! : for thereby he shall increase his honor with the grand Signior, be in credite with her majestie, be void of trouble which hereafter by future suite against him may happen, and his gallies free of such doubtful issue as doeth chance, fighting with our ships. Which, as it is well knowen to all the world, have so great hearts as never cowardly to yeeld to their enemies. And that therefore in that respect (after the proverbe, like esteeme of their like) they are the more of such a valiant prince as is their Viceroy and his couragious souldiers to be in all friendship cherished and better esteemed. If the cap-taine Bassa had bene returned from Capha, I would in like maner have procured his letters, which for that he is not, I doubt nothing but that the grand Signiors will suffise. Thus commending your selfe and these proceedings to the almighty his merciful direction, I bid you most heartily wel to fare. From my mansion Rapamat nigh Pera, this 30. of March 1585.
.