To Assan Aga, Eunuch & Treasurer to Hassan Bassa king of Alger, which Assan Aga was the sonne of Fran. Rowlie of Bristow merchant, taken in the Swalow.
Received your letters of Will. Hamor gentleman my servant very thankfully, aswel for the fervent faith that by his report I heare you have in our lord Jesus Christ, by whose onely merits and bloodshedding, you together with us and all other good Christians so truly beleeving,
shalbe saved, as also for your faithfull obedience like a true subject to her Majestie, naturally loving your countrey & countreymen, declared in your favourable furtherance of the said Wil. Hamore, procuring their redemption. Of which your good & vertuous actions, as I rejoice to understand, so wil I impart the same to your singuler commendation, both to our mistresse her Majestie, & her most honorable counsellers the nobilitie of England, to whom assure your selfe the report shalbe very welcome. And now this second time I am inforced by duetie to God & her majesty, as also by the smal regard your master had of the Grand Signors former commandements, to com-plaine unto him, though not so vehemently as I had occasion by his most unworthy answer. But I hope, & the rather by your means, he will not contrary this second commandement, threatning him, not observing the same, losse of office & life. The due execution whereof by your vertuous & careful industry procured, wil manifest to all the world, especially to her majesty, & 282
me her ambassador, your true Christian mind & English heart, intentively bent to Gods honor, & the libertie of the poore men, for which I trust you be ordained another Joseph, to folow his example in true pietie, in such sort that notwithstanding your body be subject to Turkish thraldom, yet your vertuous mind free from those vices, next under God addict to ye good service of your liege Lady & soveraigne princes, her most excellent majesty, wil continually seeke by all good means to manifest ye same in this & the like faithful service to your singuler commendation, wherby both my selfe & others in that place having found you in all good offices faithfully affectionated, may in like case performe the like towards you, when & where you may have occasion to use me : which as I for my part do assuredly promise, & wil no lesse faithfully performe : so accordingly I expect herein, and hereafter the like of you, whom most heartily saluted I commend to the divine tuition and holy direction. From my house Rapamat, this 28. of June 1586.
Your loving and good friend her Majesties Ambassador with the Grand Signor, Will. Hareborne.
