The Queenes letters to the Turke 1584. for the restitution of the shippe called the Jesus, and the English captives detained in Tripolie in Barbarie, and for certaine other prisoners in Argier.
The same in English.
Lizabeth, by the grace of the most high God, and onely maker of heaven and earth, of England, France and Ireland Queene, and of the Christian
faith, against all the Idolaters and false professors of the Name of Christ dwelling among the Christians, most invincible and puissant defender: to the most valiant and invincible Prince, Zultan Murad Can, the most mightie ruler of the kingdome of Musulman, and of the East
312
Empire the onely and highest Monarch above all, health, and many happy and fortunate yeres, with great aboundance of the best things.
Most noble and puissant'Emperour, about two yeeres nowe passed, wee wrote unto your Imperial! Majestie, that our welbeloved servant, William Hareborne, a man of great reputation and honour, might be received under your high authoritie, for our Ambassadour in Constantinople, and other places, under the obedience of your Empire of Musulman: And also that the Englishmen, being our Subjects, might exercise entercourse and marchandize in all those Provinces, no lesse freely then the French, Polonians, Venetians, Germanes, and other your confederats, which traveile through divers of the East parts: endevouring that by mutuall trafique, the East may be joyned and knit to the West.
Which privileges, when as your most puissant Majestie, by your letters and under your dispensation most liberally and favourably granted to our Subjects of England, wee could no lesse doe, but in that respect give you as great thankes, as our heart could conceive, trusting that it wil come to passe, that this order of trafique, so well ordeined, will bring with it selfe most great profits and commodities to both sides, as well to the parties subject to your Empire, as to the Provinces of our kingdome. . Which thing that it may be done in plaine and efFectuall maner, whereas some of our Subjects of late at Tripolis in Barbarie, and at Argier, were by the inhabitants of those places (being perhaps ignorant of your pleasure) evill intreated and grievously vexed, wee doe friendly and lovingly desire your Imperiali Majestie, that you will understand their causes by our Ambassadour, and afterward give commaundement to the Lieutenants and Presidents of those Provinces, that our people may henceforth freely, without any violence, or injurie, traveile, and do their businesse in those places.
And we againe with all endevour, shall studie to performe all those things, which we shall in any wise 313
A.D.
1584.
understand to be acceptable to your Imperiali Majestie, which God, the onely maker of the world, most best and most great, long keepe in health, and flourishing. Given in our pallaice at London, the fift day of the moneth of September, in the yeere of Jesus Christ our Saviour, 1584. And of our raigne, the 26.
.