Master Newberie his letter from Ormus, to M. John Eldred and William Shals at Balsara.
Right welbeloved and my assured good friends, I heartily commend me unto you, hoping of your good healths, &c. To certifie you of my voiage, after I departed from you, time wil not permit : but the 4 of this present we arrived here, & the 10 day I with the rest were
committed to prison, and about the middle of the next moneth, the Captaine wil send us all in his ship for Goa. The cause why we are taken, as they say, is, for that I brought letters from Don Antonio. But the trueth is, Michael Stropene was the onely cause, upon letters that his brother wrote him from Aleppo. God knoweth how we shall be delt withall in Goa, and therfore if you can procure our masters to send the king of Spaine his letters for our releasement, you should doe us great good: for they cannot with justice put us to death. It may be that they will cut our throtes, or keepe us long in prison: Gods will be done. All those commodities that I brought hither, had beene very well sold, if this trouble had not chanced. You shall do well to send with all speed a messenger by land from Balsara to Aleppo, for to certifie of this mischance, although it cost thirtie or forty crownes, for that we may be the sooner released, and I shalbe the better able to recover this againe which is now like to be lost: I pray you make my hearty commendations, &c. From out of the prison in Ormuz, this 21 of September, 1583.
[II. i. 248.]
[His second
457
His second Letter to the foresaid Master John Eldred and William Shales.
He barke two daies
of the Jewes is arrived here
past, by whom I know you did write, but your letters are not like to come to my handes. This bringer
hath shewed me here very great cour-tesie, wherfore I pray yt>u shew him what favor you may. About the middle of the next moneth I thinke we shall depart from hence,
God be our guide. I thinke Andrew will goe by land to Aleppo, wherein I pray you further him what you may: but if he should not goe, then I pray you dispatch away a messenger with as much speede as possible you may. I can say no more, but do for me as you would I should do for you in the like cause, and so with my very hearty commendations, &c. From out of the prison in Ormuz, this 24 day of September, t583-
Yours, John Newberie.
