Another letter of the said M. Newberie, written to Master Leonard Poore of London, from Alepo.
Right welbeloved, my very heartie commendations unto you, and the rest of my friends remembred. My last I sent you was the 25. of February
last, from Dele out of the Downes, after which time with contrary windes wee remained upon our owne coast, untill the 11. day of March, and then wee set saile from March u. Falmouth, and the thirteenth day the winde came contrary with a very great storme, which continued eight dayes, and in this great storme wee had some of our goods wette, but God bee thanked no great hurt done. After which time we sailed with a faire wind within the Streights, and so remained at Sea, and ankered at no
453
Amber greese.
Sope.
Broken glasse.
place until our comming into the roade of Tripolis in Syria, which was the last day of April. This was a very good passage. God make us thankfull for it. The foureteenth day of this present wee came from Tripolis, and the twentieth day arrived here in Alepo, and with the helpe of God to morrowe or next day, wee beginne our voyage towards Babylon and Balsara, and so into India. Our friend Master Barret hath him commended to you, who hath sent you in the Emanuel a ball of Nutmegs for the small trifles you sent him, which I hope long since you have received. Also hee hath by his letter certified you in what order hee solde those things, whereof I can say nothing, because I have not seene the accompt thereof, neither have demaunded it: for ever since our comming hither hee hath bene still busie about the dispatch of the shippe, and our voyage, and I likewise in buying of things here to cary to Balsara, and the Indies. Wee have bought in currall for 1200. and odde ducats, and amber for foure hundreth ducates, and some sope and broken glasse, with all other small trifles, all which things I hope will serve very wel for those places that wee shall goe unto. All the rest of the accompt of the Barke Reinolds was sent home in the Emanuel, which was 3600. ducats, which is 200. pound more then it was rated. For master Staper rated it but 1100. li. and it is 1300. pound, so that our part is 200. pound. Besides such profit as it shall please God to sende thereof: wherefore you shall doe very well to speake to M. Staper for the accompt. And if you would content your selfe to travell for three or foure yeeres, I would wish you to come hither or goe to Cairo, if any goe thither. For wee doubt not if you had remained there but three or foure moneths, you would like so well of the place, that I thinke you would not desire to returne againe in three or foure yeeres. And, if it should be my chance to remaine in any place out of England, I would choose this before all other that I know. My reason is, the place is healthfull and
454
LETTERS FROM JOHN NEWBERY a.d. 1583.
pleasant, and the gaines very good, and no doubt the profit will bee hereafter better, things being used in good order: for there should come in every ship the fourth part of her Cargason in money, which would helpe to put away our commodities at a very good price. Also to have two very good ships to come together, would doe very well: for in so doing, the danger of the voyage might be accompted as little as from London to Antwerpe.
Master Giles Porter and master Edmund Porter, went [II. i. 247-] from Tripolis in a small barke to Jaffa, the same day that we came from thence, which was the 14 day of this present, so that no doubt but long since they are in Jerusalem: God send them and us safe return e. At this instant I have received the account of M. Barret, and the rest of the rings, with two and twentie duckats, two medines in readie money. So there is nothing remaining in his hands but a few bookes, and with Thomas Bostocke I left certaine small trifles, which I pray you demaund. And so once againe with my hearty commendations I commit you to the tuition of the almightie, who alwayes preserve us. From Aleppo the 29 of
May 1583.	Yours assured, John Newberie.
