A letter written by the most high and mighty Empresse the wife of the Grand Signior Sultan Murad Can to the Queenes Majesty of England, in the yeere of our Lord, 1594.
114
The same in English.
LEt the beginning of our discourse be a perfect writing in the foure parts of the world, in the name of him which hath indifferently created such infinite numbers of creatures, which had neither soule nor body, and of him which mooveth the nine heavens, and stablisheth the earth seven times one above another, which is Lord and king without any deputy, who hath no comparison to his creation and worke, and is one inestimable, worshipped without all comparison, the most high God, the creator, which hath nothing like unto him, according as he is described by the Prophets, to whose power no man can attaine, and whose absolute perfection no man may controll; and that omnipotent creatour and fellow-worker, to whose Majesty all the Prophets submit themselves, among whom the greatest, and which hath obtained greatest favour, the garden of Paradise, the beame of the Sunne, the beloved of the most high God is Mahomet Mustaffa, to whom and to his adherents and followers be perpetuali peace, to whose fragrant sepulture all honour is performed. He which is emperour of the seven climats and of the foure parts of the world, the invincible king of Graecia, Agiamia, Hungaria, Tartaria, Valachia, Rossia, Turchia, Arabia, Bagdet, Caramania, Abessis, Giouasir, Sirvan, Barbaria, Alger, Franchia, Corvacia, Belgrade, &c. alwayes most happy, and possessour of the crowne from twelve of his ancestours; and of the seed of Adam, at this present emperour, the sonne of an emperour, preserved by the divine providence, a king woorthy of all glory and honour, Sultan Murad, whose forces the Lord God alwayes increase, and father of him to whom the imperiali crowne is to descend, the paradise and woonder-full tall cypresse, worthy of the royall throne, and true heire of the imperiali authority, most woorthy Mehemet
116
Can, the sonne of Sultan Murad Can, whose enterprises God vouchsafe to accomplish, and to prolong his happy dayes: on the behalfe of whose mother this present letter is written to the most gracious and most glorious, the wisest among women, and chosen among those which triumph under the standard of Jesus Christ, the most mighty and most rich governour, and most rare among womankinde in the world, the most gracious Queene of England, which follow the steps of the virgine Mary, whose end be prosperous and perfect, according to your hearts desire. I send your Majesty so honorable and sweet a salutation of peace, that al the flocke of Nightingales with their melody Cannot attaine to ye like, much lesse this simple letter of mine. The singular love which we have conceived one toward the other is like to a garden of pleasant birds: and the Lord God vouchsafe to save and keepe you, and send your Majesty an happy end both in this world and in the world to come. After the arrivall of your honourable presents from the Court of your Majesty, your Highnesse shall understand that they came in such a season that every minute ministred occasion of long consolation by reason of the comming of your Majesties Ambassadour to the triumphant Court of the Emperour, to our so great contentment as we could possibly wish, who brought a letter from your Majestie, which with great honour was presented unto us by our eunuks, the paper whereof did smell most fragrantly of camfor and ambargriese, and the incke of perfect muske; the contents whereof we have heard very attentively from point to point. I thinke it therefore expedient, that, according to our mutuall affection, in any thing whatsoever may concerne the countreys which are subject to your Majesty, I never faile, having information given unto me, in whatsoever occasion shall be ministred, to gratifie your Majesty to my power in any reasonable and convenient matter, that all your subjects businesses and affaires may have a wished and happy end. For I will alwayes be a sollicitour to the most mighty Emperour “7
This Sultana is mother to Mehemet which now reigneth as Emperor.
A.D.
*594-
>594-
for your Majesties affaires, that your Majesty at all times may be folly satisfied. Peace be to your Majesty, and to all such as follow rightly the way of God. Written the first day of the Moone of Rabie Livol in the
yere of the Prophet,
1002.
.