The second voyage made by Maister William Towrson to the coast of Guinea, and the Castle of Mina, in the yeere 1556. with the Tiger of London, a ship of 120 tunnes, the Hart of London of 60 tunnes, and a Pinnesse of sixteene tunnes.
November.
December.
Sierra Leona.
He fourteenth day of September, the yeere abovesayd, we departed from Harwich, and directed our course for the Isle of Sillie, to meete there with the Hart and Pinnesse, which were rigged and victualed at Bristoll, but arriving there the eight and twentieth day we
found them not, and therefore after long lying at hull to tarrie for them, but not espying them, we turned backe to Plimmouth the 12 day of October, and being there, the Hart and the Pinnesse came to us, so that the 15 of November we all departed together from Plimmouth at one of the clocke in the after noone, and the 28 day we had sight of the Isle of Porto Santo, and the next day in the morning of Madera.
The third day of December we fell with the He of Palma, and the 9 we were thwart of Cape Blanke, and found there certaine Caravels fishing for Pargoes.
The 19 we found our selves in the height of Sierra Leona, and all this day we ranne thwart of certaine Currants, which did set to the West Sou th westward so fast as if it had bene the overfall of a sand, making a great noyse like unto a streame or tide-gate when the water is shoale: and to proove whither we could finde ground in this place, we sounded and had 150 fadome, and no ground, and so departed.
The 30 of December we fell with the coast of Guinea, and had first sight of it about 4 leagues off. The best marke that we could take of the place to knowe it was three hilles, which lay Northeast and by East from us: 212
betwixt the Nothermost two hilles there are two high and great trees standing in sight as it were a sailes breadth one from another, and a litle more to the Northwestwards are certaine hommocks. Having sayled somewhat into the shoare wee tooke our selves to be shotte somewhat past the river de Sestos, so that we kept about to fetch it. And a litle after we had sight of three sayles of shippes and two pinnesses which were in the weather of us, and having sight of them we made our selves readie to meete them, and hailed off our ships to fetch the winde as neere as we could: and having sayled about an houre or two, they also went about, and went as we went to make themselves readie, and when we had them in chase, they went away from us : but when they had made themselves readie, they kept about againe, and came with us verie finely appointed with their streamers, and pendants and ensignes, and noyse of trum- [II. ii. 37.] pets very bravely: so when we met, they had the weather of us, and we being determined to fight, if they had bene Portugals, waved them to come under our Lee, which they denied stoutly: then we demaunded of them whence they were, and they sayd of France, we told them againe that we were of London in England. They asked of us what Portugals wee had seene, we answered, none but Fishermen: then they told us that there were certaine Portugall ships gone to the Mina to defend it, and that they met with another at the river de Sestos, The river of which was a ship of two hundred which they had burned, Sestos-and had saved none but the master and two or three Negroes, and certaine others which were sore burned which they left a shore there. Then they desired to come aboord of us with their boates to talke with us, and wee gave them leave. Then the captaine of the Admirall and divers others came aboord very friendly, desiring us to keepe them company because of the Portugals, and to goe to the Mina with them: wee told them that we had not watered, and that we were but now fallen with the coast, and they shewed us that
213
They admit certaine Frenchmen into their companie.
we were fiftie leagues past the river de Sestos: notwithstanding there was water enough to be had, and they would helpe us to water with their owne boats because they would have our companie. And told us further, that they had bene sixe weekes upon the coast, and had gotten but three tunnes of graines amongst them all: and when wee had heard them, we made our reckoning that although the Mina were cleare, yet if they did goe before us, they would marre our market; and if it were not cleare, then if the Portugals were there and did take them, they would understand that we were behind, and so would waite for us. And further we made account that if we went with them we should doe as well as they, if the coast were cleare: if it were not cleare, then by them we were assured to be the stronger. Therefore having considered thus much of their gentle offers, wee told them that the next day wee would conferre more largely of the matter. Whereupon they desired me to come the next day to dinner to them, and to bring the masters of our ships with me, and such marchants as I thought good, promising to give us water out of their owne ships if we would take it, or els to tarie with us and helpe us to water with their own boats and pin-nasses.
The 31 day in the morning the Admirall sent his boat aboord for me, and I tooke our masters and certaine of our marchants and went to him, who had provided a notable banquet for us, and intreated us very friendly, desiring us still to keepe his company, promising that what victuals were in his ships, or other things that might doe us pleasure untill the end, we should have the one halfe of it, offering us if we would to forle his Flags, and to bee at our commaundement in all things.
In the ende we agreed to come to an anker, and to send our boat on shore with the Admirals boat, and one of his pinnasses, and an Almaine which they had brought out of France, to seeke water, as for our pinnasse she
214
I557-came to an anker to seaward of us all, and would not come at us. All this night the boats continued on shore.
The first day of January our boats came to us againe and had found no river. Whereupon we weighed and set saile, and ankred againe at another river.
The 2 day we went into the river and bargained, and tooke 5 small Elephants teeth.
The 3 day we tooke 5 more.
The fourth day the French Admirall and we tooke -An assault fifteene small teeth. This day wee tooke thirtie men with us and went to seeke Elephants, our men being ' all well armed with harquebusses, pikes, long bowes, crossebowes, partizans, long swordes, and swordes and bucklers : wee found two Elephants which wee stroke divers times with harquebusses and long bowes, but they went away from us and hurt one of our men. The fift day we set saile and ranne along the coast.
The 6 day we fell with the river de S. Andre, at Rio At S. which place the land is somewhat high to the Westward Andre. of the river, and a faire Baie also to the Westward of it: but to the Eastward of it it is lowe land.
The 7 day we went into the River and found no village, but certaine wild Negros not accustomed to trade. It is a very great river and 7 fadome water in some places at the entring. Here we filled water, and after set saile.
The 8 day we sailed along the shore and came to the Red clifFes, and went forward in sailing the 9 day also.
The 10 day we came together to confer with captaine Blundel Admiral of the French ships, Jerom Baudet his vice admiral, and John de Orleans master of a ship of 70 tunne, and with their marchants, and agreed that when God should send us to any place where wee might make sale, that we should be of one accord and not one of us hurt the market of the other, but certaine of our boates to make the price for all the rest, and then
Captaine Blundel the French Admirall.
215
The castle of Mina.
Cape de Tres puntas.
one boate to make sale for every shippe. This night our boats going to the shore met with certaine Negros, who said that they had gold, and therefore we here cast anker.
The ii day all the day we tooke but one halfe angel weight of 4 graines, which we tooke by hand, for the people of this place had no weight: the Negros called this place Allow.
The 12 day we ran along the coast and found but one towne, but no boates would come out to us, and therefore we went our course.
The 13 day I tooke my boat and went along the shore, and passed by divers small townes, and was waved to come on shore at 3 places, but the sea went so high upon the shore, that it was not possible for us to land, neither could they come to us if they had had boats, as I could see none but at one place, where there was one that would have come unto us, but the Land-wash went so sore that it overthrew his boat, and one of the men was drowned, which the people lamented, and cried so sore, that we might easily heare them, and they got his body out of the sea, and caried it amongst them to their towne.
The 14 day we came within Saker-shot of the castle, & straightway they set forth an Almade to descry us, and when they perceived that we were no Portugals, they ranne within the towne againe : for there is a great towne by the Castle which is called by the Negros Dondou. Without this there lie two great rockes like Hands, and the castle standeth upon a point which sheweth almost like an Hand. Before we came at this castle, we found the land for five or six leagues to be high land, and about seven leagues before we came to the castle, lowe land, until we came at the castle, and then wee found the land high againe. This castle standeth about five leagues to the East of Cape de Tres puntas. Here I tooke the boate with our Negros and ranne alongst the shore till I came to the Cape
216
1557-and found two small townes, but no boates at them, neither any traffique to be had. At these places our Negros did understand them well, and one of them went a shore at all the places and was well received of them. This night we ankred at the Cape de Tres puntas.
The 15 day I tooke our boat and went along the shore, & about 3 leagues beyond the Eastermost part of the Cape we found a faire Bay where we ran in, and found a smal towne and certaine boates which belonged to the same towne, but the Negros in a long time would not come to us, but at the last by the perswasion of our owne Negros, one boat came to us, and with him we sent George our Negro a shore, and after he had talked with them, they came aboord our boates without feare, and I gave to their captaine a bason, and two strings of Margarets, and they shewed us about 5 duckats weight of gold, but they required so much for it that wee would not take it, because the Frenchmen and we had agreed to make price of our goods all in one boat, and the price being made then every man to sell in his owne boat, and no man to give more then the price which should be set by us al. This place is called Bulle, and here the Negros were very glad of Bulle. our Negros, and shewed them all the friendship they could, when they had told them that they were the men that were taken away being now againe brought by us.
The Negros here shewed us that a moneth since there were 3 ships that fought together, & the two shippes put the other to flight: and before that at the castle of Mina there were 4 ships of the Portugals which met with one Frenchman, which Frenchman caused them all to flee, which shippe we tooke to be the Roebarge: for the Frenchmen of our company judged her to be thereabout that time with her pinnasse also. And further, that after her went a shippe of twelve score named the Shaudet all alone, and after her a ship of fourescore, and both for the Mina. And there were two others also
217
Shamma.
which they left, one at Cape Verde called the Leuriere of Diepe, and another at the river De Sestos, besides these 3 which all this time be in our company, whose names be these:
The Espoier of Hableneff which is the Admirall, whose captaine is Denis Blundell.
The Leuriere of Roan Viceadmirall, whose master is Jerome Baudet.
The other is of Hunfleur whose master is called John de Orleans.
The sixteenth day I went along the shore with two pinnasses of the Frenchmen, and found a Baie and a fresh river, and after that went to a towne called Hanta, twelve leagues beyond the Cape. At this towne our Negros were well knowen, and the men of the towne wept for joy when they saw them, and demanded of them where Anthonie and Binne had bene: and they told them that they had bene at London in England, and should bee brought home the next voyage. So after this, our Negros came aboord with other Negros which brought a weight with them, which was so small that wee could not give them the halfe of that which they de-maunded for it.
The Negros here told us that there were five Portugall shippes at the Castle and one pinnasse, and that the Portugals did much harme to their Countrey, and that they lived in feare of them, and we told them againe, that we would defend them from the Portugals whereof they were very glad.
The 17 day we went a shore and the Frenchmen with us, but did no great good, the Negros were so unreasonable, we sold 80 Manellios for one ounce of gold.
Then wee departed and went to Shamma, and went into the river with five boates well appointed with men and ordinance, and with our noises of trumpets and drummes, for we thought here to have found some Portugals but there were none: so wee sent our Negros on shore, and after them went divers of us, and were 218
very well received, and the people were very glad of our Negros, specially one of their brothers wives, and one of their aunts, which received them with much joy, and so did all the rest of the people, as if they had bene their natural brethren: we comforted the captaine and told him that hee should not feare the Portugals, for wee would defend him from them : whereupon we caused our boats to shoote off their bases and harquebusses, and caused our men to come on shore with their long bowes, and they shot before the captaine, which he, with all the rest of the people, wondred much at, specially to see them shoot so farre as they did, and assaied to draw their bowes but could not. When it grew to be late, we departed to our ships, for we looked every houre for the Portugals. * And here the Negros shewed us that there was an English ship at the Mina, which had brought one of the Negros againe, which Robert Gaynsh tooke away.
The 18 day we went into the river with no lesse strength then before, and concluded with the Negros to give them for every Fuffe two yards and three nailes of Cloth, and to take for it one angel-duckat: so that we tooke in all 70 Duckats, whereof the Frenchmen had fortie, and wee thirtie.
The nineteenth day wee went a shore every man for himselfe, and tooke a good quantitie of gold, and I for my part tooke foure pound and two ounces and a halfe of gold, and our Hartes boate tooke one and twentie ounces. At night the Negros shewed us that the next day the Portugals would be with us by land or by Sea: and when wee were ready to depart, we heard divers harquebusses shoote off in the woods by us which wee knew to bee Portugals, which durst come no nearer to us, but shot off in the woods to see if they could feare us and so make us to leave our traffique.
The 20 day we manned our five boats, and also a great boat of the Frenchmens with our men and the Admirals, 12 of them in their murrians and corslets, and
The Negros brought home by our men.
* Note.
Robert Gaynsh.
219
Five sailes of Portingals descried.
the rest all well appoynted, with foure trumpets, a drumme and a Fife, and the boate all hanged with streamers of Silke and pendants very faire, and went into the river and traffiqued, our man of warre lying off and on in the river to waft us, but we heard no more of the Portugals. This day the Negros told us that there were certain ships come into Hanta, which towne is about 2 leagues to the Westward of this place.
This 21 day we manned our boats againe & went to a place a league from this to the Westwards, and there found many Negros with another Captaine, and sold at the same rate that wee had done with the others.
The 22 day we went a shore againe and traffiqued in like sort quietly, and I tooke 4 pound and six ounces of gold.
The 23 day about night the Negros with their captaine came to us and told us that the king of Portugals ships were departed from the Castle, meaning the next day to plie to the windward to come to us, giving us warning to take heed to our selves: we told them againe that wee were very glad of their comming, and would be ready at all times to meet them, and to assure them that we were glad of it, wee sounded our trumpets, and shot off certaine bases whereof the Negros were very glad, and requested us that if the Portugals sought to hinder our traffique, to shew them all the extremitie that we could, promising us that if they came by land, they would advertise us thereof.
The 24 we went a shore with our trumpets and drummes, and traffiqued, and I bade the captaine of the towne to dinner.
The 2 5 day we being a shore, our ships had descried five sailes of the king of Portugals, & our ships shot off ordinance to call us away, and we threw every man his caske a shore for water, and went to our ships, and by that time we had weighed and given order one to another what to do, it was night, so y‘ that night nothing was done. We set saile and lay close all night to get the 220
wind if we could: we were neere some of them, and one shot off a piece which wee judged to be the Admirall of the Portugals, to cause the rest to come and speake with him : so all this night we made our selves ready for fight.
The 26 we came in with the shore and had sight of the Portugals where they rid at anker, and we bare with them, and we gave all our men white scarffes, to the ende that the Frenchmen might know one the other if we came [II. ii. 40.] to boording: but the night came upon us that we could not fetch them, but we ankered within demie-culverin shot of them.
The 27 day we weighed and so did the Portugals, and about eleven of the clocke wee had the wind of them, and then we went roome with them, which when they perceived, they kept about to the shore againe, and wee after them, and when they were so neere the shore that they could not well runne any further on that boord, they kept about againe, and lay to the Seaward, and then we kept about with them, and were a head of them, and tooke in our topsailes and taried for them: and the first that came up was a small barke which sailed so well that she cared not for any of us, and caried good ordinance : and assoone as she came up, she shot at us, and overshot us, and then she shot at the Admirall of the Frenchmen, and shot him through in two or three places, The fight with and went foorth a head of us, because we were in our the Portu5als-fighting sailes: then came up another caravell under our Lee in like case which shot at us and at the Frenchman, and hurt two of his men and shot him through the maine maste. And after them came up the Admirall under our Lee also, but he was not able to doe us so much harme as the small shippes, because he caried ordinance higher then they, neither were we able to make a good shot at any of them, because our shippe was so weake in the side, that she laid all her ordinance in the Sea: wherefore we thought to lay the great ship aboord, and as soone as the French Admirall went roome with
221
him, he fell a sterne and could not fetch him, and after he fell a sterne of two caravels more and could fetch none of them, but fell to Leeward of them all: and when he was to Leeward, he kept about to the shoreward, and left us, and then we put out our topsailes and gave them chase, and both the other Frenchmen kept the wind, and would not come neere us, and our owne ship was a sterne so that she could not come to us: and after we had folowed them about two houres to the seaward, they kept about againe towards the shore, thinking to pay us as they went along by, and to have the wind of the French Admirall which before ran in towards the shore, and we kept about with them, and kept still the wind of them thinking that our Viceadmiral and the other would have folowed us as wee willed them to do: but after that the Portugall was past by them, and every one had shot at us and our Viceadmirall, both our Viceadmirall and the two Frenchmen, & our owne pinnasse left us in the laps, and ran to seaward, and we ran still along, and kept the wind of them to succour the French Admirall, who was under all of their Lees, and when they met with him, every one went roome with him, and gave him the broad side, and after they cast about againe, and durst not boord him, because they sawe us in the weather of them, or els without doubt they had taken or sunke them, for three of them which were the smallest, went so fast that it was not possible for a ship to boord them, and caried such ordinance that if they had had the weather of us, they would have troubled 3 of the best ships that we had, and as for their Admirall and Viceadmirall they were both notablie appointed.
When the Frenchman was cleare of them, hee laie as neere the winde as hee could, and wee followed them still towardes the shore, and then the Admirall ranne to Sea after the rest, and left us all alone: and when the Portugals perceived that we were alone, and gave them chase, they kept about with us and we with them, to keepe the wind of them, and we ranne still within base
222
shot of them, but they shot not at us, because we had the weather of them, and sawe that they could do us no hurt: and thus we folowed one another until night, and in the night we lost them, but as for all the rest of our ships, they packed on all the sailes that they could and ranne to sea, and as they themselves confesse, they praied for us, but as for helpe at their hands we could have none.
The 28 day we met with our Viceadmirall, our pin-nasse, and two of the Frenchmen, and the third was fled which was a ship of fourscore tunne, and belonged to Roan: and when I had the sight of the rest of our ships, I tooke our skiffe and went to them to know why they lost us in such a case, and John Kire made me answere that his ship would neither reare nor steere, and as for the pinnasse, John Davis made me answere that she would doe nothing, and that he could cary her no further, for her rudder was broken, so that the Hart was glad to towe her. Then I went to the French Admirall, and found himselfe to be a man of good stomacke, but the one halfe of his men were sicke and dead: and then I talked with the smaller Frenchman, and he made mee answere that he could doe nothing, saying, that his ship would beare no saile, and had 16 of his men dead and sicke, so he made us plaine answere that he was able to doe nothing. After this the Frenchmen durst not anker for feare of the Portugales.
The 29 day the master of the pinnasse came to us and sayd that they were not able to keepe her any longer, and then wee viewed her and seeing there was no remedie, her rudder with all the iron worke being broken both aloft and belowe, wee agreed to breake her up and to put the men into the Hart. So we tooke out of her foure bases, one anker, and certaine fire wood, and set her on fire, and afterwards ran along the coast.
The thirtie day we went in to the shore, and spake with certaine Negros, who told us that some French
223
[II. ii. +I.J
shippes had bene there, but wee could not bargaine with them they were so unreasonable.
The 31 day I went to shore but did not traffike. Februarie. The i day of Februarie we weighed, seeing we could not bring the Negros to any reason, and came to another place which standeth upon an hill.
The third day I went to a towne foure leagues from us, and shot off two pieces, and the Captaine came to us, and I sent Thomas Rippen a land who knew the Captaine, and assoone as he came on shore the Captaine knew him and divers of the Negros who then began to aske for mee, and having told the Captaine that I was in the boate, hee made no longer tarying but by and by caused two boates to be put to the Sea, and came to me him-selfe, and when he sawe me, he cryed to me before hee came to the boat and seemed to be the gladdest man alive, and so did all the companie that knew mee, and I gave him a reward as the maner of the Countrey is, and caused the Frenchmen to give another, promising the next day to give him wine: and that night because it was late, he would not talke of any price, but left me a pledge, and tooke another of me and so departed.
The 4 day going on shore, I found that the ships of France which had bin there, had done much hurt to our markets, but yet I tooke five ounces and a halfe of gold.
The fift day I tooke eight ounces and one eight part of gold: but I saw that the Negros perceived the difference in Cloth betwixt ours and that which the Frenchmen had, which was better, and broader then ours: and then I told captaine Blundel that I would goe to the Leeward, because I perceived that being there where his Cloth was sold, I should do no good, whereof hee was sorie.
The 6 day there came an Almade & Negros aboord me, requesting me to come to their towne for they had much gold and many marchants: and so I went and found their old Captaine gone, and another in his place: but this night wee did no good, because the marchants
224
1557-were not come downe: so he required a pledge which I let him have, and tooke another of him.
The 7 day George our Negro came to us, who had George °ur followed us at the least 30 leagues in a small boat, and Negro-when he came, the Negros and we soone concluded of price. I tooke this day five pound and one ounce, and 3 quarters of gold. This Negro we had left at Shamma at the time of the fight, who said that he saw the fight being on shore, and that when we were gone from the Portugals, the Portugals came into their river, and told them that the Englishmen had slaine two Portugals with ^•oPo^tu^s a piece, which was in deed out of our ship, and they	'
required harbour there, but the captaine of Shamma would not suffer them.
The 8 day we tooke nineteene pound three ounces and a halfe.
The 9 day we tooke two halfe.
pound
six ounces and a
The 10 day three pound.
The 11 day came to us Jerome Bawdet the Vice-admirall of the Frenchmen and his pinnasse, and he shewed us that where we left them there was no good to be done, and sayd he would goe to the Eastward, but wee told him hee should not: and thereupon com-maunded him to goe to his company which he was appointed to bee with, which hee refused to doe untill wee had shot three or foure pieces at their pinnasse, and when the ship sawe that, she kept about, and ranne to Seaward, and durst come no neerer to us, so the pinnasse went after her. We tooke this day one pound five
The Frenchmen bridled by the English.
ounces.
The 12 day there came one of the Frenchmens pin-nasses to us laden with cloth, and would have made sale, but I would not suffer him, and therefore tooke him and sent him aboord of our ship, and caused him to ride there all day. We tooke five pound six ounces and a halfe.
The 14 day we tooke of some Negros 4 ounces of gold.
vi	225	p
The offer of the king to the English to build a Fort.
A towne in circuit as big as London.
The 16 we came to another towne.
The 17 day I went a shore and understood that 3 of the Portugall ships were at the Castle, and the other two at Shamma. The captaine of this towne was gone to the principali towne, to speake with their king, and would returne shortly as they told me, and so he did, and brought me a weight and measure, and I sent a man to see that principali towne, and their king. The Portugall ships rid so neere us, that within 3 houres they might be with us, yet were all contented to tary for sales.
The 18 day certaine of the kings servants came to us, and we tooke one pound two ounces, and one eight part of gold.
The 10 day we tooke five pound one ounce.
The 20 day one pound and foure ounces.
The 21 I tooke foure pound and one ounce, and the Negroes enquired for fine cloth, and I opened two pieces which were not fine enough, as they sayd, but seeing that we had no other, they bought of them. At night I provided a gift, or present, and sent one marchant and a mariner with it to the king, to certifie him of our want of victuals, by reason whereof we could not stay long: for in deed we searched our ship, and the most part of our beere was leaked out of all our barrels.
The 22 day we tooke three ounces and a halfe.
The 23 our men came from the king Abaan, and told us, that he had received them very friendly, but he had litle gold, but promised, if we would tary, to send into all his countrey for gold for us, and he willed our men at their comming home to speake to our king to send men and provision into his countrey, to build a castle, and to bring Tailors with them, to make them apparell, and good wares, and they should be sure to sell them: but for that present the Frenchmen had filled them full of cloth.
This towne standeth about foure leagues up in the land, and is, by the estimation of our men, as big in circuit as London, but the building is like to the rest of 226
the countrey. They have about this Towne great store of the wheate of the Countrey, and they judge, that on one side of the towne there were one thousand rikes of Wheate, and another sort of Corne which is called Mill, which is much used in Spaine. About this towne they keepe good watch every night, and have to warne the watchmen certaine cordes made fast over their wayes, which lead into the towne, and certaine bels upon them, preAe so that if any man touch the cordes, the bels ring, and then the watchmen runne foorth of their watch houses to see what they be: and if they be enemies, if they passe the cord, they have provision with certaine nets hanged over the wayes, where they must passe, to let fall upon them, and so take them, and otherwise then by the wayes it is not possible to enter the towne, by reason of the thickets and bushes which are about the same, and the towne is also walled round abqut with long cords, and bound together with sedge and certaine barkes of trees.
When our men came to the towne, it was about five of the clock in the morning, for there they travell alwayes in the night by reason of the heate of the day: and about nine of the clocke, the king sent for them, for there may no man come to him before he be sent for, and then they would have caried their present with them: but the Negros told them, that they must bee three times brought before him, before they might offer their gift: and when they came to him, he talked with them, and received them very friendly, and kept them about halfe an houre, and then they departed, and after that sent for them againe three times, and last of all, they brought him their present, which he received thankfully, and then caused a pot of wine of Palme to be brought foorth, and made them drinke: and before they drinke, both here and in all the Countrey, they use certaine ceremonies.
First, they bring foorth their pot of drinke, and then they make a hole in the ground, & put some of the drinke into it, and they cast the earth upon it, which
The kings friendly entertainment of our men.
Their ceremonies in drinking.
227
they digged forth before, and then they set the pot upon the same, then they take a litle thing made of a goord, and with that they take out of the same drinke, and put it upon the ground in three places, and in divers places they have certaine bunches of the pils of Palme trees set in the ground before them, and there they put in some drinke, doing great reverence in all places to the same Palme trees.
All these ceremonies first done, the king tooke a cup of gold, and they put him in wine, and hee dranke of it, and when he dranke, the people cried all with one voice, Abaan, Abaan, with certaine other words, like as they cry commonly in Flanders, upon the Twelfe night, The kinning drinks: and when he had drunke, then they gave drinke to every one, and that done, the king licensed them to depart, and every one that departeth from him boweth 3 times towards him, and waveth with both hands together, as they bow, and then do depart. The king hath commonly sitting by him 8 or 10 ancient men with gray beards.
This day we tooke one pound and 10 ounces of gold.
The 24 day we tooke 3 pound and 7 ounces.
The 25 we tooke 3 ounces and 3 quarters.
The 26 we tooke 2 pound and 10 ounces.
The 27 two pound and five ounces.
The 28 foure pound, and then seeing that there was no more gold to be had, we weighed and went foorth.
The first day of March we came to a towne called Mowre. Mowre, but we found no boats nor people there: but being ready to depart, there came two Almades to us [II. ii. 43.] from another towne, of whom we tooke two ounces and a halfe of golde: and they tolde us that the Negroes that dwelled at Mowre were gone to dwell Lagova. at Lagova.
They returns. The second day we came thwart of the castle, and about two leagues off, and there saw all the five Portugall ships at anker, and this day by night we fetched Shamma.
228
The third day we had sight of one tall ship, of about two hundred tunnes, in the weather of us, and within lesse then two leagues of our ships, and then we saw two more a sterne of her, the one a ship of five hundred or more, and the other a pinnesse: and these were a new fleet at that present arrived out of Portugall. Whereupon we wayed, and made shift to double out of the land, and then the winde comming to the South-southwest, the Hart going roome with them fell three leagues to the leewards of us. These Portugals gave us the chase from nine of the clocke in the morning, till five at night, but did no good against us. At last, we perceiving the Admirall to be farre a sterne of his company, because his maine topmast was spent, determined to cast about with them againe, because we were sure to weather them, and the winde being as it was, it was our best course: but the Hart was so farre to the leeward, that we could not doe it, except we would lose her company, so that we tooke in some of our sailes, and went roome with him: which when he perceived, he loofFed to, and was able to lie as neere as he did before. At night, when we came to him, he would not speake to us: then we asked of his company why he went so roome; and they made excuse that they were able to beare no saile by, for feare of bearing their foretopmast over boord: but this was a simple excuse.
The fourth day, being put from our watring place we began to seethe our meat in salt water, and to rebate our allowance of drinke, to make it indure the longer: and so concluded to set our course thence, for our owne countrey.
The 12 of March I found my selfe thwart of Cape das palmas.
The 16 day we fell with the land, which we judged to be the Cape Mensurado, about which place is very much high land.
The 18 day we lost sight of the Hart, and I thinke the willfull Master ran in with the shore of purpose
229
Ships of Portugall.
Cape Mensurado.
A French bravado.
to lose us, being offended that I tolde him of his owne folly.
The 27 day we fell in sight of two small Ilands, which lie by our reckoning sixe leagues off the headland of Sierra Leona: and before we came in sight of the same Ilands, we made our reckoning to be forty or thirty leagues at the least off them. Therefore all they that saile this way are to regard the currents which set Northnorthwest, or els they may be much deceived.
The 14 of Aprill we met with two great ships of Portugall, which although they were in the weather of us, yet came not roome with us, whereby we judged that they were bound for Calicut.
The 18 day we were in the heigth of Cape verde.
The 24 we were directly under the tropike of Cancer.
The first day of May Henry Wilson our Steward died: and the next day died John Underwood.
The fift day we were in the heigth of S. Michael.
The 23 we had sight of a shippe in the weather of us, which was a Frenchman of 90 tunne, who came with us as stoutly and as desperately as might be, and comming neere us perceived that we had bene upon a long voyage, and judging us to be weake, as in deed we were, came neerer us, and thought to have layed us aboord, & there stept up some of his men in armour, and commanded us to strike saile: whereupon we sent them some of our stuffe, crossebarres, and chaineshot, and arrowes, so thicke, that it made the upper worke of their shippe flie about their eares, and we spoiled him with all his men, and toare his shippe miserably with our great ordinance, and then he began to fall a sterne of us, and to packe on his sailes, and get away: and we seeing that, gave him foure or five good pieces more for his farewell; and thus we were rid of this French man, who did us no harme at all. We had aboord us a French man a Trumpetter, who being sicke, and lying in his bed, tooke his trumpet notwithstanding, and sounded till he could sound no more, and so died.
230
The 28 we conferred together, and agreed to go into Severne, and so to Bristoll, but the same night we had sight of the Lizard, and by reason of the winde, we were not able to double the lands end to go into Severne, but were forced to beare in with the Lizard.
The 29 day, about nine of the clocke in the morning, we arrived safely in Plimmouth, and praised God for our good arrivall.
