The third and last voyage of M. William [H. ii. 44-] Towrson to the coast of Guinie, and the Castle de Mina, in the yeere 1577.
He thirtieth day of January, the yeere abovesayd, we departed out of the sound of Plimmouth, with three ships, and a pinnesse, whereof the names are these:
1	The Minion Admirall of the fleet.
2	The Christopher Viceadmirall.
3	The Tyger.
4	A pinnesse called the Unicorne: being all bound for the Canaries, and from thence, by the grace of God, to the coast of Guinie.
The next day, being the last of this moneth, we met with two hulks of Dantzick, the one called the Rose, a ship of foure hundred tunnes, and the other called the Unicorne, of an hundred and fifty tunnes, the Master
It is to be understood, that at this time there was warre betwixt
of the Rose was called Nicholas Masse, and the Master England and of the Unicorne Melchior White, both laden at Bour- France-deaux, and for the most part with wines. When we came to them, we caused them to hoise foorth their boats, and to come and speake with us, and we examined every one of them apart, what French mens goods they had in their shippes, and they sayd they had none: but by the contrarieties of their tales, and by the suspicion which we gathered of their false chartar-parties, we perceived that they had French mens goods in them: we therefore caused one of them to fetch up his bils of
231
lading, and because he denied that he had any, we sent certaine with him, who caused him to goe to the place where he had hid them, and by the differences of his billes of lading, and his talke, we gathered, as before, that they had Frenchmens goods. Whereupon we examined them straightly, and first the Purser of the Unicorne, which was the smaller shippe, confessed that they had two and thirty tunnes and a hogshead of a French mans. Then we examined the Master in like case, and he acknowledged the same to be true. Then we examined also the Master of the great ship, and he confessed that he had an hundred and eight and twenty tunnes of the same French mans, and more they would not confesse, but sayd that all the rest was laden by Peter Lewgues of Hamburg, to be delivered to one Henry Summer of Camphire, notwithstanding all their letters were directed to Hamburg, and written in Dutch without, and within in French.
When they had confessed that they had thus much French mens goods within their shippes, we conferred together what was best to be done with them. William Cretton and Edward Selman were of the opinion, that it should be good either to carry them into Spaine, and there to make sale of the goods, or els into Ireland, or to returne backe againe into England with them, if the winde would permit it. But I, waying what charge we had of our Masters, first by mouth, and afterwards by writing, that for no such matter we should in any case prolong the time, for feare of losing the voyage, and considering that the time of the yeere was very farre spent, and the money that we should make of the wines not very much, in respect of the commodity which we hoped for by the voyage, perswaded them that to goe into Ireland, the winde being Easterly as it was, might be an occasion that we should be locked in there with that winde, and so lose our voyage: and to cary them into Spaine, seeing they sailed so ill, that having all their sailes abroad, we kept them company onely with our foresailes,
232
and without any toppe sailes abroad, so that in every two dayes sailing they would have hindered us more then one; and besides that (the winde being Easterly) we should not be able to seaze the coast with them: besides all this the losse of time when we came thither was to be considered, whereupon I thought it not good to carry them any further.
And as for carying them into England, although the winde had bene good, as it was not, considering what charge we had of our Masters, to shift us out of the way for feare of a stay by reason of the warres, I held it not in any wise convenient.
But notwithstanding all this, certeine of our company not being herewith satisfied went to our Master to know his opinion therein, who made them a plaine answere, that to cary them into any place, it was not the best The French way nor the profit of their Masters. And he tolde them further, that if the time were prolonged one moneth sfime longer before they passed the Cape, but a few men warre upon would go the voyage. All these things considered, we the losse of all paused, and determined at the last, that every man Cales-should take out of the hulks so much as he could well bestow for necessaries, and the next morning to conclude what should be further done with them. So we tooke out of them for us foureteene tunnes and a halfe of wine, and one tunne we put into the pinnesse.
More we tooke out one hogshead of Aquavitae.
Sixe cakes of rozzen.
A small halser for ties: and certeine chesnuts.
The Christopher tooke out,	[II. ii. 45.]
Ten tunnes of wine, and one hogshead.
A quantity of Aquavitae.
Shall-lines.
Chesnuts.
Sixe double bases with their chambers. And their men broke up the hulks chests, and tooke out their compasses, and running glasses, the sounding leade and line, and candles: and cast some of their beefe over
233
boord, and spoiled them so much, that of very pity we gave them a compasse, a running glasse, a lead and a line, certaine bread and candles, and what apparell of theirs we could finde in their ship, we gave them againe, and some money also of that which William Crompton tooke for the ransome of a poore Frenchman, who being their Pilot downe the River of Bordeux, they were not able to set him a shore againe, by reason of the foule weather.
The Tyger also tooke out of the smaller hulke sixe or seven tunnes of wine, one hogshead of Aquavitae, and certeine rozzen, and two bases he tooke out of the great hulke.
The first day of February in the morning we all came together againe saving W. Crompton who sent us word that he was contented to agree to that order which we should take.
Now Edward Selman was of this opinion, that it was not best to let the ships depart, but put men into them to cary them into England, which thing neither we nor our Master would agree unto, because we thought it not good to unman our ships going outward, considering how dangerous the time was: so that in fine we agreed to let them depart, and give them the rest of the wine which they had in their ships of the Frenchmens for the fraight of that which we had taken, and for their ordinance, rozzen, aquavitae, chesnuts, and other things which the company had taken from them. So we received a bill of their handes, that they confessed how much Frenchmens goods they had, and then we let them depart.
The io day we reckoned our selves to be 25 leagues from the Grand Canarie, and this day about nine of the clocke our pinnesse brake her rudder, so that we were forced to towe her at the sterne of the Minion, which we were able to doe, and yet kept company with the rest of our ships. About eleven of the clocke this day we had sight of the Grand Canarie.
234
The 11 day when we came to the Hand we perceived that it was the He of Tenerif, 8c then in deed wee had sight of the Grand Canarie, which lieth 12 leagues to the Eastwards of Tenerif: and because the road of Tenerif is foule ground, and nothing was there to be gotten for the helping of our pinnesse, having the winde large, we agreed to go with the Grand Canarie.
The 12 day we came into the roade of the towne of Canarie, which lieth one league from the same towne. And after we had shot off divers pieces of ordinance to salute the towne and the castle, the governour and captaines of the Hand sent to us which were the captaines, of the ships, requiring us to come a shore. And when we came to them they received us very frendly, offering us their owne Jennets to ride to the towne, and what other friendship they could shew us: and we went to the towne with two English Marchants which lay there, and remained in their house that day. The second day following we came aboord to deliver our marchandise, and to get our pinnesse mended.
The 14 day came into the road the Spanish fleet which was bound to the Emperours Indies, which were in number nineteene saile, whereof sixe were ships of foure hundred and five hundred a piece, the rest were of two hundred, an hundred and fifty, and of an hundred. When they were come to an ancre they saluted us with ordinance, and so we did them in like case. And afterwards the Admirall (who was a knight) sent his pinnesse to desire me to come to him; and when I came to him he received me friendly, and was desirous to heare somewhat of the state of England and Flanders. And after he had made me a banquet, I departed; and I being gone unto the boat, hee caused one of his gentlemen to desire Francisco the Portugall, which was my interpreter, to require me to furle my flagge, declaring that hee was general of the Emperours fleet. Which thing (being come aboord) Francisco shewed me: and because I refused to furle it, and kept it foorth still, 235
A.D. !577-
Two English Marchants Liters in the Grand Canary.
The Spanish West Indian fleet of nine-teene saile.
certaine of the souldiers in the ships shot divers harque-bush shot about the ship, and over the flagge: and at the same time there came certeine gentlemen aboord our ship to see her: to whom I sayd, that if they would not cause those their men to leave shooting, I would shoot the best ordinance I had thorow their sides. And when they perceived that I was offended, they departed, and caused their men of warre and souldiers to shoot no more, and afterwards they came to me againe, and tolde me that they had punished their men. That done, I shewed them the ship, and made them such cheere as I could, which they received very thankfully: and the day following they sent for mee to dine with them, and sent me word that their General was very sory that any [II. ii. 46.] man should require me to furle my flagge, and that it was without his consent: and therefore he requested me not to thinke any ungentlenesse to be in him, promising that no man of his should misdemeane himselfe.
The 17 day we set saile in the road of Grand Canarie, and proceeded on our voyage.
The 20 in the morning we had sight of the coast of Barbarie, and running along the shore we had sight Rio del Oro. of Rio del Oro, which lieth almost under the tropike of Cancer.
The 21 day we found ourselves to be in 20 degrees and a halfe, which is the heigth of Cape Blank.
The 25 we had sight of the land in the bay to the Northward of Cape Verde.
Francis The 26 I tooke Francisco and Francis Castelin with Castehn. me, anj went ;nto p[nnessej anj so went to the Tyger which was neerer the shore then the other ships, and went aboord her, and with her and the other ships we ranne West and by South, and West-southwest, untill about foure of the clocke, at which time we were Cape verde. hard aboord the Cape, and then we ran in Southwest, and beyond the Cape about foure leagues we found a Foure Hands, faire Hand, and besides that two or three Hands, which 236
were of very high rocks, being full of divers sorts of sea-foule, and of pigeons, with other sorts of land-foules, and so many, that the whole Hand was covered with the dung thereof, and seemed so white as if the whole Hand had bene of chalke; and within those Hands was a very faire bay, and hard aboord the rocks eighteene fadom water, and faire ground. And when we perceived the bay, and understanding that the Frenchmen had a great trade there, which we were desirous to know, we came to an ancre with the Tyger. And after that the Minion and the Christopher ancred in like case: then we caused the pinnesse to runne beyond another Cape of land, to see if there were any place to trade in there.
It being neere night I tooke our cocke and the Tygers skiffe, and went to the Hand, where we got certaine foules like unto Gannards: and then. I came
A great trade of the Frenchmen at Cape verde.
aboord againe and tooke two of the Gannards which we had taken, and caried them to the captaine of the Christopher, and when I had talked with him, I found him not willing to tary there, neither was I desirous to spend any long time there, but onely to attempt what was to be done. The Master of the Christopher tolde me he would not tary, being not bound for that place.
The 27 the Captaine of the Tyger and Edward Selman came to me, and John Makeworth from the Christopher, and then we agreed to take the pinnesse, & to come along the shore, because that where we rid no Negros came to us, and the night before our pinnesse brought us word that there was a very faire fare Hand Hand. And when I came beyond the point I found it v^re^c^ietrade so, and withall a goodly bay, and we saw upon the maine >a e' certaine Negros which waved us on shore, and then we came to an ancre with the pinnesse, and went a shore with our cocke, and they shewed us where their trade was, and that they had Elephants teeth, muske, & hides, and Elephants offered us to fetch downe their Captaine, if we would ‘ send a man with them, and they would leave a pledge for '
237
him: then we asked them when any ship had bene there; and some of them sayd not in eight moneths, others, in sixe moneths, and others in foure, and that they were Frenchmen.
Then we perceiving the Christopher not willing to tary, departed from them, & set saile with the pinnesse and went aboord the Tyger.
The io day of March we fell with the coast of Guinea, five leagues to the Eastward of Cape de Monte, beside a river called Rio das Palmas.
The ii we went to the shore, and found one man that could speake some Portuguise, who tolde us that there were three French ships passed by; one of them two moneths past, and the other one moneth past. At this place I received nineteene Elephants teeth, and two ounces and halfe a quarter of golde.
The 12 we set saile to go to the river de Sestos.
The 13 at night we fell with the same river.
The 14 day we sent in our boats to take water, and romaged our shippes, and delivered such wares to the Christopher and Tyger, as they had need of.
The 15 we came together, and agreed to send the Tyger to another river to take in her water, and to see what she could do for graines. After that we tooke marchandise with us, and went into the river, and there we found a Negro which was borne in Lisbone, left there by a ship of Portugal which was burned the last yere at this river in fighting with three Frenchmen; and he told us further, that two moneths past there were three Frenchmen at this place; and sixe weeks past there were two French ships at the river; and fifteene dayes past there was one. All which ships were gone towards the Mina. This day we tooke but few graines.
The 19 day considering that the Frenchmen were gone before us, and that by reason of the unholesome aires of this place foureteene of our men in the Minion were fallen sicke, wee determined to depart, and with all speed to go to the Mina.
238
The 2i wee came to the river de Potos, where some [II. ii. 47.] of our boats went in for water, and I went in with Rio de Potos. our cocke, and tooke 12 small Elephants teeth.
The 23. day, after we had taken as many teeth as we could get, about nine of the clocke we set saile to go towards the Mina.
The 31 we came to Hanta, and made sale of certaine Manillios.
The first Aprill we had sight of five saile of Portugals, They descrie whereupon we set saile and went off to sea to get the s^ile °f winde of them, which wee should have had if the winde * e ortu^a had kept his ordinary course, which is all the day at the Southwest, and West-southwest: but this day with a flaw it kept all the day at the East, and East-southeast, so that the Portugals had the winde of us, and came roome with the Tyger and us untill night, and brought themselves all save one, which sailed not so well as the rest, within shot of us: then it fell calme, and the winde came up to the Southwest, howbeit it was neere night, and the Christopher, by meanes of her boat, was about foure leagues to the leewards of us. We tacked and ranne into the weather of the Admirall, and three more of his company, and when we were neere him we spake to him, but he would not answere. Then we cast about and lay The fight. in the weather of him; and casting about he shot at us, and then wee shot at him, and shot him foure or five times thorow. They shot divers times thorow our sailes, but hurt no man. The Tyger and the pinnesse, because it was night, kept out their sailes, & would not meddle with them. After we had thus fought together 2 houres or more, and would not lay him aboord because it was night, we left shooting one at the other, and kept still the weather of them. Then the Tyger and the pinnesse kept about and came to us, and afterward being neere the shore, wee three kept about and lay to the sea, and shot ofF a piece to give warning to the Christopher.
This night about 12 of the clocke, being very litle winde, and the Master of the Tyger asleepe, by the ill
239
worke of his men the ship fel aboord of us, and with her sheare-hooks cut our maine saile, and her boat being betwixt us was broken and suncke, with certaine mar-chandise in her, and the ships wales were broken with her outleger: yet in the ende we cleared her without any more hurt, but she was in hazzard to be broken downe to the water.
The second day we had sight of the Christopher, and were neere unto her, so that I tooke our boat and went to her. And when I came thither, they shewed me, that after the Portugals had left us, they went all roome with him, and about twelve a clocke at night met him, and shot at him, and hee at them, and they shot him thorow the sailes in divers places, and did no other great hurt. And when we had understood that they had beene with him as well as with us, we agreed altogether to seeke them (if wee might finde them) and keepe a weather our places of traffique.
The third day we ran all day to the Southwestwards to seeke the Portugals, but could have no sight of them, and hailed into the shore.
The fourth day, when we had sight of land, we found that the currant had set us thirty leagues to the Eastwards of our reckoning, which we woondered at: for the Lagua. first land we made was Lagua. Then I caused our boat to be manned, and the Christophers also, and went to the shore and tooke our Negro with us. And on shore we learned that there were foure French ships upon the Perinnen. coast; one at Perinnen, which is six leagues to the Weamba. Westward of Laguoa: another at Weamba, which is foure leagues to the Estward of Laguoa: a third at Perecow. Perecow, which is foure leagues to the Eastward of Egrand. Weamba: and the fourth at Egrand, which is foure leagues to the Eastward of Perecow.
When we had intelligence of these newes we agreed to go to the Eastwards with the French men to put them from their traffique, and shot off two or three pieces in our boats to cause the ships to way: and having bene
340
about one houre under saile, we had sight of one of the French men under saile, hailing off from Weamba to whome we gave chase, and agreed in the night for feare of overshooting them, that the Minion should first come to ancre, and after that about three houres, the Tyger and the Christopher to beare along all night.
The 5. day we found three of the French ships at ancre: one called La foye de Honfleur, a ship of 220 tunnes, another called the Ventereuse or small Roebarge of Honfleur, of 100 tunnes, both appertaining to Shawdet of Honfleur, the third was called the Mulet de Batuille a ship of 120 tunnes, and this ship belonged to certaine Marchants of Roan.
When we came to them, we determined to lay the Admiral aboord, the Christopher the Viceadmirall, and the Tyger the smallest: but when we came nere them they wayed, and the Christopher being the headmost & the weathermost man, went roome with the Admirall: the Roebarge went so fast that wee could not fetch her. The first that we came to was the Mulet, and her wee layed aboord, and our men entred and tooke her, which ship was the richest except the Admirall: for the Admirall had taken about 80 pound of golde, and the Roeberge had taken but 22 pound; and all this we learned of the Frenchmen, who knew it very well: for they were all in consort together, and had bene upon the coast of Mina two moneths and odde dayes: howbeit the Roeberge had bene there before them with another ship of Diepe, and a caravel, which had beaten all the coast, and were departed one moneth before our arriving there, and they three had taken about 700 pound of golde.
Assoone as we had layed the ship aboord, and left certaine men in her to keepe her, we set saile and gave chase to the other two ships, and chased them all day and night, and the next day untill three a clocke in the afternoone, but we could not fetch them: and ther-fore seeing that we brought our selves very farre to
vi	241	Q
A.D.
1511-
The English board the Frenchmen.
[II. ii. 48.]
Fifty pound of glide taken in the French prise.
Benin.
Our men die ofsicknesse.
 leeward of our place, we left the chase, and kept about againe to go with the shore.
The 7 day I sent for the captaine, marchants & Masters of the other ships, and when they came we weighed the golde which we had from the Frenchmen, which weighed fifty pound and five ounces of golde: this done, we agreed to put men out of every ship into the prise to keepe her.
The 12 day we came to the further place of the Mina called Egrand, and being come to an ancre, discharged all the marchants goods out of the prise, and would have sold the ship with the victuals to the Frenchmen, but because she was leake they would not take her, but desired us to save their lives in taking them into our owne ships: then we agreed to take out the victuals and sinke the ship, and divide the men among our ships.
The 15 at night we made an end of discharging the prise, and divided all the Frenchmen except foure which were sicke and not able to helpe themselves; which foure both the Christopher and the Tyger refused to take, leaving them in their ship alone in the night, so that about midnight I was forced to fetch them into our ship.
The 15 of April, mooving our company for the voyage to Benin, the most part of them all refused it.
The 16, seeing the unwillingnesse of the company to goe thither, we determined to spend as much time upon the coast as we could, to the end we might make our voyage, and agreed to leave the Minion here at Egrand, the Tyger to go to Pericow which is foure leagues off, and the Christopher to goe to Weamba, which is ten leagues to the weatherward of this place: and if any of them both should have sight of more sailes then they thought good to meddle withall, to come roome with their fellowes: to wit, first the Christopher to come with the Tyger, and then both they to come with us.
We remained in this place called Egrand, untill the last day of April, in which time many of our men fell 242
sicke; and sixe of them died. And here we could have no traffique with the Negros but three or foure dayes in the weeke, and all the rest of the weeke they would not come at us.
The 3 of May not having the pinnesse sent us with cloth from the other ships, as they promised, we solde French cloth, and gave but three yards thereof to every fuffe.
The 5 day the Negros departed, and told us they would come to us againe within foure dayes, which we determined there to tary, although we had divers of our men sicke.
The 8 day, all our cloth in the Minion being sold, I called the company together, to know whether they would tary the sale of the cloth taken in the prise at this place or no: they answered, that in respect of the death of some of their men, and the present sicknesse of twenty Sicknesse. more, they would not tary, but repaire to the other ships, of whom they had heard nothing since the 27 of April: and yet they had our pinnesse with them, onely to cary newes from one to another.
The 9 day we determined to depart hence to our fellowes, to see what they had done, and to attempt what was to be done at the towne of Don John.
The 10 day in the morning we sat saile to seeke the Christopher and the Tyger.
The 11 day the captaine of the Christopher came to us, and told us that they could finde small doings at the places where they had bene.
The 12 William Crompton and I in our small pinnesse went to the Tyger and the Christopher at Perenine.
The 13 we sent away the Tyger to Egrand, because we found nothing to doe at Perenine, worth the tarying for.
The 14 our great pinnesse came to us, and presently we put cloth into her, and sent her backe to Weamba, where she had bene before, and had taken there ten pound of golde.
243
The 15 the Minion came to us, and the next day we went a shore with our boats, and tooke but one ounce of golde.
The 19 day having set saile we came to an ancre before Mowre. Mowre, and there we tarried two dayes, but tooke not an ounce of golde.
[II. ii. 49.J The 21 we came to an ancre before Don Johns towne.
The 22 we manned our boats and went to shore, but the Negros would not come at us; then the Captaine of the Christopher and I tooke a skiffe and eight men with us, and went and talked with the Negros, and they sayd The great that they would send a man to the great towne, where ‘john m Don John himselfe lay, to advertise him of our comming.
’	The 23 we went a shore againe, and the Negros tolde
us that this day the marchants of Don John would come downe: so we tarried there untill night, and no man would come to us: but divers of the Negros made us signes to depart.
The 24 the Captaine of the Christopher tooke his boat & went to Mowre, and when he came thither, certaine Negros came to him to know the price of his wares, but in the end there came an Almade, which he judged came from the castle, and caused all the Negros to depart from him: and when he saw they would come no more to him, he went a shore and tooke certaine men with him, and then the Negros cast stones at them, & would not suffer them to come up to their towne. And when they saw that, they tooke certaine of the Almades, and put them to the sea, and afterwards departed. The same morning I went a shore at Don Johns towne, and tooke a white flag with me, but none of the Negros could come to me, which caused us to judge that the Portugals were in the towne. After this, our boat came to us well manned, and I sent one man up to the towne with a white flag in his hand, but when he was come thither, all the Negros went away & would not speake with him. Then I sent one alone into the woods after them, but
244
they in no case would come to us. When we saw that, we tooke twelve goats and fourteene hennes, which we found in the towne, and went aboord without doing any further hurt to the towne: and when I came aboord, I found our pinnesse come from Cormatin, which had taken Cormatin. there two pound & five ounces of golde. Then after much ado with the froward Mariners, we went thitherwards with our ship, and the Christopher went to Mowre.
The 25 day the Master of the Christopher sent his boat to the shore for balast, and the Negros would have beaten the company from the shore, whereupon the the company resisted them, and slew and hurt divers of them, and having put them to flight, burned their towne, and brake all their boats.
The 26 day our pinnesse came to us from Cormatin, and had taken two pound & eleven ounces of golde: and John Shirife tolde us that the Negros of that place were very desirous to have a ship come backe againe to their towne.
The 27 we wayed and went to Cormatin.
The 28 the Christopher came to us from Mowre, and traffiqued there two dayes.
The second day of June the Tyger came to us from Egrand, and the pinnesse from Weamba, and they two had taken about fifty pound of golde since they departed from us.
The 4 day we departed from Cormatin to plie up to Shamma, being not able to tary any longer upon the coast for lacke of victuals, and specially of drinke.
The 7 day we had sight of five of the king of Portugals ships, which came to an ancre besides the castle.
The 8 day George and Binny came to us, and brought with them about two pound of golde.
The 10 day in the morning I tooke our small pinnesse, and the Captaine of the Christopher with me, and manned her well, and went to the castle to view the Portugals ships, and there we found one ship of about 300 tunne, and foure caravels: when we had well viewed 24s
them, we returned backe againe to our ships which we found seven leagues at sea.
The 11 day in the morning we found our selves wel shot toward Shamma, & the Tyger with us, but the Minion & the pinnesse had not wayed that night, so that we were out of sight of them : and having brought our selves in the weather of the Portugals ships, we came to an ancre to tary for the Minion, or els we might have fetched Shamma. At night the Minion and the pinnesse came up to us, but could not fetch so farre to the weatherward as we, and therefore they ancred about a league a weather The castle, and we waied in the Christopher, and went roome with her.
The 12 day the Tyger came roome with us, and she and the Christopher finding themselves to stand in great need of victuals, would have gone with the Portugals ships to have fetched some of them forth: but our master and company would in no case consent to goe with them, for feare of hanging when we came home: and the other two ships being folly minded to have gone, and fearing that their owne company would accuse them, durst not go to them.
After this, by reason of the want of victuals in the pinnesse, which could receive no victuals from the other shippes, but from us onely, we tooke out all our men, and put twelve Frenchmen into her, and gave them victuals to bring them to Shamma.
[II. ii. 50.] The 19 day the Tyger and Minion arrived at Shamma, Note- and the Christopher within two leagues off them, but could not fetch the winde by reason of the scantnesse of the winde, which hath bene so scant, that in fifteene dayes we have plied to the windewards but twelve leagues, which before we did in one day and a night.
The 20 day I tooke our pinnesse, and went to the towne of Shamma to speake with the captaine, and he tolde me that there was no golde there to be had, nor so much as a hen to be bought, and all by reason of 246
the accord which he had made with the Portugals, and I seeing that departed peaceably from him.
The 2i I put such things as we had into our small pinnesse, and tooke one marchant of our ship, and another of the Tyger, and sent her to Hanta, to attempt, if she could doe any thing there. That night they could do nothing but were promised to have golde the next day.
The next day (which was the 22) being come, we sent our pinnesse to Hanta againe, but there neither the captaine nor the Negros durst traffike with us, but intised us from place to place, and all to no purpose.
This day we put away our pinnesse, with five and They put the twenty Frenchmen in her, and gave them such victuals Trenchmen as we could spare, putting fifteene of them to the ransome the of sixe crownes a man.	pinnesse.
The 23 of June our pinnesse came to us from Hanta, and tolde us that the Negros had dealt very ill with them, and would not traffike with them to any purpose.
The 24 we tooke our boat and pinnesse and manned them well, and went to the towne of Shamma, and Shamma burnt because the Captaine thereof was become subject to the tyk English. Portugals we burned the towne, and our men seeking the spoile of such trifles as were there found a Portugals chest, wherein was some of his apparell, and his weights, and one letter sent to him from the castle, whereby we gathered that the Portugall had bene there of a long time.
The 25 day, about three of the clocke at afternoone, Their retume we set saile, and put into the sea, for our returne to homewardEngland.
The last day of this moneth we fell with the shore againe, and made our reckoning to be eighteene leagues to the weatherward of the place where we set off". When we came to make the land, we found our selves to be eighteene leagues to the leeward of the place, where we set ofF, which came to passe, by reason of the extreame currant that runneth to the Eastward : when we perceived The currant.
247
The description of the lie of 8. Thome.
our selves so abused, we agreed to cast about againe, and to lie as neere the winde as we could, to fetch the line.
The seventh of July we had sight of the He of S. Thome, and thought to have sought the road to have ancred there: but the next morning the winde came about, and we kept our course.
The ninth, the winde varying, we kept about againe, and fell with the Hand of S. Thome, and seeking the road, were becalmed neere the Hand, and with the currant were put neere the shore, but could have no ground to ancre: so that we were forced to hoise out our pinnesse, and the other ships their skifs to towe from the Hand, which did litle good, but in the end the winde put us three leagues off the shore.
The tenth day the Christopher and the Tyger cast about, whereby we judged them to have agreed together, to goe seeke some ships in the road, and to leave us: our men were not willing to goe after them, for feare of running in with the Hand againe, and of putting our selves into the same danger that we were in the night before: but we shot off a piece, and put out two lights, and they answered us with lights againe: whereupon we kept our course, and thought that they had followed us, but in the morning we could not see them, so that they left us willingly, and we determined to follow them no more. But the eleventh day we altered our opinion and course, and consented to cast about againe for the Hand, to seeke our ships; and about foure of the clocke in the afternoone we met with them.
The 13 we fell againe with the Hand of S. Thome; and the same night we found our selves directly under the line.
This Hand is a very high Hand, and being upon the West side of it, you shall see a very high pike, which is very small, and streight, as it were the steeple of a church, which pike lieth directly under the line, and at the same South end of the Hand to the Westward thereof lieth a small Hand, about a mile from the great Hand.
248
The third of August we departed from the He of S.
Thome, & met the winde at the Southwest.
The 12 day we were in the height of Cape verde.
The 22 day we fell with one of the Iles of Cape verde, called The He of Salt, and being informed by a Scotish °f man that we tooke among the Frenchmen upon the Salt' coast, that there were fresh victuals to be had, we came to an ancre there.
The 23 day in the morning we manned our skiffe, and went a shore, and found no houses, but we saw foure men, which kept themselves alwayes farre from us, as for cattell we could finde none, but great store of goats, [II. ii. 51.] and they were so wilde, that we could not take above three or foure of them: but there we had good store of fish, and upon a small Hand which lay by the same we had great store of sea-birds.
At night the Christopher brake her cable, and lost an ancre, so that she could tary no longer, so we all wayed, and set saile. Upon the same Hand we left the Scotish man, which was the occasion of our going aland at that place, but how he was left we could not tell: but, as we judged, the people of the Hand found him sleeping, and so caried him away: for at night I went my selfe to the Hand to seeke him, but could hear nothing of him.
The 24 day the Master of the Tyger came aboord us, & tolde us that his men were so weake, and the shippe so leake, that he was not able to keepe her above the water, and therefore requested us to go backe againe to the Hand, that we might discharge her, and give her up: but we intreated him to take paine with her a while, and we put a French Carpenter into her, to see if he could finde the leake. This day we tooke a view of all in~ our men, both those that were hole, and the sicke also, and we found that in all the three ships, were not above the coast thirty sound men.	of Guinie.
The 25 we had sight of the He of S. Nicholas, and the day following, of the other Iles, S. Lucia, S. Vincent, 249
and S. Anthony; which foure Iles lie the one from the other Northwest and by West, Southeast and by East. The 26 we came againe with the Hand of S. Anthony, and could not double the Cape. This day Philip Jones, the Master of the Christopher, came aboord us, who had beene aboord the Tyger, and tolde us that they were not able to keepe the Tyger, because she was leake, and the Master very weake, and sayd further, he had agreed with the Master and the company, that if the next day we could double the Hand, we should runne to the leeward of it, and there discharge her: but if we could not double it, then to put in betwixt the Hand of S. Vincent and S. Anthony, to see if we could discharge her.
The third day of September I went aboord the Tyger, with the Master and marchants with me, to view the shippe and men: and we found the shippe very leake, and onely six labouring men in her, whereof one was the Master gunner: so that we seeing that they were not able to keepe the ship, agreed to take in the men, and of the goods what we could save, and then to put the ship away.
The fift day we went to discharge the Tyger.
The eight day, having taken out the artillery, goods, The Tyger victuals, and gold of the Tyger, we gave her up 25 gyven up. degrees by North the line.
The 27 we had sight of two of the Iles of the Azores, S. Mary, and S. Michael.
The fourth of October we found our selves to be 41 degrees and a halfe from the line.
The sixt day the Christopher came to us, and willed us to put with the Cape, for they also were so weake, that they were not able to keepe the sea, and we being weake also, agreed to goe for Vigo, being a place which many English men frequent.
The 10 day the Christopher went roome with the Cape, but we having a mery wind for England, and fearing the danger of the enemies, which ordinarily lie 25°
about the Cape: besides, not knowing the state of ’ our countrey and Spaine, and although it were peace, yet there was little hope of friendship at their hands, considering the voyage that we had made, and we also being so weake, that by force and violence we could come by nothing, and doubting also that the King of Portugall knowing of our being there, might worke some way with the Councell of Spaine to trouble us: and further, considering that if we did put in with any harbor, we should not be able to come out againe, till we sent for more men into England, which would be a great charge, and losse of time, and meanes of many dangers. All these things pondred, we agreed to shoot ofF two pieces of ordinance, to warne the Christopher, and then we went our course for England: she hearing our pieces followed us, and we carried a light for her, but the next day in the morning it was thicke, and we could not see her in the afternoone neither, so that we suspected that either she was gone with Spaine, or els that she should put foorth more sailes then we in the night, and was shot a head of us, so that then we put forth our top-sailes, and went our course with England.
At the time when the Christopher left us, we were within 120 leagues of England, and 45 leagues Northwest and by West from Cape Finister: and at the same time in our ships we had not above sixe Mariners and sixe Marchants in health, which was but a weake company for such a ship to seeke a forren harbour.
The 16 day, about sixe of the clocke at night, we met with a great storme at the Westsouthwest, & West, and our men being weake, and not able to Extreame handle our sailes, we lost the same night our maine «eaineueof saile, foresaile, and spreetsaile, & were forced to lie a mrmen' hulling, untill the eighteenth day, and then we made ready an olde course of a foresaile, and put it to the yard, and therewith finding our selves far shot into the [II. ii. 52.] sleeve, we bare with our owne coast; but that fore-
’S1
saile continued not above two houres, before it was blowen from the yard with a freat, and then we were forced to lie a hull againe, untill the nineteenth day of October in the morning, and then we put an olde bonnet to our foreyard, which, by the good blessing and providence of God, brought us to the He of Wight, where we arrived the 20 of October in the afternoone.
