Certaine Articles delivered to M. John Lok, by Sir William Gerard Knight, M. William Winter, M. Benjamin Gonson, M. Anthony Hickman, and M. Edward Castelin the 8 of September 1561, touching a voyage to Guinea.
A remembrance for you M. Lok at your com-ming to the coast of Guinie.
tions.
Irst, when God shal send you thither, to procure, as you passe alongst the coast, to understand what rivers, havens, or harboroughs there be; and to make your selfe a plat thereof, setting those places which you shall thinke materiali in your sayd plat, with their true eleva-
Also you shall learne what commodities doe belong to the places where you shall touch, and what may be good for them.
It is thought good, that having a fort upon the coast of Mina in the king of Habaans country, it would serve to great purpose: wherfore you are especially sent to consider where the fort might be best placed, and upon what ground: wherein are to be noted these things following.
1.	That the ground so serve, that it joyne to the sea on the one part, so as shippes and boats may come
The English marchants intend to fortifie in Ghinea, in the king of Habaans countrey.
to lade and unlade.
2.	What molde of earth the ground is of.
3.	What timber or wood may be had, and how it will be caried.
4.	What provision of victuals may be had in the countrey: and what kinde of our victuals will best serve to continue.
5.	The place must be naturally strong, or such as
253
may be made strong with a small charge, and afterwards kept with a few men.
6.	How water may be provided, if there be none to be had in the ground where the fort shall stand, or neere to it.
7.	What helpe is to be had from the people of the countrey, either for the building of it, or for the defence thereof.
[II. ii. 53.] To moove the king of Haban a farre off, for ma^n8	a f°rtJ and to note ^ow he will like it;
' but use your communication so, that although there might fall out good cause for the doing of it, yet he do not understand your meaning.
Search the countrey so farre as you may, both alongst the coast, and into the land.
To learne what became of the marchants that were left at Benin.
The matters which shall be of importance to be noted we nothing doubt that you will omit, wherefore we referre the order of these aflaires to your good discretion.
Also we pray you as occasion shall serve that you ayd and helpe our factours, both with your counsel! and otherwise; and thus God send you safely to returne.
William Gerrard, William Winter, Benjamin Gonson, Anthony Hickman, Edward Castelin.
.