The relation of the course which the Sunshine a barke of fiftie tunnes, and the Northstarre a small pinnesse, being two vessels of the fleete of M. John Davis, helde after hee had sent them from him to discover the passage be-tweene Greenland and Island, written by Henry Morgan servant to M. William Sanderson of London.
He seventh day of May 1586. wee departed out of Dartmouth haven foure sailes, to wit, the Mermaid, the Sunshine, the Mooneshine, & the Northstarre. In the Sunshine were sixteene men, whose names were these: Richard Pope Master, Marke Carter Masters mate, Henry
Morgan Purser, George Draward, John Mandie, Hugh Broken, Philip Jane, Hugh Hempson, Richard Borden, 408
John Philpe, Andrew Madock, William Wolcome, Robert Wag carpenter, John Bruskome, William Ashe, Simon Ellis.
Our course was Westnorthwest the seventh and eight dayes: and the ninth day in the morning we were on head of the Tarrose of Silley. Thus coasting along the South part of Ireland the 11. day, we were on head of the Dorses: and our course was Southsouthwest untill sixe of the clocke the 12. day. The 13. day our course was Northwest. We remained in the company of the Mermaid and the Mooneshine until we came to the latitude of 60. degrees: and there it seemed best to our general M. Davis to divide his fleete, himself sayling to ®avts™ the Northwest, and to direct the Sunshine, wherein I was, e and the pinnesse called the Northstarre, to seeke a divideth his passage Northward betweene Greenland and Island to fleete into 2. the latitude of 80. degrees, if land did not let us. So farts-the seventh day of June wee departed from them: and The-j.ofJsme. the ninth of the same we came to a firme land of yce, which we coasted along the ninth, the tenth, and the eleventh dayes of June: and the eleventh day at sixe of the clocke at night we saw land which was very high, which afterward we knew to be Island: and the twelft Island day we harboured there, and found many people: the descr3e,i' land lyeth East and by North in 66. degrees.	66. degrees.
Their commodities were grefcne fish, and Island lings, Their commo-and stockfish, and a fish which is called Scatefish: of all tities. which they had great store. They had also kine, sheep and horses, and hay for their cattell, and for their horses.
Wee saw also their dogs. Their dwelling houses were Their dwell-made on both sides with stones, and wood layd crosse in&' over them, which was covered over with turfes of earth, and they are flat on the tops, and many of these stood hard by the shore. Their boates were made with wood Their boats, and yron all along the keele like our English boates: and they had nayles for to naile them withall, and fish-hookes and other things for to catch fish as we have here in England. They had also brasen kettles, and girdles
409
and purses made of leather, and knoppes on them of copper, and hatchets, and other small tooles as necessary as we have. They drie their fish in the Sun, and when they are dry, they packe them up in the top of their houses. If we would goe thither to fishing more then we doe, we should make it a very good voyage: for wee got an hundreth greene fish in one morning. Wee found heere two English men with a shippe, which came out of England about Easter day of this present yeere 1586, and one of them came aboord of us, and brought us two M. John Roy- lambs. The English mans name was M. John Roydon don of Ipswich. of IpSWich marchant: hee was bound for London with
his ship. And this is the summe of that which I They departed observed in Island. We departed from Island the ^Northwe^f sixteenth day of June in the morning, and our course ’	was Northwest, and we saw on the coast two small barkes
going to an harborough: we went not to them, but saw them a farre off. Thus we continued our course unto
the end of this moneth.
July.	The third day of July we were in betweene two firme
lands of yce, and passed in betweene them all that day untill it was night: and then the Master turned backe againe, and so away we went towards Greenland. And Gronelanddls- the seventh day of July we did see Greenland, and it was covered.	high, and it looked very blew: we could not come
to harborough into the land, because we were hindered by a firme land as it were of yce, which was along the shoares side: but we were within three leagues of the land, coasting the same divers dayes together. The seventeenth day of July wee saw the place which our Captaine M. The land of John Davis the yeere before had named The land of Desolation. Desolation, where we could not goe on shore for yce.
The eighteenth day we were likewise troubled with yce, and went in amongst it at three of the clocke in the Greenland morning. After wee had cleared our selves thereof, wee ranged all along the coast of Desolation untill the ende last Of July °f the aforesayd moneth.
August. The third day of August we came in sight of Gilberts 410
1586. sound in the latitude of 64. deg. 15. min. which was the place where wee were appoynted to meete our general and the rest of our Fleete. Here we came to an har-borough at 6. of the clocke at night.
The 4. day in the morning the Master went on shore  with 10. of his men, and they brought us foure of the people rowing in their boats aboord of the ship. And in the afternoone I went on shore with 6. of our men, and there came to us seven of them when we were on land. We found on shore three dead people, and two of them had their staves lying by them, and their olde skinnes wrapped about them and the other had nothing lying by, wherefore we thought it was a woman. We also saw their houses neere the Sea side, which were made with The houses of pieces of wood on both sides, and crossed over with poles Gnnland-and then covered over with earth: we found Foxes running upon the hilles : as for the place it is broken land all the way that we went, and full of broken Islands.
The 21. of August the Master sent the boate on shore for wood with sixe of his men, and there were one and thirtie of the people of the countrey which went on shore to them, & they went about to kill them as we thought, for they shot their dartes towards them, and we that were aboord the ship, did see them goe on shore to our men: whereupon the Master sent the pinnesse after them, and when they saw the pinnesse comming towards them, they turned backe, and the Master of the pinnesse did shoote off a caliver to them the same time, but hurt none of them, for his meaning was onely to put them in feare. Divers times they did wave us on shore to play with them O«r men play at the football, and some of our company went on shore to play with them, and our men did cast them downe as gavages. soone as they did come to strike the ball. And thus much of that which we did see and do in that harborough where we arrived first.
The 23. day wee departed from the Merchants Isle, where wee had beene first, and our course from thence
411
A skirmish between the Savages and out-men.
was South & by West, and the wind was Northeast, and we ran that day and night about 5. or 6. leagues, untill we came to another harborough.
The 24. about eleven of the clocke in the fbrenoone wee entred into the aforesayd new harborow, and as wee came in, we did see dogs running upon the Islands. When we were come in, there came to us foure of the people which were with us before in the other harborough, and where we rode, we had sandie ground. We saw no wood growing, but found small pieces of wood upon the Islands, & some small pieces of sweete wood among the same. We found great Harts homes, but could see none of the Stagges where we went, but we found their footings. As for the bones which we received of the Savages I cannot tell of what beasts they be.
The stones that we found in the countrey were black, and some white, as I thinke they be of no value, neverthelesse I have brought examples of them to you.
The 30. of August we departed from this harborough towards England, & the wind tooke us contrary, so that we were faine to go to another harborough the same day at 11. of the clocke. And there came to us 39. of the people, and brought us 13. Seale skins, and after we received these skins of them, the Master sent the carpenter to change one of our boates which wee had bought of them before, and they would have taken the boate from him perforce, and when they sawe they could not take it from us, they shot with their dartes at us, and stroke one of our men with one of their dartes, and John Filpe shot one of them into the brest with an arrow. And they came to us againe, and foure of our men went into the shipboate, and they shot with their dartes at our men: but our men tooke one of their people in his boate into the shipboate, and he hurt one of them with his knife, but we killed three of them in their boates : two of them were hurt with arrowes in the brests, 412
and he that was aboord our boat, was shot in with an arrow, and hurt with a sword, and beaten with staves, whome our men cast overboord, but the people caught him and carried him on shore upon their boates, and the other two also, and so departed from us. And three of them went on shore hard by us, where they had their dogs, and those three came away from their dogs, and presently one of their dogs came swimming towards us hard aboord the ship, whereupon our Master caused the Gunner to shoote off one of the great pieces towards the people, and so the dog turned backe to land and within an houre after there came of the people hard aboord the ship, but they would not come to us as they did come before.
The 31. of August we departed from Gylberts sound for England, and when we came out of the harborough there came after us 17. of the people looking which way we went.
The 2. of September we lost sight of the land at 12. of September. the clocke at noone.
The third day at night we lost sight of the Northstarre our pinnesse in a very great storme, and lay a hull tarying for them the 4. day, but could heare no more of The pinnesse them. Thus we shaped our course the 5. day South- n^^returnei southeast, and sayling untill the 27. of the sayd moneth, ’ we came in sight of Cape Clere in Ireland.
The 30. day we entred into our owne chanell.
The 2. of October we had sight of the Isle of Wight.
The 3. we coasted all along the shore, and the 4. and 5.
The 6. of the said moneth of October wee came into  the river of Thames as high as Ratliffe in safetie God be thanked.
.