I thinke there is none of you that is ignorant of how his compete ° great consequence this our enterprize is, and also how acceptable it is unto our yong King. Therefore my
friendes (as one desiring your honour and benefite) I would not faile to advertise you all of the exceeding good happe which should fall to them, which, as men of valure and worthy courage, would make tryall in this our first discoverie of the benefits and commodities of this new land: which should be, as I assure my selfe, the greatest occasion that ever could happen unto them, to arise unto the title and degree of honour. And for this cause I was desirous to propose unto you and set downe before your eyes the eternall memorie which of right they deserve, which forgetting both their parents and their countrey have had the courage to enterprize a thing of such importance, which even kings themselves understanding to be men aspiring to so high degree of 468
magnanimitie and increase of their majesties, doe not disdaine so wel to regard, that afterwards imploying them in maters of weight & of high enterprize, they make their names immortali for ever. Howbeit, I would not have you perswade your selves, as many doe, that you shall never have such good fortune, as not being knowen neither to the king nor the Princes of the Realme, and besides descending of so poore a stocke, that few or none of your parents, having ever made profession of armes, have bene knowen unto the great estates. For albeit that from my tender yeeres I my selfe have applyed all my industry to follow them, and have hazarded my life in so many dangers for the service of my prince, yet could I never attaine therunto (not that I did not deserve this title and degree of government) as I have seene it happen to many others, onely because they descende of a noble race, since more regard is had of their birth then of their virtue. For wel I know that if vertue were regarded, ther would more be found worthy to deserve the title, & by good right to be named noble and valiant. I will therefore make sufficient answere to such propositions and such things as you may object against me, laying before you the infinite examples which we have of the Romans ; which concerning the point of honour were the first that triumphed over the world. For how many finde we among them, which for their so valiant enterprizes, not for the greatnesse of their parentage, have obtained the honour to tryumph ? If we have recourse unto their ancesters, wee shall finde that their parents were of so meane condition, that by labouring with their hands they lived very basely. As the father of /Elius -^Rus Perti-Pertinax, which was a poore artisan, his Grandfather nfx^scend-likewise was a bond man, as the historiographers do parentage witnes : and neverthelesse, being moved with a valiant became Em-courage, • he was nothing dismayed for all this, but perour of rather desirous to aspire unto high things, he began Rome-with a brave stomacke to learne feates of armes, and
469
Rusten Bassha of an heard-mans sonne through his va-lure became the great Turkes sonne in law.
Agathocles a potters sonne became king of SiciBe.
profited so wel therein, that from step to step he became at length to be Emperour of the Romans. For all this dignitie he despised not his parents: but contrariwise, & in remembrance of them, he caused his fathers shop to be covered with a fine wrought marble, to serve for an example to men descended of base & poore linages, to give them occasion to aspire unto high things notwithstanding the mean-nesse of their ancesters. I wil not passe over in silence the excellencie & prowesse of the valiant and renowned Agathocles the sonne of a simple potter, and yet forgetting the contemptible estate of his father, he so applied himselfe to vertue in his tender yeeres, that by the favour of armes he came to be king of Sicilie : and for all this title he refused not to be counted the sonne of a Potter. But the more to eternize the memorie of his parentes and to make his name renowned, he commanded that he should be served at the Table in vessels of gold and silver and others of earth : declaring thereby that the dignitie wherein hee was placed came not unto him by his parents, but by his owne vertue onely. If I shal speake of our time, I will lay before you onely Rusten Bassha, which may be a sufficient example to al men : which though he were the sonne of a poore heard-man, did so apply his youth in all vertue, that being brought up in the service of the great Turke, he seemed to aspire to great and high matters, in such sort that growing in yeres he increased also in courage, so far forth, that in fine for his excellent vertues he married the daughter of the great Turke his Prince. Howe much then ought so many worthy examples to move you to plant here ? Considering also that hereby you shalbe regis-tred for ever as the first that inhabited this strange countrey. I pray you therfore all to advise your selves thereof, and to declare your mindes freely unto mee, protesting that I will so well imprint your names in the kings eares, and the other princes, that your re-
470
1587-nowme shall hereafter shine unquenchable through our Realme of France. He had scarcely ended his Oration, but the greatest part of our souldiers replyed : that a souldiers greater pleasure could never betide them, perceiving ^^eretoRi-well the acceptable service which by this meanes they shoulde doe unto their Prince : besides that this thing should be for the increase of their honours : therfore they besought the Captaine, before he departed out of the place, to begin to build them a Fort, which they hoped afterward to finish, and to leave them munition necessarie for their defence, shewing as it seemed that they were displeased, that it was so long in doing. Whereupon John Ribault being as glad as might be to see his men so well willing, determined the next day to search the most fit and convenient place to be inhabited. Wherefore he embarked himselfe very earely in the morning and commanded them to followe him that were desirous to inhabite there, to the intent that they might like the beter of the place. Having sayled up the great river on the North side, in coasting an Isle which ended with a sharpe point toward the mouth of the river, having sailed a while, he discovered a small river, which entred into the Islande, which hee would not faile to search out. Which done, & finding the same deep inough to harbour therein Gallies and Galliots in good number, proceeding further, he found a very open place, joyning upon the brinke thereof, where he went on land, and seeing the place fit to build a Fortresse in, and commodious for them that were willing to plant there, he resolved incontinent to cause the bignes of the fortification to be measured out.
And considering that there stayed but sixe and twentie there, he caused the Fort to be made in length but The length and sixteene fathome, and thirteene in breadth, with flankes p^ak^by according to the proportion thereof. The measure being Laudonnier ? taken by" me and Captaine Salles, we sent unto the and Captaine shippes for men, and to bring shovels, pickaxes and other instruments necessarie to make the fortification.
471
A Fort built We travailed so diligently, that in a short space the Fort in Port Roial was made in some sort defenciable. In which meane by Ribault. time john Ribault caused victuals and warrelike munition to be brought for the defence of the place. After he had furnished them with all such things as they had neede of, he determined to take his leave of them. But before his departure he used this speech unto Captaine Albert, which he left in this place.
Ribaults Captaine Albert, I have to request you in the speech to Cap- presence of a] these men, that you would quit your tame ert. se|pe so w|sejy yOur charge, and governe so modestly your small companie which I leave you, which with so good cheere remaineth under your obedience, that I never have occasion but to commend you, and to recount unto the king (as I am desirous) the faithfull service which before us all you undertake to doe him in his new France : And you companions, (quoth he to the Souldiers) I beseech you also to esteeme of Captaine Albert as if hee were my selfe that stayed here with you, yeelding him that obedience which a true souldier oweth unto his general and Captaine, living as brethren one with another, without all dissention : and in so doing God wil assist you and blesse your enterprises. Having ended his exhortation, we tooke our leaves of each of them, and sayled toward our shippes, calling the Forte by the name of Charles-fort, and the River by the name Chenonceau. The next day wee determined to depart from this place being as well contented as was possible that we had so happily ended our busines, with good hope, if occasion would permitte, to discover perfectly the river of Jordan. For this cause we hoysed our sayles about ten of the clocke in the morning : after wee were ready to depart Captain Ribault commanded to shoote ofF our Ordinance to give a farewel unto our Frenchmen, which failed not to doe the like on their part. This being done wee sailed toward the North : and then we named this river Porte Royal, because of the largenes and excellent
472
The aforesaide Fort was called Charles-fort.
Port Royall.
fairenes of the same. After that we had sailed about 15 leagues from thence, we espied a river, whereupon wee sent our pinnesse thither to discover it. At their return they brought us word that they found not past warde of Port halfe a fathom water in the mouth therof. Which Royall. when we understood, without doing any thing els, we continued our way, and called it the Base or Shallow river. As we stil went on sounding we found not Shallow water. past five or sixe fathome water, although we were sixe P^' good leagues from the shoare : at length we found not past three fathomes, which gave us occasion greatly to muse. And without making any farther way we strook our sayles, partly because we wanted water, & partly because the night approched : during which time Captaine John Ribault bethought with himselfe whether it were best for him to passe any farther, because of the eminent dangers which every houre we saw before our eyes : or whither he should content himselfe with that which he had certainely discovered, & also left men to inhabite the countrey. Being not able for that time to resolve with himselfe, he referred it until the next day.
The morning being come he proposed to all the company what was best to be done, to the end that with good advisement every man might deliver his opinion. Some made answere, that according to their judgement he had occasion fully to content himselfe, considering he could doe no more : laying before his eyes, that he had discovered more in sixe weekes, then the Spaniards had done in two yeres in the conquest of their New Spaine: and that he should do the king very great service, if he did bring him newes in so short a time of his happy discoverie. Other shewed unto him the losse and spoile of his victuals, and on the other side the inconvenience that might happen by the shallow water that they found continually along the coast. Which things being well and at large debated we resolved to leave the coast, forsaking the North, to take our way toward the East, which is the right way and course to our
473
Their arrwall France, where we happily arrived the twentieth day of in France July, the yere 1562.
1562.^20	7	7 J
of My.	The state and condition of those which were
left behind in Charles-fort.
KingAudusta.
Note.
Mayon. Hoya. Touppa. Stalame.
OUr men after our departure never rested, but night and day did fortifie themselves, being in good hope that after their fort was finished, they would begin to discover farther up within the river. It happened one day, as certaine of them were in cutting of rootes in the groves, that they espied on the sudden an Indian that hunted the Deere, which finding himselfe so neere upon them, was much dismayed, but our men began to draw neere unto him and to use him so courteously, that he became assured and followed them to Charles-fort, where every man sought to doe him pleasure. Captaine Albert was very joyfull of his comming, which after he had given him a shirt and some other trifles, he asked him of his dwelling: the Indian answered him that it was farther up within the river, and that he was vassal of king Audusta: he also shewed him with his hand the limits of his habitation. After much other talke the Indian desired leave to depart, because it drew toward night, which Captaine Albert granted him very willingly. Certaine dayes after the Captaine determined to saile toward Audusta, where being arrived, by reason of the honest entertaynment which he had given to the Indian, he was so courteously received, that the king talked with him of nothing else but of the desire which he had to become his friend: giving him besides to understand that he being his friend and allie, he should have the amitie of foure other kings, which in might & authoritie were able to do much for his sake: Besides all this, in his necessitie they might be able to succour him with victuals. One of these kings was called Mayon, another Hoya, the third Touppo, and the fourth Stalame. He told him moreover, that they would be very glad, when they should understand the newes of his comming, and
474
therefore he prayed him to vouchsafe to visit them.
The Captaine willingly consented unto him, for the desire that he had to purchase friends in that place. Therefore they departed the next morning very earely, and first arrived at the house of king Touppa, and afterward went into the other kings houses, except the house of king Stalame. He received of each of them all the amiable courtesies that might be : they shewed themselves to be as affectioned friends unto him as was possible, and offered unto him a thousand small presents. After that he had remained by the space of certaine daies with these strange kings, he determined to take his leave: and being come backe to the house of Audusta, he commanded al his men to goe aboord their Pinnesse: for he was minded to goe towardes the countrey of king Stalame, The countrey which dwelt toward the North the distance of 15 great leagues from Charles-fort. Therefore as they sailed up kagfus North-the river they entred into a great current, which they ward of ' followed so farre till they came at the last to the house of Charles-fort. Stalame: which brought him into his lodging, where he sought to make them the best cheere he could devise.
He presented immediatly unto Captaine Albert his bow and arrowes, which is a signe and confirmation of alliance betweene them. He presented him with Chamoys Chamoys skinnes. The Captaine seeing the best part of the day s^nnes-was now past, tooke his leave of king Stalame to return to Charles-fort, where hee arrived the day following. By this time the friendship was growne so great betweene our men and king Audusta, that in a manner all things were common betweene him and them : in such sort that this good Indian king did nothing of importance, but he called our men thereunto. For when the time drew The feast of neere of the celebrating their feasts of Toya, which are ceremonies most strange to recite, he sent Ambassadours pjj j to our men to request them on his behalfe to be there present. Whereunto they agreed most willingly for the desire that they had to understand what this might be. They imbarked themselves therefore and sailed towards
475
The Indians trimming of themselves with rich feathers.
the kings house, which was already come forth on the way towards them, to receive them courteously, to bid them welcome & bring them to his house, where he sought to intreat them the best he might. In the meane while the Indians prepared themselves to celebrate the feast the morrow after, and the king brought them to see the place, wherein the feast should be kept: where they saw many women round about, which laboured by al meanes to make the place cleane & neat. This place was a great circuit of ground with open prospect and round in figure. On the morrow therefore early in the morning, all they which were chosen to celebrate the feast, being painted and trimmed with rich feathers of divers colours, put themselves on the way to go from the kings house toward the place of Toya: whereunto when they were come they set themselves in order, & followed three Indians, which in painting and in gesture were differing from the rest: each of them bare a Tabret in their hand, dancing & singing in a lamentable tune, when they began to enter into the middest of the round circuit, being followed of others which answered them again. After that they had sung, danced, and turned 3 times, they fel on running like unbridled horses, through the middest of the thickest woods. And then the Indian women continued all the rest of the day in teares as sad & woful as was possible: & in such rage they cut the armes of the yong girles, which they lanced so cruelly with sharpe shels of Muskles that the blood followed which they flang into the ayre, crying out three times, He Toya. The king Audusta had gathered all our men into his house, while the feast was celebrated, and was exceedingly offended when he saw them laugh. This he did, because the Indians are very angry when they are seene in their ceremonies. Notwithstanding one of our men made such shift that by subtile meanes he gatte out of the house of Audusta, and secretly went and hid himselfe behinde a very thicke bush, where at his pleasure, he might easily discry the ceremonies of the feast. They three that began
476
1587-the feast are named Jawas: and they are as it were three Jawas are Priestes of the Indian law: to whom they give credite and their ^rtestes-beliefe partly because that by kinred they are ordained to be over their Sacrifices, and partly also because they be so subtile magicians that any thing that is lost is Maidans. straightway recovered by their meanes. Againe they are Positions. not onely reverenced for these things, but also because they heale diseases by I wotte not what kinde of knowledge and skill they have. Those that ran so through the woodes returned two dayes after: after their returne they began to dance with a cherefull courage in the middest of the faire place, and to cheere up their good olde Indian fathers, which either by reason of their too great age, or by reason of their natural indisposition and feeblenesse were not called to the feast. When all these dances were ended, they fell on eating with such a greedinesse, that they seemed rather to devoure their meate then to eate it, for they had neither eaten nor drunke the day of the feast, nor the two dayes following. Our men were not forgotten at this good cheere, for the Indians sent for them all thither, shewing themselves very glad of their presence. While they remained certaine time with the Indians, a man of ours got a yong boy for certaine trifles, and inquired of him, what the Indians did in the wood during their absence: which boy made him understand by signes, that the Jawas had
made invocations to Toya, and that by Magicall Characters Invocations of they had made him come that they might speake with the Jawas or him and demand divers strange things of him, which for unt° feare of the Jawas he durst not utter. They have also y ’ many other ceremonies, which I will not here rehearse for feare of molesting the reader with a matter of so small importance.
When the feast therefore was finished our men returned unto Charles-fort: where having remained but a while their victualles beganne to waxe short, which forced them Their victuals to have recourse unto their neighbours, and to pray them fayle them. to succour them in their necessitie: which gave them
477
The Indians maner of living in the Winter time of Mast and rootes.
King Covexis mightie and renowmed.
King Ovade.
King Maccou.
Ovades countrey in the river Belle.
part of all the victualles which they had, and kept no more unto themselves then would serve to sow their fieldes. They tolde them farther that for this cause it was needeful for them to retire themselves into the woods, to live of Mast and rootes untill the time of harvest, being as sory as might be that they were not able any farther to ayde them. They gave them also counsell to goe toward the countreys of King Covexis a man of might and renowme in this province, which maketh his aboad toward the South abounding at all seasons and replenished with such quantitie of mill, corne, and beanes that by his onely succour they might be able to live a very long time. But before they should come into his territories, they were to repayre unto a king called Ovade the brother of Covexis, which in mill, beanes, and corne was no lesse wealthy, and withall is very liberali, and which would be very joy full if he might but once see them. Our men perceiving the good relation which the Indians made them of those two kings resolved to go thither; for they felt already the necessity which oppressed them. Therfore they made request unto king Maccou, that it would please him to give them one of his subjects to guide them the right way thither: wherupon he condescended very willingly, knowing that without his favour they should have much ado to bring their interprize to passe. Wherefore after they had given order for all things necessary for the voyage, they put themselves to Sea, and sayled so farre that in the end they came into the countrey of Ovade, which they found to be in the river Belle. Being there arrived they perceived a company of Indians, which assoone as they knew of their being there came before them. Assoone as they were come neere them, their guides shewed them by signes that Ovade was in this company, wherefore our men set forward to salute him. And then two of his sonnes which were with him, being goodly and strong men saluted them againe in very good sort, and used very friendly
entertainment on their part. The king immediatly began to make an Oration in his Indian language of the great pleasure and contentment which he had to see them in that place, protesting that he would become so loyall a friend of theirs hereafter, that he would be their faithfull defendour against all them that would offer to be their enemies. After these speeches he led them toward his house, where he sought to entreate them very courteously. His house was hanged about with Tapistrie of feathers of divers colours the height of a Tapistrieof pike. Moreover the place where the king tooke his rest was covered with white Coverlettes embroydered ietsedgedwlth with devises of very wittie and fine workemanship, and red fringe. fringed round about with a Fringe dyed in the colour of Skarlet. They advertised the king by one of the guides which they brought with them, how that (having heard of his great liberalitie) they had put to the Sea to come to beseech him to succour them with victuals in their great want and necessitie: and that in so doing, he should binde them all hereafter to remaine his faithfull friends and loyall defenders against all his enemies. This good Indian assoone ready to doe them pleasure, as they were to demand it, commanded his subjects that they should fill our Pinnesse with mil and beanes. Afterward he TheHberaHtie caused them to bring him sixe pieces of his Tapistry ofkingQvade. made like litle coverlets, & gave them to lour men with so liberal a minde, as they easily perceived the desire which he had to become their friend. In recompence of all these giftes our men gave him two cutting hookes and certaine other trifles, wherewith he held himselfe greatly satisfied. This being done, our men tooke their leave of the king, which for their farewell, sayd nothing els but that they should returne if they wanted victuals, & that they might assure themselves of him, that they should Qvades coun-never want any thing that was in his power. Wherefore trey twenty-they imbarked themselves, and sayled towards Charles-fort, which from this place might be some five and f^m^charles tcn&alCf leagues distant. But as soone as our men firt.
479
The fort set on fire by casualtie.
The fort reedified by the Savages in the space of sz houres.
thought themselves at their ease, & free from the dangers whereunto they had exposed themselves night and day in gathering together of victuals here and there : Lo, even as they were asleepe, the fire caught in their lodgings with such furie, being increased by the winde, that the roome that was built for them before our mens departure, was consumed in an instant, without being able to save any thing, saving a little of their victualles. Whereupon our men being farre from all succours, found themselves in such extremitie, that without the ayd of Almighty God, the onely searcher of the hearts and thoughts of men, which never forsaketh those that seeke him in their afflictions, they had bene quite and cleane out of all hope. For the next day betimes in the morning the King Audusta and King Maccou came thither, accompanied with a very good companie of Indians, which knowing the misfortune, were very sory for it. And then they uttered unto their subjects the speedy diligence which they were to use in building another house, shewing unto them that the Frenchmen were their loving friends, & that they had made it evident unto them by the gifts and presents which they had received : protesting that whosoever put not his helping hand unto the worke with all his might, should be esteemed as unprofitable, and as one that had no good part in him, which the Savages feare above all things. This was the occasion that every man began to endevour himselfe in such sort, that in lesse then 12 houres, they had begun and finished a house which was very neere as great as the former. Which being ended, they returned home fully contented with a few cutting hookes, and hatchets, which they received of our men. Within a small while after this mischance, their victuals began to waxe short: and after our men had taken good deliberation, thought and bethought themselves againe, they found that there was no better way for them then to returne againe to the king Ovade and Covexis his brother. Wherefore they resolved to send thither some of their company the 480
next day following: which with an Indian Canoa sayled up into the countrey about io leagues : afterward they found a very faire & great river of fresh water, which they failed not to search out: they found therein a great number of Crocodils, which in greatnes passe those of Crocodiles. the river Nilus : moreover, al along the bankes thereof, there grow mighty high Cypresses. After they had Cypresses. stayed a smal while in this place, they purposed to follow sec^he their journey, helping themselves so wel with the tydes, Countrey0of ‘ that without putting themselves in danger of the continual! Ovade. perill of the Sea, they came into the countrey of Ovade : of whom they were most courteously received. They advertised him of the occasion wherefore they came  againe to visite him, and told him of the mischance, which happened unto them since their last voyages : how they had not onely lost their houshold stuffe by casualtie of fire, but also their victuals which he had given them so bountifully : that for this cause they were so bolde as to come once againe unto him, to beseech him to vouchsafe to succour them in such neede and necessitie.
After that the king had understood their case, he sent messengers unto his brother Covexis, to request him upon his behalfe to send him some of his mill and beanes, which thing he did: and the next morning, they were come againe with victuals, which the king caused to be borne into their Canoa. Our men would have taken their leave of him, finding themselves more then satisfied with this liberalitie. But for that day hee would not suffer them, but retained them, and sought to make them the best cheere hee could devise. The next day very earely in the morning, he tooke them with him to shewe them the place where his corne grewe, and saide unto them that they should not want as long as all that mil did last. Afterward he gave . them a certaine number of exceeding faire pearles, & two stones of fine Christal, and certaine silver oare. Our yne men forgot not to give him certaine trifles in recom- silver ore, vin	481	2 H
The flace where christall gp-oweth in very good quantitie ten dayes journey from the river Belle.
Note.
Mutiny against the captaine, and the causes thereof.
pence of these presentes, and required of him the place whence the silver oare and the Christall came. He made them answere, that it came ten dayes journey from his habitation up within the countrey: and that the inhabitants of the countrey did dig the same at the foote of certaine high mountaines, where they found of it in very good quantitie. Being joyfull to understand so good newes, and to have come to the knowledge of that which they most desired, they tooke their leave of the king, and returned by the same saw, by which they came.
Behold therefore how our men behaved themselves very well hitherto, although they had endured many great mishaps. But misfortune or rather the just judgement of God would have it, that those which could not bee overcome by fire nor water, should be undone by their owne selves. This is the common fashion of men, which cannot continue in one state, and had rather to overthrow themselves, then not to attempt some new thing dayly. We have infinite examples in the ancient histories, especially of the Romanes, unto which number this litle handfull of men, being farre from their countrey and absent from their countreymen, have also added this presents example. They entred therefore into partialities and dissentions, which began about a souldier named Guernache, which was a drummer of the French bands: which, as it was told me, was very cruelly hanged by his owne captaine, and for a smal fault: which captaine also using to threathen the rest of his souldiers which staied behind under his obedience, and peradventure (as it is to be presumed) were not so obedient to him as they should have bene, was the cause that they fell into a mutinie, because that many times he put his threatnings in execution: wherupon they so chased him, that at the last they put him to death. And the principali occasion that moved them thereunto was, because he degraded another souldier named La Chere (which he had banished) and because he had not performed his
482
• . . 15871 promise: for hee had promised to send him victuals, from 8 dayes to 8 dayes, which thing he did not, but said on the contrary, that he would be glad to heare of his death. He said moreover, that he would chastise others also, & used so evil sounding speeches, that honestie forbiddeth me to repeat them. The souldiers Captaine . seeing his madnes to increase from day to day, and Albert slaine rearing to rail into the dangers or the other, resolved to SOul<liers. kil him. Having executed their purpose, they went to seeke the souldier that was banished, which was in a small Island distant from Charles-fort about 3 leagues, where they found him almost half dead for hunger. When they were come home againe, they assembled themselves together to choose one to be governour over them whose name was Nicolas Barre a man worthy of commendation, Nicolas and one which knewe so well to quite himselfe of his Barre.>c!t0!en charge, that all rancour and dissention ceased among ca^tain' them, and they lived peaceably one with another. During this time, they began to build a smal Pinnesse, with hope to return into France, if no succours came unto them, as they expected from day to day. And though there were no man among them that had any skill, notwithstanding necessitie, which is the maistresse of all sciences, taught them the way to build it. After that it was finished, they thought of nothing else saving how to furnish it with all things necessarie to undertake the voyage. But they wanted those things that of all other were most needefull, as cordage and sayles, without which the enterprise coulde not come to effect. Having no meanes to recover these things, they were in worse case then at the first, and almost ready to fall into despayre. But that good God, which never forsaketh the afflicted, did succour them in their necessitie.
As they were in these perplexities king Audusta and Maccou came to them, accompanied with two hundred  Indians at the least, whom our Frenchmen went forth to meete withall, and shewed the king in what neede of cordage they stood: who promised them to returne
483
Cordage for tackle.
They put to the sea without sufficient victuals.
within two dayes, and to bring so much as should suffice to furnish the Pinnesse with tackling. Our men being pleased with these good newes & promises, bestowed upon them certaine cutting hookes and shirtes. After their departure our men sought all meanes to recover rosen in the woodes, wherin they cut the Pine trees round about, out of which they drew sufficient reasonable quantitie to bray the vessell. Also they gathered a kind of mosse which groweth on the trees of this countrey, to serve to calke the same withall. There now wanted nothing but sayles, which they made of their owne shirtes and of their sheetes. Within few dayes after the Indian kings returned to Charles fort with so good store of cordage, that there was found sufficient for tackling of the small Pinnesse. Our men as glad as might be, used great liberalitie towards them, and at their leaving of the countrey, left them all the marchandise that remained, leaving them thereby so fully satisfied, that they departed from them with all the contentation of the worlde. They went forward therefore to finish the Brigandine, & used so speedie diligence, that within .a short time afterward they made it ready furnished with all things. In the meane season the winde came so fit for their purpose that it seemed to invite them to put to the Sea: which they did without delay, after they had set all their things in order. But before they departed they embarked their artillerie, their forge, and other munitions of war're which Captaine Ribault had left them, and then as much mill as they could gather together. But being drunken with the too excessive joy, which they had conceived for their returning into France, or rather deprived of all foresight & consideration, without regarding the incon-stancie of the winds, which change in a moment, they put themselves to sea, and with so slender victuals, that the end of their interprise became unluckly and unfortunate.
For after they had sayled the third part ot their way, they were surprized with calmes which did so much hinder them, that in three weekes they sailed not above 484
five and twentie leagues. During this ti’me their victuals consumed, and became so short, that every man was Their victuals constrained to eate not past twelve graines of mill by the utterh con~ day, which may be in value as much as twelve peason. sume ' Yea, and this felici tie lasted not long : for their victuals failed them altogether at once: and they had nothing for their more assured refuge but their shooes and leather jerkins which they did eat. Touching their beverage, some of them dranke the sea water, others did drink their They drinke owne urine: and they remained in such desperate necessitie a very long space, during the which part of water_ them died for hunger. Beside this extreme famine, which did so grievously oppresse them, they fell every minute of an houre out of all hope ever to see France againe, insomuch that they were constrained to cast the water continually out, that on al sides entred into their Barke.
