169
170
171
172
173
175
Suelasdevaca.
ix	177	M
Quires.
179
180
7,uni.,o Cibola.
185
[A briefe
A briefe relation of two notable voyages, the first made by frier Augustin Ruyz a Franciscan, in the yeere 1581: the second by Antonio de Espejo in the yeere 1583: who together with his company discovered a land wherin they found fifteene provinces all full of townes, conteining houses of foure and five stories high, which they named New Mexico ; for that in many respects it resembleth the province of olde Mexico. This land is situate to the North of Nueva Espanna, and stretcheth from 24 to 34 degrees and better: by the which & by other inhabited lands it is thought that men may travell even to Terra de Labrador. Taken out of the history of China written by Frier Juan Gonzales de Mendosa, and printed in Madrid 1586.
The first voyage made by FrierAngus tin Ruiz to the province de los Tiguas.
Have now declared in the title of this present discourse, that in the yeere 1583 there were discovered fifteene provinces, which the discoverers called New Mexico, situate on the firme land of Nueva Espanna, and I promised to give notice of the sayd discovery, which I will do
with as much brevity as is possible : for if I should record at large all particulars which they saw and came to the knowledge of, it would require a full history. The substance thereof is as followeth.
In the yere of our Lord 1581 a certaine Franciscan frier called Augustin Ruiz which dwelt in the valley of S. Bartholomew, being informed by the report of certaine Indians called Conchos, which had dealings and conversation with other of their neighbours called Pas-186
1581-83. saguates ; that toward the North, travelling alwayes by land, there were certaine great townes not hitherto knowen nor discovered by our Spanyards : mooved with a zeale of charity, and a desire to save soules, craved licence of the Conde of Corunna as then Viceroy of Nueva Espanna, and of his superiours, to go to the sayd townes, and to indevour to learne their language, and having learned the same, to baptize them, and to preach the holy Gospel unto them. After he had obteined licence of the parties aforesayd, taking with him other two companions of his owne order, and eight souldiers, 23« «f who of their owne good will offered to beare him company, he departed to put in execution his Christian prancisc0 and zealous intent. Who after certeine dayes travell Sanchez come unto a countrey called The province de los Tiguas Xamuzcado distant from the mines of Santa Barbara, from whence they began their journey, 250 leagues towards the North : in which province the inhabitants, upon a cer-taine occasion, slew one of the sayd friers two companions. The souldiers that went with him seeing this mishap, and perceiving the successe, and likewise fearing, that thereof might happen some greater danger, determined with a common consent to return unto the mines from whence they departed : considering that their company was too small to resist the dangers that might happen, being so farre distant from the dwellings of the Spanyards, and from all necessary succour. But the two friers which remained alive did not onely refuse their determination, but rather seeing fit occasion to put their good desire in execution, and so great a harvest ripe for the Lords table, because they could not persuade the souldiers to proceed any further in that discovery, remained behinde in the sayd province with three Indian boyes, and one Mestizo, whom they had caried with them; thinking that although they remained alone, yet should they be there in securitie, by reason of the great affability and love which the people of that place shewed unto them.
187
which intercepted is come to our hands.
The province de los Tiguas distant 250 leagues Northward from the mines of Santa Barbara.
The mines of SantaBarbara 160 leagues distant from Mexico.
The second voyage.
Las quatro Cienegas in the province offue v a Biscaya 70 leagues from the mines of Santa Barbara.
The eight souldiers being returned to their wished home, immediatly sent newes of all that had passed to the Viceroy unto the city of Mexico, which is distant from the sayd mines of Santa Barbara 160 leagues.
The friers of Sant Francis were very much agrieved at the staying of their brethren behinde in the countrey, and fearing least the Savages would kill them seeing them left alone, they began to moove the minds of certaine souldiers to make another voyage to the sayd province in the company of another frier of the foresayd Order called Frier Bernardin Beltran, to deliver the aforesayd two religious men out of danger, and to prosecute their former enterprise.
At the same time there was at the foresayd mines upon some occasion a citizen of Mexico called Antonio de Espejo, a rich man, and of great courage and industry, and very zealous in the service of king Philip his sovereine, and was borne in Cordova. Who understanding the desire of the foresayd friers, and the importance of the action, offered himselfe to go on that voyage, and also to spend part of his substance, and to adventure his life therein ; conditionally that licence might be granted him to the same purpose from some person sufficiently authorised by his Majestie. Which licence at the sayd friers procurement was granted unto him by the governour Juan de Ontiveros the kings Alcalde may6r or chiefe Justice in the towns called Las quatro Cienegas situate within the jurisdiction of Nueva Biscaya seventy leagues from the sayd mines of Santa Barbara ; authorizing him both to take in hand the sayd voyage, and also to assemble such people and souldiers as he could, which might accompany and ayde him in the performance of this his Christian intent.
The sayd Antonio de Espejo was so earnest in this matter, that in very few dayes he had gathered a company of souldiers, and made provision of things necessary for his voyage, spending therein a good part of his substance. And he departed with his whole company from the valley 188
of S. Bartholomew the tenth of November 1582 ; taking with him (for whatsoever should happen) 115 horses and mules, with great store of weapons, munition, and victuals, and some Indians to serve him in his journey.
Directing his course toward the North, after two dayes journey he met with great Store of the foresayd Indians called Conchos, which dwell in villages or hamlets of cottages covered with straw. Who, so soone as they understood of his approch, having newes thereof long before, came foorth to receive him with shewes of great joy. The food of this people and of all the rest of that province, which is great, are conies, hares, and deere which they kill, of all which they have great abundance. Also they have great store of Maiz or Indian wheat, gourds, and melons very good and plentifull : and there are many rivers full of excellent fish of divers sorts. They goe almost naked, and the weapons that they use are bowes & arrowes, and live under the government and lordship of Caciques like those of Mexico : they found no idols among them, neither could they understand that they worshipped any thing, whereupon they easily consented that the Spanyards should set up crosses, and were very well content therewith, after they were informed by our friers of the signification thereof, which was done by the interpreters that they caried with them ; by whose meanes they understood of other townes, whither the sayd Conchos did conduct them, and bare them company above foure & twenty leagues, all which way was inhabited with people of their owne nation : and at all places where they came they were peaceably received by advice that was sent by the Caciques from one towne to another.
Having passed the foure and twenty leagues afore-sayd, they came unto another nation of Indians called Passaguates, who live after the maner of the foresayd Conchos their borderers, and did unto them as the others had done, conducting them forward other foure dayes journey, with advice of the Caciques as before. The 189
A.D.
1581-83.
Antonio de Espejo his setting forth from the valley of S. Bartholomew the tenth of November 1582.
Indians called Conchos.
Many rivers.
Spanyards found in this journey many mines of silver, which according to the judgement of skilfull men, were very plentifull and rich in metall.
A dayes journey from thence they met with another nation called Tobosos, who so soone as they beheld the countenance of our people fledde unto the mountaines, leaving their townes and houses desolate. Afterward wee understood that certeine yeeres past there came unto that place certaine souldiers to seeke mines, who caried away captive certaine of the people of the countrey, which caused the rest of them to be so shey and fearefull. The captaine sent messengers to call them backe againe, assuring them that they should not sustaine any harme, and handled the matter so discreetly, that many of them returned, whom he made much of, and gave them gifts, using them kindly, and declaring unto them by the interpreter, that their comming was not to hurt any man : whereupon they were all quieted, and were content they should set up crosses, and declare the mystery of the same, making shew that they were highly pleased therewith. For proofe whereof they accompanied them on their voyage, as their neighbours had done, untill they had brought them to a countrey inhabited by another nation, which was distant from theirs some 12 leagues. They use bowes and arrowes and go naked.
The nation unto which the sayd Tobosos conducted them, is called Jumanos, whom the Spanyards by another name call Patarabueyes : their province is very great, conteining many townes and great store of people : their houses are flat-rooffed, and built of lime and stone, and the streets of their townes are placed in good order. All the men and women have their faces, armes and legges raced and pounced : they are a people of great stature, and of better government, then the rest which they had seene in their former journeyes : and are well provided of victuals, and furnished with plenty of wilde beasts, fowles and fishes, by reason of mighty rivers which come from the North, whereof one is as great as 190
Guadalquivir, which falleth into the North sea or bay of Mexico. Here are also many lakes of salt water, which at a certeine time of the yere waxeth hard, and be-commeth very good salt. They are a warlike people, and soone made shew thereof: for the first night that our people incamped there, with their arrowes they slew five horses, and wounded five other very sore, nor would not have left one of them alive, if they had not beene defended by our guard. Having done this mischiefe, they abandoned the towne, and withdrew themselves to a mountaine which was hard by, whither our captaine went betimes in the morning, taking with him five souldiers well armed, and an interpreter called Peter an Indian of their owne nation, and with good persuasions appeased them, causing them to descend to their towne and houses, and persuading them to give advice unto their neighbours, that they were men that would hurt no body, neither came they thither to take away their goods : which he obtained easily by his wisedome, and by giving unto the Caciques certeine bracelets of glasse beads, with hats and other trifles, which he caried with him for the same purpose : so by this meanes, and by the good intertein-ment which they gave them, many of them accompanied our Spanyards for certeine dayes, alwayes travelling along the banke of the great river abovesayd ; along the which kit del'Norte. there were many townes of the Indians of this nation, which continued for the space of twelve dayes travel, all which time the Caciques having received advice from one to another, came forth to interteine our people without their bowes and arrowes, and brought them plenty of victuals, with other presents and gifts, especially hides and chamois-skins very well dressed, so that those of Flanders do nothing exceed them. These people are all clothed, and seemed to have some light of our holy faith : for they made signes of God, looking up towards heaven, and call him in their language Apalito, A pall to. and acknowledge him for their Lord, from whose bountifull hand and mercy they confesse that they have
191
received their life and being, and these worldly goods. Many of them with their wives and children came unto the frier (which the captaine and souldiers brought with them) that hee might crosse and blesse them. Who demanding of them, from whom they had received that knowledge of God, they answered, from three Christians, & one Negro which passed that way, and remained certaine dayes among them, who by the signes which  they made, were Alvaro Nunnez, Cabe?a de Vaca, and Dorantes, and Castillo Maldonado, and a Negro ; all Pamphilo de which escaped of the company which Pamphilo de Narvaex	Narvaez landed in Florida ; who after they had bene
Florida 1527. many dayes captives and slaves, escaped and came to these townes, by whom God shewed many miracles, and healed onely by the touching of their hands many sicke persons, by reason wherof they became very famous in all that countrey. All this province remained in great peace and security ; in token whereof, they accompanied and served our men certaine dayes, travelling along by Rio del Norte, the great river aforesayd.
Another Within few dayes after they came unto another great province. province of Indians, from whence they came forth to receive them, upon the newes which they had heard of their neighbors, and brought them many very curious things made of feathers of divers colours, and many mantles of cotton straked with blew and white, like those that are brought from China, to barter & trucke them for other things. All of them both men, women and children were clad in chamois skinnes very good and wel dressed. Our people could never understand what nation they were for lacke of an interpreter : howbeit they dealt with them by signes ; and having shewed Very great unto them certaine stones of rich metall, and inquired quantity of	whether there were any such in their countrey: they
stver'	answered by the same signes, that five dayes journey
Westward from thence there was great quantity therof, and that they would conduct them thither, and shew it unto them; as afterward they performed their 192
1581-83. promise, & bare them company 22 leagues, which was all inhabited by people of the same nation.
Next unto the foresayd province they came unto Another pro -another further up the great river aforesayd, being mnce' much more populous then the former, of whom they were well received, and welcomed with many presents, especially of fish, whereof they have exceeding great store, by reason of certaine great lakes not far from Great lakes. thence, wherein they are bred in the foresayd plenty. They stayed among these people three dayes ; all which time both day and night they made before them many dances, according to their fashion, with signification of speciali joy. They could not learne the name of this nation for want of an interpreter, yet they understood that it extended very farre, and was very great. Among these people they found an Indian of the foresayd nation of the Conchos, who told them, and shewed them by signes, that fifteene dayes journey from thence toward the West there was a very broad lake, and nere unto A mighty lake. it very great townes, and in them houses of three or foure stories high, and that the people were well apparelled, and the countrey full of victuals and provision. This Concho offered himselfe to conduct our men thither, whereat our company rejoyced, but left off the enterprise, onely to accomplish their intent for which they undertooke the voyage, which was to go Northward to give ayd unto the two friers aforesayd. The chiefe and principali thing that they noted in this province was, that it was of very good temperature, and a very rich soyle, and had great store of wilde beasts, and wilde-fowle, and abundance of rich metals, and other excellent things, and very pro- Rich metals. fitable.
From this province they folowed their journey for the space of fifteene dayes without meeting any people all that while, passing thorow great woods and groves of pine tods of pine trees bearing such fruit as those of Castile : at the end trees' whereof, having travelled, to their judgement, fourescore leagues, they came unto a small hamlet or village of fewe
ix	193	N
people, in whose poore cottages covered with straw they found many deeres-skinnes as well dressed as those of Flanders, with great store of excellent white salt. They gave our men good entertainment for the space of two dayes while they remained there, after which they bare them company about twelve leagues, unto certaine great townes, alwayes travelling by the river called Rio del Norte abovesayd, till such time as they came unto the New Mexico, countrey called by them New Mexico. Here all along ^o°°lar°and t^le sh°re sayd river grew mighty woods of poplar walnut trees being in some places foure leagues broad, and great Vines.	store of walnut trees, and vines like those of Castillia.
Having travelled two dayes thorow the said woods of Poplar and Walnut trees, they came to ten townes situate on both sides of the sayd river, besides others which they might see further out of the way, wherein there seemed to be great store of people, and those which they saw were above ten thousand persons. In this province they received them very courteously, and brought them to their townes, whereas they gave them great plenty of victuals and hennes of the countrey, with many other things, and that with great good will. Houses of 4 Here they found houses of foure stories high, very stones high. weq with gallant lodgings, and in most of them were
Stooves for the Winter season. Their garments were of Cotton and of deere-skinnes, and the attire both of the men and women is after the maner of the Indians of the kingdome of Mexico. But the strangest thing of all was to see both men and women weare shooes and boots with good soles of neats leather, a thing which they never sawe in any other part of the Indies. The women keepe their haire well combed and dressed, wearing nothing els upon their heads. In all these  townes they had Caciques which governed their people like the Caciques of Mexico, with Sergeants to execute their commandements, who goe thorow the townes proclaiming with a loud voice the pleasure of the Caciques, commanding the same to be put in execution. In this 194
province our men found many idols which they worshipped, and particularly they had in every house an Oratory for the divell, whereinto they ordinarily cary him meat: and another thing they found, that as it is an use among the Christians to erect crosses upon the high wayes, so have this people certaine high chapels, in which they say the divell useth to take his ease, and to recreat himselfe as he travelleth from one towne to another; which chapels are marvellously well trimmed and painted. In all their arable grounds, whereof they have great plenty, they erect on the one side a little cottage or shed standing upon foure studdes, under which the labourers do eat, and passe away the heat of the day, for they are a people much given to labour, and doe continually occupy themselves therein. This countrey is full of These high mountaines and forrests of Pine trees. The weapons m°untainesa™ that they use are strong bowes and arrowes headed with C!)ij,nes offa flints, which will pierce thorow a coat of male, and countrey. macanas which are clubs of halfe a yard long, so beset with sharpe flints, that they are sufficient to cleave a man asunder in the midst: they use also a kinde of targets made of raw hides.
Having remained foure dayes in this province, not The province farre ofF they came to another called The province of °fTiSuas-Tiguas conteining sixteene townes, in one whereof, called Poala, they understood that the inhabitants had slaine the Poala. two fathers aforesayd, to wit, frier Francis Lopez, and frier Augustus Ruyz, whom they went to seeke, together with the three Indian boyes, and the mestizo. So soone as the people of this towne and their neighbours saw our men there, their owne consciences accusing them, and fearing that our men came to punish them, and to be avenged of the death of the foresaid fathers, they durst not abide their comming, but leaving their houses desolate they fled to the mountaines next adjoyning, from whence they could never cause them to descend, although our men attempted the same by divers devises and entise-ments. They found in the townes and houses good store
J9S
of victuals, with infinite number of hennes in the countrey, and many sorts of metals, whereof some seemed to be very good. They could not perfectly understand what numbers of people this province might conteine, by reason they were fled into the mountaines, as I have sayd before.
Having found those to be slaine which they went to seeke, they entred into consultation, whether they should returne to Nueva Biscaya, from whence they came, or should proceed further in their journey; whereabout there were divers opinions: howbeit, understanding there, that toward the Orient or East parts of that province, and very far distant from thence, there were great and rich townes: and finding themselves so far on the way, the sayd captaine Antonio de Espeio with the consent of the foresayd frier called Frier Bernardine Beltran, and the greater part of his souldiers and companions determined to proceed on the discovery, till such time as they did see to what end it would come; to the end they might give certeine and perfect knowledge thereof to his Majesty, as eye-witnesses of the same. And so with one accord they determined, that while the army lay still there, the captaine and two more of his company should prosecute their desire, which they did accordingly. And within two dayes journey they came unto another province, where they found eleven townes, and much people in them, which in their judgement were above forty thousand persons. The countrey was very fertile and plentifull, whose confines bordered upon the territories of Cibola, where there are great store of kine, with whose hides and with cotton they apparell themselves, imitating in the forme of their government their next neighbours. In this place are signes of very rich mines, some quantity of the metals whereof they found in the houses of the Indians; which Indians have and doe worship idols. They received our men peaceably, and gave them victuals. Having seene thus much, and the disposition of the countrey, they returned to the campe, from whence they 196
1581-83. departed, to informe their companions of the things above mentioned.
Being returned to the campe they had intelligence of Quiresb°rder' another province called Los Quires, which stood sixe uPm ^l0 leagues higher up the river called Rio del Norte. And e °rte' in their journey thitherward, being arrived within a league of the place, there came forth very many Indians to receive them in peace, requesting them to beare them company to their townes: which they did, and were marvellous well interteined and cherished. In this province they found five townes only, wherein were great store of people, and those which they saw were above 14000
soules, who worship idols as their neighbours do. In one of these townes they found a pie in a cage after the maner of Castile, and certaine shadowes or canopies like unto those which are brought from China, wherein were painted the Sunne, the Moone, and many Starres. Where having taken the height of the pole-starre, they found themselves to be in 37 degrees and of Northerly latitude.
They departed out of this province, and keeping still the same Northerly course, foureteene leagues from thence they found another province called The Cunames, where they saw other five townes, the greatest whereof was called Cia, being so large, that it conteined eight market-places, the houses whereof being plaistered and painted with divers colours, were better then any which they had seene in the provinces before mentioned: the people which they heere saw, they esteemed to be above twenty thousand persons. They presented to our men many curious mantles, and victuals excellently well dressed; so that our men deemed this nation to be more curious, and of greater civility, and better government, then any other that hitherto they had seene. They shewed them rich metals, and the mountaines also not farre off whereout they digged them. Heere our people heard of another province standing toward the Northwest, whereunto they purposed to goe.
197
Seven & thirty degrees and a halfe. 
Having travelled about sixe leagues, they came to the Ameies, or sayd province, the people whereof were called Ameies, Emexes. wherin were seven very great townes, conteining, to their judgement, above thirty thousand soules. They reported that one of the seven townes was very great and faire, which our men would not go to see, both because it stood behinde a mountaine, and also for feare of some mishappe, if in case they should be separated one from another. This people are like unto their neighbours of the former province, being as well provided of all necessaries as they, and of as good government.
About fifteene leagues from this province, travelling alwayes toward the West, they found a great towne called AcomaorAco- Acoma, conteining above sixe thousand persons, and man a towne situa^e UpOn an high rocke which was above fifty paces above 6000 having no other entrance but by a ladder or paire persons. of staires hewen into the same rocke, whereat our people marvelled not a little : all the water of this towne was kept in cisternes. The chiefe men of this towne came peaceably to visit the Spanyards, bringing them many mantles, and chamois-skinnes excellently dressed, and great plenty of victuals. Their corne-fields are two leagues from thence, and they fetch water out of a small river nere thereunto, to water the same, on the brinks whereof they saw many great banks of Roses like those of Castile. Signes of	Here are many mountaines that beare shewes of mettals,
metals.	but they went not to see them, because the Indians
dwelling upon them are many in number, and very warlike. Our men remained in this place three dayes, upon one of the which the inhabitants made before them a very solemne dance, comming foorth in the same with gallant apparell, using very witty sports, wherewith our men were exceedingly delighted.
Twenty foure leagues from hence toward the West, they came to a certaine province called by the inhabitants ZunyorSunne. themselves Zuny, & by the Spanyards Cibola, containing great numbers of Indians; in which province Francisco Vazquez de Coronado had bene, and had erected many 198
crosses and other tokens of Christianity, which remained as yet standing. Heere also they found three Indian Christians which had remained there ever since the said journy, whose names were Andrew de Culiacan, Gaspar de Mexico, and Antonio de Guadalajara, who had almost forgotten their owne language, but could speake that countrey speech very well; howbeit after some small conference with our men, they easily understood one another. By these three Indians they were informed, that threescore dayes journey from this place there was a very mighty lake, upon the bankes whereof stood many great and good townes, and that the inhabitants of the same had plenty of golde, an evident argument wherof was their wearing of golden bracelets & earrings: and also that after the sayd Francis Vasquez de Coronado had perfect intelligence thereof, hee departed out of this province of Cibola to goe thither, and that having proceeded twelve dayes journey, he began to want water; and thereupon determined to returne, as he did indeed, with intention to make a second voyage thither at his better opportunity ; which afterward he performed not, being prevented of his determined journey by death.
Upon the newes of these riches the sayd Captaine Antony de Espeio was desirous to go thither; and though some of his companions were of his opinion, yet the greater part and the frier were of the contrary, saying that it was now high time to returne home unto New Biscay from whence they came, to give account of that which they had seene: which the sayd greater part within few dayes put in execution, leaving the captaine with
A mighty lake 60 dales journey from Cibola.
Plenty ofgolde.
nine companions onely that willingly followed him: who after hee had fully certified himselfe of the riches above-sayd, and of the great quantity of excellent mettals that were about that lake, departed out of this province of mightiepro-
Another
Cibola with his companions; and travelling directly toward vince w"V-
the West, after hee had passed 28 leagues, he found
another very great province, which by estimation con- ^iied^Mo-
teined above 50000 soules: the inhabitants whereof 199
A witty politic to be used by the English in like cases.
assoone as they understood of their approch, sent them word, upon paine of death to come no neerer to their townes: whereto the captaine answered, that their comming was in no wise to hurt them, as they should well perceive, and therefore requested them not to molest him in his intended voyage, and withall gave to the messenger a reward of such things as they brought with them: who thereupon made so good report of our people, and so appeased the troubled minds of the Indians, that they granted them free accesse unto their townes, and so they went thither with 15. Indians their friends of the province of Cibola aforesaid, and the three Mexican Indians before mentioned. When they were come within a league of the first towne, there came forth to meete them above 2000. Indians laden with victuals, whom the Captaine rewarded with some things of small value, which they made great accompt of, and esteemed more precious then gold. As they approched neere unto the towne which was named Zaguato, a great multitude of Indians came forth to meete them, and among the rest their Caciques, with so great demonstration of joy and gladnes, that they cast much meale of Maiz upon the ground for the horses to tread upon: with this triumph they entred the towne, where they were very wel lodged and much made of, which the Captaine did in part requite, giving to the chiefest among them hats, and beads of glasse, with many such trifles, which he caried with him for the like purpose. The said Caciques presently gave notice to the whole province of the arrival of these new guests, whom they reported to bee a courteous people, and such as offered them no harme: which was occasion sufficient to make them all come laden with presents unto our people, and to intreat them to goe and make merry with them in their townes ; which they yeelded unto, though alwayes with great foresight what might follow. Whereupon the Captaine used a certaine policie, making the Caciques beleeve, that forasmuch as his horses were very fierce (for they
200
had told the Indians that they would kill them) therefore it was necessary to make a Fort of lime and stone to inclose them, for the avoyding of such inconveniences as otherwise might happen unto the Indians by them. This tale was so stedfastly beleeved by the Casques, that in five houres they assembled such store of people together, that with incredible celeritie they built the said Fort which our men required.
Moreover, when the Captaine saide that he would depart, they brought unto him a present of 40000. mantles of cotton, both white and of other colours, and great store of hand-towels, with tassels at the corners, with divers other things, and among the rest rich mettals, which seemed to holde much silver. Rich metals. Among these Indians they learned very much concerning The great Lake aforesaide, whose report agreed wholly with the relation of the former, as touching the riches and great abundance of gold about that lake. Great abun-
The Captaine reposing great confidence in this people 8c in their good disposition toward him determined after certaine dayes, to leave there five of his companions with the rest of his Indian friends, that they might returne with his cariages to the province of Zuni, while himselfe with the foure other which remained should ride in post to discover certaine very rich Mines, whereof he had perfect information. And putting this his purpose in execution he departed with his guides, and having travelled due-west 45. leagues he came unto the said Mines, and tooke out of the same with his Exceedingrich owne hands exceeding rich metals holding great quantitie Mines of of silver: arid the mines which were of a very broad ' veine were in a mountaine whereon they might easily ascend, by reason of an open way that led up to the same. Neere unto these mines were certaine townes of Indians dwelling upon the mountaines, who shewed them friendship & came forth to receive them with crosses on their heads, and other tokens of peace. Hereabout they found two rivers of a reasonable bignesse,
201
upon the banks whereof grew many vines bearing excellent grapes, and great groves of walnut-trees, and much A mighty	flaxe like that of Castile: and they shewed our men by
River °f eight	sjgneS) that behinde those mountaines there was a river
runnings-	about 8. leagues broad, but they could not learne how
ward the	neere it was: howbeit the Indians made demonstration
'North sea.	that it ran towards the North sea, and that upon both
^River snowfall s^es thereof stood many townes of so great bignesse, that into^theChese- c°mParison thereof those wherein they dwelt were but piouk bay, or small hamlets.
into the great After he had received all this information, the said ItAeofTadoac. Captaine returned toward the province of Zuni, whither ' he had sent his said companions: and being arrived there in safety, having travailed upon a very good way, he found in the same place his 5. companions, & the said father Frier Bernardin Beltran, with the souldiers which were determined to returne, as is aforesaid, but upon certaine occasions were not as yet departed: whom the inhabitants had most friendly intreated, & furnished with all things necessary in abundance, as afterward likewise they used the Captaine, and those that came with him, comming foorth to meete them with shew of great joy, and giving them great store of victuals to serve them in their journey homewards, and requesting them to returne againe with speed, and to bring many Castilians with them (for so they call the Spaniards) to whom they promised food sufficient. For the better performance whereof they sowed that yeere more graine and other fruits, then they had done at any time before.
 At this present the Frier and souldiers aforesaid resolved themselves in their former determination, & agreed to returne unto the province from whence they came with intention before mentioned, to seek the two Friers that were slaine, to whom also Gregorio Hernandez who had bene standard-bearer in the journey, joyned himselfe. Who being departed, the Captaine accompanied onely with 8. souldiers, determined to prosecute his former attempt, & to passe up higher the saide river
202
called Rio del Norte, which he did accordingly. And having travelled about 60. leagues toward the province 60. Leagues. of the Quires aforesaid, 12 leagues from thence toward the Orient or East they found a province of Indians called Hubates, who received them peaceably, and gave Hubates. them great store of victuals, informing them also of very rich Mines which they found, whereout they got Very rich glistering & good metal, and therewith returned to the Mines. towne from whence they came. This province contained by their estimation 25000. persons all very well apparelled in coloured mantles of cotton, and Chamois-skins very well dressed. They have many mountaines full of Pines and Cedars, and the houses of their townes are Houses of 4. of 4. and 5. stories high. Here they had notice of five stories another province distant about one dayes journey from ' thence inhabited by certaine Indians called Tamos, and Tamos. containing above 40000. soules: whither being come the inhabitants would neither give them any victuals, nor admit them into their townes: for which cause, and in regard of the danger wherein they were, and because some of the souldiers were not well at ease, and for that they were so fewe (as we have said) they determined Theirretume. to depart thence, and to returne toward the land of the Christians, which they put in execution in the beginning of July 1583, being guided by an Indian that went with them, who led them another way then they went forth by, downe a river, which they called Rio de las vacas ; that de las is to say, The river of oxen, in respect of the great multitudes of oxen or kine that fed upon the bankes thereof, by the which they travelled for the space of
120. leagues, still meeting with store of the said cattell. 120. Leagues. From hence they went forward to the river of Conchos by which they entered, and thence to the valley of S. Bartholomew, from whence they first entered into their discoverie. Upon their comming thither they found that the said Frier Bernardin Beltran and his company were safely arrived at the said towne many dayes before, & were gone from thence to the towne of Guadiana. In Guadiana.
203
this towne the foresaid captaine Antony de Espejo made most certaine relation of all that is aforesaid, which relation presently hee sent unto the Conde of Corunna Vizroy of Nueva Espanna, who sent the same to his Majestie, & to the Lords of his royal counsel of the Indies, to the end they might take such order as they thought best, which they have already performed with great care and circumspection.
Almighty God vouchsafe his assistance in this busines, that such numbers of soules redeemed by his blood may not utterly perish, of whose good capacitie, wherein they exceed those of Mexico and Peru (as we be given to understand by those that have delt with them) we may boldly presume that they will easily embrace the Gospel, and abandon such idolatrie as now the most of them doe live in : which Almightie God graunt for his honour and glory, and for the increase of the holy Catholique faith.
.