The first and second discovery of the gulfe of California, and of the Sea-coast on the Northwest or back side of America, lying to the West of New Mexico, Cibola and Quivira, together with Sir Francis Drakes landing and taking possession upon Nova Albion in the behalfe of the Crowne of England, and the notable voyage of Francis Gaule; Wherein amongst many other memorable matters is set downe the huge bredth of the Ocean sea from China and Japan to the Northwest parts of America, in the 38. and 40. degrees.
A relation of the discovery, which in the Name of God the Fleete of the right noble Fernando Cortez Marques of the Vally, made with three ships; The one called Santa Agueda of 120. tunnes, the other the Trinitie of 35. tunnes, and the thirde S. Thomas of the burthen of 20. tunnes. Of which Fleete was Captaine the right worshipfull knight Francis de Ulloa borne in the Citie of Merida. Taken out of the third volume of the voyages gathered by M. John Baptista Ramusio.
Chap. 1.
Francis Ulloa a captaine of Cortez departeth with a Fleet from the port of Acapulco, and goeth to discover unknowen lands, he passeth by the coast of Sacatula and Motin, and by tempest runneth to the river of Guajaval, from whence he crosseth over to the haven of Santa Cruz, along the coast whereof he discovereth 3. smal Hands, and within two dayes and an halfe returning to the maine land he discovereth the river called Rio de san Pedro y san Pablo, and not far distant from thence two other rivers as big or greater then that of Guadalquivir which runneth by Sivil, together with their head-springs.
E imbarked our selves in the haven of Acapulco in Acapulco on the 8. of July in the yeere J 7; degrees of of our Lord 1539, calling upon almighty atitude-God to guide us with his holy hand unto such places where he might be served, and his holy faith advanced. And we sailed from the said port by the coast
of Sacatula and Motin, which is sweete and pleasant The coast of through the abundance of trees that grow thereon, and $acatfla rivers which passe through those countreis, for the which Motin-wee often thanked God the creatour of them. So sailing along we came to the haven of S. Iago in the province S- Iago de of Colima: but before we arrived there, the maine mast of our ship called Santa Agueda was broken by a storme of winde that tooke us, so as the ship was forced to saile without her mast until we arrived in the said haven. From the port of Acapulco to this haven of Colima wee were sayling the space of 20. dayes. Here wee stayed to mende our mast and to take in certaine victuals, water, and wood, the space of 27. dayes. And wee departed from the saide haven the 23. of August, and The Isles of sayling by the Isles of Xalisco the 27. or 28. of the Xalisco. saide moneth wee were taken with an extreame tempest wherein wee thought we should have perished, and being tossed and weather-beaten, wee ranne as farre as Guajaval. the river of Guajaval in the Province of Culiacan. In this storme wee lost the pinnesse called Sant Thomas, and because wee had lost her wee crossed over to the Santa Cruz port of Santa Cruz in California: for while wee were 'cedifornla	so beaten	tbe f°rmer tempest, the pilot of the Barke signified unto us, that he perceived she beganne to leake, and that already she had received in much water, insomuch that she beganne to founder: whereupon, to helpe her neede, and that wee might meete together in a knowen haven, if by chance the tempest should separate us, as it did indeed, we willed him to repaire to the haven of Santa Cruz, where we meant to repaire his harmes and our owne. Wherefore being all arrived in this place of Santa Cruz, wee stayed there five dayes and tooke in water, wherein we heard no newes of our Barke which we had lost: Whereupon the Captaine resolved to follow on our voyage; wherefore we set saile the 12. of September, and as wee sailed wee Three Hands, saw along the coast of the saide haven 3. Islands, whereof the Captaine made no great accompt, thinking there coulde be no great good found in any of them. These Islands seemed not to be great; wherefore he commanded the Masters and pilotes to proceed on their voyage, and not to leese time without any profit. So sailing over the gulfe of California, in two dayes and an halfe Rio de san we came to the river of S. Peter and S. Paul, finding Ppablo* !an before we entred into the same a small Island in the a °'	mouth of the River, being 4. or 5. miles distant from the maine. On both sides of this River wee beheld goodly and pleasant great plaines full of many greene and beautifull trees, and farther within the land we beheld certaine exceeding high mountaines full of woods very pleasant to beholde. From this River wee sailed still along the coast the space of 15. leagues, in which course wee found two other Rivers in our judgement Two great as great or greater then Guadalquivir the River of nvers-Sivilia in Spaine. Al the coast by these Rivers is plaine as the other which we had passed, with many woods: likewise within the lande appeared great mountaines covered with woods very beautifull to beholde, and beneath in the plaine appeared certaine lakes of water. From these Rivers we sailed 18. leagues, and found very pleasant plaines, and certaine great lakes whose Certainegreat mouthes opened into the Sea: here our Captaine thought la^es' good throughly to discover what those lakes were, and to search whether there were any good haven for his ships to ride in, or to harbour themselves, if any tempest should arise; and so hee commaunded a boat to be hoised out into the Sea, with a Master and five or sixe men to view them, and to sound the depth, and botom of them : who went thither, and found the coast very sholde, and the mouthes of the lakes ; whereupon they made no accompt of them, onely because the shore was so shallow, for otherwise the land was very pleasant. Here at evening we saw on the shore 10. or 12. Indians and fires. The aforesaide two Rivers are two leagues distant the one from the other little more or lesse, and are great, as I have saide, and being in the last of them we went up to the ship-top, and saw many lakes, and one among the rest exceeding great, and wee supposed that they had their springs out of this great lake, as other Rivers also have from other lakes, for wee sawe the course of them severally each by themselves, having goodly woods growing all along their bankes. The currents of these Rivers might be discerned three leagues within the Sea : and at the mouthes of them were many small stakes set up for markes : the shore here is plaine and sandie, and the countrey very pleasant.
Chap. 2.
Sailing along the coast from the two aforesaid great Rivers, they discover three mouthes of lakes and a goodly Countrey, they come unto Cabo Roxo, and take possession of those countreys for the Emperours Majesty. A discourse of the faire havens that are on those coastes, and of very many Islands which they saw, before they came to the Cape called Capo de las Plaias.
THis day wee sailed along the coast the space of 16. leagues, and in the midst of this voyage there is a Bay very faire of 4. or 5. leagues, having certaine bankes or fences in it, in beholding whereof we tooke great pleasure. The night following we road in 20. radome water. The next day we followed our voyage toward the North, and having sailed 3. or 4. leagues we saw 3. mouthes of lakes which entered into the land, where they became like standing pooles. Wee road a league distance from these mouthes in 6. fadome water, to see what they were, and sent our boat with certaine men, to see if there were any entry for our ships : for halfe a league from shore we had not past one or two fadome water. Here our men saw 7. or 8. Indians, and found sundry sorts of greene herbes somewhat differing from those of Nueva Espanna. The Countrey is plaine, but farre within land they saw great and small hils extending themselves a great way, and being very faire and pleasant to behold. The day following we proceeded on our voyage, sayling alwayes in sight of the plaine coast toward the Northwest, in 10. or 15. fadome water. And having sailed 6. good leagues we found a Bay on the coast within the land of about 5. leagues over, from whence the coast trended Northwest, and this day we sailed about 16. leagues. All this coast is plaine, and not so pleasant as that which we had passed : here are certaine small hilles, but not so high as those which we had found before. Thus we sailed all night Northwest, and until the next day at noone, at which time we fell with a headland of white sand, where by the height which we tooke that day we found our selves to be in the latitude of 27. degrees and This cape we called Capo Roxo. All the coast is plaine and faire and cleane sand, and we saw within land some few trees not very great, with certaine mountaines 8c woods 3. or 4. leagues distant from the said cape : and here likewise appeared a mouth of a river, which (as far as we could discerne) made certaine lakes up within the land : from the mouth whereof for the space of a league into the sea it seemed to be very sholde, because the sea did breake very much. Here we saw within the land 3. or 4. rivers. In this sort we sailed on our voiage to the Northward, 8c because we had not good weather we road that night in a great haven lying in our way, where on the shore wee saw certaine plaines, and up within the land certaine hilles not very high : and continuing our course toward the North about 3. leagues from this haven we found an Hand of about one league in circuite lying before the mouth of the said haven. And sailing forward we found an haven which hath two mouthes into the Sea, into which we entered by the Northermost mouth, which hath 10. or 12. fadome water, 8c so decreaseth till it come to 5. fadome, where we anckered in a poole which the Sea maketh, which is a strange thing to beholde, for there are so many entrances 8c mouths of streames and havens, that we were all astonied at the sight thereof; and these havens are so excellently framed by nature, as the like are not to be seene in the world, wherein we found great store of fish. Here wee anckered, and the Captaine went on shore, and tooke possession, using all such ceremonies as thereunto belong. Here also wee found certaine weares to catch fish made by the Indians, and certaine small cottages, wherein were divers pieces of earthen pots as finely made as those in Spaine. Here by commandement of the Captaine a Crosse was erected upon an hill, and it was set up by Francis Preciado. In this place we saw the Countrey full of fresh and greene grasse, howbeit differing from that of New Spaine, and up within the Countrey wee saw many great and very greene mountaines. This Countrey seemed very goodly and delightsome to all of us, in regard of the greennesse and beautie thereof, and we judged it to be very populous within the land. From this haven we departed and kept our way toward the Northwest with good weather, and began to finde hard by the sea-shore exceeding high mountaines spotted with white, and in them we saw many foules which had their nestes in certaine holes of those rocks, and sailed io. leagues until night, all which night we were becalmed. The next day we followed our course Northwest with good weather : and from that day forward we began to see on the Westerne shore (whereon the foresaid haven of S. Cruz standeth) certaine Islands or high lands, whereat we rejoyced not a little. And so sayling An Island. forward we met with an Island about two leagues in bignesse, and on the East shore having still the maine land and Islands in sight, we sailed 15. leagues until the evening, alwayes finding hard by the sea-coast exceeding high mountaines bare of trees, the land appearing still more plainely unto us on the Westerne shore. Where-Some take the upon wee began to be of divers opinions, some thinking lfomiaafe' that coast of Santa Cruz was a firme land, and nothing but that joyned with the continent of Nueva Espanna, Islands. others thought the contrary, and that they were nothing else but Islands, which were to the Westward. And in this sort we proceeded forward, having the land on both sides of us, so farre, that we all began to wonder at it. This day we sailed some 15. leagues, and called this Cape Capo de las Plaias.
Capo Roxo.
The coast runneth 'Northward.
Fishingweares like those of Virginia.
Of the Streight which they discovered on the coast of Capo de las Plaias, and of the pleasant Countrey which they found before they came to the rockes called Los diamantes. Of the wonderfull whitenesse of that Sea, and of the ebbing and flowing thereof: and of the multitude of Islands and lands, which extend themselves Northward from the haven of Santa Cruz.
THe day folowing we sailed until night with so good weather, that we ran about 20. leagues. All this coast along the shore is full of little hilles without grasse or trees : and that night we anckered in 20. fadome water. The next day we followed our voyage beginning to saile before breake of day Northwestward, and we came into the midst of a Streight or mouth which was Streight of 12 leagues broad from one land to the other, which Streight had two Hands in the midst thereof being 4. Ceding depth leagues distant the one from the other : and here we discerned the countrey to be plaine, and certaine mountaines, 8c it seemed that a certaine gut of water like a brooke ran through the plaine. This streight (as far as we could perceive) was very deep, for we could finde no botome : and here we saw the land stretching afarre off from the one shore to the other, and on the Westerne shore of the haven of S. Cruz, the land was more high with very bare mountaines. The day following we passed on our way toward the North, and sailed some The Streight 15. leagues, and in the midst of our way we found a ^re rumeth circuit or bay of 6. leagues into the land with many Northward. cooves or creeks, and the next day following continuing our course we sailed some 10. leagues, and the coast in this dayes journey was all of high mountaines naked and bare without any tree. It is very deepe hard by the shore, and that night we were constrained to stay by reason of the contrary winde. The next morning before breake of day we sailed still along the coast to the Northwest until evening, and ranne about some 15. leagues. All along this shore wee sawe very goodly mountaines within the land, and many plaines and downes with some few trees, & the sea shore was all sandy. In the midst of this dayes course we found certaine small rockes in the sea 4. leagues distant from the maine, were the said land maketh a great point into the sea, and here we stayed the rest of the night, where we had a very great shower of raine. The day following we proceeded on our voyage, and sailed untill night by a compasse or turning, some 8. or 9. leagues, and saw within land a few mountaines having no trees upon them, but the Sunne shining alwayes very cleare, as farre as wee could descry, they were very great, on the Westerne shore of the haven of Santa Cruz. Here we stayed all night because we found very shallow water and sawe the sea very white, and in a maner like to chalke, so that we all beganne to marveile thereat. The day following wee went forward againe along the coast Northwestward, and sailed eight leagues, and saw another land which stretched Northwest, and was full of high mountaines. And still continuing this course we searched very diligently to see if there were any passage through betweene both the landes, for right forward wee sawe no land. And thus sayling wee alwayes found more shallow water, and the Sea thicke, blacke, and very muddie, and came at length into five fadome water; and seeing this, wee determined to passe over to the land which wee had seene on the other side, and here likewise wee found as little depth and lesse, whereupon we rode all night in five fadome water, and wee perceived the Sea to runne with so great a rage into the land, that it was a thing much to be marveilled at, and with the like fury it returned backe againe with the ebbe ; during which time wee found 11. fadome water, and the flood and ebbe continued from sixe to sixe houres.
The day following the Captaine and Pilote went up to the shippes top, and sawe all the lande full of sand in a great round compasse, and joyning it selfe with the other shore, and it was so low, that whereas wee were a league from the same wee could not well discerne it, and it seemed that there was an inlet of the mouthes of certaine lakes, whereby the Sea went in and out. There were divers opinions amongst us, and some thought that that current entered into those lakes, and also that some great River there might be the cause thereof. And when we could perceive no passage through, nor could discerne the countrey to be inhabited, the Captaine accompanied with certaine of us went to take possession thereof. The same day with the ebbe of the Sea wee fell downe from the other coast from the side of Nueva Espanna, though alwayes we had in sight the firme land on the one side of us, and the other Islands on our left hande, on the side of the port of Santa Cruz situate on the Westerne shore : for on that side there are so many Islands and lands, so farre as we could descry, that it was greatly to be wondered at: for from the said haven of Santa Cruz, and from the coast of Culiacan we had alwayes in a maner land on both sides of us, and that so great a countrey, that I suppose if it should so continue further inwarde, there is countrey ynough for many yeeres to conquer. This day wee had the winde contrary, and cast ancker until the flood increased, which was in the afternoone, and then wee set saile likewise with contrary winde untill midnight, and then cast ancker.
The next day wee departed, shaping our course along the coast Southwest, untill midnight with little winde, and wee sawe within the land high mountaines with some openings, and wee made way some three leagues, and all the next night wee were becalmed, and the next day we continued our course but a little while, for we sailed not above five leagues, and all the night were becalmed, and sawe the lande full of bare and high mountaines, and on our left hande wee descried a plaine countrey, and saw in the night certaine fires.
Chap 4.
They land upon an Island to discover the same, and there they see many fires, which issue out of certaine mountaines, and many Seale-fishes. Here they take an Indian, and can not understand his language. Running along they discover another Island, and take possession therof for the Emperours Majestie, and a great haven in the firme land, which they call Ancon de Sant Andres, or The haven of S. Andrew.
THe next day following our course we saw a great haven with an Hand in the sea, within a crosse-bow shoote of the firme land, and in this Island and on the firme land were seene many smokes by the judgement of all the company; wherefore the captaine thought good that wee should goe on land to know the certainty of these smokes and fires, himselfe taking ten or twelve of us with a boate in his company : and going on shore in the Island, we found that the smokes proceeded out of Burning certaine mountaines and breaches of burned earth, where-mountaines. out ascended into the aire certaine cinders and ashes which mounted up to the middle region of the aire, in such great quantitie, that we could not esteeme lesse then twenty lodes of wood to bee burned for the causing of every of those smokes, whereat wee were all not a little amazed.
In this Island were such abundance of Seales, as it was wonderful. Here we stayed that day, and killed a great number of these Seals, with whom we had some trouble : for they were so many, and ayded one another so well, that it was strange to behold ; for it fell out, that while we were occupied in killing some of them with staves, they assembled twentie or thirty together, and lifting Abundance of themselves up assayled us with their feete in a squadron, Seales. and overthrew two or three of our company on the ground : whereupon letting goe those which they had in their hands, they and the others escaped us and went into the sea, howbeit wee killed good store of them, which were so fatte as it was wonderfull: and when we opened some of them to have their livers, we found certaine small b'lacke stones in their bodies, whereat wee much marveiled. The next day wee rode at anker here for lacke of good weather to sayle withall: whereupon the Captaine determined to goe on shore with nine or ten in his company, to see whether there were any people there, or any signe of people that had bene there, and they found on the maine land seven or eight Indians like to Chichimecas, which were gone a fishing, and had a raft rafi °f of canes ; who so soone as they espied us ranne away and betooke themselves to flight, but being pursued by us, in the end we tooke one of them, whose language was so strange that wee could by no meanes understand him ; his clothing was nothing at all, for he was starke naked. These people caried their water in bottels made of beasts skins, they fished with hookes of bone, and wee found good store of their fishes, whereof we tooke three or foure dozen.
The Indian which we had taken seeing himselfe in our hands did nothing but weepe, but the Captaine called him, and made much of him, giving him certaine beades, with a hat and certaine hookes of ours, and then let him goe. And it seemed that after hee was returned to his companions, he declared unto them how we had done him no harme at all, shewing them the things which we had given him : whereupon they also determined to come unto us to our boate, but because it was now night, and that our shippes were farre from us, we forced not to stay for them, especially because it was a bad place and a dangerous. This countrey hath on the sea-coast high and bare mountaines with certaine grasse in some places like unto our broomes, or like unto woods of rosemary.
Bottles of beasts skins and fishhooks of bone
Ancon de S. Andres, or The haven of S. Andrew in 32 degrees.
Two Indians of exceeding huge stature.
The next day wee sayled neere to the coast on the same side, with very scarce winde, and in a manner calme, and ranne not above five leagues, and all the night following we lay becalmed, and we saw on the shore five or sixe fires. The land is high with very-high mountaines without grasse, having certaine caves in them: the next day also, and part of the night following we were becalmed : and the morow after we followed our course along the sayd coast, and passed betweene a great Island full of exceeding high mountaines, and the maine land, where we saw a very great haven in the firme land in which wee ankered to see what it was, and being come to an anker, the Captaine and some of us went on land the same day to see if there were any people and fresh water, and wee found certaine small cottages covered with drie grasse, with certaine little staves layd overthwart, and we went a little way into the countrey which was very baren, by certaine small and streight pathes, and found a little pond or pit, but drie and without water ; and here the Captaine tooke possession for the Marques of the valley in the name of his Majestie, and after this we returned to our ship, and that night we sawe foure or five fires on the land. The next day the Captaine determined, because hee had seene these fires, to goe on shore, and so with our two boates we went fifteene or twenty of us unto certaine crooked strands two leagues from the place where our ships rode, and where we had seene the fires, and we found two Indians of exceeding huge stature, so that they caused us greatly to wonder ; they caried their bowes and arrowes in their hands, and as soone as they saw us leap on shore they ran away, and wee followed them unto their dwellings and lodgings, which were certaine cottages and bowers covered with boughs, and there we found great and small steps of many people, but they had no kind of victuals but onely cuttle-fishes which wee found there. The countrey toward the sea side seemed but barren, for we saw neither trees nor greene grasse there, yet were there certaine smal pathes not well beaten, and along the sea-coast we saw many tracts of dogges, hares, and conies, and in certaine small Islands neere unto the maine we saw Seale-fishes. This haven is called Ancon Ancon de Zant de Sant Andres. 	Andres.
Chap. 5.
They discover a mountainous Island very great, and neere unto it certaine other Islands with a goodly greene and pleasant countrey. They have sight of certaine Indians in Canoas of canes, whose language sounded like the Flemish tongue, with whome they could not have any traffique.
THe next day we proceeded on our voyage, sayling betweene the maine and an Island, which we suppose to be in circuit about a hundreth or eighty leagues, sayling sometimes within one, and sometimes within two leagues of the maine. The soile of this Island is of certaine mountaines not very steepe with caves in them, and as farre as wee could descrie by the coast, there appeared no signe of any plaine countrey. Here from this day forward wee began to bee afraid, considering that we were to returne to the port of Santa Cruz ; for it was supposed, that all along this mighty gulfe from the entrance in at Culiacan until the returning backe unto the said haven, was all firme land, and also because wee had the firme land alwayes on our right hand and it goeth round circle-wise unto the sayd haven ; but many thought and hoped that we should finde some mouth or out-let, whereby wee might passe through unto the other coast. What our successe was we will declare in the relation following.
The next day being Thursday wee sayled with scant winde, for it was almost calme, and passed beyond that great Island, having firme land alwayes on our right hand, and coasting (as I sayd) very neere unto it. The next day likewise we sayled with little winde, it being in a manner calme, and passed neere unto the shore by certaine round baies, and certaine points which the land made, which was pleasant to behold being somewhat greene, and there seemed to be some
A great Island.
They returne from the bot-tomeofthegulf of California.
219
creeke there. This Friday at night wee sayled altogether with a fresh gale, and at breake of day wee Another were betweene the maine land, and an Island on our Island. |eft hand, which was somewhat big, as farre as we could discerne. There was a great bay in the firme land, and before it was a point which stretched farre into the sea. The firme land seemed to bee much fresher and pleasanter then those lands which we had passed, having many bankes and hilles of indifferent height, and beautifull to behold.
The countrey (as farre as wee could discerne) was so pleasant and delightfull, that wee all desired to goe on shore, and to search up into it two or three dayes journey, to see whether it were inhabited or not. Wee saw within the land of that bay two fires. The night following being Saturday we sailed continually with a prosperous and fresh gale, and the wind was so great that we drew our bonet to our maine sayle, and sayled so till the morning.
On Sunday the twelfth of October we found our selves altogether inclosed with land, on the right hand with the maine, which compassed us before and behinde, and on the left hand with an Island of a league and a halfe; and betweene the maine and the Island in the midst of the sea there lay a small Islet, and also betweene the sayd maine and the Island there were two mouthes, through which there appeared a passage whereby afterward we passed through. This maine was much more fresh and greene then the other which wee had passed, and had certaine plaines and points of mountaines of pleasant view, and full of greene grasse. Here all this night we saw two or three villages which were very great, and at breake of day we saw a Canoa or boate made of canes, which came from the land out of a creeke, and wee stood still untill it came neere unto us in the ship, and they began to speake in their language which no man understood, whose pronuntiation was like to the Flemings, and being 220
called they returned with great haste unto the shore, and we were very sory because our boate had not followed them.
Here happened unto us a very strange thing, which was, that as this Indian returned to the shore in  certaine of these creekes where a number of his fellow Indians were, as wee viewed that part, we sawe five Canoas issue foorth, which came toward us: whereupon wee stayed to see what they would doe. In the meane while our Admirall came up unto us, which was neere the shore, for she also had seene them, and so being come together we cast anker, expecting what those Canoas would doe. In the meane while our general commanded us to make ready our boate, and to furnish the same with oares and men, to trie if we could by any meanes take some of them, that we might come to some knowledge of them, and that wee might give them some of our trifles, and specially of our hookes and beads to winne their friendship. The Indians with their five Canoas approched within one or two stones cast of us, and then began to speake very loude unto us in a very strange language, alwayes standing upon their guard to retire themselves with speede. When our Captaine saw this, and that they would not come neere us, but rather retired, he commanded sixe mariners to goe into the boate from the sterne of the ship, and himselfe also went with them with all possible haste toward the Indians. The Indians returned to the shore with so great celeritie, that they seemed to flie in those little Canoas of canes. Neverthelesse our men used such diligence that one of the Canaos was boorded & taken ; but the Indian in the Canoa seeing himselfe now taken leapt into the water, and our men followed with their boat to take him, but seeing himselfe within their reach, he ducked with his head under their boate, and so deceived them, and then rose up againe, and with their oares and with staves they gave
221
him certaine blowes, to amaze him, but nothing would serve them; for as they were about to lay handes upon him hee still dived under water, and with his hands and feete got neere to the shore : and as he rose up above the water, hee called to his felowes which stood on the shore to behold, crying Belen with a loud voyce, and so they pursued him, and strooke him sometimes being very neere the shore, and he alwayes went calling the rest of his fellowes to come and helpe him, whereupon within a short while after three other Canoas came foorth to succour him, being full of Indians with bowes and arrowes in their handes, crying with a loude voyce, that wee should come on shore: these Indians were of great stature and salvage, fat also and well set, and of a browne colour. Our Captaine perceiving this, least they should wound any of our people with their arrowes, returned backe, and commanded us immediately to set sayle, and so foorthwith wee departed.
This day the wind skanted, and we returned to anker in the foresayd place, and our Admirall rode from the firme land toward the Island, and wee which were in the ship called The Trinitie lay neere unto the maine, and before breake of day wee departed with a fresh gale. And before we disemboqued out of that chanell we saw certaine grasse very high and greene upon the maine: whereupon a mariner, and the Pilot went up into the top, and saw the mouth of a river which ranne through that greene countrey into the sea. But because our Admirall was under all her sayles farre from us, we could not tell them of this river, where wee would have taken water, whereof we had some neede, and because it was a very good haven to goe on shore to take it, and therefore without watering we followed our course. On munday we departed from this haven which is like unto a lake, for on all sides we were compassed with land, having the continent before, behinde us, and on our right side, and the Island on our left side, and we passed foorth
222
1539' at those mouthes beforementioned, which shewed an out-let into the open sea. Thus wee sayled along still viewing the situation of the countrey, rejoycing all of us at the sight thereof, for it alwayes pleased us more and more, still appearing more greene and pleasant, and the grasse which wee found neere unto the shore was fresh and delectable, but not very high, being (to all our judgements) not past a spanne long. Likewise the hilles which wee saw, which were many, and many downes made a very pleasant prospect, especially because we judged, that there were many valleys and dales betweene them.
Chap. 6.
They discover a very great bay with foure small Islands in it, whereas they take possession. As they sayle along and discover divers Islands they come at length to the port of Santa Cruz, where not being able to get any knowledge of those Indians, although they lay in waite for them at a place called The well of Grijalva, they departed thence. They have a perilous and long tempest, which ceased, after they had seene a light on their shrowdes.
AT our comming out of these openings we began to great finde a Bay with a very great haven, environed with havendivers small hilles having upon them greene woods and pleasant to behold. In this bay and strand were two  small Islands neere unto the shore, one of the which was like unto a table about halfe a league in bignes, and the other was a round hill almost as big as the former. These Islands served us onely to content our sight, for we passed by them without staying, having but a slacke wind on Munday morning : all which day we followed our course with the foresayd slacke winde, and within a while after it became flat contrary, so that we were constrained to anker at the sayd point of the sayd haven ; and on Tewesday at breake of day we set sayle, but made but little away all the day, because
223
the winde continued contrary, although but very weake. The night following wee were becalmed a little beyond the point of this haven; but about midnight wee began to have a fresh gale, and on Wednesday in the morning wee were seven leagues distant from that point. This countrey shewed (as it was indeede) more plaine then the rest, with certaine small woody hilles, and within the other point which was before descried, the situation seemed to be more pleasant and delightsome then the rest which we had passed. And at the uttermost end of the point were two small Islets. The sayd Wednesday about nine of the clocke the winde blew a good gale, and we sayled by evening between seven and eight leagues, and came over against a land not very high, where wee saw certaine creekes or breaches not very ragged, into every of which a river seemed to fall, because the soyle was very greene, and had certaine trees growing on it farre bigger then those which we had found before. Here the Captaine with five or sixe men went on shore, and taking possession passed up one of those rivers, and found the footing of many Indians upon the sand. On the bankes of that river they saw many fruitful trees, as cherry-trees and little apple-trees, and other white trees : they found also in the wood three or foure beasts called Adibes, which are a kind of dogs. The same night wee set sayle with the winde off- the land, which blew so freshly, that it made us to strike our foresayle; and on the sixeteenth of October at nine of the clocke we came neere unto a point of certaine high mountaines, on which day being Thursday we made little way, because the winde ceased, but it rose againe in the night, whereupon by the breake of day on Friday wee came before the sayd point being sixe or seven leagues off. The land seemed to bee very mountainous with certaine sharpe points not greatly clad with grasse, but somewhat bare. On our left hand wee saw two Islands, the one of a league and a halfe, the other not so much, and it seemed that we drew neere
224
to the port of Santa Cruz, whereat we were sory, because we were alwaies in good hope to find some out-let into the maine Ocean in some place of that land, and that the same port was the same out-let, and also that by the sayd coast we might returne to the foresayd haven of Santa Cruz, and that we had committed a great error, because we had not certainely sought out the secret, whether that were a Streit or a river, which wee had left behind us unsearched at the bottome of this great sea or gulfe.
All Friday and the night following we sayled with a scant winde, and on Saturday at breake of day we were betweene two points of land which make a bay, wherein -A bay with 4 we saw before and behinde foure or five great and small or 5 Inlands. Islands. The land was very mountainous, part wherof was covered with grasse, and part was voide. Within the land appeared more mountaines and hils, and in this place we were come neere unto the haven of Santa Cruz, which is all firme land, except it be divided in the very nooke by some streite or great river which parteth it from the maine, which because we had not throughly discovered, all of us that were imployed in this voyage were not a little grieved. And this maine land stretcheth so farre in length, that I cannot well expresse it: for from the haven of Acapulco, which standeth in seven-teene degrees and twenty minutes of latitude, wee had alwayes the coast of the firme land on our right hand, untill we came to the great current of the white & red sea: This current and here (as I have said) we knew not the secret of this u in 32 Ae-current, whether it were caused by a river or by a streit: and so supposing that the coast which wee had on our and red. right hand was closed up without passage, wee returned backe againe, alwayes descending Southward by our degrees, untill wee returned unto the sayd haven of This returne Santa Cruz, finding still along the coast a goodly and u pleasant countrey, and still seeing fires made by the ca$' Indians, and Canoas made of Canes. We determined to take in fresh water at the haven of Santa Cruz, to
ix	225	p
runne along the outward Westerne coast, and to see what it was, if it pleased God. Here we rested our selves, and eat of the plummes and fruits called Pithaias : They arrive and wee entred into the port of Santa Cruz on Sunday ‘ot^San^’1 th® *8 °f October and stayed there eight daies to take Qruz in wood and water resting our selves all that while, that our men might strengthen and refresh themselves. Our captaine determined to divide amongst us certain garments of taffata, with clokes and saies, and a piece of taffata, and likewise ordained, that wee should goe on land to catch a couple of Indians, that they might talke with our interpreter, and that we might come to the knowledge of their language. Whereupon thirteene of us went out  of our ship by night, and lay in ambush in a place which
is called The well of Grijalva, where we stayed untill noone betweene certaine secret wayes, and could never see or descrie any one Indian: wherefore wee returned The Spaniards to our ships, with two mastive-dogs which we caried with
US tO catc^ th® Indians with more ease: and in our Indians	returne we found two Indians hidden in certaine thickets,
'	which were come thither to spie what wee did: but
because wee and our dogs were weary, and thought not on them, these Indians issued out of the thickets, and fled away, and wee ranne after them, and our dogges saw them not: wherefore by reason of the Reade more of thicknes of the wilde thistles, and of the thornes and these staves bryars, and because we were weary, we could never cat- I0- overtake them : they left behinde them certaine staves so finely wrought that they were very beautifull to behold, considering how cunningly they were made with a handle and a corde to fling them.
The nine and twentieth of October being Wednesday, we set sayle out of this haven of Santa Cruz with little winde, and in sayling downe the chanell our shippe called the Trinitie came on ground upon certaine sholdes: this was at noone at a low water, and with all the remedy that we could use wee could not draw her off, whereupon wee were constrained to underprop her, and to stay 226
the next tide : and when the tide began to increase wee used all diligence to draw her off, and could not by any meanes, whereat all the company and the Captaine were not a little grieved: for wee thought wee should have lost her there, although wee ceased not with all our might to labour with both our boates, and with our cable and capsten. In the ende it pleased God about midnight at a full sea with the great force which wee used to recover her, that wee drew her off the sand, for which we gave God most hearty thankes, and rode at anker all the rest of the night, wayting for day-light for feare of falling into any further danger or mishap. When day was come, wee set forward with a fresh gale, and proceeded on our voyage, directing our prows to the maine sea, to see whether it would please God to let us discover the secret of this point. But whether it pleased not his great goodnesse, or whether it were for our sinnes, wee spent eight dayes from this port, before we could double the point, by reason of contrary winds, and great raine, and lightning and darknesse every night : also the windes grew so raging and tempestuous, that they made us all to quake, and to pray continually unto God to ayde us. And hereupon wee made our cables and ankers ready, and the chiefe Pilot commanded us with all speede to cast anker, and in this sorte we passed our troubles : and whereas wee rode in no securitie, he caused us foorthwith to weigh our ankers, and to goe whither the wind should drive us. And in this sorte wee spent those eight dayes, turning backe by night the same way that wee had gone by day, and sometimes making good in the night that which we had lost in the day, not without great desire of all the company to have a winde which might set us forward on our voyage, being afflicted with the miseries which wee indured by reason of the thunders, lightnings, and raine, wherewith we were wet from toppe to toe, by reason of the toyle which we had in weighing and casting of our ankers, as neede required.
And on one of these nights, which was very darke 227
and tempestuous with winde and raine, because we thought we should have perished, being very neere the shore, we prayed unto God that he would vouchsafe to ayde and save us without calling our sinnes to remembrance. And straightway wee saw upon the shrowdes of the Trinity as it were a candle, which of it selfe shined, and gave a light, whereat all the company greatly rejoyced, in such sort that wee ceased not to give thankes unto God. Whereupon we assured our selves, that of his mercie hee would guide and save us, and would not suffer us to perish, as indeede it fell out; for the next day wee had good weather, and all the mariners sayd, that it was the light of Saint Elmo which appeared on the shrowdes, and they saluted it with their songs and prayers. These stormes tooke us betweene the Isles of Saint Iago and Saint Philip, and the Isle called Isla de perlas lying over against the point of California supposed to be firme land.
Chap. 7.
Sayling on their way they discover a pleasant Countrey, and in their judgement greatly inhabited, and finde the Sea-coast very deepe. They went to discover or viewe the Isle of perles. And by a current one of their ships is separated from the other, and with great joy after three dayes they had sight again of her, and following their voyage they discover certaine great, greene, and pleasant plaines.
WE began to sayle along the coast the seventh or eight of November, the land alwayes shewing very greene with grasse pleasant to behold, and certaine plaines neere the shore, and up within the countrey many  pleasant hils replenished with wood, and certaine valleys, so that wee were delighted above measure, and wondered at the greatnes and goodly view of the countrey: & every night we saw fires, which shewed that the countrey is greatly inhabited. Thus we proceeded on our voyage untill the tenth of the sayd moneth of November, having 228
1539-alwayes the coast of the maine Ocean on our right hand, From hence and the farther we sailed, wee alwayes found the countrey more delightsome and pleasant, as well in beholding the greennes therof, as also in that it shewed certaine plaines backside of and deepe valleys, through which rivers did fall downe California. into the land, within certaine mountaines, and hilles full of great woods which were not very high, and appeared within the countrey. Here we were 54 leagues distant from California little more or lesse, alwayes toward the California. Southwest, seeing in the night three or foure fires, whereby it appeareth that the countrey is inhabited, and full of people, for the greatnes of the countrey argueth no lesse: and we supposed that there must needs bee great townes inhabited within the land, although in this poynt we were of divers opinions. The sea is so deepe on all this coast that we could scarce find ground in 54 fadomes. On the greatest part of the coast there are hilles of very white sand, and it seemeth to be a dangerous coast, because of the great and swift tides which goe there, for the sand sheweth so much for the space of ten or twelve leagues, for so the Pilots affirmed. This day being Saturday
the winde increased, and wee had sight of the Isle of Isla de perlas. pearles, which on this side of the gulfe appeareth with a deepe valley all covered over with trees, and sheweth much fairer then on the other side, and wee entred into the Porte of Santa Cruz. From the ninth of November to the fifteenth we sayled not above tenne leagues, because we had contrary winds, and great showres : and besides this we had another mischance which did not a little grieve us: for wee lost company of the ship called The Trinitie, and could never see her for the space of three dayes, whereupon wee suspected that shee was returned home unto New Spaine, or that she was severed from our company: wherefore we were grieved out of measure to see our selves so left alone, and the Captaine of all others was most sad, though he ceased not to encourage us to proceede on our voyage, saying that notwithstanding all this wee ought
229
not to leave off this enterprise which we had begunne, and that though we were left alone we should deserve the greater commendation and credite : whereupon wee all answered him, that wee would not have him thinke that any of us would ever be discouraged, but that we would follow him untill hee should thinke it reasonable that we should not proceede any further in the enterprise, and that we were in danger of perishing, and that untill then wee would bee at his commandement: but withall we perswaded him that after he had seene any great difficulty to proceede any further, he should doe well to returne backe to make relation of our successe to the R. H. lord the Marques de valle. Hereupon he made an Oration unto us wherein he told us, that he could not beleeve, much lesse could imagine, wherefore the shippe called the Trinitie should returne into Newe Spaine, nor why she should willingly depart from us, and goe unto any other place, and that he thought by all reason, that some current had caried her out of our sight, and that through contrary weather and tempests she could not fetch us up, and that notwithstanding all that which we had done in the voyage, he had an instruction, that if by chance we were separated one from the other, wee were to take this course to meete againe together, namely to returne backe eight or tenne leagues to seeke one another, beyond certaine head-lands which lay out into the sea, and that therefore we should doe well to returne to seeke her up. This sentence pleased us all, and so returning to seeke her, we espied her two leagues distant from us, comming toward us with a fresh gale of winde, whereat we greatly rejoyced.
Thus being come together we ankered for that day, because the weather seemed very contrary, and the Captaine chid them for their negligence in sayling, because they had in such sort lost our company ; and they excused themselves, that they could doe no lesse, because a current had caried them away above three leagues, whereby they could never reach unto us. The next day 230
being the sixeteenth of November wee set forward, but sayled very little, for the North and Northwest winds were against us. Here we discovered certaine plaines, in my judgement very great and greene, and right before us we could not discerne any mountaines or woods, whereat wee marveiled to see so great a countrey. And wee met an Indian in a Canoa on the shore whereon the sea did breake, who stayed to beholde us a great while, and oftentimes hee lifted up himselfe to view us the better, & then returned backe along the coast: we used al diligence to see whether he would come out further from the shore, to give him chace, and to trie whether we could catch him, but he very cunningly viewed us without comming neere unto us, and returned to the shore with his Canoa. Here we saw in the evening but one fire, and wist not whether it were done by the cunning of the Indians, because they would not have us know that there were people there, or that it was  so indeede. From the said 16 day of November untill the 24 of the same moneth we could not proceede on our way above 12 or 15 leagues: and looking into our Sea-chart, we found our selves distant from the
Xaguges of the Port of Santa Cruz about 70 leagues. They are 70 Now on the 24 being munday very early in the morn- teagtuffrom ing we beganne to take very good view of that SantaCruz Countrey, and all along the coast we saw many faire plaines with certaine furrowes made in the midst like unto halfe plaines, the said plaine still appearing up into the Countrey, with pleasant champions, because the grasse which grew there was very beautifull, short, and greene, and good pasture for cattell. Howbeit because we rode so farre off, we could not perfectly judge what kind of grasse it was, but it shewed very short and greene, and without thornes. These plaines on the right hand made a bay into a valley which seemed to be a piece of a mountaine : the rest shewed to be al plaines without any thistles or weedes, but full of grasse good for cattel very green and faire, as I have said.
231
One of their ships by tempest was separated from the other, and afterward meeting with her consort she reporteth that the land stretcheth to the West by the mouth of the great lake. The Pilots are of divers judgements touching the state of this coast inhabited by Chichimecas. They enter into an haven to take in fresh water, and are suddenly assayled by two squadrons of Indians. They defend themselves valiantly, and the Captaine with some of his souldiers are grievously wounded.
THe 26 of this moneth being Wednesday at night the North wind tooke us, which still increased more and more so greatly that it put us to much trouble, for it continued two dayes, in which the Sea was alwayes boisterous ; and this night againe we lost the Trinity being beaten with the North winde aforesaid (and we had sight of her on munday the 24) wherewith we were all of us greatly agrieved, both Captaines, Souldiers and Mariners, because we saw we were left alone, and our ship call Santa Agueda wherein we were, was but badly conditioned, and this grieved us more then the trouble which we had with the boisterousnesse of the Sea, imagining that if we should leese the Trinity, or if any mishap should fall unto us, we should not be able to follow our voyage according to our Captaines and our owne Land running desire. This said 24 day being munday we saw a the	Countrey with high mountaines toward the Northwest,
oit west.	anj seemed that the land stretched on still forward,
whereat we exceedingly rejoyced, because we judged that the lande grew alwayes broader and broader, and that wee should meete with some speciali good thing. Whereupon we desired that it would please God to send us good weather for our voyage, which hitherto we Note. found alwayes contrary, so that in 26 dayes we sayled not above 70 leagues, and that with much trouble, sometimes riding at anker and sometimes sayling, and seeking 232
the remedies and benefite of the shore to avoide perils. In this Countrey which we discovered the 26 day we alwayes saw (as I have said) along the shore, and within the land, goodly plaines without any tree, in the midst wherof was a lake or gathering together of the Seawater, which (to our judgement) was above 12 leagues in compasse, and the sea-coast reached to the mountaines before mentioned. And this day we saw our ship called the Trinitie, which rode 2 leagues distant from us, which so soone as she saw us, set saile, and we came together and rejoyced greatly. They brought us great quantity A wonderfull of gray fishes, and of another kinde : for at the point fi^nSPlace of those mountaines they found a fishing which was very wonderfull, for they suffered themselves to be taken by hand: and they were so great that every one had much adoe to finde roome to lay his fish in. They found also on the said point a fountaine of fresh water which descended from those hilles, and they told us that at the same place they had found a narrow passage, whereby the Sea entered into the said lake. They comforted us much with the report of these things, and in telling us that the lande trended to the West; for the chiefe Pilot thought, and the other Pilot was of the same opinion, that we should finde a good Countrey. This night we set saile to goe to that point to take in fresh water which we wanted, and to see this lake, and to put some men on shore : and after midnight the winde came upon us so forcibly at the North that we could not stay there: whereupon wee were constrained to put further into the Sea, and returned the same way backe againe unto the shore with much adoe, and came to an anker a great way short of the place from whence we were driven : and there we rode untill Thursday at noone with this bitter North winde, and on Friday about noone, when we most thought it would have ceased, it beganne to increase againe, which grieved us not a little seeing the weather so contrary, hoping alwayes that it would cease, and that some winde would blow from the shore, whereby
233
 we might recover the point of land to take in fresh water, and to search whether there were any people about that lake. Here we lay from the 26 of the saide moneth till the 29, driving up and downe the Sea, winding in by little and little untill we had gotten under the shelter of those mountaines : which being obtayned wee rode the sayd 29 of the moneth halfe a league from those wooddy mountaines, which we had seene in the Sea. We stayed in this place at our ease all the Sunday, and Juan Castilio the chiefe Pilot went that day in the bote on shore with seven in his company, and they landed neere the Sea, and on a certaine low ground they found foure or five Indians Chichimecas of great stature, and went toward them, who fled away like Deere that had beene chased. After this the Pilot went a little way along the Sea-shore, and then returned to his boate, and by that time he was entered thereinto, he saw about fifteene Indians of great stature also, with their bowes and arrowes which called unto him with a loude and strong voice, making signes with their bowes ; but the Pilot made no account of their gesture, but rather returned to the shippes, and declared what had passed betweene him and the Indians. The same day the Captaine commaunded that our caske should be made readie against the next morning to take in water, for in both the shippes there were about five and twentie buttes emptie. The first of December, and the second day in the morning the Captaine went with both the barkes on shore with some dozen souldiers, and the greatest part of the Mariners which laboured in filling of water, leaving in the shippes as many as were neede-full, and as soone as wee were come on shore at the watering place the Captaine caused the buttes to be taken out, to the ende they might be filled with water, and while they returned to fetch the barrels and hogsheads of the shippe, the Captaine walked a turne or two upon the shore for the space of one or two crossebow shoots, and afterwarde we went up to certaine of those
234
mountaines, to view the disposition of the countrey, and in trueth we found it in that place very bad to our judgement, for it was very ragged, full of woods and caves, and so stonie, that we had much adoe to goe. Being come unto the top we found certaine small hilles full of woods, and cliffes that were not so craggie, although very troublesome to climbe up ; and while we looked from these little hilles, we could not discerne any more mountaines, but rather judged that from that place forward there were great plaines. The Captaine would not suffer us to goe any further, because in those places we had seene certaine Indians which seemed to be spies, and warning us thereof he commanded us to retire unto the shore, where we were to take in water, and to dispatch our businesse quickly, and appointed us to make certaine pits, that our buts might more easily be filled with water. And setting our Guardes or Centinels, we beganne to fill water. In the meane while the Captaine tooke certaine souldiers, and went to the top of an high hill, from whence he descryed a great part of the Sea, and a lake which is within the land : for the Sea entereth in the space of a league, and there is a good fishing place round about: and the lake was A fishingplace so great, that it seemed unto us to be very neere 30	°f
leagues in compasse, for we could not discerne the end thereof. Then we came downe with no lesse trouble ’ then wee had mounted up unto the hill, by reason of the steepenesse of the place, and some tumbled downe with no small laughter of the rest. And being come somewhat late to our watering place (for it was then past noone) we set our selves to dinner, alwayes appointing some of our company in Centinell, untill we were called to dinner, and when some were called two others were appointed in their roomes. And about two of the clocke after dinner, the Captaine and the rest suspecting no danger of assalt of Indians, both because the place seemed not to be fit for it, as also for that we had set our Centinels at the passages ; two squadrons of Indians
235
A sudden assalt of the Indians with stones, arrows, and staves.
came upon us very secretly and covertly, for one came by the great valley through which the water ranne which we tooke, and the other came by a part of that great hill which we had ascended to see the lake, and all of them came so covertly, that our Centinels could neither see nor heare them ; and wee had not perceived them, if a souldier by chance lifting up his eyes had not sayde, Arme, Arme, my maisters, for many Indians come upon us. When we heard this the Captaine leapt up in a great rage, because the guards were changed out of their place: and with his sword and target, being followed by a souldier, whose name was Haro, and afterward by the rest, he and the said souldier went toward a little gate of certaine stones, whither the rest of us were to follow him: for if the Indians had gotten that place from us, we should have incurred great danger, and the greatest part of us had like to have beene slaine, and none could have escaped but such as by chance could have leapt into the boates, and the tide went so high, that none could be saved but such as were most excellent swimmers. But at length the Captaine bestirred himselfe very nimbly, using all celeritie that was possible. Therefore when he and Haro had wonne the gate, the rest of the souldiers gate up after them, and the Captaine and Haro turned themselves to the Indians and made head against them, and the Indians assailed them with such numbers of stones, arrowes, & javelins (which was a very strange thing) that they brake in pieces the target which the Captaine had on his arme, and besides that wounded him with an arrow in the bending of his knee, and though the wound was not great, yet was it very painefull unto him. While they thus stood to withstand their assalt, they strooke Haro which was on the other side so forcibly with a stone, that they threw him flat upon the ground: and by and by another stone lighted upon him which shivered his Target, and they hit the Captaine with another arrow, and shot him quite through one of his eares. Another arrow came and strooke a
236
souldier called Graviello Marques in the legge, of which he felt great paine and went halting. In the meane space Francis Preciado, and certaine other souldiers came up and joyned himselfe with the rest on the left hand of the Captaine, saying unto him, Sir, withdrawe your selfe, for you be wounded, but be you not dismayed, for they are but Indians and cannot hurt us. In this wise we beganne to rush in among them upon the side of a rocke alwayes gayning ground of them, which greatly incouraged our mindes, and when we beganne to inforce them to retire, we wanne a small wooddy hill, where we sheltered our selves, whereas before they shot upon us from aloft, for they were on the higher ground under covert in safetie, & then by no meanes we could offend them, but by running forcibly upon them with our targets on our armes, and our swords in our hands. On the other side, to approch and seeke to overtake them was a vaine thing, seeing they were as swift as wilde goates. By this time Haro was gotten up on foot, and having clapt a woollen cloth upon his head, which had bled extremely, he joyned himselfe unto us, of whom we received no small aide. In the meane space the Indians fortified themselves on the cragge of a rocke, from whence they did not a little molest us, & we likewise fortified our selves upon an hillocke, whereby we descended into their Fort, and there was a small valley betweene them & us, which was not very deepe from the upper part. There we were 6 souldiers & two Negroes with the Captaine, & all of us were of opinion that it was not good to passe that place, least ye Indians being many might destroy us all, for the rest of our souldiers which were beneath at the foote of the hill, making head against the other squadron of the Indians, kept them from hurting those which tooke in water on the strand and from breaking the buts of water, and being but few, we concluded to stay here, and so we stood still fortifying our selves as well as we could, especially considering that we had no succour on any side ; for Berecillo our Mastive-dogge which should have
237
A.D.
1539-
The Spaniards use mas-tives in their warns against the Indians. Reade more hereof cap. 12.
aided us was grievously wounded with 3 arrowes, so that by no meanes we could get him from us: this mastive was wounded in the first assalt when the Indians came upon us, who behaved himselfe very wel, & greatly aided us; for he set upon them, and put 8 or 10 of them out of array, 8c made them run away, leaving many arrowes behind them: but at length (as I have said) he was so wounded, that by no meanes we could get him to goe from us to set any more upon the Indians, 8c the other two mastives did us more harme then good: for when they went against them, they shot at them with their bowes, and we received hurt and trouble in defending them. The Captaines legge when he waxed cold was so swolne, that we lapped it up in a wollen cloth, and he halted much of it: and while the Indians thus stood still, one part of them beganne to dance, sing, and shout, and then they began all to lade themselves with stones, and to put their arrowes into their bowes, and to come downe toward us verie resolutely to assalt us, and with great out-cries they beganne to fling stones and to shoot their arrowes. Then Francis Preciado
turned him to the Captaine and said : Sir, these Indians know or thinke, that we be affeard of them, 8c in itrueth it is a great fait to give them this incouragement, it were better for us resolutely to set upon them with these dogs, 8c to assalt them on this hill, that they may know us to be no dastards, for they be but Indians and dare not stande us ; and if we can get their Fort upon the hill, God will give us victory in all the rest. The Captaine answered, that he liked well of the motion, and that it was best so to doe, although for any further pursuit up the hill, he thought we were to take another course. By and by Francis Preciado getting his target on his arme, and his sword in his hand, ranne unto the other side of the valley, which on that part was not very steepe, crying S. Iago, upon them my masters, and after him leapt Haro, Teresa, Spinosa, and a Crossebow-man called Montanno, and after them followed the Captaine, 238
1539-though very lame, with a Negro and a souldier which accompanied him, incouraging and comforting them, willing them not to feare. Thus we drave them to the place where they had fortified themselves, and from whence they descended, and we tooke another hill over against them within a darts cast of them. And having breathed our selves a little, the Captaine came unto us, and said, Go too my maisters, upon them before they strengthen themselves on this hill, for now we see plainely that they be afFeard of us, seeing we chase them continually from their Forts: & suddenly 3 or 4 of us went toward them well covered with targets, unto the foot of their Fort where they were assembled, and the rest of our company followed us: the Indians beganne  to make head against us, and to fling many stones upon us, and shoot many arrowes, and we with our swords in our hands rushed upon them in such sort, that they seeing how furiously we set upon them, abandoned the fort, and ranne downe the hill as swift as Deere, and fled unto another hill over against us, where the other squadron of the Indians stood, of whom they were rescued, and they began to talke among themselves, but in a low voyce, and joyned together 6 and 6 and 8 8c 8 in a company, and made a fire and warmed themselves, and we stood quietly beholding what they did.
239
[Chap. 9
After the skirmish the Captaine being wounded, and the rest of the souldiers seeing the Indians depart, returned unto their ships. The next day taking in fresh water at the saide place he sent mariners to sound the mouth of the lake. Departing thence they came to the port called Baya de Sant Abad, and indured a dangerous storme at sea. And afterward comming neere the shore to take fresh water in the said haven, they see certaine peaceable Indians.
BY this time it was late and the night approched, and the Indians seeing this, within a short while after determined to get them packing, and ech of them or the greatest part tooke fire-brandes in their hands, & got them away into craggy places. When the Captaine saw this he commanded us to returne aboord our boats, it being now darke night, thanking us all for the good service we had done him. And being not able to stand upon his legge, he leaned with his arme upon Francis Preciado ; and thus we returned to our boats, where with much adoe we got aboord, by reason of the great tide and roughnesse of the sea, so that our boats were filled with every wave. Thus very weary, wet, & some wounded (as is aforesaid) each man returned unto his ship, where our beds which we found, and our refreshing, & the cheere we had at supper did not greatly comfort us in regard of our former travels. We passed that night in this sort, and the next day being Tuesday the Captaine found himself greatly payned with his wounds, & chiefly with that on his leg, because it was greatly swolne with his going upon it. We lacked 12 buts to fill with water, and the barrels in both the ships, and the Captaine would have gone out to cause them to be filled, but we would not suffer him, and therefore we left ofF the businesse for that day. But he appointed that the crossebowes should be made readie, and two speciali good
240
harquebuzes, & the next day being Wednesday very early, he commanded Juan Castilio chiefe Pilot to goe out with both the botes and with all the souldiers and mariners that he could make, having the day before commanded the Trinitie to go as neere the shore as she might, & to make ready some of her ordinance, that if the Indians should shew themselves, they might affright them, & doe them as much hurt as they could. Wherfore on the Wednesday al we that were souldiers, saving the wounded persons, went on shore with certaine mariners in the best order that we could, and tooke the first hill, where we had fortified our selves, standing all upon our guard untill the water was filled, and untill we were called, during which time not one Indian shewed himselfe. Thus we went aboord when we thought good our selves, at least without any suspition of the Indians, although the tide of the Sea went so high y‘ it put us to great trouble, for oftentimes with great waves it beat into our boats. This was on the Wednesday the 3 of December. And to avoide losse of time the Captaine commanded Juan Castilio the chiefe Pilot to take a boat and certaine mariners as he should thinke good, and to view the mouth of the lake to see whether the entrance were deepe enough for to harbour the ships. He taking the boat of the Admirall with 8 mariners, and ours of the Trinity, went and sounded the mouth, & on the shallowest place of the barre without they found 3 fadome A special good depth, and farther in 4, & up higher 5, alwayes increasing unto 10 or 12 fadomes, when they were come into the two points of the said lake, which was a league broad from one point to the other, and all their sounding was exceeding good ground. Then they went over to the southeast point, & there they saw a great boat or raft which they indevoured to take to carrie unto their ships. In ye meane while they espied certaine cottages, which the Pilot determined to goe and see, and being come neere they saw 3 other raftes with 3 Indians on them distant from the cottages one or two cross-bowes shot,
ix	241	Q
and he leapt on land with 4 or 5 mariners in his com-panie: and while they behelde those cottages, they saw many Indians descending downe a small hill in warlike manner with their bowes and arrowes, whereupon they determined to retire to their boats, and to returne to their ships, and they were not gone from the sea-shore scarce a stones cast, but the Indians were come upon them to shoot at them with their arrowes, and because they were unarmed, they would not fight with them, having gone on shore for no other purpose, but to sound the mouth and enterance of that lake. On Thursday the 4 of December we set saile with a fresh gale of winde, and sayled some 8 or 10 leagues, and came unto certaine  mouthes or inlets which seemed to all of us as though they had beene Hands, and we entered into one of them, Baya del and came into an haven which we called Baya del Abad Abad it100 ap inc[ose(l anj compassed with land, being one of the the point of fairest havens that hath beene seene: and about the same, California. especially on both sides the lande was greene and goodly to behold; we discryed certaine rivers on that part which seemed greene, & therefore we returned backe, going out at that mouth wherby we came in, alwayes having contrary wind: yet the Pilots used their best indevour to make way : and we saw before us certaine wooddy hils, and beyond them certaine plaines ; this we saw from the Friday the 5 of the said moneth, untill the Tuesday, which was the ninth. As we drew neere to these woods they seemed very pleasant, and there were goodly and large hilles and beyond them towardes the sea were certaine plaines, and through all the countrey we saw these woods. Many great From the day before, which was the Conception of our tmokes, of	Lady, we saw many great smokes, whereat we much
Francis Gualle marvelled, being or diverse opinions among our selves, maketh men- whether those smokes were made by the inhabitants of tion. the countrey or no. Over against these woods there fell every night such a dew, that every morning when we rose, the decke of the ship was so wet, that untill the sunne was of a good height, we alwaies made the
242
decke durtie with going upon it. We rode over against these woods from the Tuesday morning when we set saile, untill Thursday about midnight, when a cruell Northwest winde tooke us, which, whither we would or no, inforced us to way our anker; and it was so great, that the ship Santa Agueda began to returne backe, untill her cable broke, and the ship hulled, and suddenly with a great gust the trinket and the mizen were rent asunder, the Northwest winde still growing more and more: within a short while after the maine saile was rent with a mighty flaw of winde, so that we were inforced, both souldiers, captaine, and all of us, to doe our best indevor to mend our sailes; and the Trinitie was driven to do the like, for she going round upon her anker, when she came a-head of it, her cable broke, so that there we lost two ankers, each ship one. We went backe to seeke Baya del Abad, for we were within 20 leagues of the same, and this day we came within foure leagues of it, and being not able to reach it by reason of contrary windes, we rode under the lee of certaine mountaines and hilles which were bare, and almost voide of grasse, neere unto a strand full of sandie hilles. Neere unto this road wee found a fishing-place under a point Afishingplace. of land, where having let downe our lead to see what ground was there, a fish caught it in his mouth, and began to draw it, and he which held the sounding-lead crying and shewing his fellowes that it was caught, that they might helpe him, as soone as he had got it above the water, tooke the fish, and loosed the cord of the sounding-lead, and threw it againe into the sea, to see whither there were any good depth, and it was caught againe, whereupon he began to cry for helpe, and all of us made a shout for joy; thus drawing the fish the rope of the sounding-lead being very great was crackt, but at length we caught the fish which was very faire. Here we stayed from Friday when we arrived there, untill the Munday, when as it seemed good to our Captaine, that we should repaire to the watering place, from whence
243
we were some sixe leagues distant, to take in 12 buttes of water, which wee had drunke and spent, because he knew not whither we should from thencefoorth finde any water, or no; and though we should finde water, it was doubtfull whither we should be able to take it by reason Great tides of the great tide that goeth upon that coast. We drewe upon this coast.	neere to that	place on	Munday at night,	when as we
sawe certaine	fires of	the Indians. And	on Tuesday
morning our	general	commaunded that	the Trinitie
should come as neere our ship & to the shore as it could, that if we had neede, they might helpe us with their great ordinance: and having made 3 or 4 bourds to draw neere the shore, there came 4 or 5 Indians to the seaside ; who stood and beheld while we put out our boat and anker, marking also how our bwoy floated upon the water; and when our boat returned to the ship, two of them leapt into the sea, and swamme unto the bwoy, and beheld it a great while; then they tooke a cane of an arrow, and tyed to the sayd bwoy a very faire and shining sea-oyster of pearles, and then returned to the shore, neere to the watering place.
Chap. 10.
They give unto the Indians many trifles which stand upon the shore to see them, and seeke to parley with them by their interpreter, which was a Chichimeco, who could not understand their language. They go to take fresh water. Francis Preciado spendeth the time with them with many signes, and trucking and being afeard of their great multitude, retireth himselfe wisely with his companions, returning with safety to the ships.
WHen the Captaine and we beheld this, we judged these Indians to be peaceable people; whereupon the Captaine tooke the boat with 4 or 5 mariners carrying  with him certain beades to truck, and went to speake with them. In the meane while he commanded the Indian interpreter our Chichimeco, to be called out of 244
the Admirall that he should parley with them. And the Captaine came unto the boy, and laid certaine things upon it for exchange, & made signes unto the Savages to come and take them; and an Indian made signes unto our men with his hands, his armes, and head, that they understood them not, but signified that they should go aside. Whereupon the Captaine departed a smal distance from that place with his boat. And they made signes againe that he should get him further ; whereupon we departing a great way off, the saide Indians leapt into the water, came unto the boy, and tooke those beades, and returned backe againe to land, and then came unto the other three, and all of them viewing our things, they gave a bowe and certaine arrowes to an Indian, and sent him away, running with all haste on the shore, and made signes unto us that they had sent word unto their lord what things we had given them, and that he would come thither. Within a while after the said Indian returned, running as he did before, and beganne to make signes unto us, that his Lord was comming. And while we stayed here, we saw on the shore ten or twelve Indians assemble themselves, which came unto the other Indians, apd by and by we saw another company of 12 or 15 more appeare, who assembled themselves all together. And againe they began to make signes unto us, to come foorth-with to our boates, and shewed us many Oysters of pearles on the top of certaine canes, making signes that they would give them us. When we beheld this, the Captaine commanded us to make readie our boate, and went aboord it with the said mariners, and rowed to a certaine stone in forme of a rocke, which lay in the sea neere unto the shore. And hither came first 2 or 3 Indians and layd downe one of those Oysters, and a garland made of Parats feathers, or sparrowes feathers painted red ; they layd downe also certaine plumes of white feathers, and others of blew colour. In the meane while we sawe continually Indians assemble to the shore by tenne and tenne, and so by little and little they came in squadrons ;
245
and one of them assoone as hee sawe the boat beganne to leape forward and backeward with so great nimblenesse, that doubtlesse he seemed to all of us a man of great agilitie, and we tooke no small pleasure while we beheld him fetching those gambols : but the rest of the Indians which stood at the mouth of the fresh water ranne toward him, and cryed unto him, forbidding him to use those gestures, because we were come thither in peaceable sort, and by this meanes he came with the rest to the watering place, where by little and little in this manner there assembled above a hundred of them all in order, with certaine staves with cordes to fling them, and with their bowes and arrowes, and they were all painted. In the meane while our Chichimeco-interpreter borne in the He of California, was come unto us, and the Captaine againe commanded a mariner to strippe himselfe, and to swimme and laye upon the said rocke certaine belles, and more beades, and when he had layd them there, the Indians made signes that he should goe away ; and so they came thither and tooke them, and our men drew neere with their boat. The Captaine commanded the Indian our Chichimeco to speake unto them, but they could not understand him, so that we assuredly beleeve, that they understand not the language of the He of California. This day being Tuesday untill night the Indians stayed at this watering place, taking some of our beades, and giving unto us their feathers and other things, and when it was very late they departed. The morrow following being Wednesday very early the Captaine commanded that our buttes should be made ready, that before breake of day, and before the Indians should take the hill, which stood over the watering place, we might be landed in good order : which was put in execution : for we went on shore with as many as could goe, saving those that had charge to take in the water, and such as were to stay on ship-boord, which in all were about fourteene or fifteene persons, in as good order as we could devise : for we were foure crossebowes, two 246
. . . I539' harquebuziers, and eight or nine targets, and the most part of us carryed very good slings, and every one eighteene river stones, which weapon the Captaine invented, because the Indians at the first had handled us very shrewdly with the multitude of stones which they flang at us : we had nothing to defende us saving our targets, and to seeke to winne the fortes from whence they indamaged us ; he therefore thought with these slings, that we might offend them, and we likewise thought well of his opinion, for making tryall of them, we threw very well with them, and much farther than we thought we could have done : for the slings being made of hempe, we flung very farre with them. Nowe being come to the watering place the sayd Wednesday by breake of day we tooke the fort of the fountaine, which were certaine cragges or rockes hanging over the same, betweene which there was an opening or deepe valley through which this water runneth, which is no great quantitie, but a little brooke not past a fadome broad. So standing all in order, other foure or five Indians came thither, who as soone as they sawe us to be come on shore, and to have gotten the toppe of the watering place,  they retired unto a small hill on the other side, for the valley was betweene them and us : neither stayed they long before they beganne to assemble themselves as they had done the day before by 10 and 10, and 15 and 15, ranging themselves on this high hill, where they made signes unto us. And Francis Preciado craved license of the general to parley with these Indians, and to give them some trifles ; wherewith he was contented, charging him not to come too neere them, nor to goe into any place where they might hurt him. Whereupon Francis went unto a plaine place, under the hill where the Indians stood, and to put them out of feare he layd downe his sword and target, having onely a dagger hanging downe at his girdle, and in a skarfe which he carried at his necke, certaine beades to exchange with them, combs, fishinghooks and comfits. And he began to goe up the hill, and
247
Truck W traf-fique with the Indians fir mother ofpearle, and other things.
to shew them diverse of his marchandise. The Indians as soone as he had layd those things on the ground, and gone somewhat aside, came downe from the hill and tooke them, and carried them up, for it seemed that their Lord was among them, to whom they carried those trifles. Then they came downe againe, and layd to give unto him in the said place, an oyster of pearles, and two feathers like haukes feathers, making signes to Preciado that he should come and take them ; which he did, and againe layde there a string of belles, and a great fish-hooke, and certaine beades ; and they taking the same, layd there againe another oyster of pearle, and certaine feathers : and he layd downe other beads, two fishhookes, and more comfits, and the Indians came to take them up, and approched much neerer unto him, then at other times, and so neere that a man might have touched them with a pike, and then they began to talke together : and 7 or 8 more came downe, unto whom Francis Preciado made signes, that they should come downe no lower, and they incontinently layd their bowes and arrowes on the ground, and having layd them downe came somewhat lower, and there with signes, together with them which came first, they began to parle with him, and required mariners breeches & apparell of him, and above all things a red hat pleased them highly, which the said Francis ware on his head, and they prayed him to reach it unto them, or to lay it in the place ; and after this certaine of them made signes unto him to knowe whether he would have a harlot, signifying with their fingers those villanies and dishonest actions, and among the rest they set before him an Indian of great stature dyed wholly with black, with certaine shels of the mother of pearle at his necke, and on his head, and speaking by signes to Francis Preciado touching the foresaid act of fornication, thrusting their finger through a hole, they said unto him, that if hee would have a woman, they would bring him one ; and he answered, that he liked well of it, and that therfore they should bring him one. In the meane space 248
on the other side where the general stood with his company, another squadron of Indians shewed themselves, whereupon the general and his company made a stirre, and put themselves in battell array : whereupon Francis Preciado was inforced to come downe from them, to joy ne with the general & his company : and here the Indians which came last began to make signes that we should lay downe something to truck, and that they would give us some of their shels of mother of pearle, which they brought upon certaine small stickes, and here-withall they came very neere unto us, wherewith we were not well content. And Francis Preciado said unto the Captaine, that if it pleased him, hee would cause all the Indians to come together and to stay upon that high hill; and he answered, that it was best to draw them all together, for by this time our men had taken in all their water, and stayed for the boat: whereupon Francis taking a crowne of beades went toward the valley, through which the water ran toward the Indians, and. made signes unto them to call the rest, and to come all together, because hee would goe to the olde place, to lay things on the ground for exchange, as at the first; and they answered that he should doe so, and that they had called the others, and that they would doe, as he would have them, and so they did, for they caused them to come unto them, which they did, and Francis likewise went alone towards them, in which meane space the general commanded his people to get into the boat. Francis comming unto the place beganne to lay downe his marchandise of traffique, and afterwards made signes unto them to stay there, because hee would goe to the ships to bring them other things, and so he returned to the place where the Captaine was, and found them all got into the boates, saving the general and three or foure others, and the general made as though he had given other trifles to Preciado to carry unto the Indians, and when he was gone a little from him, he called him backe againe, and all this while the
249
Indians stood still, and being come unto him, wee went faire and softly to our boates, and got into them at our ease, without any thronging, and thence we came aboord our ship.
The Indians seeing us thus gone aboord came downe to the strand where the brooke of water was, and called unto us to come foorth with our boates, and to come on shore, and to bring our beades, and that they would give us of their mother of pearles : but we being now set at [III. 4.14.] dinner made no account of them : whereupon they beganne to shoote arrowes at the ship, and although they fell neere us, yet they did not reach us. In the meane season certaine mariners went out in the boat, to wey the anker, whereupon the Indians seeing them comming towards them, 8c bringing them nothing, they beganne in scorne to shew them their buttockes, making signes that they should kisse their bums: and these seemed to be those that came last. The general seeing this, commanded a musket to be once or twise shot off, and that they should take their just ayme. They seeing these shot to be made readie, some of them rose and went to shoot their arrowes at our mariners, which were gone to weigh the ankers, then the general commanded the great ordinance speedily to be shot off, whereupon three or foure bullets were discharged, and we perceived that we had slaine one of them, for we assuredly saw him lye dead upon the shore ; and I thinke some of the rest were wounded. They hearing this noyse, and seeing him dead ranne away as fast as ever they could, some along the shore, and some through the vallies, dragging the dead Indian with them, after which time none of them appeared, save ten or twelve, which peeped up with their heads among those rocks; whereupon another piece of ordinance was discharged aloft against the place where they were, after which time we never saw any more of them.
250
At the point of the Trinitie they spend three dayes in fishing, and in other pastime: after which setting sayle they discover pleasant countries, and mountaines voide of grasse, and an Hand afterward called Isla de los Cedros, or the He of Cedars, neere which they suffer sharpe colde and raine, and to save themselves they returne thither.
IMmediatly we set saile to joyne with the ship Santa Agueda, which was above halfe a league in the high sea from us, and this was on the Wednesday the seventeenth of December. Being come together because the windes were contrary, we drew neere to a headland, which wee called Punta de la Trinidad, and here wee stayed fishing, and solacing our selves two or three dayes, although we had alwayes great store of raine. Afterward we beganne to sayle very slowly, and at night we rode over against those mountaines where we had left our ankers, and upon knowledge of the place we received great contentment seeing we had sailed some five and thirtie leagues from the place where we had taken in water: neither was it any marvell that wee so rejoyced, because that the feare which we had of contrary windes caused us to be so well appayd of the way which we had made. The day of the holy Nativitie of our Lord, which was on the Thursday the five and twentieth of the said moneth, God of his mercy beganne to shewe us favour in giving us a fresh winde almost in the poope, which carried us beyond those mountaines, for the space of tenne or twelve leagues, finding the coast alwayes plaine: and two leagues within the land, which we coasted along, and betweene these mountaines, there was a great space of plaine ground, which we might easily discerne with our eyes, although others were of another opinion. We beganne from Christmas day to saile slowly with certaine small land-windes, and
251
Great apparante of gold and silver.
January 1540.
Forty leagues.
 sayled from morning to night about seven or eight leagues, which wee esteemed no small matter, alwayes praying to God to continue this his favour toward us, and thanking him for his holy Nativitie, and all the dayes of this feast the Frier sayd masse in the Admirall, and the father Frier Raimund preached unto us, which gave us no small comfort, by incouraging us in the service of God.
On Saturday at night being the 27 of the said moneth we ankored neere unto a point which seemed to be plaine land all along the shore, and within the countrey were high mountaines with certaine woods, which woods and mountaines ranne overthwart the countrey, and continued along with certaine small hilles sharpe on the toppe, and certaine little vallies are betweene those mountaines. And in truth to me which with diligent eyes beheld the same both in length and in the breadth thereof, it could not chuse but be a good countrey, and to have great matters in it, as well touching the inhabiting thereof by the Indians, as in golde and silver; for there was great likelihood that there is store thereof. This night we saw a fire farre within the lande towards those mountaines, which made us thinke that the countrey was throughly inhabited. The next day being Sunday and Innocents day, the 28 of the said moneth at breake of day we set sayle, and by nine or ten of the clocke had sayled three or foure leagues, where we met with a point which stretched towarde the West, the pleasant situation whereof delighted us much. From the eight and twentieth of December we ranne our course untill Thursday being Newyeares day of the yeere 1540, and we ran some 40 leagues, passing by certaine inlets and bayes, and certaine high mountains covered with grasse in colour like rosemary : but toward the sea-side very bare and burned, and toward the top were certaine cragges somewhat of a red colour, and beyond these appeared certaine white mountaines, and so all the countrey shewed unto a point which appeared beyond 252
those burnt white and red mountaines which have neither any grasse nor tree upon them, whereat we marvelled not a little. This Newyeares day we sawe neere the maine two small Hands, and rejoyced greatly to see them ; for we stood in great feare, that contrary windes would drive us as farre backe in one day, as we had sayled in tenne, which if they had taken us, we could not have withstood them. Wee ranne from the first of January untill Munday which were five dayes, and the land alwayes stretched Northwest from the mountaines aforesaid.
And on the Sunday we saw a farre off" a-head of us a high land somewhat severed from the maine shore, and all of us beganne to dispute whether it were the land which trended toward the Northwest, for that way the Pilots hoped to discover a better countrey: and the said Munday the fift of Januarie we came to this high land beforesaid, and it was two Hands the one a small one and the other a great one : we coasted these two Hands some sixe leagues, which were greene, and had on the toppe of them many high slender trees; and the great Hand was twentie leagues in compasse. We coasted in 6 leagues in length without seeing or discovering any other things, but we saw before us high land which stretched eight or tenne leagues Northward, where we rode on Munday at night. From Thursday being Newyeares day untill the next Munday we sayled about 35 leagues. And in this course we felt great cold, which grieved us much, especially being assailed by two or three windie showers which pinched us much with colde. We rode over against this land two or three nights, having it neere unto us, alwayes keeping watch by equall houres, one while mariners, and another souldiers, all the night long with great vigilancie. On Tuesday being Twelfe day we came within two or three leagues of this land, which we had descryed the day before, seeming to us very pleasant for it shewed greene with greene trees of an ordinary bignesse, and we saw
253
Two small Islets neere the maine.
Isla de Ids Cedros mentioned in the 13 chap.
The land trendeth here Northwest 35 leagues.
Thistle degrees of Northerly latitude.
many vallies, out of which certaine small mists arose, which continued in them for a long time, whereupon we gathered, that they rose out of certaine rivers. The same morning, to our great comfort we saw great smokes, though we were above foure leagues distant from them, and the Captaine made no great reckoning to approch neere unto them, nor to seeke nor serch what the matter was, and perchance because he was not then in the Santa Agueda, but was aboord the Trinitie, as his maner was to come and stay there two or three dayes, as well to passe the time, as to give order for things that were needefull. In this countrey the winter and raine seemed to be like that of Castile. We rode al night two or three leagues distance from shore, and toward evening we saw five or sixe fires, whereat we all rejoyced, but did not marvell thereat, because the situation of that countrey shewed to be habitable, being faire, pleasant, and all greene, and likewise because the Hand which we had left behind us being (as I have said) twenty leagues in circuit, made shewe that it was well peopled. On the Wednesday we were 3 or 4 leagues at sea from the land, and began to see two fires more, & therfore we assured our selves that the countrey was very well inhabited ; and the farther we sayled, we alwayes found it more civill. And for the space of fifty leagues before we came hither we alwayes found swimming on the sea certaine flotes of weedes of a ships length, and of the bredth of two ships, being round and full of gourds, and under these weedes were many fishes, and on some of them were store of fowles like unto white sea-meawes. We supposed that these floting weeds did grow upon some rocke under the water. We were now in 30 degrees of Northerly latitude. We sailed from the 7 of January untill the 9 still with contrary windes : and on Fry day about noone there rose a North and Northeastern winde, which forced us to returne under the shelter of that Hand which we left behind us, from whence we had sayled above 254
twentie leagues. And that Friday at night somewhat Twentie late wee had sayled backe above twelve leagues of the same, and because it was night wee stayed in the sea, ofQedars. where we and our shippes were not a little troubled, so that all that night none of us slept a winke, but watched every one. The next morning betimes being Saturday we proceeded on our voyage, and gate under the shelter of the said Hand, riding in thirtie fadome water : and on that side where we ankored, we found high and closed mountaines, with heapes of a certaine earth which was all ashes and burned, and in other places skorched and as blacke as coales, and like the rust of yron, and in other places whitish, and here and there small blacke hilles, whereat we marvelled exceedingly, considering that when we passed by, it seemed unto us an habitable countrey full of trees, and now we saw not a sticke growing on this side.
All of us supposed that on the other side toward the firme lande the trees grewe which we sawe, although (as I have sayde) wee sayled foure or five leagues distant from the same.
We stayed here under the shelter of these mountaines  Saturday, Sunday, and Munday, alwayes having the Northren winde so strong, that we thinke if it had caught us in the sea, wee should have bene cast away.
Chap. 12.
They environ and land upon the Hand of Cedars, to discover the same, and to seeke water and wood. They are assailed of the Indians, and many of them wounded with stones : but at length getting the upper hand, they goe to their cottages, and ranging farther up into the Iland they find diverse things which the Indians in their flight had left behind them.
ON Friday the 13 of January the Captaine commanded us to hoise out our boates, and to goe on shore, which was done accordingly, and we did row along the shore for the space of a good halfe league and
255
entered into a valley : for (as I said) all this countrey was full of high and bare hils, of such qualitie as I mentioned before : and in this and other small valleys we found some water which was brackish, and not farre from thence certaine cottages made of shrubs like unto broome ; likewise we found the footings of Indians both small and great, whereat we much marvelled that in so rough and wilde a countrey (as farre as we could discerne) there should be people. Here we stayed all day, making foure or five pits to take in water which we wanted, which though it were bad, and in small quantitie we refused not; and so the evening being come, we returned to our boates, and so came unto our ships which rode a good league from the shore. The next day being Wednesday the fourteenth of the said moneth our general commanded us to set saile, and we sailed about the said Hand on the same side which we coasted when we came from Nueva Espanna : for when we arrived on the coast we saw five or sixe fires ; wherefore he desired to see and learne whether it were inhabited ; and at the farthest ende of this inlet or bay where we rode there came out before us a Canoa, wherein were foure Indians which came rowing with certaine small oares, and came very neere us to see what we were : whereupon we tolde our general, that it were best to send some of us out with our boates to take these Indians or some one of them to give them something that they might thinke us to be good people : but hee would not consent thereto, because he minded not to stay, having then a prety gale of winde, whereby he might saile about this Hand, hoping that afterward we might finde and take some others to speake with them, and give them what we would to carry on shore; and as we sayled neere the land, we saw a great hill full of goodly trees of the bignesse of the trees and Cypresses of Castile. We found in this Hand the footing of wilde beasts and conies, and saw a peece of pine tree-wood, whereof we gathered, that there was store 256
of them in that countrey. Thus sayling neere unto the shore, we sawe another Canoa comming toward us with other foure Indians, but it came not very neere us, and as we looked forward, we sawe toward a point which was very neere before us, three other Canoas, one at the head of the point among certaine flattes, and the other two more into the sea, that they might descry us without comming over neere us. Likewise betweene certaine hilles which were neere the point, there appeared here three and there foure of them, and afterward we saw a small troope of some twentie of them together, so that all of us rejoyced greatly to behold them. On this side the land shewed greene with pieces of plaine ground which was neere the sea, and likewise all those coasts of hils shewed greene, and were covered with many trees, although they grew not very thicke together. Here at evening we rode neere the shore hard upon the said point, to see if we could speake with those Indians, and likewise to see if we could get fresh water, which now we wanted, and still as soone as we were come to an anker, we saw the Indians shew themselves on land
comming likewise to
in a Canoa, by sixe and seven at a time, whereat we marvelled, because we never thought that one of those Canoas would hold so many men. In this wise we stayed looking still what would be the successe, and in the place where we rode we were two small leagues distant from the shore, where we found these Indians in their Canoas : whereupon wee marvelled not a little to see so great an alteration in so small a distance of countrey, as well because we still discovered pleasant land with trees (whereas on the other side of the isle there were none) as also because it was so well peopled with Indians, which had so many Canoas made of wood, as we might discerne, and not raftes or Balsas, for so they Balsa is a call those floats which are made all flat with canes.	flat raft made
The next day being Thursday the fifteenth of the said canes' moneth about breake of day foure or five Indians shewed
ix	257	R
neere unto their lodgings,
themselves at the head of that point, who as soone as they had spyed us retired behind the point, and hid themselves among the bushes upon certaine small hilles that were there, from whence they issued forth, and covered all the greene hils and mountaines, which were along that coast; whereupon we gathered that they had their dwellings there, in regard of the commoditie of the water and the defence against ill weather and the benefite of fishing. At sun-rising we saw the Indians appeare in greater companies, going up unto the hilles in small troopes, and from thence they stood and beheld us. Immediatly we saw five or sixe Canoas come out into the sea a good distance from us, and those which were in them stood often on their tip-toes, to view and descry us the better. On the other side we stirred not at all for all these their gestures, but stood still riding at anker; and the general seemed not to be very willing to take any of them, but this day in the morning very early commanded the Masters mate to conveigh him to our other shippe called The Trinitie. Things passed in this sort, when about ten of the clocke we saw three Canoas lanch farre into the sea to fish very neere unto us, whereat we tooke great pleasure. At 12 of the clocke the general returned from the Trinitie and commanded the boat & men to be made readie, as well souldiers as mariners, and that we should goe on shore to see if we could get any wood and water, and catch one of those Indians to understand their language if it were possible: and so all the men that were readie went into the Admirals boate, and went toward the Trinitie which by this time with the other ship had a small gale of winde, wherewith they entered farther within the point, and we discovered the lodgings and houses of the Indians, & saw neere the waters side those five or sixe Canoas which at the first came out to view us, drawen on shore, and over against this place the ships cast anker in 30 and 35 fadome water, and we were very neere the land ; whereat we marvelled much to find so great 258
depth of water so neere the shore. Being gone abord our botes, we made toward the shore over against a village of the Indians, who as soone as they saw us village of about to come on land, left an hill whereon they stood the Indians-to behold what we did, & came downe to the shore, where we were prepared to come on land : but before they came against us they caused their women and children to fly into the mountaines with their goods, & then came directly towards us, threatning us with certaine great staves which they carried in their handes some 3 yardes long and thicker then a mans wrest: but perceiving that for all this we ceased not to come neere the sea shore to come on land, they began to charge us with stones and to fling cruelly at us, and they hit skirmish of 4 or c men, among whom they smote the general with Ilians two stones. In the meane while the other bote landed stones. a little beneath, whereupon when they saw that they were forced to divide themselves to keepe the rest of our company from comming on land, they began to be discouraged, and did not assaile the Generals boate so fiercely, who began to cause his people to goe on shore with no small trouble ; for albeit he was neere the land, yet as soone as they leapt out of the boat they sunke downe, because they could finde no fast footing; and thus swimming or otherwise as they could, first a souldier called Spinosa got on land, and next to him the General, and then some of the rest, and began to make head against the Indians, and they came hastily with those staves in their hands, for other kinds of weapons we saw none, saving bowes and arrowes of pine-tree. After a short combate they brake in pieces the targets of the general, and of Spinosa. In the meane while those of the other boat were gotten on land, but not without much difficultie, by reason of the multitude of stones which continually rained downe
upon them, and they stroke Terazzo on the head a	use
very shrowd blow, and had it not bene for our targets, against arrows many of us had beene wounded, and in great distresse, and stones.
2.59
although our enemies were but few in number. In this maner all our company came on shore with swimming and with great difficultie, and if they had not holpen one another, some of them had bene drowned. Thus we landed, and within a while after those of the other bote were come on land, the Indians betooke themselves to flight, taking their way toward the mountaines, whether they had sent their women, children and goods: on the other side we pursued them, & one of those Indians which came to assaile the Generals boat, was slaine upon the strand, & two or three others were wounded, and some said more. While we pursued them in this maner our mastive dogge Berecillo overtooke one of them not farre from us (who because we were so wet could not run very Theuseofmas- fast) and pulled him downe, having bitten him cruelly, ^arr”Gainst and doubtlesse he had held him till we had come, Indians. unlesse it had happened that another of his companions had not followed that Indian which the dogge had pulled downe, who with a staffe which he had in his hands gave the dogge a cruell blow on the backe, and without any staying drew his fellow along like a Deere, and Berecillo was faine to leave him for paine, neither had he scarse taken the dogge off on him, but the Indian got up, and fled so hastily towarde the mountaine, that within a short while hee overtooke his fellowe which had saved him from the pawes of the dogge, who (as it appeared) betooke him lustily to his heeles, and thus they came unto their fellowes which descended not downe to the shore being about some twentie, and they were in all about fiftie or sixtie.
 After we had breathed our selves a while, we viewed their houses where they stood, which were certaine cottages covered with shrubs like broome and rosemary, with certaine stakes pight in the ground; and the general willed us to march all together without dispersing of our selves, a little way up those mountaines, to see if there were any water and wood, because we 260
stood in great neede of them both. And while we marched forward, we saw in certaine little vallies the goods which the women had left there behind them in their flight: for the Indians as soone as they saw us pursue them overtooke the women, and for feare charged them to flie away with their children leaving their stuffe in this place. We went unto this booty, and found good store of fresh-fish, and dried fish, and certaine bags containing above 28 pound weight full of dried fish ground to pouder, and many seal-skins, the most part dressed with a faire white graine upon them, and others very badly dressed. There were also their instruments to fish withall, as hookes made of the prickes of certaine shrubs and trees. Here we tooke the said skins without leaving any one in the place, and then we returned to the sea, because it was now night, or at least very late, and found our botes waiting for us.
Chap. 13.
A description of the Canoas of the Indians of the He of Cedars, and how coasting the same to find fresh water they found some, and desiring to take thereof they went on shore, and were diversly molested with the weapons of the Indians. They christen an old Indian, and returne unto their ships.
THe Canoas which they had were certaine thicke trunkes of Cedars, some of them of the thicknesse of two men, and three fadome long, being not made hollow at all, but being laid along and fastened together, they shove them into the sea, neither were they plained to any purpose, for we found no kind of edge-toole, saving that there were certaine sharp stones, which we found upon certaine rockes that were very keene, wherewith we supposed that they did cut & flea those seales. And neere the shore we found certaine water, wherewith we filled certaine bottles made of the skins of those seales, contayning ech of them above a great paile of water. The next day our general commanded us to 261
Seale-skws well dressed with a white graine.
Isla de Ids Cedros, or the lie of Cedars in 28 deg. and a quarter.
set saile, whereupon sailing with a fresh gale about 2 leagues from the shore of this Hand, trending about the same to see the end thereof, and also to approch neere the firme land, to informe our selves of the state thereof, because we had seene 5 or 6 fires, we compassed the same about: for by this meanes we performed 2 or 3 good actions, namely, we returned to our right course, and searched whether any river fell out of the coast of the firme land, or whether there were any trees there, or whether any store of Indians did shew themselves or no.
In this maner proceeding on our way all the Friday being the 16 of January at evening, and seeking to double the point of the Hand, so fierce and contrary a Northren winde encountered us, that it drave us backe that night over against the lodgings and habitations of the Indians, and here we stayed all Saturday, what time we lost the Trinitie againe, but on Sunday-night being the 18 we saw her againe, and beganne to proceede on our way to compasse that Hand, if it pleased God to send us good weather.
On Sunday, Munday, and Tuesday (which was the twentieth of the said moneth of Januarie) wee sailed with scarse and contrary windes, and at length came to the cape of the point of the Hand, which we called Isla de los Cedros or the He of Cedars, because that on the tops of the mountaines therein, there growes a wood of these Cedars being very tall, as the nature of them is to be. This day the Trinitie descryed a village or towne of the Indians, and found water: for on Sunday night we had newly lost her, and had no sight of her untill Tuesday, whenas we found her riding neere the shore, not farre from those cottages of the Indians. And as soone as we had descryed her, we made toward her, and before we could reach her, we espied three Canoas of Indians which came hard aboord the said ship called the Trinitie, so that they touched almost the side of the ship, and gave them of their fish, and our people 262
on the other side gave them certaine trifles in exchange, and after they had spoken with them, the Indians went backe to the shore, and at the same instant we came up unto the Admirall and rode by them, and they all saluted us, saying that the Indians were neere them, and telling what had passed betweene them, whereat the general and we received great contentment. They told us moreover, that they had found fresh water, whereby they increased our great joy, because we stood in much neede thereof, for at the other place of the Indians we could get but a little.
While we thus rode at ankor, we saw a Canoa with 3 Indians put out into the sea from their cottages, and they went unto a fishing place, among certaine great and high weedes, which grow in this sea among certaine rockes, the greatest part of which weedes groweth in 15 or 20 fadome depth ; and with great celeritie they caught seven or eight fishes, and returned with them unto the Trinity, and gave them unto them, and they in recompense gave the Indians certaine trifles. After this the Indians stayed at the sterne of the ship, viewing the same above three houres space, and taking the oares of our boat they tryed how they could rowe with them, whereat they tooke great pleasure; and we which were in the Admirall stirred not a whit all this while, to give them the more assurance, that they should not flie away, but should see, that we ment to doe them no harme, & that we were good people. As soone as we were come to anker, & beheld all that had passed betweene the Indians and those of the Trinity, after the Indians were gone to the shore in their Canoas made of the bodies of trees, the General commanded the boat which was without to be
These mighty deepe and high weedes are described in the end of this treatise.
brought unto him : and when it was come, he, and Francis Preciado, and two others went into it, and so we went aboord the Trinity. The Indians seeing people comming out of the other ship into the Trinitie, sent two Canoas unto the sterne of the ship, and brought us a bottle of water, and we gave unto them certain 263
beads, and continued talking with them a little while; but evening approching the aire grew somewhat cold. The Indians returned on shore to their lodgings, and the General and we to our ship. The next day being Wednesday in the morning, the General commanded certaine of us to take the bote and goe ashore, to see if we could find any brooke or well of fresh water in the houses of the Indians, because he thought it unpossible for them to dwell there without any water to drinke. The father frier Raimund likewise went out in our company, because the day before seeing the Indians came to the sterne of the shippe and parlying with us, he thought he might have spoken a little with them, with the like familiarity. In like sort many mariners and souldiers went out in the boat of the Trinity, and going altogether with their weapons toward the shore, somewhat above the lodgings of the Indians, very early in the morning they watched the boats, and perceived that wee would come on land, whereupon they sent away their women & children with certaine of them, who caried their goods up into certaine exceeding steepe mountaines and hilles, and 5 or 6 of them came toward us, which were excellently well made, and of a good stature. Two of them had bowes and arrowes, and other two 2 bastonadoes much thicker then the wrist of a mans hand, and other two with 2 long staves like javelins with very sharpe points, and approched very neere us being nowe come on shore. And beginning by signes very fiercely to brave us, they came so neere us, that almost they strooke with one of those staves one of our souldiers called Garcia a man of good parentage, but the General commanded him to withdraw himselfe, and not to hurt any of them. In the meane season the General and frier Raimund stept foorth, the frier lapping a garment about his arme, because they had taken up stones in their hands, fearing that they would do them some mischiefe. Then began both of them to speake unto them by signes & words, to be quiet, signifying, that they ment them no
264
1540-harme, but only were come to take water ; and the frier shewed them a drinking-cup ; but nothing would serve to make them leave that bragging, and flinging of stones : and the General continuing still in a mind not to hurt them, commanded his men gently to come neere unto them, and that by signes they should all shew them, that they meant in no wise to hurt them, but that we were come on land onely to take water. On the other side refusing utterly to take knowledge of these things they still insulted more and more : whereupon Francis Preciado counselled the General to give him leave to kill one of them, because all the rest would flee away, wherby at our ease we might take water : but he replied that he would not have it so, but willed them to looze the two mastives Berecillo and Achillo : wherefore the dogs were let loose, and as soone as they saw them, they vanished immediately, betaking them to their heeles, and running up those clifFes like goates. Also others which came The great use from the mountains to succour them, betooke them- °fmas^ve^^ selves to flight. The dogs overtooke two or them, and indans. bit them a little, and we running after, laid hold on them, and they seemed as fierce as wild & untamed beasts, for 3 or 4 of us held either of them, to cherish & pacific them, and to seeke to give them some thing: but we availed not, for they bit us by the hands, and stooped downe to take up stones for to strike us with them. We led them a while in this maner, & came unto their lodgings, where the general gave a charge, that no man should touch any thing of theirs, commanding Francis Preciado to see that this order were observed, in not taking any thing from them, although in very deed there was little or nothing there, because the women and Indians which were fled had caried al away. Here we found an old man in a cave so extreamly aged as it was wonderful, which could neither see nor go, because he was so lame and crooked. The father frier Raimund sayd, it were good (seeing he was so aged) to make him a Christian; whereupon we christened him. The captaine
265
gave the Indians which we had taken two paire of eare-rings, and certaine counterfeit diamonds, and making much of them, suffied them to depart at their pleasure, and in this sort faire and softly they returned to the rest of their fellowes in the mountaine. We tooke the matter  of that village which was but a small quantity, and then the general commanded us to returne to our ship, because we had eaten nothing as yet, and after our repast we sayled towards a bay which lay beyond that village, where we saw a very great valley, and those of the Trinitie sayd, that they had seene there good store of water, and sufficient for us ; wherefore wee ankered neere unto that valley. And the general went on shore with both the boates, and the men that went on land in the morning with the two fathers frier Raimund, and frier Antony: and passing up that valley a crossebow-shot, we found a very small brooke of water which nevertheles supplied our necessity for we filled two buts thereof that evening, leaving our vessels to take it with on shore untill the next morning : and we rejoyced not a little that we had found this water, for it was fresh, and the water which we had taken up before was somewhat brackish, and did us great hurt both in our bodies and in our taste.
Chap. 14.
They take possession of the Isle of Cedars for the Em-perours Majestie, and departing from thence they are greatly tossed with a tempest of the sea, and returne to the Island, as to a safe harbour.
THe next day being the two and twentieth of January very early the General commanded us to go on shore, and that we should have our dinner brought us, and should take in the rest of our water, which we did, and filled 17 buts without seeing any Indian at al. The next day going out to fill 8 or 9 vessels which were not yet filled, a great winde at Northwest tooke us, wherupon they made signes to us from the ships, that with all haste wee should come on boord againe, for the wind grew 266
. . . . I54°‘ still higher, and higher, and the Masters were affraid that our cables would break, thus we were in the open sea. Therefore being come aboord againe not without great trouble, we returned backe over against the village of the Indians,* where we had slaine the Indian, and be- Cap. 12. cause the wind grew more calme about midnight, the Pilots did not cast anker, but hulled under the shelter
of this Island, which (as I have said) is called The Isle of IsladehsGe-Cedars, and is one of the 3 Isles of S. Stephan, the greatest & chiefest of them, where the General tooke possession. While we hulled here, about midnight, the Stephan. next Friday being the 23 of the moneth, without our expectation we had a fresh gale of wind from the Southeast, which was very favourable for our voyage, & the longer it continued, the more it increased : so that betweene that night and the next day being Saturday the 24 of the said moneth we sailed 18 great leagues. While Read cap. 11. wee were thus on our way, the wind grew so contrary a^out the end-and so tempestuous, that to our great griefe we were constrained to coast about with our ships, and returned twenty leagues backe againe, taking for our succour the second time, the point of the lodgings of the Indians, where the foresayd Indian was slaine, and here we stayed Munday, Tewsday, and Wednesday, during which time the Northwest and the North wind blew continually, whereupon we determined not to stirre from thence untill we saw good weather, and well setled for our voyage : for in this climate these winds doe raigne so greatly, that we feared they would stay us longer there then we would; and we were so weary of staying, that every day seemed a moneth unto us. Under this shelter we rode Thursday, Friday, and Saturday untill noone, which was the last of January in the yeere 1540.
About noone the wind began to blow softly at Southwest, whereupon the General told the Pilots, that we should doe well to put over to the maine land, where with some wind off the shore we might by the grace of God saile somewhat farther. Thus we hoised our sailes, February.
267
and sailed until evening three or foure leagues, for the wind scanted, and wee remained becalmed. The night being come there arose a contrary winde, and we were inforced of necessitie to retire the third time to the same shelter of the Isle of Cedars, where we stayed from the first of February until Shrovesunday, in the which meane time we tooke in two buts of water which we had spent. During the space of these eight dayes we sought to make sayle two or three times, but as we went out a little beyond the point of this Isle, we found the wind so boystrous and contrary, and the sea so growen, that of force we were constrained to returne under the succour of the Island, and often times wee were in great feare that we should not be able to get in thither againe. During this time that we could not proceed on our journey, we imployed our selves in catching a few fishes for the Lent. From Shrovesunday being the 8 of February, on which day we set sayle, we sayled with a very scant wind, or rather a calme, untill Shrove-tewsday, on which we came within kenne of the firme land, from whence we were put backe these twenty leagues (for in these two dayes and a halfe wee sayled some 20 small leagues) and we lay in sight of the sayd poynt of the firme land. And on the Tewsday we were becalmed, waiting till God of his mercy would helpe us with a prosperous wind to proceed on our voyage.
On Shrovesunday at night, to make good cheere withall wee had so great winde and raine, that there was nothing in our ships which was not wet, and a very colde ayre. On Ashwednesday at sun-rising we strooke saile neere a point which we fel somewhat short withall in a great bay running into this firme land: and this is the place where we saw five or sixe fires, and at the rising of the sunne being so neere the shore that we might well descrie and viewe it at our pleasure we sawe it to bee very pleasant, for wee descried as farre as wee could discerne with our eyes, faire valleys and small hilles, with greene shrubs very pleasant to 268
behold, although there grew no trees there. The situation shewed their length and breadth. This day was little winde, it being in a manner calme, to our no small griefe: and the father frier Raimund sayd us a drie masse, and gave us ashes, preaching unto us according to the time and state wherein we were: with which sermon we were greatly comforted. After noone-tide we had contrary wind, which still was our enemie in all our journey, at the least from the point of the port of Santa Cruz. Here we were constrained to anker in five fadome water, and after wee rode at anker wee began to viewe the countrey, and tooke delight in beholding how goodly and pleasant it was, and neere unto the sea wee judged that wee saw a valley of white ground. At evening so great a tempest came upon us of winde and raine, that it was so fearefull and dangerous a thing that a greater cannot bee expressed ; for it had like to have driven us upon the shore, and the chiefe Pilot cast out another great anker into the sea, yet all would not serve, for both these ankers could not stay the ship. Whereupon all of us cryed to God for mercy, attending to see how he would dispose of us ; who of his great goodnesse, while we were in this danger, vouchsafed a little to slake the tempest, and with great speede the chiefe Pilot commanded the mariners to turne the capsten, and the general commanded and prayed all the souldiers to helpe to turne the capsten, which they were nothing slow to performe: and thus we beganne to weigh our ankers, and in weighing of one which was farre greater then the other, the sea was so boisterous that it forced the capsten in such sorte, that the men which were at it could not rule the same, and it strooke a Negro of the Generals such a blowe, that it cast him downe along upon the decke, and did the like unto another mariner and one of the barres strooke our fire-furnace so violently, that it cast it overboord into the sea. Yet for all these troubles wee weighed our ankers, and set sayle, and albeit we had great tempests at sea, yet made wee no 269
The point of Santa Cruz otherwise called Punta de Balenas.
account thereof in respect of the joy which we conceived to see our selves freed of the perill of being cast on that shore with our ships, especially seeing it fell out at midnight, at which time no man could have escaped, but by a meere myracle from God.
Wee sayled up and downe the sea all Thursday, and untill Friday in the morning being the fourteeneth day of February, and the waves of the sea continually came raking over our deckes. At length, on Saturday morning at breake of day we could finde no remedy against the contrary windes, notwithstanding the general was very obstinate to have us keepe out at sea, although it were very tempestuous, least we should be driven to put backe againe, but no diligence nor remedie prevailed: for the windes were so boysterous and so contrary, that they could not be worse, and the sea went still higher, and swelled more and more, and that in such sorte, that we greatly feared wee should all perish. Whereupon the Pilot thought it our best course to returne to the Isle of Cedars, whither wee had repaired three or foure times before by reason of the selfe same contrary windes, for wee tooke this Island for our father and mother, although we received no other benefite thereby save this onely, namely, to repaire thither in these necessities, and to furnish our selves with water, and with some small quantitie of fish.
Being therefore arrived at this Island, and riding under the shelter thereof, the contrary windes did alwayes blow very strongly, and here we tooke water which we drunke, and wood for our fewel, and greatly desired, that the windes would bee more favourable for proceeding on our journey. And though we rode under the shelter of the Isle, yet felt wee the great fury of those windes, and the rage of the sea, and our ships never ceased rolling.
At breake of day the twentieth of February wee found the cable of our Admirall cracked, whereupon, to our great griefe, we were constrained to set sayle, to fall downe lower the space of a league, and the Trinitie came and rode in our company.
270
They goe on land in the isle of Cedars, and take divers
wilde beasts, and refresh and solace themselves. They are strangely tossed with the Northwest winde, and
seeking often to depart they are forced, for the avoiding of many mischiefes, to repaire thither againe for harbour.
THe two and twentieth of February being the second
Sonday in Lent, the General went on shore with the greatest part of his people and the friers, neere unto a valley which they sawe before them. And hearing masse on land, certaine souldiers and mariners, with certaine dogges which we had in our company went into the said valley, and we met with certaine deere, whereof we tooke a female, which was little, but fat, whose haire was liker the haire of a wild goat then of a deere, and we found her not to be a perfect deere, for she had foure dugs like unto a cowe full of milke, which made us much to marveile. And after we had flayed ofF her skinne, the flesh seemed more like the flesh of a goate, then of a deere. We killed likewise a gray conie, in shape like unto those of Nueva Espanna, and another as blacke as heben-wood. In the cottages at the shelter above, where we brake our cable, we found many pine-nuts opened, which (in mine opinion) the Indians had gathered together to eate the kernels of them. On Munday the 23 of the said moneth we rode at anker, taking our pleasure and pastime with fishing. And the Northwest winde began to blow, which waxed so great a little before midnight, as it was wonderfull: so that although we were under the shelter of the Island, and greatly defended from that wind, yet for all that it was so furious, and the sea became so raging and boisterous, that it greatly shook our ships, and we were in great feare of breaking our cables, whereof (to say the trueth) we had very much neede: for having spent longer time in this voyage then we looked for, wee had broken two, and
271
lost two of our best ankers. This furious winde continued untill the next day being Tewsday the 24 when as we went on shore with the friers, who sayd us masse, recommending our selves to God, beseeching him to vouchsafe to succour and help us with some good weather that we might proceede on our voyage, to the advancement of his service. And still the winds were so high and outragious, that the devill seemed to be loosed in the aire. Whereupon the Pilots caused all the masts to be let downe, least they should be shaken with the wind, and tooke off all the shrowds, and likewise caused the cabbens in the sterne to be taken away, that the winds might have more free passage, for the safetie of the ships: yet for al this they ceased not to be in great trouble. On Tewsday the second of March, about midnight or somewhat after, riding under the Island in this distresse, there came a gust of Northwest winde, which made the cable of the Admirall to slip, and the Trinitie brake her cable, and had bene cast away, if God of his mercy had not provided for us, together with the diligence which the Pilots used, in hoising the sailes of the trinkets and mizzen, wherewith they put to sea, and rode by another anker untill day, when the men of both the ships went with their boats to seeke the anker untill noone, which at length they found and recovered, not without great paines & diligence which they used in dragging for it, for they were till noone in seeking the same, and had much adoe to recover it. After this we set up our shrowdes, and all things necessary to saile, for to proceede on our voyage, if it pleased God, and not to stay alwayes in that place, as lost and forlorne. Thus on the Wednesday two or three houres after dinner wee set saile, with a scarce winde at Southeast, which was favourable for our course and very scant; and our Pilots 8c all the rest of us were in no smal feare, that it would not continue long. We began therfore to set forward, although we seemed to see before our eies, that at the end of the
272
Island we should meete with contrary winde at North and Northwest. This day about evening when our ships had discovered the point of this Isle of Cedars, wee began to perceive those contrary windes, and the sea to goe so loftily, that it was terrible to behold. And the farther we went, the more the winds increased, so that they put us to great distresse, sayling alwayes with the sheates of our mainesaile and trinket warily in our hands, and with great diligence we loosed the ties of all the sailes, to save them the better, that the wind might not charge them too vehemently. For all this the mariners thought it best to returne backe, and that by no means we should runne farre into the sea, because we were in extreame danger. Whereupon wee followed their counsel, turning backe almost to the place from whence we departed, whereat we were al not a little grieved, because we could not prosecute our voyage, and began to want many things for the furniture of our ships. The 8 of March being Munday about noone the general commanded us to set saile, for a small gale of winde blew from the West, which was the wind whereof we had most need, to follow our voyage, whereat wee were all glad for the great desire which we had to depart out of that place. Therefore we began to set saile, & to passe toward the point of the Island, and to shape our  course toward the coast of the firme land, to view the situation thereof. And as we passed the Island, and were betwixt it and the maine, the Northwest being a contrary wind began to blow, which increased so by degrees, that we were constrained to let fall the bonets of our sailes, to save them, striking them very low.
And the Trinitie seeing this bad weather returned forthwith unto the place from whence we departed, and the Admiral cast about all night in the sea, untill the morning ; and the chiefe Pilot considering that by no means we could proceed farther without danger, if we should continue at sea any longer, resolved that wee should retire our selves againe to that shelter, where we rode at
ix	273	s
anker untill Thursday. And on Friday about noone we set saile againe with a scarce winde, & in comming forth unto the point of the Island, we met againe with contrary winde at Northwest: whereupon running all night with the firme land, on Saturday in the morning being S. Lazarus day and the 13 of march, we came in sight thereof, in viewing of the which we all rejoyced, and we souldiers would very willingly have gone on shore. This night fel great store of raine like the raine in Castilia, and we were all well wet in the morning, & we tooke great pleasure in beholding the situation of Thefirmeland that firme land, because it was greene, and because we very green and discovered a pleasant valley and plaines of good ^goMy valleys largenesJ which seemed to bee environed with a garland and plaines.	of mountains. At length for feare of misfortunes,
seeing the sea so high, we durst not stay here or approch neere the land, & because we had great want of cables and ankers, we were again constrained to put to sea; and being in the same, and finding the said contrary windes, the Pilots judged that we had none other remedie, but againe to retire our selves to our wonted shelter. And thus we returned, but somewhat above the old place. On Sunday we rode here to the great grief of all the company, considering what troubles we indured, & could not get forward; so that this was such a corrasive, as none could be more intollerable. This day being come to an anker wee had a mighty gale of wind at Northwest, which was our adversary and capital enemie, and when day was shut in, it still grew greater and greater, so that the ships rouled much. And after midnight, toward break of day, the Trinitie brake her two cables, which held the two ankers which she had, and seeing her selfe thus forlorne, she turned up and downe in the sea untill day, and came & rode neere us, by one anker which shee had left. This day all of us went to seeke these lost ankers, and for all the diligence which wee used, wee could find but one of them. We rode at anker all day until night, when
274
the Trinitie againe brake a cable, which certaine rocks had cut asunder: wherupon the General commanded that she should ride no longer at anker, but that shee should turne up and downe, as she had done before in sight of us, which she did al day long, and at night she came to an anker over against a fresh water somewhat lower, and wee went and rode hard by her. On Palme-sunday we went on shore with the fathers, which read the passion unto us and said masse, and we went in procession with branches in our hands. And so being comforted, because we had received that holy Sacrament, we returned to our ships.
Chap. 16.
Returning to the Isle of Cedars weather-beaten, and with their ships in evil case, they conclude, that the ship called Santa Agueda or Santa Agatha should returne unto Nueva Espanna. Of the multitude of whales which they found about the point of California: with the description of a weede, which groweth among the Islands of those seas.
HEre we continued untill the Wednesday before Easter being the foure and twentieth of March, on which day wee consulted together, that because the ships were ill conditioned, and wanted necessary furniture to proceede any further, it were best for us to returne backe to New Spaine, as also because our clothes were consumed : but the general seemed not willing to returne, but to proceed on his voyage : and in fine it was resolved, that seeing both the ships could not proceede forwarde, as well because they had lost their necessary furnitures, as also that the Santa Agatha had neede of calking, because she received much water, and was the worst furnished of the twaine, that shee should returne backe to advertize the Marques of our successe in this voyage, and what hindred our proceeding, and in what case wee stoode, and howe wee were bereft of our necessary furniture. And because the Trinitie was
275
A.D.
J54O.
the swifter ship, and better appointed then the other, it was concluded, that it should be provided in the best maner that might be, & that the General should proceed on his journey in her with such companie as he should make choise of, and that the rest should returne at their good leisure. Wherefore upon this determination we went under a point of this Island, because it was a fit place to carene the ship : & in recovering the same we spent Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday till noone, and yet for all that wee could not wel double it, until Easter day about noone. Here we ankered very neere the shore, and in a valley we found very excellent fresh water, wherof we made no smal account, & here stayed all the Easter-holidayes, to set our selves about the furnishing up of the Trinity: and  after the worke was taken in hand by the two Masters which were very sufficient calkers (one of which was Juan Castiliano chiefe Pilot, and the other Peruccio de Bermes) they finished the same so well in fives dayes, as it was wonderfull; for no man could perceive how any droppe of water could enter into any of the seames. Afterward they mended the other ship from Saturday till Munday, during which time all those were shriven that had not confessed, and received the communion, and it was resolved by charge of the confessors, that all those seale-skins which they had taken from the Indians should bee restored againe; and the general gave charge to Francis Preciado to restore them all, charging him on his conscience so to doe. Thus they gathered them together, and delivered them into the hands of the fathers, to bee kept untill they returned to the place, The Santa where they were to restore them. After this maner on
Munday before noone we tooke our leaves of the New-spaine general Francis Ulloa, and of the people that stayed the 5. of with him, who at our departure shed no small number April.	of teares, and we chose for our captaine in the Santa
Agueda master Juan Castiliano the chiefe pilot, as well of the ship, as of us all, and set saile the same day 276
being the fift of April, having our boat tied at our sterne, till we came over against the cottages, whence wee had taken the seale-skins. From the countrey of The °f the Christians and the port of Colima we were now distant some three hundreth leagues, which is the first port where wee determined to touch at. And having sailed a league from the Trinitie the captaine Juan Castiliano commanded us to salute them with three pieces of great Ordinance, and she answered us with other three, and afterward we answered one another with two shot apiece.
We sailed on Munday & * Tewsday til noon with ThesixtoJ contrary wind in sight of the Island, and at noone we had a fresh gale in the poupe, which brought us over against the cottages of the Indians where we tooke away those seal skins ; & there certain souldiers & mariners with the father frier Antony de Melo leapt on shore with the boat, carying the skins with them, & flung them into the sayd cottages out of which they were taken, and so returned to their ship. This day the The q of weather calmed, whereupon we were driven to cast anker, ^P^ fearing that we should foorthwith be distressed for want of victuals, if we should stay there any long time : but God which is the true helper provided better for us then we deserved or imagined ; for as we rode here, They sail after midnight the Wednesday following before ten the clocke wee had a favourable gale of winde from the the point of Southeast, which put us into the sea ; whither being Santa Cruz driven, wee had the wind at Northwest so good and con- or California stant, that in sixe dayes it brought us to the cape of the tn stxe point of the port of Santa Cruz: for which so great blessing of God we gave unto him infinite thankes. And here we began to allow our selves a greater proportion of victuals then wee had done before, for wee had eaten very sparingly for feare lest our victuals would faile us. Before we came to this point of the haven of Santa Cruz by sixe or seven leagues we saw on shore between certaine valleys divers great smokes. And having passed
277
Read more of these vieedes cap. 13.
Sant Iago de Buena esfer-anza in 19 degrees.
Cabo del En-gtinno in 30 degrees y a halfe.
the point of this port, our captaine thought it good to lanch foorth into the maine Ocean : yet although we ran a swift course, above 500 whales came athwart of us in 2 or 3 skulles within one houres space, which were so huge, as it was wonderfull, and some of them came so neere unto the ship, that they swam under the same from one side to another, whereupon we were in great feare, lest they should doe us some hurt, but they could not because the ship had a prosperous and good winde, and made much way, whereby it could receive no harme, although they touched and strooke the same.
Among these Islands are such abundance of those weedes, that if at any time wee were inforced to sayle over them they hindred the course of our ships. They growe fourteene or fifteene fadome deepe under the water, their tops reaching foure or five fadome above the water. They are of the colour of yellow waxe, & their stalke groweth great proportionably. This weede is much more beautifull then it is set foorth, and no marvell, for the natural painter and creator thereof is most excellent.
This relation was taken out of that which Francis Preciado brought with him.
After this ship the Santa Agueda departed from the general Ulloa, and returned backe the 5 of April, she arrived in the port of Sant Iago de buena esperan^a the 18 of the said moneth, and after she had stayed there foure or five dayes, she departed for Acapulco : howbeit untill this present seventeenth of May in the yeere 1540, I have heard no tidings nor newes of her.
Moreover after the departure of the Santa Agueda for Nueva Espanna, the General Francis Ulloa in the ship called the Trinitie proceeding on his discovery coasted the land untill he came to a point called Cabo del Enganno standing in thirty degrees and a halfe of Northerly latitude, and then returned backe to Newspaine, because he found the winds very contrary, and his victuals failed him.
