The course which Sir Francis Drake held from  the haven of Guatulco in the South sea on the backe side of Nueva Espanna, to the North-west of California as far as fourtie three degrees : and his returne back along the said Coast to thirtie eight degrees : where finding a faire and goodly haven, he landed, and staying there many weekes, and discovering many excellent things in the countrey and great shewe of rich minerail matter, and being offered the dominion of the countrey by the Lord of the same, hee tooke possession thereof in the behalfe of her Majestie, and named it Nova Albion.
Ee kept our course from the Isle of Cano (which lyeth in eight degrees of Northerly latitude, and within two leagues of the maine of Nicaragua, where wee calked and trimmed our ship) along the coast of Nueva Espanna, untill we came to the Haven and Towne of Guatulco,
which (as we were informed) had but seventeene Spaniards dwelling in it, and we found it to stand in fifteene degrees and fiftie minutes.
Assoone as we were entred this Haven we landed, and went presently to the towne, and to the Towne house, where we found a Judge sitting in judgement, he being associate with three other officers, upon three Negroes that had conspired the burning of the Towne : both which Judges, and prisoners we tooke, and brought them a shippeboord, and caused the chiefe Judge to write his letter to the Towne, to command all the Townesmen to avoid, that we might safely water there.
319
Which being done, and they departed, wee ransaked the Towne, and in one house we found a pot of the quantitie of a bushell full of royals of plate, which we brought to our ship.
And here one Thomas Moone one of our companie, took a Spanish gentleman as he was flying out of the Towne, and searching him, he found a chaine of Gold about him, and other jewels, which we tooke and so let him goe.
At this place our general among other Spaniards, set a shore his Portugall Pilote, which he tooke at the Island of Cape Verde, out of a ship of Saint Marie port of Portugall, and having set them a shoare, we departed thence.
Our General at this place and time thinking himselfe both in respect of his private injuries received from the Spaniards, as also of their contempts and indignities offered to our Countrey and Prince in generail, sufficiently satisfied, and revenged : and supposing that her Majestie at his returne would rest contented with this service, purposed to continue no longer upon the Spanish coastes, but began to consider and to consult of the best way for his Countrey.
He thought it not good to returne by the Streights, for two speciali causes : the one, least the Spaniards should there waite, and attend for him in great number and strength, whose handes he being left but one ship, could not possibly escape. The other cause was the dangerous situation of the mouth of the Streights of the South side, with continual! stormes raining and blustring, as he found by experience, besides the shoals and sands upon the coast, wherefore he thought it not a good course to adventure that way: he resolved therefore to avoide these hazards, to goe forward to the Islands of the Malucos, and there-hence to saile the course of the Portugales by the Cape of Bona Speranda.
Upon this resolution, he began to thinke of his best way for the Malucos, and finding himselfe, where hee
320
now was, becalmed, hee sawe that of necessitie hee must bee enforced to take a Spanish course, namely to saile somewhat Northerly to get a winde. Wee therefore set saile, and sayled 800 leagues at the least for a good winde, and thus much we sayled from the 16 of Aprill after our olde stile till the third of June.
The fift day of June being in fortie three degrees to-wardes the pole Arcticke, being speedily come out of the extreame heate, wee found the ayre so colde, that our men being pinched with the same, complayned of the extremitie thereof, and the further we went, the more the colde increased upon us, whereupon we thought it best for that time to seeke land, and did so, finding it not mountainous, but low plaine land, & we drew backe againe without landing, til we came within thirtie eight degrees towardes the line. In which height it pleased God to send us into a faire and good Bay, with a good winde to enter the same.
In this Bay wee ankered the sevententh of June, and the people of the Countery, having their houses close by the waters side, shewed themselves unto us, and sent a present to our general.
When they came unto us, they greatly wondred at the things which we brought, but our general (according to his natural and accustomed humanitie) curteously intreated them, and liberally bestowed on them necessarie things to cover their nakednesse, whereupon they supposed us to be gods, and would not be perswaded to the contrary: the presentes which they sent unto our general were feathers, and cals of net worke.
Their houses are digged round about with earth, and have from the uttermost brimmes of the circle clifts of wood set upon them, joyning close together at the toppe like a spire steeple, which by reason of that closenesse are very warme.
Their bed is the ground with rushes strawed on it, and lying about the house, they have the fire in the middest. The men goe naked, the women take bulrushes and ix	321	x
Sir Francis Drake sayled on the backe side of America, to 43 degrees of Northerly latitude.
38 degrees.
A description of the people and Countrey of Nova Albion.
 kembe them after the maner of hempe, and thereof make their loose garments, which being knit about their middles, hang downe about their hippes, having also about their shoulders a skinne of Deere, with the haire upon it. These women are very obedient and serviceable to their husbands.
After they were departed from us, they came and visited us the second time, and brought with them feathers and bags of Tabacco for presents: And when they came to the toppe of the hil (at the bottome whereof wee had pitched our tents) they stayed themselves, where one appointed for speaker, wearied himselfe with making a long oration, which done, they left their bowes upon the hill and came downe with their presents.
In the meane time the women remaining on the hill, tormented themselves lamentably, tearing their flesh from their cheekes, whereby we perceived that they were about a sacrifice. In the meane time our general, with his companie, went to prayer, and to reading of the Scriptures, at which exercise they were attentive and seemed greatly to be affected with it: but when they were come unto us they restored againe unto us those things which before we had bestowed upon them.
The newes of our being there being spread through the countrey, the people that inhabited round about came downe, and amongst them the king himself, a man of a goodly stature, and comely personage, with many other tall and warlike men : before whose com-ming were sent two Ambassadours to our general, to signifie that their king was comming, in doing of which message, their speech was continued about halfe an howre. This ended, they by signes requested our general to send something by their hand to their king, as a token that his comming might bee in peace : wherein our general having satisfied them, they returned with glad tidings to their king, who marched to us with a princely Majestie, the people crying continually after their maner, and as they drewe neere unto us, so did they
322
strive to behave themselves in their actions with comelinesse.
In the fore front was a man of a goodly personage, who bare the scepter, or mace before the king, whereupon hanged two crownes, a lesse and a bigger, with three chaines of a merveilous length : the crownes were made of knit work wrought artificially with feathers of divers colours; the chaines were made of a bony substance and few be the persons among them that are admitted to weare them : and of that number also the persons are stinted, as some ten, some twelve, &c. Next unto him which bare the scepter, was the king himselfe, with his Guarde about his person, clad with Conie skinnes, and other skinnes : after them followed the naked common
These are like chaines of Esurnoy in Canada and Hochelage.
sort of people, every one having his face painted, some with white, some with blacke, and other colours, and having in their hands one thing or other for a present, not so much as their children, but they also brought
their presents.
In the meane time, our general gathered his men together, and marched within his fenced place, making
against their approching, a very warlike shewe. They being trooped together in their order, and a general salutation being made, there was presently a general silence. Then he that bare the scepter before the king, being informed by another, whome they assigned to that office, with a manly and loftie voice, proclaimed
that which the other spake to him in secret, continuing
halfe an houre: which ended, and a general Amen as it were given, the king with the whole number of men, and women (the children excepted) came downe without any weapon, who descending to the foote of the hill,
set themselves in order.
In comming towards our bulwarks and tents, the scepter bearer began a song, observing his measures in a dance, and that with a stately countenance, whom the king with his Garde, and every degree of persons following, did in like maner sing and dance, saving onely
323
 The king resignes his crowne and kingdom to Sir Francis Drake.
Great riches in Nova Albion.
the women which daunced and kept silence. The General permitted them to enter within our bulwark, where they continued their song and daunce a reasonable time. When they had satisfied themselves, they made signes to our general to sit downe, to whom the king, and divers others made several orations, or rather supplication, that he would take their province and kingdom into his hand, and become their king, making signes that they would resigne unto him their right and title of the whole land, and become his subjects. In which to perswade us the better, the king and the rest, with one consent and with great reverence, joyfully singing a song, did set the crowne upon his head, inriched his necke with all their chaines, and offered unto him many other things, honouring him by the name of Hioh, adding thereunto as it seemed a signe of triumph : which thing our general thought not meete to reject, because hee knewe not what honour and profite it might bee to our countrey. Wherefore in the name, and to the use of her Majestie, he tooke the scepter, crowne and dignitie of the said Countrey in his hands, wishing that the riches & treasure thereof might so conveniently be transported to the inriching of her kingdome at home, as it aboundeth in the same.
The common sort of the people leaving the king and his Guarde with our general, scattered themselves together with their sacrifices among our people, taking a diligent viewe of every person; and such as pleased their fancie, (which were the yongest) they inclosing them about offred their sacrifices unto them with lamentable weeping, scratching, and tearing the flesh from their faces with their nayles, whereof issued abundance of blood. But wee used signes to them of disliking this, and stayed their hands from force, and directed them upwardes to the living God, whome onely they ought to worshippe. They shewed unto us their wounds, and craved helpe of them at our handes, whereupon wee gave them lotions, plaisters and ointments agreeing to 324
. . . I578, the state of their griefes, beseeching God to cure their deseases. Every thirde day they brought their sacrifices unto us, untill they understoode our meaning, that we had no pleasure in them : yet they could not be long absent from us, but daily frequented our company to the houre of our departure, which departure seemed so grievous unto them, that their joy was turned into sorrow. They intreated us, that being absent wee would remember them, and by stelth provided a sacrifice, which we misliked.
Our necessarie businesse being ended, our general Great heards with his companie traveiled up into the Countrey to their °f Deere. villages, where we found heardes of Deere by a thousand in a companie, being most large and fat of body.
We found the whole countrey to bee a warren of a Abundance of strange kinde of Conies, their bodyes in bignes as be stran&conies-the Barbary Conies, their heads as the heades of ours, the feet of a Want, and the taile of a Rat being of great length: under her chinne on either side a bagge, into the which shee gathereth her meate when she hath filled her belly abroad. The people eate their bodies, and make great account of their skinnes, for their Kings coate was made of them.
Our general called this countrey, Nova Albion, and Nova Albion. that for two causes : the one in respect of the white bankes and cliffes, which ly towardes the sea : and the other, because it might have some affinitie with our Countrey in name, which sometime was so called.
There is no part of earth here to bee taken up, Golde and wherein there is not some speciali likelihood of gold or silver in the silver	earth of Nova
At our departure hence our general set up a monument of our being there ; as also of her Majesties right and title to the same, namely a plate nailed upon a faire great poste, whereupon was ingraven her Majesties name, the day and yeere of our arrivall there, with the free giving up of the Province and people into her Majesties hands, together with her highnes picture and armes, in
325
a peice of sixe pence of current English money under the plate, where under was also written the name of our general.
It seemeth that the Spaniards hitherto had never bene in this part of the countrey, neither did ever discover the land by many degrees to the Southwards of this place.
