 CERTAINE BRIEFE TESTIMONIES
Concerning the mightie River of Amazones or Orellana, and of the most wonderfull downefall or cataract of waters at the head thereof, named by the Spaniards El Pongo: together with some mention of the rich and stately empire of
Dorado, called by Sir Walter Ralegh and the natural inhabitants Guiana, and of the golden countrey of Paytity neere adjoyning, with other memorable matters: taken out of Josephus de Acosta his natural and
morall historic of the West Indies.
The first Testimonie out of Josephus de Acosta, lib. 2. cap. 6.
Ut when we intreat of Rivers, that which some men call the river of Amazones, others Marannon, others the river of Orellana, doeth justly put to silence all the rest, whereunto our Spaniards have gone and sayled. And I stand in doubt, whether I may cal it a river or a sea.
This river runneth from the mountaines of Piru, from which it gathereth infinite store of waters, of raine, and rivers, which runneth along, gathering it selfe together, and passing through the great fieldes and plaines of Paytiti, of Dorado, and of the Amazones, and falleth at length into the Ocean sea, and entreth into it almost over against the Isles of Margarita and Trinidad. But it groweth so broad, especially towardes the mouth, that it maketh in the middest many and great Isles: and that which seemeth incredible, sayling in the middle chanel 16
1590. of the river, men can see nothing but the skie and the river, although men say that there are hilles neere the bankes thereof, which can not be kenned, through the greatnesse of the River. Wee understood by very good meanes the wonderfull bredth and largenesse of this River, which justly may bee called the Emperour of Rivers, to wit by a brother of our companie, which being a boy was there, & sayled it wholy through, being personally present in all the successes of that strange enterance, which Pedro de Orsua made, and in the mutinies and perilous conspiracies of that wicked Diego de Aguirre, out of all which troubles and dangers the Lord delivered him, to make him one of our societie.
The second Testimonie out of Josephus de Acosta, lib. 3. cap. 20.
A Mong all the rivers not onely of the West Indies but also of the whole world, the chief is the River of Marannon or of the Amazones, whereof I have spoken in the second booke. The Spaniards have divers times sayled along this river, with determination to discover countries, which, according to report, are of great riches, especially that which they call Dorado, and Paytiti. The Adelantado or admirall Juan de Salinas made a very notable entrance, although to small profite. It hath a salt or fall of water which they call El Pongo, which El Pongo. is one of the most dangerous places in the world: for being restrained betweene two exceeding hie devided mountaines, it maketh a fall of terrible depth where the water with the great descent maketh such whirlepooles that it seemeth impossible but that it should sinke it self there into the ground. For all this the boldnes of men hath attempted to passe the said El Pongo for the greedines to come to that so famous renowmed Dorado. They suffered themselves to bee caryed from aloft, being throwne downe headlong with the furie of the river, and sitting fast in their Canoas or boats in which they sayled, although they were overturned in the fal, and they and
xi	17	b
their Canoas suncke downe to the bottome, yet they rose up againe above the water, and at length with their hands, and force gat out of the whirlepooles. The whole army in a maner escaped, saving a very fewe which were drowned: and which I most marvel at, they handled the matter so well, that they lost not their victuals and powder which they caryed with them. In their returne (for after great travels and dangers they returned that way againe) they clymed up over one of those afore-saide exceeding high mountaines, creeping up upon their hands and feete.
Captaine Pedro de Orsua made another enterance by the selfe same river, and after hee was slaine by a mutinie of his people, other captaines followed the discoverie, by the arme that falleth into the North Sea. One of our companie told me (who while he was a secular man was in al that expedition) that they entred up the River almost an hundred leagues with the tydes, and that when the fresh water & the salt meeteth, which is either almost under or very neere the Equinoctial line, the river is 70 leagues broad, a thing incredible, and which exceedeth the breadth of the Mediterran sea. Howbeit other in their descriptions make it not past 25 or 30 leagues broad at the mouth.
 The third Testimonie out of Josephus de Acosta, lib. 3. cap. 25.
IN that part of America, whereof the coasts be throughly known, the greater part of the Inland is not knowen, which is that which falleth betweene Piru and Brasil, and there are divers opinions of some, which say, that it is all sunken land full of lakes and bogges, and of others, which affirme that there are great and florishing kingdomes there, and there they place the Countrey of Paytity, and Dorado, and great Emperours, and say, that there are wonderfull things there. I heard of one of our companie my selfe, a man of credite, that hee had seene great townes, and high wayes as 18
