A ruttier or course to be kept for him that will sayle from Cabo Verde to the coast of Brasil, and all along the coast of Brasil unto the river of Plate : and namely first from Cabo Verde to Fernambuck.
He ship that goeth from Cabo Verde to Brasil, must goe Southsoutheast: and when she is within 5 or 6 degrees of the Equinoctial she must go Southeast and by South. And if she have the ternados, that is thundrings and lightnings, then thou must go altogether
South, or that way and by that boord that doth profit thee most. And take this for advise, that having the general winds, & if the wind be at South or Southeast, then go Southwest, or westsouthwest. And if the winde Ye that toitt be South, then goe Southwest, and by this way sa3le toBrasil, but little, for it is not a way for thy profit, because ^thin^ow-the more thou goest this way, the more will be thy 70 leagues of trouble, because thou mayest not come neerer the the coast of coaste of Guinea then 60 or 70 leagues unto the sholde Gmnea. called Os baixos de Santa Anna. And being this distance from the same, thou shalt cast about the other way towards Brasil, and the wind will be large.
Thou shalt understand that the ship that keepeth this course to Fernambuck, and goeth in October or after, and chanceth to goe to windward of the Isle 73
of Fernando de Loronha, when thou commest to 8 * Of Souther- degrees, or 8 and then thou shalt go West and ly latitude. beare with the land. Thou must take this for a warning, that if going West in 8 degrees thou see land, then looke to the Northward, and thou shalt see certaine white clifFes. Then I advise thee that thou goe well to the Southward. And this is to bee understoode from October forward, for then the time is most subject to Northeast and Eastnortheast winds. And if thou find thy selfe in the sayd height above mentioned, and seest clifFes, and seest a Cape to the Southward, and seest no more land to the South, then make accompt that thou art at Capiguoari: and from thence to Fernambuck thou hast sixe leagues, and hast a good port.
Thou shalt take this for a warning, that if in 8 degrees and a halfe thou see land lying all flat, thou mayest goe neerer it, and be bold till thou come in ten ne or twelve radomes : And then thou shalt see a great grosse land along the sea-coast which is called Capitagua : And being East and West with this land, and, as I have sayd, in tenne or twelve fadomes water ; and the time being from October to Februarie, then thou needest not to feare any thing : but looke to the South and thou shalt see the cape of S. Augustine: and looke to the North and thou shalt see a point, and to the Southeast a point called Punta de Olinda, where Aponiquay standeth. And the land from the cape to the poynt called Punta de Olinda lieth North and South.
 I advise thee that if thou be East and West with the cape of Saint Augustine, thou shalt see within the land an high hill, having as it were a saddle upon it like to a camel: And thou shalt see to the Southwards three hilles along the sea, and then presently thou shalt see the coaste to lie Northeast and Southwest.
The height of Thou shalt understand that from this cape of Saint Augustine, to the towne of Olinda, thou hast nine of Olinda^ leagues to the North. And this cape standeth in eight Fernambuck. degrees and two third parts, and Olinda standeth in eight 74
degrees and a quarter, and Fernam buck standeth in eight degrees. And this course is to be understood to be observed and kept, if thou depart from Lisbon in October or November.
Take this advise, that if thou depart in February or March from Lisbone, then thou shalt goe to beare In what height with the land in nine degrees, because that from thed March forwards raigne most commonly Southeast and ^art Southwest windes. And if by this height and course from Lisbon thou bring thyselfe nigh to the shore, feare not to in February bring thy ship into 18 or 20 fadomes, for all the °r March. •coast is cleane: and there are no more dangers, but such as the sea doth breake upon.
And if after thy fall with the land thou have occasion to goe to the Northward, and so going seest -certaine sholdes, doubt not to come for the North, and Hm) i0 kncm thou shalt see the cape of Saint Augustine, which lyeth as it were sloaping to the seaward, and hath as it were ’	'
a Whales head, and hath upon it a round hill, with many hilles round about it. And if thou come along the sea ■coast much about the depth above mentioned, thou shalt see a little Island called Saint Alexio: And from this A& de Santo Island to the cape of Saint Augustine are foure leagues, Xi°' -and it standeth in eight degrees and three quarters.
The course that a man must keepe to the bay called A Bahia de Todos os Santos, that is to say, The bay of all Saints, which lieth on the foresayd coast of Brasil.
F thou goe for Bahia de Todos os Santos, thou must keepe the course which I have already set downe, and shalt observe the time from March
forwards, as also from October forwards. Thou shalt understand that the Bahia de Todos os Santos standeth in 13 degrees and J: and if thou goe in October or after October, then goe to fall with the land in 12 degrees or 12 and a halfe.
And take this for a warning, that when thou seest a
75
The height of Bahia de Todos os Santos in 13 degrees and one third part.
white land, and long bankes of white sand, which shew much like linnen cloth when it is in whiting, then thou must go along from the North to the South untill this white land doe end: and thou needest not to feare to goe along the coast, for there are no sholds. Before thou be cleane past the white land or white sands, thou shalt have sight of an Island that standeth along the bay, I say on the Northside of the bay, which is called The situation Tapaon: and here the land lieth West and by South. of the Isle of When thou art so farre shot as Tapaon, thou shalt a*wm" see a certaine great tree which is round, and standeth neere the sea upon the very point of the entrance into Bahia on the Northside.
And marke well that if thou looke to the Southward, and seest no white grounds such as I wrote of before, but that they be all behind thee to the Northward: When a man then when thou seest none to the Southward, thou ^th^Balia1 mayest bee bold to beare in with Bahia. And if when ' thou goest into Bahia to the Northwest, and seest the sea to breake, feare nothing: for it is the breach of a certaine banke, whereon thou shalt have alwayes 5 or 6 fadomes water: and this be sure of.
Thou shalt understand that if thou come for this place from March to the end of April, I would wish thee not to fall to the Southward of 13 degrees and a halfe. And falling with the land, and not seeing the white sands, thou shalt strive to goe to the Northward. And seeing the land in 13 degrees and a halfe, thou shalt have sight of an hill along the sea: And if thou be nigh the land, and cannot make it certaine what land it is: thou shalt marke if it bee a round high hill The distance along the sea, that it is O morro de San Paulo, or, The Paulo hill Saint P^l: and it lieth blacke and bare on the from Bahia. top. And from thence to Bahia is tenne leagues.
And here along this hill on the Northwest side Pio de Tin- there is a great river called Tinsare: and it is a very sare a very gOOd river. And in the entrance of Bahia there are ’ sixe or seven fadomes water in the chanell. And I
advise thee that being in the height of 13 degrees and a halfe, thou come not neere the land, for it hath a bay very dangerous.
And if thou goe from Bahia to Fernambuck, then I advise thee that thou take good heede of the coast on the Northeast and Southwest, and thou shalt goe East, if the winde will suffer thee to goe East: and so goe thirtie or forty leagues off to the sea.
I advise thee that thou beare not in with the land of Fernambuck, but in the height of 9 or 10 degrees, because that in 11 degrees thou shalt fall with the bay called A Enseada de Vazabaris. Also if thou come from Portugal and fallest with the land in eleven degrees, beare not in with it, neither come neere it, for thou mayest hurt thy selfe in so doing: but thou shalt shunne it, and goe to the Southward. For if thou lie to the North thou shalt bring thy selfe into some trouble.
This Bay of All Saints standeth in thirteene degrees. And from thence to Fernambuck thou hast a hundreth leagues: and the coast lyeth Northeast and Southwest. And from thence to Rio das Ilhas, that is, the river of the Islands the coast runneth Northeast and Southwest, I meane taking a quarter of the North and South. The course for Baia das Ilhas, that is, The bay of the Islands, which lie on the sayd coast of Brasil, & the marks for the finding of them.
F thou goe for Baia das Ilhas thou must looke for it in fifteene degrees lacking a quarter.
If thou be minded as I sayd to goe for these Isles, if it bee from March forward, thou shalt fall with the land in 15 degrees and a halfe, and though it be in
15 degrees and f, it is all the better.
And if thou have sight of certaine high hilles, that seeme to reach to the skie, these hilles are called As Serras Raiemores. Then having sight of these hilles, 77
A dangerous bay in 13 degrees and a halfe.
 The height of the bay called A Enseada de Vazabaris.
Baia de todos Santos in 13 degrees.
Baia das Ilhas lieth in 15 degrees lacking a quarter.
In what height a man must fall with this place in time of the Northeast winds. Giemana. Mangues.
thou shalt goe dong the coast; and feare nothing, for there are no sholdes along to the North. And when thou seest the Islands, thou mayest make accompt they be these which thou seekest, for there are no other on al this coast, and thou shalt see a round hil along the sea. Thou shalt understand that on the North side of this hill is the going in of the river. But if it chance that thou finde thy selfe in a time that will not suffer thee to goe in, then goe along the Islands giving them a bredth off. And thou mayest well come to an ankor hard aboord them, for all is cleane ground. And thou shalt finde eight or nine fadomes, and from thence thou mayest goe into the river hard aboord the shore. And if it chance that thou goe from the North to the South all along the great Island, thou must keepe thy selfe from the land: and when thou hast brought it Eastnortheast, then thou mayest ankor two cables length from the shore: for all is cleane ground.
If thou chance to arrive on this coast in the time of the Northeast windes, thou shalt seeke to fall with the land in foureteene degrees. And if thou see a lowe land, thou mayest make accompt it is the land called Ciemana, and then thou shalt see Mangues: And also thou shalt come along this coast to the South: and when thou seest an ende of the low land, then thou shalt finde an high land along the sea like the other that I have made mention of before, that is, all sandie along the sea coast.
And thou must understand, that where the high land beginneth, there is a little river called Rio das Contas, but enter not into it: it hath for a marke to be knowen by as it were a white mouth. And from thence to the Islands thou hast nine leagues. And at the ende of this high land to the Southward of it thou shalt find a great bay within the land, & then thou shalt looke to the Westsouthwest, and shalt see another high land, which lieth as it were in the middest of the bay, and thou shalt there see certaine white houses 78
•which are the Ingenios or houses wherein they make The white sugar of Lucas Giraldo. From thence thou shalt see sugar houses the Isles being so farre shotte as Rio de Contas. And thou shalt see within the land a round hill which ' is like Monte de laude, and it hath another coppie on the South side.
The course to sayle to Porto Seguro, that is to say, The safe haven, lying on the fore-sayd coast of Brasil, & the markes to know the same by.
i' thou goe for Porto Seguro and goest in the time of the Southeast windes, which is from March forwards, I advise thee that thou fall not in more degrees then sixteen and a halfe, because of the sholdes called Os baixos dos Abrolhos, which are very dangerous, and stretch
very farre into the sea. And also going West from them, that thou keepe thy lead going and be often sounding. And if thou chance to see the land, and an high hill and long withall, much like to The pike, it is the hill that is called Monte Pasqual. And from thence thou must goe to the North, and when thou hast brought it Southwest of thee, then thou mayest beare with the land, but with great care to looke about thee.
Marke when thou seest the land and commest to see a red cliffe, then looke to the Southward, and thou shalt see a great smooth coast along the sea, and then on the North side thou shalt descrie Porto Seguro. And going along the coast thou shalt see the towne of Porto Seguro standing upon the toppe of an hill; which hill is a white rocke : and on the North side of the sayd rocke there is a very hie land. I advise thee that when thou art East and West with the sayd land, I meane with this rocke, that then thou looke to the Northward, and 79
To avoids Os baixos dos Abrolhos.
Monte Pasqual.
The place of thou shalt see certaine rocks lying two leagues off into r an th® sea> whereon the sea doth breake, and to the South-Ptrto Seguro, ward of them thou mayest come to an ankor against which standeth the towne, and hast a good place to ride in thirteen in 16 deg. & fadomes in sight of the towne.
one third. And if it be thy chance to arrive in the time of the Northeast winds, and commest in the height of fifteene degrees and two third parts, and seest not certaine hilles, 16 degrees. then thou must goe along the coast being in 16 degrees, and under the first hie land that thou shalt descrie, thou A dangerous shalt see certaine sandie bayes along the sea coast: And if rwer in 16 thou have sight of a river in this height, put not thy selfe S ' into it, neither beare with the land, for it hath many sholdes. And off them lie certaine sunken grounds, Baixos de called Os Baixos de Santo Antonio. And from hence Santo Antonio. to Southward lyeth Porto Seguro.
I advise thee that going along the coast to the Southward, and seeing such sholdes, and the sea to breake upon them, as the other which I last spake of, thou shalt runne along them a sea boord of them: and when thou art at the end of them, then the towne will beare West of thee: and then thou mayest goe to thine ankor-ing place as is abovesayd, giving these sholds a good birth.
The course to the haven named Baia do Spirito Santo, that is to say, The bay of the holy Ghost, lying on the sayd coast of Brasil, and the markes thereof.
Hou shalt understand that the ship goeth for Spirito Santo, when it doubled the sholdes Os Baixos
that hath dos
Monzmns are certaine set winds with which the tides set.
Abrolhos, and hath brought it selfe in 20 or 19 degrees and a halfe, then it may hall with the land in 18 or 19 degrees and a halfe, and in twentie. And the sayd shippe must goe in this height, because
on this coast there are no Monzoins.
If thou chance to come in the height of 19 degrees Market on the and seest lowe land to the Northwest off thee, then North s,^e thou art on the North side of Spirito Santo, and thou SPmt° ant0‘ mayest make accompt that it is the land lying over Criquare, and over the river called Rio dolce, that is the river of sweete or fresh water. If thou come along the land thou shalt find certaine high hilles: but trust not the first that thou seest only. For besides the rest thou shalt see a round hie hill which is at the capes end, which is called la Sierra de mestre Alvaro. Take heede that The situation going for this land thou looke to the North and thou shalt see a river called Rio dos Reyes Magos: that is, Aharo. The river of the three kings. And comming to the Rio dos Reyes Southward thou shalt see presently the mouth of the bay to open. At the end of this hill on the South side, thou hast a point of a rocke, which is called A punta do Tubaron. And on the South side of the bay it hath two or three blacke hie hilles, and in the middest of the bay thou shalt goe in westward.
I advise thee that in going in thou take heede of a sholde which lieth in the mouth of the bay: thou must leave it to the Southward of thee, and then plie to double a certaine Island which lieth within, and thou must leave it to the Northward of thee: and when it beareth on the North or Northeast, thou mayest come to an ankor: for all is cleane ground.
And if thou chance to come by this course, and fallest in 20 degrees, and seest many hilles, and one among the rest very high and craggie: it is called A Sierra de Guari- Sierra de parim, that is, the hill of Guaraparim, and seest another inzo^degrees hill on the North side, which is called A Sierra de Pero a Sierra de Cam: both these lie on the South side of Spirito Santo. Pero Cam. And from these hils thou shalt see a little hill named Guaipel. And when thou seest these hilles, thou shalt see three little Islands together, lying to the Southward: And then from these thou shalt see another rockie, bare, and round Island: and to the land ofF this Island thou shalt see a great bay. If thou wilt thou mayest ankor
xi	81	F
here safely. And if thou wilt go in, thou shalt bring thy selfe East and West with the hill, and so thou mayest go in. And thou shalt leave a lowe land to the North A Ilha de of thee, which is called A Ilha de Repouso, that is, the Repouso. Isle op rest. anj thjs jsje Jietaiong the coast: and thou mayest be bold to ride betwixt it and the maine, giving it a breadth off.
From these three Islands to Spirito Santo are 12 SpiritoSanta leagues: and running Northwards to come to Spirito standeth in 20 gantOj thou shalt see another Island, and shalt go a sea-egrees. boord of it, and by & by the mouth of the bay will open toward thee. And this bay standeth in 20 degrees.
 The course from the bay de Spirito Santo to the bay of S. Vincent, and the markes thereof. Also the course from Saint Vincent to the
river of Plate.
Baia de Salvador 12 leagues North from Cabo frio.
Two small Islands.
The height of Cape Frio in 23 degrees. Rio de Jenero.
Ailing from Spirito Santo for Saint Vincent, thou mayest goe along the coast, keeping seven or eight leagues off, and must goe to seeke Cabo Frio, that is, The cold cape. And as thou commest toward Cabo Frio, thou hast a very great bay called Bahia de Salvador, that is, The
bay of our Saviour. And from thence thou hast twelve leagues to Cabo Frio.
And before thou commest to Cabo Frio, thou hast two small Islands. Thou mayest go safely either a sea boord of them, or else betweene them. Thou shalt understand that Cabo Frio hath as it were an Island in the midst of
the face or shew thereof, that doth cut off the cape. Thou mayest ride safely on the West side thereof; for all is cleane ground.
Understand that Cabo Frio standeth in 23 degrees: and from it to Rio de Jenero are twelve leagues. And this river of Jenero hath in the mouth thereof 3 or 4 Islands. And if thou wilt go into this river de Jenero, thou 82
mayest well goe in betweene two Islands which stand in the entrance of the river on the South side: neere unto this river there is a great hill seeming to bee a man with long haire.
And take this for advise, that if thou be in the height of this river, thou shalt see certaine high hilles within the land, which be like unto organs. And when thou seest these organs, then make accompt thou art right against the river: and comming neere the land thou shalt see a certaine Island very round, which lieth to the Southward, and is hie and bare in the top. Thou must know that the mouth of this river standeth in 23 degrees and one third part. And from this river to Angra, that is to say, The open haven, thou hast 15 leagues. Goe not neere the land there, except necessitie compell thee.
I advise thee, that from this river that I spake of, I meane from the entrance thereof, thou must goe Westsouthwest, and Southwest, and West and by South. And thou shalt see a great Island called Isla de San Sebastiano, and to the Southward thereof another small Island very high, called the Island of Alcatrarzas, that is to say, The Island of Pellicanes: but come not neere it, for it hath dangerous shoalds. And from hence thou mayest go West, and so thou shalt fall right with the mouth of Saint Vincent, and thou shalt see an Island. And if thou meane to goe into Saint Vincent thou must leave this Island to the Westward. And understand that Saint Vincent lieth in foure and twentie degrees. And when thou art in the mouth of this bay, or art neere the mouth of it, then thou shalt see many other Islands, and one among the rest to the seaward. And having these sights, thou hast the best markes that bee for these Islands, that I have told thee of: and this Island lieth Northwest and Southeast with the mouth of S. Vincent.
The situation of an hill like a man with long haire by Jenero.
The organs certaine high hilles.
Angra.
A llha de San Sebastiano..
The Isle of Alcatrarzas.
Saint Vincent in 24 degrees. Many Islands about ye mouth ofS. Vincent, y one out to the seaward.
83
[The course
Porto de Patos.
Porto de Don Roderigo. Laguna.
Rio de Martin de Sousa.
Cananea.
Rio de San Francisco.
The course from Saint Vincent to the river of Plate.
Rom S. Vincent to Cananea thou hast 40 leagues: and the coast lieth Northeast and by East, and Southwest and by West. From Cananea to the river of Saint Francisco are fifteene leagues, and the coast lieth Northeast and Southwest. There is a little Island, which hath as
it were two bayes, and a good rode, and is in 26 degrees and a quarter, and towards the maine it is hie and craggie.
From San Francisco to Boca de Overniron are 26 leagues, and the coast lieth North & South. Also thou must marke that the river of San Francisco hath a great entrance, and 3 small Islands, and to seaward it hath a good road; and the maine is high and craggie.
From this Boca de Overniron to Ilha de Arvoredo thou hast no great markes be observed: but this Boca is a very great bay, and this bay is deepe within the Island, and is a good road, and hath many Islands, and standeth in 28 degrees. And to the North of this Island under the point there is a good road: and there is no other road hereabout but this, and it is under the Island.
From hence thou shalt have sight of the Isle called Santa Catharina, which is a great Island about eight or nine leagues long, and lieth North and South. And hard by even with this Hand is Porto de Patos, which standeth in 29 degrees. And from Porto de Patos to Porto de Don Roderigo are ten or eleven leagues: and the coast lieth North and South. And from Porto de Don Roderigo to Laguna are 5 leagues. And this is a good harbour for all winds, except the Northeast wind.
From the Laguna to the river called Rio de Martin de Sousa are 42 leagues. And the coast is somthing 84
high, & lieth Northeast & by North, & Southwest & by South: and it hath an Island 2 leagues into the sea, pn 72+ j where ships may ride well. And from the river of Martin de Sousa to Rio de San Pedro are 52 leagues, Rio de S. and the coast lieth Northeast and Southwest.	Pedro.
From this river of San Pedro there lieth a point of sand a good league off and more, and it lyeth on the Southwest side of the port. And from thence to Cabo Caio de Santa de Santa Maria are 42 leagues: and the coast lieth Maria. Northeast and Southwest, and all is lowe land.
Also on the Southeast side of Cabo de Santa Maria
there lyeth an Isle two leagues off into the sea, and it hath a good harborough betwixt it and the mayne. And note that the mayne is lowe land.
The cape of Santa Maria standeth in 35 degrees, and at the point thereof it hath an Island a league into the sea.
