Of certaine Englishmen to the river of Plate situate in 35 degrees of southerly latitude: together with an exact ruttier and description thereof, and of all the maine branches, so farre as they are navigable with small barkes, by which river the Spaniards of late yeeres have frequented an exceeding rich trade to and from Peru, and the mines of Potossi, as also to Chili, and other places.
A report of a voyage of two Englishmen in the company of Sebastian Cabota, intended for the Malucos by the Streights of Magellan, but perfourmed onely to the river of Plate in April 1527. Taken out of the information of M. Robert Thorne to Doctor Ley Ambassadour for King Henry the eight, to Charles the Emperour, touching the discovery of the Malucos by the North.
N a flote of three ships and a caravell This was the that went from this citie of Sivil armed wherein by the merchants of it, which departed grg^the^er in Aprill last past, I and my partner of Plate, have one thousand foure hundred duckets i526- Two that wee employed in the sayd fleete, En&slimen principally for that two Englishmen,
friendes of mine, which are somewhat learned in Cos- discovery. mographie, should goe in the same ships, to bring me certaine relation of the situation of the countrey, and to be expert in the navigation of those seas, and there
to have informations of many other things, and advise that I desire to know especially. Seeing in those quarters are ships and mariners of that countrey, and cardes by which they saile, though much unlike ours: that they should procure to have the sayd cards, and learne how they understand them, and especially to know what navigation they have for those Islands Northwards and Northeastward.
The Islands of For if from the said Islands the sea doth extend the Maltuos. w;thout interposition of land to saile from the North point to the Northeast point one thousand seven hundred or one thousand eight hundred leagues, they The New should come to The new round Islands that we dis-found Hands covered & so we should be neerer to the said Spicerie the English, by almost 200 leagues then the Emperour, or the king of Portugall are.
.