The last voyage of the worshipfull M. Thomas Candish esquire, intended for the South sea, the Philippinas, and the coast of China, with 3. tall ships, and two barks: Written by M. John Jane, a man of good observation, im-ployed in the same, and many other voyages.
He 26. of August 1591, wee departed from Plimmouth with 3. tall ships, and two barkes, The Galeon wherein M. Candish went himselfe being Admiral, The Roebucke vice admirall whereof M. Cocke was Captaine, The Desire Rere-admirall whereof was Captaine M. John
Davis (with whom and for whose sake I went this voyage) The Blacke pinnesse, and a barke of M. Adrian Gilbert, whereof M. Randolfe Cotton * was Captaine.
The 29. of November wee fell with the bay of Salvador upon the coast of Brasil 12. leagues on this side Cabo Frio, where wee were becalmed untill the second of
December: at which time wee tooke a small barke bound
for the River of Plate with sugar, haberdash wares, and Negros. The Master of this barke brought us unto an yle called Placencia thirtie leagues West from Cabo Frio, where wee arrived the fift of December, and rifled sixe or 3^9
A.D.
1591.
The Spaniard taken in at Port Famine.
Baya de Salvador.
Abarketaken.
Cabo Frio.
Isla de Placencia.
seven houses inhabited by Portugales. The 11. wee departed from this place, and the fourteenth we arrived Isla de S. Se- at the yle of S. Sebastian: from whence M. Cocke and bastian. Captaine Davis presently departed with The Desire and the blacke pinnesse, for the taking of the towne of Santos. The 15. at evening we anckered at the barre of Santos, from whence we departed with our boates to the towne ; and the next morning about nine of the clocke wee came to Santos, where being discovered, wee were inforced to land with 24. gentlemen, our long boat being farre a sterne, by which expedition wee tooke all the people or the towne at Masse both men and women, whom wee kept all that day in the Church as prisoners. The cause why master Candish desired to take this towne was to The towne of supply his great wants: For being in Santos, and having Santos taken. jn qUje^ possession, wee stood in assurance to supply all our needes in great abundance. But such was the negligence of our governour master Cocke, that the Indians were suffered to carry out of the towne whatsover they would in open viewe, and no man did controll them: and the next day after wee had wonne the towne, our prisoners were all set at libertie, onely foure poore olde men were kept as pawnes to supply our wants. Thus in three dayes the towne that was able to furnish such another Fleete with all kinde of necessaries, was left unto us nakedly bare, without people and provision.
Eight or tenne dayes after master Candish himselfe came thither, where hee remained untill the 22. of January, seeking by intreatie to have that, whereof we were once possessed. But in conclusion wee departed out of the towne through extreeme want of victuali, not being able any longer to live there, and were glad to receive a fewe canisters or baskets of Cassavi meale; so that in every condition wee went worse furnished from the towne, then when wee came unto it. The 22. of The towne of January we departed from Santos, and burnt Sant Vincent to the ground- The 24. we set saile, shaping our course ' for the Streights of Magellan.
390
LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH a.d. 1592.
The seventh of February we had a very great storme, and the eighth our Fleet was separated by the fury of the tempest. Then our Captaine called unto him the Master of our ship, whom hee found to be a very honest and sufficient man, and conferring with him he concluded to goe for Port Desire, which is in the Southerly latitude of 48. degrees; hoping that the general would come thither, because that in his first voyage he had found great reliefe there. For our Captaine could never get any direction what course to take in any such extremities, though many times hee had intreated for it, as often I have heard him with griefe report. In sayling to this port by good chance we met with The Roe-bucke, wherein master Cocke had endured great extremities, and had lost his boate, and therefore desired our Captaine to keepe him company, for hee was in very desperate case. Our Captaine hoised out his boate, and went abord him to know his estate, and returning tolde us the hardnesse  thereof, and desired the Master and all the company to be carefull in all their watches not to loose The Roe-bucke, and so wee both arrived at Port Desire the sixth They arrive at of March.	Port Desire.
The 16. of March The Blacke pinnesse came unto us, but master Gilberts barke came not, but returned home Adrian to England, having their Captaine abord the Roe-bucke Gilberts barke without any provision more then the apparell that hee England wore, who came from thence abord our ship to remaine with our Captaine, by reason of the great friendship betweene them. The 18. the Galeon came into the road, and master Candish came into the harborough in a boat which he had made at sea; for his long boat and lighthorseman were lost at sea, as also a pinnesse which he had A pinnesse built at Santos: and being abord The Desire he tolde our built at Santos. Captaine of all his extremities, and spake most hardly of his company, and of divers gentlemen that were with him, purposing no more to goe abord his owne ship, but to stay in The Desire. We all sorrowed to heare such hard speaches of our good friends ; but having spoken with the
391
gentlemen of the Galeon wee found them faithfull, honest, and resolute in proceeding, although it pleased our general otherwise to conceive of them.	.
The 20. of March we departed from Port Desire, master Candish being in The Desire with us. The eighth They fall with of April 1592, wee fell with the Streights of Magellan, induring many furious stormes betweene Port Desire and an. the Streight. The 14. we passed through the first Streight. The 16. we passed the second Streight being ten leagues distant from the first. The 18. we doubled Cape Froward, which Cape lieth in 53. degrees and J. The 21. wee were inforced by the fury of the weather to put into a small coove with our ships, 4. leagues from the said Cape, upon the South shoare, where wee remained until the 15. of May. In the which time wee indured extreeme stormes, with perpetual snow, where many of our men died with cursed famine, and miserable cold, not having wherewith to cover their bodies, nor to fill their bellies, but living by muskles, water, and weeds of the sea, with a small reliefe of the ships store in meale sometimes. And all the sicke men in the Galeon were most uncharitably put a shore into the woods in the snowe, raine, and cold, when men of good health could skarcely indure it, where they ended their lives in the highest degree of misery, master Candish all this while being abord the Desire. In these great extremities of snow and cold, doubting what the ende would be, he asked our Captaines opinion, because he was a man that had good experience of the Northwest parts, in his 3. severall discoveries that way, imployed by the marchants of London. Our Captaine tolde him, that this snow was a matter of no long continuance, and gave him sufficient reason for it, and that thereby hee could not much be prejudiced or hindered in his proceeding. Notwithstanding he called together all the company, and tolde them, that he purposed not to stay in the Streights, but to depart upon some other voyage, or else to returne againe for Brasil. But his resolution was to goe for the Cape of
392
LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH	a.d.
. .	W-
Buena Esperanza. The company answered, that if it pleased him, they did desire to stay Gods favour for a winde, and to indure all hardnesse whatsoever, rather then to give over the voyage, considering they had bene here but a smal time, and because they were within fourtie leagues of the South sea, it grieved them now to returne ; notwithstanding what hee purposed that they would performe. So hee concluded to goe for the Cape of Buena Esperanza, and to give over this voyage. Then our Captaine, after master Candish was come abord The Desire from talking with the company, tolde him, that if it pleased him to consider the great extremitie of his estate, the slendernesse of his provisions, with the weake-nesse of his men, it was no course for him to proceed in that newe enterprize : for if the rest of your shippes (said hee) bee furnished answerable to this, it is impossible to performe your determination: for wee have no more sailes then mastes, no victuals, no ground-tackling, no cordage more then is over head, and among seventie and five persons, there is but the Master alone that can order the shippe, and but foureteene saylers. The rest are gentlemen, servingmen, and artificers. Therefore it will be a desperate case to take so hard an enterprize in hand. These perswasions did our Captaine not onely use to master Candish, but also to master Cocke. In fine upon a petition delivered in writing by the chiefe of the whole company, the general determined to depart out of The Streights of Magellan, and to returne againe for Santos in Brasil.
So the 15. of May wee set saile, the general then 234^ returne being in the Galeon. The eighteenth wee were free of . the btreights, but at Cape broward it was our hard hap Magellan. to have our boat sunke at our sterne in the night, and to be split and sore spoiled, and to loose all our ores.
The twentieth of May being thwart of Port Desire, in The occasion of the night the general altered his course, as we suppose, by which occasion wee lost him: for in the evening he ' stood close by a winde to seaward, having the winde at
393
Northnortheast, and wee standing the same way, the winde not altering, could not the next day see him: so that  we then perswaded our selves, that hee was gone for Port Desire to relieve himselfe, or that hee had sustained some mischance at Sea, and was gone thither to remedy it. Whereupon our Captaine called the Generals men unto him, with the rest, and asked their opinion what was to bee done. Every one sayde, that they thought that the general was gone for Port Desire. Then the Master being the Generals man, and carefull of his masters service, as also of good judgement in Sea-matters, tolde the company howe dangerous it was to goe for Port Desire, if wee shoulde there misse the general: for (saide hee) wee have no boate to lande our selves, nor any cables nor anckers that I dare trust in so quicke streames as are there: yet in all likelyhood concluding that the general was gone thither, wee stayed our course for Port Desire, and by chance mette with the Blacke pinnesse, which had likewise lost the Fleete, being in very miserable case: so wee both concluded to seeke the general at Port Desire.
They come The sixe and twentieth day of May we came to Port againe to Port Desire, where not finding our general, as we hoped, ?fMathe2(> being most slenderly victualled, without sailes, boate, V ay' ores, nailes, cordage, and all other necessaries for our reliefe, wee were strooken into a deadly sorrow. But referring all to the providence and fatherly protection of the Almightie, wee entered the harbour, and by Gods quiet road, favour found a place of quiet roade, which before wee knewe not. Having mored our shippe with the pinnesses boate, wee landed upon the South shore, where wee found A poole of	a standing poole of fresh water, which by estimation might
fresh water on ho[de some tenne tunnes, whereby wee were greatly ^PortDe^ire comforted. From this poole wee fet more then fortie tunnes of water, and yet we left the poole as full as wee found it. And because at our first being in this harbour wee were at this place and found no water, we perswaded our selves that God had sent it for our reliefe. Also
394
LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH a.d.
J592-there were such extraordinary low ebbes as we had never scene, whereby wee got muskles in great plentie. Likewise God sent about our shippes great abundance of Abundance of smelts, so that with hookes made of pinnes every man ms^^s ani caught as many as hee coulde eate: by which meanes wee ' preserved our ships victuals, and spent not any during the time of our abode here.
Our Captaine and Master falling into the consideration of our estate and dispatch to goe to the general, found our wants so great, as that in a moneth wee coulde not fitte our shippe to set saile. For wee must needes set up a Smiths forge, to make boltes, spikes, and nayles, besides the repairing of our other wants. Whereupon they concluded it to bee their best course to take the pinnesse, and to furnish her with the best of the company, and to goe to the general with all expedition, leaving the shippe and the rest of the company untill the Generals returne; for hee had vowed to our Captaine, that hee would returne againe for the Streights, as hee had tolde us. The Captaine and Master of the pinnesse being the Generals men were well contented with the motion.
But the general having in our shippe two most dangerous pestilent fellowes, when they heard of this determination mutm3-they utterly misliked it, and in secret dealt with the company of both shippes, vehemently perswading them, that our Captaine and Master would leave them in the countrey to bee devoured of the Canibals, and that they were mercilesse and without charitie: whereupon the whole company joyned in secret with them in a night to murther our Captaine and Master, with my selfe, and all those which they thought were their friendes. There were markes taken in his caben howe to kill him with muskets through the shippes side, and bullets made of silver for the execution, if their other purposes should faile. All agreed hereunto, except it were the bote-swaine of our shippe, who when hee knew the matter, and the slender ground thereof, reveiled it unto our Master, and so to the Captaine. Then the matter being
39S
called in question, those two most murtherous fellowes were found out, whose names were Charles Parker and Edward Smith.	.
The Captaine being thus hardly beset in perill of famine, and in danger of murthering, was constrained to use lenitie, and by courteous meanes to pacific this furie: shewing, that to doe the general service, unto whom he had vowed faith in this action, was the cause why hee purposed to goe unto him in the pinnesse, considering, that the pinnesse was so necessary a thing for him, as that hee could not bee without her, because hee was fearefull of the shore in so great shippes. Whereupon all cried out with cursing and swearing, that the pinnesse should not goe unlesse the shippe went. Then the Captaine desired them to shewe themselves Christians, and not so blasphemously to behave themselves, without regard or thankesgiving to God for their great deliverance, and present sustenance bestowed upon them, alleaging many examples of Gods sharpe punishment for such ingratitude; and withall promised to doe any thing that might stand with their good liking. By which gentle speaches the matter was pacified, and the Captaine and Master at the request of the company were content to forgive this great treachery of Parker and Smith, who after many admonitions concluded in these wordes: The Lord judge be- tweene you and mee : which after came to a most sharpe revenge even by the punishment of the Almightie. Thus by a generail consent it was concluded not to depart, but there to stay for the Generals returne. Then our Captaine and Master, seeing that they could not doe the general that service which they desired, made a motion to the companie, that they would lay downe under their handes the losing of the general, with the extremities wherein we then stoode: whereunto they consented, and wrote under their hands as followeth.
.