The Letters patents of King Henry the seventh granted unto John Cabot and his three sons , Lewis , Sebastian , and Sancius for the dis — coverie of new and unknown lands . 
 141 
 142 
 The same in English . 
 HEnry by the grace of God , king of England and France , and lord of Ireland , to all to whom these presents shall come , Greeting . 
 Be it known that we have given and granted , and by these presents do give and grant for us and our heirs , to our well-beloved John Cabot citizen of Venice , to Lewis , Sebastian , and Santius , sons of the said John , and to the heirs of them , and every of them , and their deputies , full and free authority , leave , and power to sail to all parts , countries' , and seas of the East , of the West , and of the North , under our banners and ensigns , with five ships of what burden or quantity soever they be , and as many mariners or men as they will have with them in the said ships , upon their own proper costs and charges , to seek out , discover , and find whatsoever isles , countries' , regions or provinces of the heathen and infidels whatsoever they be , and in what part of the world soever they be , which before this time have be unknown to all Christians : we have granted to them , and also to every of them , the heirs of them , and every of them , and their deputies , and have given them licence to set up our banners and ensigns in every village , town , castle , isle , or main land of them newly found . And that the aforesaid John and his sons , or their heirs and assigns may subdue , occupy and possess all such towns , cities , castles and isles of them found , which they can subdue , occupy and possess , as our vassals , and lieutenants , getting unto us the rule , title , and jurisdic - 
 M3 
 1495 - 
 Bristol thought the meetest port for Westerns discoveries . 
 Freedoms from custom . 
 cion of the same villages , towns , castles , & firm land so found . Yet so that the aforesaid John , and his sons and heirs , and their deputies , be held and bounden of all the fruits , profits , gains , and commodities growing of such navigation , for every their voyage , as often as they shall arrive at our port of Bristoll ( at the which port they shall be bound and held only to arrive ) all manner of necessary costs and charges by them made , being deducted , to pay unto us in wares or money the fift part of the capital ! gain so got . We giving and granting unto them and to their heirs and deputies , that they shall be free from all paying of customs of all and singular such merchandise as they shall bring with them from those places so newly found . And moreover , we have given and granted to them , their heirs and deputies , that all the firm lands , isles , villages , towns , castles and places whatsoever they be that they shall chance to find , may not of any other of our subject's be frequented or visited without the licence of the foresaid John and his sons , and their deputies , under pain of forfeiture aswell of their ships as of all and singular goods of all them that shall presume to sail to those places so found . Willing , and most straightly commanding all and singular our subject's aswell on land as on sea , to give good assistance to the aforesaid John and his sons and deputies , and that as well in arming and furnishing their ships or vessels , as in provision of food , and in buying of victuals for their money , and all other things by them to be provided necessary for the said navigation , they do give them all their help and favour . In witness whereof we have caused to be made these our Letters patents . Witness our self at Westminster the fift day of March , in the eleventh year of our reign . 
 . 