And extract taken out of the map of Sebastian Cabot , cut by Clement Adams , concerning his discovery of the West Indies , which is to be seen in her Majesties privy gallery at Westminster , and in many other ancient merchant's houses . 
 Nno Domini 1497 Joannes Cabotus Venetus , & Sebastianus illius filius eam terram fecerunt perviam , quam nullus prius adire ausus fuit , die 24 Junii , circiter horam quintam bene mane . Hanc autem appellavit Terram primum visam , credo quod ex mari in eam partem 
 primum oculos injecerat . Nam quae ex adverso sita est insula , eam appellavit insulam Divi Joannis , hac opinor ratione , qudd aperta fuit eo die qui est sacer Divo Joanni Baptistae : Hujus incolae pelles animalium , exuviasque ferarum pro indumentis habent , easque tanti faciunt , vn 145 K 
 quanti nos vestes preciosissimas . Cum bellum gerunt , utuntur arcu , sagittis , hastis , spiculis , clavis ligneis & fundis . Tellus sterilis est , neque ullos fructus aflert , ex quo fit , ut ursis albo colore , & cervis inusitatae apud nos magnitudinis referta sit : piscibus abundat , iisque sane magnis , quales sunt lupi marini , & quos salmons vulgus appellat ; soleae autem reperiuntur tam longae , ut ulnae mensuram excedant . Imprimis autem magna est copia eorum piscium , quos vulgari sermon vocant Bacallaos . Gignuntur in ea insula accipitres ita nigri , ut corvorum similitudinem mirum in modum exprimant , perdices autem & aquilae sunt nigri coloris . 
 The same in English . 
 IN the year of our Lord 1497 John Cabot a Venetian , and his son Sebastian ( with and English fleet set out from Bristoll ) discovered that land which no man before that time had attempted , on the 24 of June , about five of the clock early in the morning . This land he called Prima vista , that is to say , First seen , because as I suppose it was that part whereof they had the first sighed from sea . That Island which lies out before the land , he called the Island of S. John upon this occasion , as I think , because it was discovered upon the day of John the Baptist . The inhabitants of this Island use to wear beasts skins , and have them in as great estimation as we have our finest garments . In their wars they use bows , arrows , pikes , darts , wooden clubs , and slings . The soil is barren in some places , & yields little fruit , but it is full of white bears ; and stags far greater then ours . It yields plenty of fish , and those very great , as seals , and those which commonly we call salmons : there are soles also above a yard in length : but especially there is great abundance of that kind of fish which the Savages call baccalaos . In the same Island also there breed hauks , but they are so black that they are very like to ravens , as also their partridges , and eagles , which are in like sort black . 
 146 
 A discourse of Sebastian Cabot touching his discovery of part of the West India out of England in the time of king Henry the seventh , used to Galeacius Butrigarius the Popes Legate in Spaine , and reported by the said Legate in this sort . 
 ) e you not understand said he ( speaking to certain Gentlemen of Venice ) how to pass to India towards the Northwest , as did of late a citizen of Venice , so valiant a man , and so well practised in all things pertaining to navigations , and the science of Cosmography , that at this present he 
 hath not his like in Spaine , insomuch that for his virtues he is preferred above all other pilots that sail to the West Indies , who may not pass thither without his licence , and is therefore called Piloto mayor , that is , the grand Pilot. And when we said that we knew him not , he proceeded , saying , that being certain years in the city of Sivil , and desirous to have some knowledge of the navigations of the Spanyards , it was told him that there was in the city a valiant man , a Venetian born nam Sebastian Cabot , who had the charge of those things , being and expert man in that science , and one that could make Cards for the Sea with his own hand , and that by this report , seeking his acquaintance , he found him a very gentle person , who entertained him friendly , and showed him many things , and among other a large Map of the world , with certain particular Navigations , as well of the Portugals , as of the Spaniards , and that he spoke further unto him to this effect . 
 This discourse is taken out of the second volume of the voyages of Baptista Ramusius . 
 Sebastian Cabota Pilot mayor of Spaine . 
 When my father departed from Venice many years since to dwell in England , to follow the trade of merchandises , he took me with him to the city of London , while I was very young , yet having nevertheless some knowledge of letters of humanity , and of the Sphere . 
 147 
 The second voyage of Cabot to the land of Brasil , and Rio the plate a. 
 And when my father died in that time when news were brought that DONE Christopher Colonus Genuese had discovered the coasts of India , whereof was great talk in all the Court of king Henry the 7. who then reigned , insomuch that all men with great admiration affirmed it to be a thing more divine then humane , to sail by the West into the East where spices grow , by a way that was never known before , by this fame and report there increased in my heart a great flame of desire to attempt some notable thing . And understanding by reason of the Sphere , that if I should sail by way of thee Northwest , I should by a shorter tract come into India , I thereupon caused the King to be advertised of my devise , who immediately commanded two Carvels to be furnished with all things aPPERTAINING to the voyage , which was as far as 1 remember in the year 1496. in the beginning of Summer . I began therefore to sail towards the Northwest , not thinking to find any other land then that of Cathay , & from thence to turn towards India , but after certain days I found that the land ran towards the North , which was to me a great displeasure . Nevertheless , sailing along by the coast to see if I could find any gulf that turned , I found the land still continent to the 56. degree under our Pole . And seeing that there the coast turned towards the East , despairing to find the passage , I turned back again , and sailed down by the coast of that land towards the Equinoctial ( ever with intent to find the said passage to India ) and came to that part of this firm land which is now called Florida , where my victuals failing , I departed from thence and returned into England , where I found great tumults among the people , and preparation for wars in Scotland : by reason whereof there was no more consideration had to this voyage . 
 Whereupon I went into Spaine to the Catholic king , and Queen Elizabeth , which being advertised what I had done , entertained me , and at their charges furnished certain ships , wherewith they caused me to sail to dis-148 
 cover the coasts of Brasile , where I found and exceeding great and large river nam at this present Rio de la plata , that is , the river of silver , into the which I sailed and followed it into the firm land , more then sixe score leagues , finding it every where very fair , and inhabited with infinite people , which with admiration came running daily to our ships . Into this River run so many other rivers , that it is in manner incredible . 
 After this I made many other voyages , which I now pretermit , and waxing old , I give my self to rest from such travels , because there are now many young and lusty Pilots and Mariners of good experience , by whose for - office of wardnesse I do rejoice in the fruit of my labours , and ’ " ‘ Merest with the charge of this office , as you see . 
 The foresaid Baptista Ramusius in his preface to the thirde volume of the Navigations , writeth thus of Sebastian Cabot . 
 N the latter part of this volume are put certain relations of John de Vararzana , Florentine , and of a great captain a Frenchman , and the two voyages of Jaques Cartier a Briton , who sailed unto the land situate in 50. degrees of Latitude to the North , which is called New 
 France , which lands hitherto are not thoroughly known , whither they do join with the firm land of Florida and Nova Hispania , or whither they be separated and divided all by the Sea as Hands : and whither that by that way one may go by Sea unto the country of Cathaia . As many years passed it was written unto me by Sebastian Cabota our Country man a Venetian , a man of great experience , and very rare in the art of Navigation , and the knowledge of Cosmography , who sailed along and beyond this land of New France , at the charges of King Henry the seventh king of England : and he advertised me , that having sailed a long time West and by North , 
 The great fro-babilitleofthis Northwest passage . 
 149 
 beyond those Hands unto the Latitude of 67. degrees and and half , under the North pole , and at the n . day of June finding still the open Sea without any manner of impediment , he thought verily by that way to have passed on still the way to Cathaia , which is in the East , and would have done it , if the mutiny of the shipmaster and 
 Mariners had not hindered him and made him to return homeward from that place . But it seems that God doth yet still reserve this great enterprise for some great prince to discover this voyage of Cathaia by this way , which for the bringing of the Spiceries from India into Europe , were the most easy and shortest of all other ways hitherto found out . And surely this enterprise would be the most glorious , and of most importance of all other that can be imagined to make his name great , and fame immortali , to all ages to come , far more then can be done by any of all these great troubles and wars e among the miserable 
 Christian people . 
 which daily are used in Europ 
 Another testimony of the voyage of Sebastian Cabot to the West and Northwest , taken out of the sixt Chapter of the third Decade of Peter Martyr of Angleria . 
 Crutatus est oras glaciales Sebastianus quidam Cabotus genere Venetus , said a parentibus in . Britanniam insulam tendentibus ( uti moris est Venetorum , qui commercii causa terrarum omnium sunt hospites ) transportatus pene infans . Duo is sibi navigia , propria pecunia in Brit - 
 annia ipsa instruxit , & prim tendens cum hominibus tercentum ad Septentrionem donec etiam Julio mense vastas repererit glaciales moles pelago natantes , & lucem fere perpetuam , tellure tamen libera , gelu liquefacto : quare coactus fuit , uti ait , vela vertere & occidentem sequi : tetenditque tantum ad meridiem littore seize in - 
 * 5° 
 curvante , ut Herculei freti latitudinis fere gradus aequarit : ad occidentemque profectus tantum est ut Cubam Insulam a laeva , longitudine graduum pene parem , habuerit . Is ea littora percurrens , quae Baccalaos appelavit , eosdem se reperisse aquarum , sed lenes delapsus ad Occidentem ait , quos Castellani , meridionales suas regiones adnavigantes , inveniunt . Ergo non modd verisimilius , sed necessario concludendum est , vastos inter utramque ignotam hactenus tellurem jacere hiatus , qui viam praebeant aquis ab orient cadentibus in Occidentem . Quas arbitror impulsu coelorum circulariter agi in gyrum circa terrae globum , non autem Demogorgone anhelante vomi , absorberique ut nonnulli senserunt , quod influxu , & refluxu forsan assentire daretur . Baccalaos , Cabotus ipse terras illas appellavit , eo quod in earum pelago tantam reperierit magnorum quorundam piscium , tynnos aemulantium , sic vocatorum ab indigenis , multitudinem , ut etiam illi interdum navigia detardarent . Earum Regionum homines pellibus tantum coopertos reperiebat , rationis haudquaquam expertes . Ursorum inesse regionibus copiam ingentem refert , qui & ipsi piscibus vescantur . Inter densa namque piscium illorum agmina seize immergunt ursi , & singulos singuli complexos , unguibusque inter squammas immissis in terram raptant & comedunt . Propterea minime noxios hominibus visos esse ait . Orichalcum in plerisque locis se vidisse apud incolas praedicat . Familiarem habeo domi Cobotum ipsum , & contubernalem intejdum . Vocatus namque ex Britannia a Rege nostro Catholico , post Henrici Majoris Britanniae Regis mortem , concurialis noster est , expectatque indies , ut navigia sibi parentur , quibus arcanum hoc naturae latens jam tandem detegatur . 
 The same in English . 
 THese North Seas have be searched by one Sebastian Cabot , a Venetian born , whom being yet but in manner and infant , his parents carried with them into England , having occasion to resort thither for trade of mar - 
 The people of Island say the Sea and ice sets also West . 
 Jonas Arngrimus . 
 chandise , as is the manner of the Venetians to leave no part of the world unsearched to obtain riches . He therefore furnished two ships in England at his own charges , and first with 300 men directed his course so far towards the North pole , that even in the month of July he found monstrous heaps of ice swimming on the sea , and in manner continual day light , yet saw he the land in that tract free from ice , which had be melted by the heat of the Sun . Thus seeing such heaps of ice before him , he was inforced to turn his sails and follow the West , so coasting still by the shore , that he was thereby brought so far into the South , by reason of the land bending so much Southwards , that it was there almost equal in latitude , with the sea Fretum Herculeum , having the Northpole elevate in manner in the same degree . He sailed likewise in this tract so far towards the West , that he had the Island of Cuba on his left hand , in manner in the same degree of longitude . As he traveled by the coasts of this great land , ( which he nam Baccalaos ) he says that he found the like course of the waters towards the West , but the same to run more softly and gently then the swift waters which the Spaniards found in their Navigations Southward . Wherefore it is not only more like to be true , but ought also of necessity to be concluded that between both the lands hitherto unknown , there should be certain great open places whereby the waters should thus continually pass from the East unto the West : which waters I suppose to be driven about the globe of the earth by the un-cessant moving and impulsion of the heavens , and not to be swallowed up and cast up again by the breathing of Demogorgon , as some have imagined , because they see the seas by increase and decrease to ebb and flow . Sebastian Cabot himself nam those lands Baccalaos , because that in the Seas thereabouts he found so great multitudes of certain big fish much like unto Tunies , ( which the inhabitants call Baccalaos ) that they sometime stayed his ships . He found also the people of those 
 * 5* 
 regions covered with beasts skins , yet not without the use of reason . He also says there is great plenty of Bears in those regions which use to eat fish : for ing themselves into you water , where they perceive a multitude of these fish to lie , they fasten their claws in their scales , and so draw them to land and eat them , so ( as he says ) the Bears being thus satisfied with fish , are not noisome to men . He declareth further , that in many places of these Regions he saw great plenty of Copper among the inhabitants . Cabot is my very friend , whom I use familiarly , and delight to have him sometime keep me company in mine own house . For being called out of England by the commandment of the Catholic King of Castile , after the death of King Henry the seventh of that name King of England , he was made one of our council and Assistants , as touching the affairs of the new Indies , looking for ships daily to be furnished for him to discover this hid secret of Nature . 
 The testimony of Francis Lopez de Gomara a Spaniard , in the fourth Chapter of the second Book of his general history of the West Indies concerning the first discovery of a great part of the West Indies , to wit , from 58. to 38. degrees of latitude , by Sebastian Cabota out of England . 
 E which brought most certain news of the country & people of Baccalaos , says Gomara , was Sebastian Cabote a Venetian , which rigged up two ships at the cost of K. Henry the 7. of England , having great desire to traffic for the spices as the Portingals did . He carried 
 with him 300. men , and took the way towards Island from beyond the Cape of Labrador , until he found himself in 58. degrees and better . He made relation 153 
 Copper found in many places by Cabote . 
 that in the month of July it was so cold , and the ice so great , that he durst not pass any further : that the days were very long , in a manner without any night , and for that short night that they had , it was very clear . Cabot feeling the cold , turned towards the West , refreshing himself at Baccalaos : and afterwards he sailed along the coast unto 38. degrees , and from thence he shaped his course to return into England . 
 A note of Sebastian Cabots first discovery of part of the Indies taken out of the latter part of Robert Fabians Chronicle not hitherto printed , which is in the custody of M. John Stow a diligent preserver of Antiquities . 
 Cabots voyage from Bristol wherein he discovered ' Newfound land , y the Northern parts of that land , and from thence as far almost as Florida . 
 N the 13. year of K. Henry the 7. ( by means of one John Cabot a Venetian which made himself very expert and cunning in knowledge of the circuit of the world and Hands of the same , as by a Sea carded and other demonstrations reasonable he showed ) the king caused 
 to man and victuali a ship at Bristow , to search for and Island , which he said he knew well was rich , and replenished with great commodities : Which ship thus manned and victualed at the kings cost , diverse Merchants of London ventured in her small stocks , being in her as chief patron the said Venetian . And in the company of the said ship , sailed also out of Bristow three or foure small ships fraught with sleight and gross merchandizes , as course cloth , caps , laces , points & other trifles . And so departed from Bristow in the beginning of May , of whom in this Majors time returned no tidings . 
 154 
 Of three Savages which Cabot brought home and presented unto the King in the fourteenth year of his reign , mentioned by the foresaid Robert Fabian . 
 His year also were brought unto the king three men taken in the Newfound Island that before I spoke of , in William Purchas time being Mayor : These were clothed in beasts skins , & did eat raw flesh , and spoke such speech that no man could understand them , and in their 
 demeanour like to bruit beasts , whom the King kept a time after . Of the which upon two years after , I saw two appareled after the manner of Englishmen in Westminster palace , which that time I could not discern from Englishmen , till I was learned what they were , but as for speech , I herd none of them utter one word . 
 . 