The discovery of the Isles of Frisland , Iseland , Engroneland , Estotiland , Drogeo and Icaria : made by two brothers , namely M. Nicholas Zeno , and M. Antonio his brother : Gathered out of their letters by M. Francisco Marcolino . 
 N the year of our Lord 1200 there was in the City of Venice a famous Gentleman , nam Messer Marino Zeno , who for his great virtue and singular wisdom , was called and elected governor in certain common wealths of Italy : in the administration whereof he boar him - 
 self so discreetly , that he was beloved of all men , and his name greatly reverenced of those that never knew or saw his person . And among sundry his worthy works , this is recorded of him , that he pacified certain grievous civil dissensions that arose among the citizens of Verona : whereas otherwise , if by his grave advice and great diligence they had not be prevented , the matter was likely to break out into hight broils of 
 445 
 war . He was the first Podesta , or Ruler , that the Common wealth of Venice appointed in Constantinople in the year 1205 when our state had rule thereof with the French Barons . This Gentleman had a son nam Messer Pietro , who was the father of the Duke Rinieri , which Duke dying without issue , made his heir M. Andrea , the son of M. Marco his brother . This M. Andrea was Captain general and Procurator , a man of great reputation for many rare parts , that were in him . He had a son M. Rinieri , a worthy Senator and prudent Counselor : of whom descended M. Pietro Captain general of the league of the Christians against the Turkes , who was called Dragon , for that in his shield , in stead of a Manfrone which was his arms at the first , he bore a Dragon . He was father to M. Carlo II grande the famous Procurator and Captain generail against the Genowayes in those cruel wars , when as almost all the chief Princes of Europe did oppugn and seek to overthrow our Empire and liberty , wherein by his great valiancy and prowess , as Furius Camillus delivered Rome , so he delivered his country from the present peril it was in , being ready to become a prey and spoil unto the enemy : wherefore he was afterwards surnamed the Lion , and for and eternal remembrance of his fortitude and valiant exploits he gave the Lion in his arms . M. Carlo had two brothers . M. Nicolo , the knight and M. Antonio , the father of M. Dragon , of whom issued M. Caterino , the father M. Pietro da i Grocecchieri . This M. Pietro had sons M. Caterino , that died the last year , being brother unto M. Francisco , M. Carlo , M. Battista , and M. Vincenzo : Which M. Caterino was father to M. Nicolo , that is yet living . 
 Now M. Nicolo , the knight , being a man of great courage , after this aforesaid Genouan war of Chioggia that troubled so our predecessors , entered into a great desire and fancy to see the fashions of the world and to travel and acquaint himself with the manners of 446 
 sundry nations and learn their languages , whereby afterwards upon occasions he might be the better able to do service to his country , and purchase to himself credit and honour . Wherefore he caused a ship to be made , and having furnished her at his proper charges ( as he was very wealthy ) he departed out of our seas , and passing the straits of Gibraltar , he sailed for certain days upon the Ocean , keeping his course still to the Northwards , with intent to see England and Flanders . Where being assaulted in those Seas by a terrible tempest , he was so tossed for the space of many days with the sea and wind , that he knew not where he was , till at length he discovered land , and not being able any longer to sustain the violence of the tempest the ship was cast away upon the Isle of The ship of 
 Friseland . The men were saved , and most part of the 
 goods that were in the ship . And this was in the year pa^^island 1380. The inhabitants of the Island came running in jn Anno 
 great multitudes with weapons to set upon M. Nicolo 1380. 
 and his men , who being soar weatherbeaten and overlaboured at sea , and not knowing in what part of the world they were , were not able to make any resistance at all , much less to defend themselves courageously , as it behooved them in such a dangerous case . And they should have be doubtless very discourteously entreated and cruelly handled , if by good hap there had not been foreign hard by the place a prince with armed people . Who understanding that there was even at that present a iandwith great ship cast away upon the Island , came runing at armed men , the noise and outcries that they made against our when M . Zeno poor Mariners , and driving away the inhabitants , sufferetl s , fp-spake in Latin and asked them what they were and came unt0 im from whence they came , and perceiving that they came and spoke from Italy and that they were men of the said Country , Latin . he was surprised with marvelous great joy . Wherefore promising them all , that they should receive no discourtesy , and that they were come into a place where they should be well used and very welcome , he took 
 447 
 Ziehmm prince of Porland or Duke of Zorani . 
 Frisland the King ofNor-wayes . 
 them into his protection upon his faith . This was a great Lord , and possessed certain Islands called Porland , lying on the South side of Frisland , being the richest and most populous of all those parts , his name was Zichmni : and beside the said little Islands , he was Duke of Sorani , lying over against Scotland . 
 Of these North parts I thought good to draw the copy of a Sea card , which among other antiquities I have in my house , which although it be rotten through many years , yet it falls out indifferent well : and to those that are delighted in these things , it may serve for some light to the understanding of that , which without it cannot so easily be conceived . Zichmni being Lord of those Sygnories ( as is said ) was a very warlike and valiant man and above all things famous in Sea causes . And having the year before given the overthrow to the king of Norway , who was Lord of the Island , being desirous to win fame by feats of arms , he was come on land with his men to give the attempt for the winning of Frisland , which is and Island much bigger then Ireland . Wherefore seeing that M. Nicolo was a man of judgement & discretion , and very expert both in sea matters and martial affairs , he gave him commission to go aboard his Navy with all his men , charging the captain to honour him and in all things to use his counsel . 
 This Navy of Zichmni was of thirteene vessels , whereof two only were rowed with oars , the rest small barks and one ship , with the which they sailed to the Westwards and with little pains won Ledovo and Ilofe and diverse other small Islands : and turning into a bay called Sudero , in the haven of the town nam Sanestol , they took certain small barks laden with fish . And here they found Zichmni , who came by land with his army conquering all the country as he went : they stayed here but a while , and led on their course to the Westwards till they came to the other Cape of the gulf or bay , then turning again , 448 
 they found certain Islands and broken lands which they reduced all unto the Signory & possession of Zichmni . These seas , forasmuch as they sailed , were in manner nothing but sholds & rocks , in so much that if M. Nicolo and the Venetian mariners had not be their Pilots , the whole fleet in judgement of all that were in it , had be cast away , so small was the skill of Zichmnis men , in respect of ours , who had be trained up in the art and practice of Navigation all the days of their life . Now the fleet having done such things as are declared , the Captain , by the counsel of M. Nicolo , determined to go a land , at a town called Bondendon , to understand what success Zichmni had in his wars : where they herd to their great content , that he had fought a great battle and put to flight the army of his enemy : by reason of which victory , they sent Ambassadors from all parts of the Island to yield the country up into his hands , taking down their ensigns in every town and castle : they thought good to stay in that place for his coming , it being reported for certain that flee would be there very shortly . At his coming there was great congratulation and many signs of gladness showed , as well for the victory by land , as for that by sea : for the which the Venetians were honoured and extolled of all men , in such sort that there was no talk but of them , and of the great valour of M. Nicolo . Wherefore the prince , who was a great favourer of valiant men and especially of those that could behave themselves well at sea , caused M. Nicolo to be brought before him , and after having commended him with many honourable speeches , and praised his great industry and dexterity of wit , by the which two things he acknowledged himself to have received and inestimable benefit , as the saving of his fleet and the winning of many places without any great trouble , he made him knight , and rewarded his men N. leno , with many rich & bountiful gifts . Then departing from made knight thence they went in triumphing manner towards Frisland , ^tchmni . 
 vn 449 2 F 
 the chief city of that Island , situate on the Southeast side of the Isle , within a gulf , as there are many in that S^FS laden Island . In this gulf or bay there is such great abundance risknd “ for ta^en > at manY ships are laden therewith to serve 
 Flanders , Flanders , Britain , England , Scotland , Norway , and Den-Britam , Eng - mark , and by this trade they gather great wealth . land , Scotland , And thus much is taken out of a letter , that M. Nicolo Norway and sent to M Antonio his brother , requesting that he would But not to be seek some means to come to him . Wherefore he who proved that had as great desire to travail as his brother , bought a ever any came ship , and directed his course that way : & after he had lettersentb sa^ed a great while and escaped many dangers , he arrived M. N. Zeno^ at length in safety with M. Nicolo , who received him very from Frisland joyfully , for that he was his brother not only in flesh and to his brother blood , but also in valour and good qualities . M. Antonio 
 remained in Frisland and dwelled there for the space of The end of years , 4 years with M. Nicolo , and 10 years alone . the first Where they came in such grace and favour with the 
 letter . Prince , that he made M. Nicolo Captain of his Navy , 
 and with great preparation of war they were sent forth for the enterprise of Estland , which lies upon the coast between Frisland and Norway , where they did many damages : but hearing that the king of Norway was coming towards them with a great fleet , they departed with such a terrible flaw of wind , that they were driven upon certain sholds : were a great part of their ships were cast away , the rest were saved upon Grisland , a great Island but dishabited . The king of Norway his fleet being taken with the same storm , did utterly perish in those seas : Whereof Zichmni having notice , by a ship of his enemies that was cast by chance upon Grisland , having repaired his fleet , and perceiving himself Northerly near unto the Islands , determined to set upon Island , which together with the rest , was subject to the king of Norway : but he found the country so well fortified and defended , that his fleet being so small , and very ill appointed both of weapons and men , he was glad to retire . And so he left that enterprise without performing 
 45° 
 NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO a.d. c . 1380-90 . 
 any thing at all : and in the same channels he assaulted the other Isles called Island , which are seven , Talas , Broas , Iscant , Trans , Mimant , Dambere , and Bres : and having spoiled them all , he built a fort in Bres , where he left M. Nicolo , with certain small barks and men and munition . And now thinking he had done well for this voyage , with those few ships which were left he returned safe into Frisland . M. Nicolo remaining now in Bres , determined in the spring to go forth and discover land : wherefore arming out three small barks in the month of July , he sailed to the Northwards , and arrived in Engroneland . Where he found a Monastery of Engnneland . Friars , of the order of the Predicators , and a Church . 
 dedicated to Saint Thomas , hard by a hill that casts a ™ forth fire , like Vesuvius and Etna . 
 There is a fountain of hight burning water with the which they heat the Church of the Monastery and the Friars chambers , it comes also into the kitchen so boiling hight , that they use no other fire to dress their meat : and putting their bread into brass pots without any water , it does bake as it were in and hight oven . They have also small gardens covered over in the winter time , which being watered with this water , are defended from the force of the snow and cold , which in those parts being situate far under the pole , is very extreme , and by this means they produce flowers and fruits and herbs of sundry sorts , even as in other temperate countries in their seasons , in such sort that the rude and savage people of those parts seeing these supernatural ! effects , do take those Friars for Gods , and bring them many presents , as chickens , flesh , and diverse other things , and have them all in great reverence as Lords . When the frost and snow is great , they heat their houses in manner beforesaid , and will by letting in the water or opening the windows , at and instant temper the heat and cold at their pleasure . In the buildings of the Monastery they use no other matter but that which is ministered unto them by the fire : for they take the burn - 
 45 * 
 ing stones that are cast out as it were sparkles or cinders at the fiery mouth of the hill , and when they are most inflamed , cast water upon them , whereby they are dissolved and become excellent white lime and so tough that being contrived in building it lasteth for ever . And the very sparkles after the fire is out of them do serve in stead of stones to make walls and vauts : for being once cold they will never dissolve or break , except they be cut with some iron tool , and the vauts that are made of them are so light that they need no sustentaccle or prop to hold them up , and they will endure continually very fair and whole . By reason of these great commodities , the Friars have made there so many buildings and walls that it is a wonder to see . The coverts or roofs of their houses for the most part are made in manner following : first they raise up the wall up to his full height , then they make it inclining or bowing in by little and little in form of a vault . But they are not greatly troubled with rain in those parts , because the climate ( as I have said ) is extreme cold : for the first snow being fallen , it thaweth no more for the space of nine months , for so long dureth their winter . They feed of the flesh of wild foul and of fish : for whereas 
 the warm water falls into the sea , there is a large and wide haven , which by reason of the heat of the water , doth never freeze all the winter , by means whereof there is such concourse and flocks of sea foul and such abundance of fish , that they take thereof infinite multitudes , whereby they maintain a great number of people round about , which they keep in continual work , both in building and taking of fowls and fish , and in a thousand other necessary affairs and business about the Monastery . 
 Their houses are built about the hill on every side , in form round , and 25 foot broad , and in mounting upward they go narrower and narrower , leaving at the top a little hold , whereat the air comes in to give light to the house , and the flore of the house is so hight , 45 2 
 that being within they feel no cold at all . Hither in the Summer time come many barks from the Islands their about , and from the cape above Norway , and from Trondon , and bring to the Friars all manner of things that may be desired , taking in change thereof fish , which they dry in the sun or in the cold , & skins of diverse kinds of beasts . For the which they have wood to burr ne and timber very artificially carved , and corn , and cloth to make them apparel . For in change of the two aforesaid commodities all the nations bordering round about them covet to traffic with them , and so they without any travel or expenses have that which they desire . To this Monastery resort Friars of Norway , of Suetia and of other countries' , but the most part are of Island . There are continually in that part many barks , which are kept in there by reason of the sea being frozen , waiting for the spring of the year to dissolve the ice . The fishers boats are made like unto a weavers shuttle : taking the skins of fish , they fashion them with the bones of the same fish , and sowing them together in many doubles they make them so sure and substantial , that it is miraculous to see , how in tempests they will shut themselves close within and let the sea and wind carry 
 Trade in summertime from Trondon to S. Thomas Friars in Groneland . Resort of Friars from Norway and Sueden , to the Monastery in Engroneland , called S. Tho. 
 M. Frobishet brought these kind of boats from these parts into England , 
 them they care not whither , without any fear either of breaking or drowning . And if they chance to be driven upon any rocks , they remain found without the least bruise in the world : & they have as it were a sleeve in the bottom , which is tied fast in the middle , and when there comes any water into the boat , they put it into the one half of the sleeve , then fastening the end thereof with two pieces of wood and losing the band beneath , they convey the water forth of the boat : and this they do as often as they have occasion , without any peril or impediment at all . 
 Moreover , the water of the Monastery , being of sulphurous or brimstony nature , is conveyed into the lodgings of the principali Friars by certain vessels of brass , tin , or stone , so hight that it heateth the place 
 453 
 In the Monastery of Saint Thomas most of them spoke the Latin tongue . The end of the 2. letter . 
 N. Zeno died in Frisland . 
 as it were a stove , not carrying with it any stink or other noisome smell . 
 Beside this they have another conveyance to bring hight water with a wall under the ground , to the end it should not freeze , unto the middle of the court , where it falls into a great vessel of brass that stands in the middle of a boiling fountain , and this is to heat their water to drink & to water their gardens , & thus they have from the hill the greatest commodities that may be wished : and so these Friars employ all their travail and study for the most part in trimming their gardens and in making fair and beautiful buildings , but especially handsome and commodious : neither are they destitute of ingenious and painful artificers for the purpose ; for they give very large payment , and to them that bring them fruits and seeds they are very bountiful , and give they care not what . So that there is great resort of workmen and master's in diverse faculties , by reason of the good gains and large allowance that is there . 
 The most of them speak the Latin tongue , and specially the superiors and principals of the Monastery . And this is as much as is known of Engroneland , which is all by the relation of M. Nicolo , who makes also particular description of a river that he discovered , as is to be seen in the card that I drew . And in the end M. Nicolo , not being used & acquainted with these cruel colds , fell sick , and a little while after returned into Frisland , where he died . He left behind him in Venice , two sons , M. Giovanni and M. Toma , who had two sons , M. Nicolo the father of the famous Cardinal Zeno , and M. Pietro of whom descended the other Zenos , that are living at this day . 
 Now M. Nicolo being dead , M. Antonio succeeded him both in his goods , and in his dignities and honour : and albeit he attempted diverse ways , and made great supplication , he could never obtain licence to return into his country . For Zichmni , being a man of great 454 
 c . 1380-90 . courage and valour , had determined to make himself Lord of the sea . Wherefore using always the counsel and service of M. Antonio , he determined to send him with certain barks to the Westwards , for that towards those parts , some of his fishermen had discovered certain Islands very rich and populous : which discovery M. Antonio , in a letter to his brother M. Carlo , recounteth from point to point in this manner , saving that we have changed some old words , leaving the matter entire as it was . 
 Sixe and twentie years ago there departed foure fisher boats , the which , a mighty tempest arising , were tossed for the space of many days very desperately upon the Sea , when at length , the tempest ceasing , and the weather waxing fair , they discovered and Island called Estotiland , The discovery lying to the Westwards above 1000 Miles from Frisland , °f Estotiland upon the which one of the boats was cast away , and sixe men that were in it were taken of the inhabitants and men taken . brought into a fair and populous city , where the king of the place sent for many interpreters , but there was none could be found that understood the language of the fishermen , except one that spoke Latin , who was also cast by Fishermen of chance upon the same Island , who in the behalf of the Ensland king asked them what countrymen they were : and so s ? ea e Ratine . understanding their case , rehearsed it unto the king , who willed that they should tarry in the country : wherefore they obeying his commandment , for that they could not otherwise do , dwelled five years in the Island , & learned Sixe were five the language , and one of them was in diverse parts of the Island , and reporteths that it is a very rich country , Qne abounding with all the commodities of the world , and fishers of Fris-that it is little less then Island , but far more fruitful , land , reporteth having in the middle thereof a very high mountain , from the which there spring foure rivers that pass through rich the whole country . ing with all 
 The inhabitants are very witty people , and have all the commodi-artes and faculties , as we have : and it is credible that in time passed they have had traffic with our men , for Kor ’ 
 455 
 Abundance of glide . Trade from Estotiland , to Engoneland : Skins , brimstone , and fitch : glde , corn , and beer , or ale . Many cities and castles . 
 A country called Drogo . 
 The 6 fishermen of Frisland only saved , by showing the manner to take fish . 
 The chiefest of the 6fishers , specifiedbefore and his companions . 
 he said , that he saw Latin books in the kings Library , which they at this present do not understand : they have a peculiar language , and letters or characters to themselves . They have mines of all manner of metals , but especial they abound with gold . They have their trade in Engroneland , from whence they bring furs , brimstone & pitch : and he says , that to the Southwards , there is a great populous country very rich of gold . They sow corn , and make beer and ale , which is a kind of drink that North people do use as we do wine . They have mighty great woods , they make their buildings with walls , & there are many cities and castles . They built small barks and have sailing , but they have not the load stone , nor know not the use of the compass . Wherefore these fishers were had in great estimation , insomuch that the king sent them with twelve barks to the Southwards to a country which they call Drogio : but in their voyage they had such contrary weather , that they thought to have perished in the sea : but escaping that cruel death , they fell into another more cruel : for they were taken in the country and the most part of them eaten by the Savage people , which fed upon men flesh , as the sweetest meat in their judgements that is . 
 But that fisher with his fellows showing them the manner of taking fish with nets , saved their lives : and would go every day a fishing to the sea and in fresh rivers , and take great abundance of fish and give it to the chief men of the country , whereby he gate himself so great favour , that he was very well beloved and honoured of every one . 
 The fame of this man being spread abroad in the country , there was a Lord there by , that was very desirous to have him with him , and to see how he used his miraculous art of catching fish , in so much that he made war with the other Lord with whom he was before , and in the end prevailing , for that he was more mighty and a better warrior , the fisherman was sent unto him with the rest of his company . And for the 456 
 space of thirteene years that he dwelled in those parts , he says , that he was sent in this order to more then 25 Lords , for they had continual war among themselves , this Lord with that Lord , and he with another , only to have him to dwell with them : so that wandering up and down the country without any certain abided in one place , he knew almost all those parts . He says , that it is a very great country & as it were a new world : the people are very rude and void of all goodness , they go all naked so that they are miserably vexed with cold , neither have they the wit to cover their bodies with beasts skins which they take in hunting , they have no kind of metal , they live by hunting , they carry certain lances of wood made sharp at the point , they have bows , you strings whereof are made of beasts skins : they are very fierce people , they make cruel wars one with another , and eat one another , they have governors & certain laws very diverse among themselves . But the farther to the Southwestwards , the more civility there is , the air being somewhat temperate , so that there they have cities and temples to idols , wherein they sacrifice men and afterwards eat them , they have there some knowledge and use of gold and silver . 
 Now this fisherman having dwelled so many years in those countries' purposed , if it were possible , to return home into his country , but his companions despairing ever to see it again , let him go in Gods name , and they kept themselves where they were . Wherefore he bidding them farewell , fled through the woods towards Drogio , and was very well received of the Lord that dwelled next to that place ; who knew him and was a great enemy of the other Lord ; and so running from one Lord to another , being those by whom he had passed before , after long time & many travels he came at length to Drogio , where he dwelled three years . When as by good fortune he herd by the inhabitants , that there were certain boats arrived upon the coast : wherefore entering into good hope to accomplish his intent , he went 
 457 
 A.D. 
 c . 1380-90 . 
 In the space of 13 years he served 15 lords of Drogio . 
 He returned from Estotiland to Frisland . 
 Zichmni minded to send M. Antonio Zeno with a fleet towards those parts of Estotiland . 
 The 4. letter . The fisherman died that should have be interpreter . 
 Certain mariners taken in his steed , which came with him from Estotiland . 
 Isle llofe . 
 to the sea side , and asking them of what country they were ; they answered of Estotiland , whereat he was exceeding glad , , and requested that they would take him in to them , which they did very willingly , and for that he had the language of the country , and there was none that could speak it , they used him for their interpreter . 
 And afterwards he frequented that trade with them in such sort , that he became very rich , and so furnishing out a bark of his own , he returned into Frislande , where he made report unto this Lord of that wealthy country . 
 And he is thoroughly credited because of the mariners , who approve many strange things , that he reporteth to be true . Wherefore this Lord is resolved to send me forth with a fleet towards those parts , and there are so many that desire to go in the voyage , for the novelty and strangeness of the thing , that I think we shall be very strongly appointed , without any public expense at all . And this is the tenor of the letter before mentioned , which I have here set down to give intelligence of another voyage that M. Antonio made , being set out with many barks , and men , notwithstanding he was not captain , as he had thought at the first he should : for Zichmni went in his own person : and concerning that matter I have a letter in form following . 
 One great preparation for the voyage of Estotiland was begun in and unlucky hour : for three days before our departure the fisherman died that should have be our guide : notwithstanding this Lord would not give over the enterprise , but instead of the fisherman took certain mariners that returned out of the Island with him : and so making our Navigation to the Westwards , we discovered certain Islands subject to Frisland , and having passed certain shelves we stayed at Ledovo for the space of 7 days to refresh our selves , and to furnish the fleet with necessary provision . Departing from thence we arrived the first of July at the Isle of llofe : and for that the wind made for us , we stayed not there , but passed 458 
 forth , and being upon the main sea , there arose immediately a cruel tempest , wherewith for eight days space we were miserably vexed , not knowing where we were : & a great part of the barks were cast away , afterwards the weather waxing fair , we gathered up the broken pieces of the barks that were lost , and sailing with a prosperous wind we discovered land at West . Wherefore keeping our course directly upon it , we arrived in a good and safe harbour , where we saw and infinite company of people ready in arms , come running very furiously to the water side , as it were for defence of the Island . Wherefore Zichmni causing his men to make signs of peace unto them , they sent io men unto us that could speak ten languages , but we could understand none of them , except one that was of Island . He being brought before our prince and asked , what was the name of the Island , and what people inhabited it , & who governed it , answered , that the Island was called Icaria , and that all the kings that reigned there , were called Icari , after the name of the first king of that place , which as they say was the son of Dedalus king of Scotland , who conquered that Island , left his son there for king , and left them those laws that they retain to this present , and after this , he desiring to sail further , in a great tempest that arose , was drowned , wherefore for a memoriali of his 
 c . 1380-90 . 
 Tdchrnni his discovery of the Island Icaria . 
 And Island man in Icari . 
 The kings of Icaria called Icari after the name of the first king of that place , who as they report , was son to Deda - 
 death , they call those seas yet , the Icarian Sea , and the lus king of kings of the Island Icari , and for that they were contented 
 with that state , which God had given them , neither Icartan Sea‘ would they altar one jote of their laws and customs , they would not receive any stranger : wherefore they requested our prince , that he would not seek to violate their laws , which they had received from that king of worthy memory and observed very duly to that present : which if he did attempt , it would redound to his manifest destruction , they being all resolutely bent rather to leave their life , then to lose in any respect the use of their laws . Notwithstanding , that we should not think they did altogether refuse conversation and traffic with other 
 459 
 The people of I carta desirous of the Italian tongue . 
 Ten men of ten sundry nations . 
 Infinite multitudes of armed men in Icaria . 
 Zichmni departed from Icaria Westwards . 
 men , they told us for conclusion that they would willingly receive one of our men , & prefer him to be one of the chief among them , only to learn my language the Italian tongue , and to be informed of our manners and customs , as they had already received those other ten of ten sundry nations , that came into their Island . To these things our Prince answered nothing at all , but causing his men to seek some good harbrough , he made signs as though he would depart , and sailing round about the Island , he espied at length a harbrough on the East side of the Island , where he put in with all his Fleet : the mariners went on land to take in wood and water , which they did with as great speed as they could , doubting lest they should be assaulted by the inhabitants , as it fell out in deed , for those that dwelled thereabouts , making signs unto the other with fire and smoke , put themselves presently in arms and the other coming to them , they came all running down to the sea side upon our men , with bows and arrows , and other weapons , so that many were slain and diverse soar wounded . And we made signs of peace unto them , but it was to no purpose , for their rage increased more and more , as though they had fought for land and living . Wherefore we were forced to depart , and to sail along in a great circuit about the Island , being always accompanied upon the hill tops & the sea coasts with and infinite number of armed men : and so doubling the Cape of the Island towards the North , we found many great sholdes , among the which for the space of ten days we were in continual danger of losing our whole fleet , but that it pleased God all that while to send us fair weather . Wherefore proceeding on till we came to the East cape , we saw the inhabitants still on the hill tops and by the sea coast keep with us , and in making great outcries and shooting at us a far ofF , they uttered their old spiteful affection towards us . Wherefore we determined to stay in some safe harbour , and see if we might speak once again with the Islander , but our 460 
 NICHOLAS AND ANTONIO ZENO a.d. c . 1380-90 . 
 determination was frustrate : for the people more like unto beasts then men , stood continually in arms with intent to beatrice us back , if we should come on land . Wherefore Zichmni seeing he could not prevail , and thinking if he should have persevered and followed obstinately his purpose , their victuals would have failed them , he departed with a fair wind and sailed sixe days to the Westwards , but the wind changing to the Southwest , and the sea waxing rough , we sailing 4 days with the wind the powp , and at length discovering land , were afraid to approach never unto it , the sea being grown , and we not knowing what land it was : but God so provided for us , that the wind ceasing there came a great calm . Wherefore some of our company rowing to land with oars , returned 8c brought us news to our great comfort , that they had found a very good country and a better harbour : upon which news we towed our ships and small barks to land , and being entered into the harbour , we saw a far off a great mountain , that cast forth smoke , which gave us good hope that we should find some inhabitants in the Island , neither would Zichmni rest , although it were a great way off , but sent 100 soldiers to search the country and bring report 100 men sent what people they were that inhabited it , 8c in the mean t0 discontent ™ time they took in wood and water for the provision of countrey-the fleet , and catched great store of fish and sea foul and found such abundance of birds eggs , that our men that were half famished , were filled therewithal ! . While we were riding here , began the month of June , at which time the air in the Island was so temperate and pleasant as is impossible to express : but when we could see no people at all , we suspected greatly that this pleasant place loo soui was desolate and dishabited . We gave name to the diers retw^eii heaven calling it Trin , and the point that stretched out which had into the sea , we called Capo de Trin. The 100 soldiers be through that were sent forth , 8 days after returned , and brought the lsland , word that they had be through the Island and at thee and mountain , and that the smoke was a natural thing pro - found . 
 461 
 M. Antonio ' Leno , made chief captain of those ships which went back to Frisland . 
 ceding from a great fire that was in the bottom of the hill , and that there was a spring from which issued a certain water like pitch which ran into the sea , and that thereabouts dwelled great multitudes of people half wild , hiding themselves in caves of the ground , of small stature , and very fearful ; for as soon as they saw them they fled into their holes , and that there was a great river and a very good and safe harbour . Zichmni being thus informed , and seeing that it had a wholesome and pure air , and a very fruitful soil and fair rivers , with sundry commodities , fell into such liking of the place , that he determined to inhabit it , and built there a city . But his people being weary and faint with long and tedious travel began to murmur , saying that they would return into their country , for that the winter was at hand , and if they entered into the harbour , they should not be able to come out again before the next Summer . Wherefore he retaining only the barks with Oars and such as were willing to stay with him , sent all the rest with the ships back again , and willed that I , ( though unwilling ) should be their captain . I therefore departing , because I could not otherwise choose , sailed for the space of twenty days to the Eastwards without sighed of any land ; then turning my course towards the Southeast , in 5. days I discovered land , and found my self upon the Isle of Neome , and knowing the country , I perceived I was passed Island : wherefore taking in some fresh victuals of the inhabitants being subject to Zichmni , I sailed with a fair wind in three days to Frisland , where the people , who thought they had lost their prince , because of his long absence , in this our voyage received us very joyfully . 
 What followed after this letter I know not but by conjecture , which I gather out of a piece of another letter , which I will set down here underneath : That Zichmni built a town in the port of the Island that he discovered , and that he searched the country very diligently and discovered it all , and also the rivers on 462 
 c . 1380-90 . both sides of Engroneland , for that I see it particularly described in the sea carded , but the discourse or narration is lost . The beginning of the letter is thus . 
 Concerning those things that you desire to know of The 5 letter . me , as of the men and their manners and customs , of the beasts , and of the countries adjoining , I have made thereof a particular book , which by Gods help I will bring with me : wherein I have described the country , the monstrous fish , the customs and laws of Frisland , Island , Estland , the kingdom of Norway , Estotiland , Drogio , and in the end the life of M. Nicolo , the knight our brother , with the discovery which he made , and the state of Groneland . I have also written the life and acts of Zichmni , a prince as worthy of immortali memory , as any that ever lived , for his great valiancy and singular humanity , wherein I have described the discovery of Engroneland on both sides , and the city that he built . Therefore I will speak no further hereof in this letter , hoping to be with you very shortly , and to satisfy you in sundry other things by word of mouth . 
 All these letters were written by M. Antonio to Messer Carlo his brother : and it grieveth me , that the book and diverse other writings concerning these purposes , are miserably lost : for being but a child when they came to my hands , and not knowing what they were , ( as the manner of children is ) I tore them , and rend them in pieces , which now I cannot call to remembrance but to my exceeding great grief . Notwithstanding , that the memory of so many good things should not be lost : whatsoever I could get of this matter , I have disposed and put in order in the former discourse , to the end that this age might be partly satisfied , to the which we are more beholding for the great discoveries made in those parts , then to any other of the time past , being most studious of the new relations and discoveries of strange countries , made by the great minds , and industry of our ancestors . 
 For the more credit and confirmation of the former 
 463 
 The second discovery thereof . 
 Historic of Messer Nicolas and Messer Antonio Zeni ( which for some few respects may perhaps be called in question ) I have here annexed the judgement of that famous Cosmographer Abraham Ortelius , or rather the yielding and submitting of his judgement thereunto : who in his Theatrum Orbis , fol. 6. next before the map of Mar deal Zur , borroweth proof and authority out of this relation , to show that the Northeast part of America called Estotiland , and in the original always affirmed to be and Island , was about the year 1390 discovered by the aforesaid Venetian Gendeman Messer Antonio Zeno , above 100 years before ever Christopher Columbus set sail for those Western Regions ; and that the Northern Seas were even then sailed by our Europaean Pilots through the help of the loadstone : with diverse other particulars concerning the customs , religion and wealth of the Southern Americans , which are most evidendy confirmed by all the late and modern Spanish Histories of Nueva Espanna and Peru. 
 . 