A relation of Richard Clarke of Weymouth , master of the ship called the Delight , going for the discovery of Norembega , with Sir Humfrey Gilbert 1583. Written in excuse of that fault of casting away the ship and men , imputed to his oversight . 
 Eparting out of Saint Johns Harbour in the Newfound land the 20. of August unto Cape Raz , from thence we directed our course unto the lie of Sablon or the Isle of Sand , which the general Sir Humfrey Gilbert would willingly have seen . But when we came within 
 twentie leagues of the Isle of Sablon , we fell to contro - 2O-versie of our course . The general came up in his Frigate and demanded of me Richard Clarke master of 7 ’ 
 the Admiral what course was best to keep : I said that Westsouthwest was best : because the wind was at South and night at hand and unknown sands lay off a great way from the land . The general commanded me to go Westnorthwest . I told him again that the Isle of Sablon was Westnorthwest and but 15. [ ni - i64-1 leagues ofF , and that he should be upon the Island before day , if he went that course . The general said , my of Jablon . reckoning was untrue , and charged me in her Majesties HereinClarke name , and as I would show my self in her Country , untruly to follow him that night . I fearing his threatenings , si > because he presented her Majesties person , did follow Gilbert . his commandment , and about seven of the clock in The ship cast the morning the ship stroke on ground , where she ay on was cast away . Then the general went off to Sea , the 2 course that I would have had them gone before , and August^ saw the ship cast away men and all , and was not able 1583. to save a man , for there was not water upon the sand for either of them much less for the Admiral , that drew fourteene foot . Now as God would the day 
 Sixteene gate into the ship-boat . 
 Master Hed-lyes ungodly proposition . 
 before it was very calm , and a Soldier of the ship had killed some foul with his piece , and some of the company desired me that they might hoist out the boat to recover the foul , which I granted them : and when they came aboard they did not hoist it in againb that night . And when the ship was cast away the boat was a stern being in burden one tun and and half : there was left in the boat one oar and nothing else . Some of the company could swim , and recovered the boat and did hale in out of the water as many men as they could : among the rest they had a care to watch for the Captain or the Master : They happened on my self being the master , but could never see the Captain : Then they hailed into the boat as many men as they could in number 16. whose names hereafter I will rehearse . And when the 16. were in the boat , some had small remembrance , and some had none : for they did not make account to live , but to prolong their lives as long as it pleased God , and looked every moment of and hour when the Sea would eat them up , the boat being so little and so many men in her , and so foul weather , that it was not possible for a ship to brook half a coarse of sail . Thus while we remained two days and two nights , and that we saw it pleased God our boat lived in the Sea ( although we had nothing to help us withal but one oar , which we kept up the boat withal upon the Sea , and so went even as the Sea would drive us ) there was in our company one master Hedly that put forth this question to me the Master . I do see that it does please God , that our boat liveth in the Sea , and it may please God that some of us may come to the land if our boat were not overladen . Let us make sixteene lots , and those foure that have the foure shortest lots we will cast overboard preserving the Master among us all . I replied unto him , saying , no , we will live and die together . Master Hedly asked me if my remembrance were good : I answered I gave God praise it was good , and knew how far I was ofF the 
 land , and was in hope to come to the land within two or three days , and said they were but threescore leagues from the land , ( when they were seventie ) all to put them in comfort . Thus we continued the third and fourth day without any sustenance , save only the weeds that swam in the Sea , and salt water to drink . The fifth day Hedly died and another moreover : then we desired all to die : for in all these five days and five nights we saw the Sun but once and the Star but one night , it was so foul weather . Thus we did remain the sixt day : then we were very weak and wished all to die saving only my self which did comfort them and promised they should come soon to land by the help of God : but the company were very importunate , and were in doubt they should never come to land , but that I promised them the seventh day they should come to shore , or else they should cast me over board : which did happen true the seventh day , for at eleven of the clock we had sighed - of the land , and at 3. of They came on the clock at afternoon we came on land . All these land they day seven days and seven nights , the wind kept continually South . If the wind had in the mean time shifted upon any other point , we had never come to land : we were no sooner come to the land , but the wind came clean contrary at North within half and hour after our arrival . 
 But we were so weak that one could scarcely help another of us out of the boat , yet with much ado being come all on shore we kneeled down upon our knees and gave God praise that he had dealt so mercifully with us . Afterwards those which were strongest help their fellows unto a fresh brook , where we satisfied our selves with water and berries very well . There Thefruitfal-were of all sorts of berries plenty , & as goodly a Coun - ness^ trey as ever I saw : we found a very raire plain ^ewfoun / Champion ground that a man might see very far every land . way : by the Sea side was here and there a little wood with goodly trees as good as ever I saw any in Norway , able to mast any ship , of pine trees , spruse trees , 
 Foureteene of our men brought out of New fund land in a ship of St. John the Lui , . 
 fir , and very great birch trees . Where we came on land we made a little house with boughs , where we rested all that night . In the morning I divided the company three and three to go every way to see what food they could find to sustain themselves , and appointed them to meet there all again at noon with such food as they could get . As we went aboard we found great store of peason as good as any we have in England : a man would think they had be sowed there . We rested there three days and three nights and lived very well with peas and berries , we nam the place Saint Laurence , because it was a very goodly river like the river of S. Laurence in Canada , and we found it very full of Salmons . When we had well rested our selves we rowed our boat along the shore , thinking to have gone to the Grande Bay to have come home with some Spanyards which are yearly there to kill the Whale : And when we were hungry or a thirst we put our boat on land and gathered peas and berries . Thus we rowed our boat along the shore five days : about which time we came to a very goodly river that ran far up into the Country and saw very goodly grown trees of all sorts . There we happened upon a ship of Saint John de Luz , which ship brought us into Biskay to and Harbour called The Passage . The Master of the ship was our great friend , or else we had be put to death if he had not kept our counsel . For when the visitors came aboard , as it is the order in Spaine , they demanding what we were , he said we were poor fishermen that had cast away our ship in Newfound land , and so the visitors inquired no more of the matter at that time . Assoon as night was come he put us on land and bade us shift for our selves . Then had we but tenne or twelve miles into France , which we went that night , and then cared not for the Spanyard . And so shortly after we came into England towards the end of the year 1583. 
 . 