The voyage of the Grace of Bristol of M. Rice Jones , a Bark of thirty five Tons , up into the Bay of Saint Laurence to the Northwest of Newefoundland , as far as the Isle of Assumption or Natiscotec , for the barbs or fynnes of Whale's and train Oil , made by Silvester Wyet , Shipmaster of Bristoll . 
 Ee departed with the aforesaid Bark manned with twelve men for the place aforesaid from ----- Bristoll the 4 of Aprill 1594. and fell with Cape d’Espere on the coast of Newefoundland the nineteneth of May in the height of 47. We went thence for Cape Raz , being distant from thence 18 or 19 leagues , the very same day . 
 162 
 * 594-The 20. day we were thwart of Cape Raz . Cape Raz . 
 Then we set our course Northwest for Cape S. Marry , Cape S. 
 which is distant from Cape Raz 19 leagues , and is on the Marie-Eastside of the great Bay of Placentia almost at the entry thereof . 
 From thence we shaped our course for the Islands of 
 S. Pedro passing by the broken Islands of the Martyers : The Islands of and when we were thwart of the said Isles of the Martyers the Martym-our course to the Isles of S. Pedro was West and by The Isles of North . In these Isles of S. Pedro there is a fair harbour , s - Peter ' which we went into with our bark , and found there 2 ships of Sibiburo fishing for Cod : where we stayed 2 days , and took in balest for our ship . There are as fair and tall fir trees growing therein , as in any other part of Newfoundland . Then we departed thence , and as we came out of the harbours mouth we laid the ship upon the lee , and in 2 hours space we took with our hooks 3 or 4 hundred great Cods for our provision of our ship . 
 Then we departed from the Isle of S. Pedro to enter into the gulf of S. Laurence between Cape Briton and the said Isle , and set our course West North West , and fell with Cape de Rey which we found to be distant from Cape de Rey. the Isles of S. Pedro 42 leagues . From Cape de Rey to 
 Cape de Angullie we set our course Northnorthwest being Cape the An-distant thence 12 or 13 leagues . From the Cape de Angullie into the Bay of S. George we ran Northeast The bay of and by East some 18 or 19 leagues . 5amt GeorSe - 
 In this bay of Saint George , we found the wracks of 2 great Biskaine ships , which had be cast away three years before : where we had some seven or eight hundred Whale fins , and some iron bolts and chains of their main shrouds & before shrouds : all their train was beaten out with the weather but the cask remained still . Some part of the commodities were spoiled by tumbling down of the cliffs of the hills , which covered part of the cask , and the greater part of those Whale fins , which we understood to be there by foure Spaniards which escaped , & were brought to S. John de Luz . Here we 
 163 
 They land on the Isle of Natiscotec . 
 found the houses of the Savages , made of fir trees bound together in the top and set round like a Dovehouse , and covered with the barks of fir trees , we found also some part of their victuals , which were Deeres flesh roasted upon wooden spits at the fire , & a dish made of a ryne of a tree , sowed together with the sinews of the Dear , wherein was oil of the Dear . There were also fowls called Cormorants , which they had plucked and made ready to have dressed , and there we found a wooden spoon of their making . And we discerned the tracks of the feet of some fortie or fiftie men , women and children . 
 When we had dispatched our business in this bay of S. George and stayed there ten days , we departed for the Northern point of the said bay , which is nine or ten leagues broad . Then being informed , that the Whale's which are deadly wounded in the grand Bay , and yet escape the fisher for a time , are wont usually to shoot themselves on shore on the Isle of Assumption , or Natiscotec , which lies in the very mouth of the great river that runneth up to Canada , we shaped our course over to that long Isle of Natiscotec , and we found the distance of the way to the Estermost end thereof to be about forty foure leagues : and it stands in the latitude of 49. Here we arrived about the midst of June at the East end , and road in eighteene fathom water in fair white sand and very good ankerage , and for trial heaved a line overboorde and found wonderful fair and great Cod fish : we went also seven of us on shore and found there exceeding fair great woods of tall fir trees , and herd and saw store of land and sea fowls , and saw the footing of diverse beasts in the sand when we were on shore . From the Easter end we went to the Norther side of the Island , which we perceived to be but narrow in respect of the length thereof . And after we had searched two days and a night for the Whale's which were wounded which we hoped to have found there , and missed of our purpose , we returned back to the South - 
 164 
 ward , and were within one league of the Island of Penguin , which lies South from the Eastermost part of Natiscotec some twelve leagues . From the Isle of Penguin we shaped our course for Cape de Rey and had sighed of the Island of Cape Briton : then returned we by the Isles of Saint Pedro , and so came into the Bay of Placentia , and arrived in the Easterside thereof some ten leagues up within the Bay among the fishermen of Saint John de Luz and of Sibiburo and of Biskay , which were to the number of threescore and odd sails , whereof eight ships only were Spaniardes , of whom we were very well used and they wished heartily for peace between them and us . There the men of Saint John and Sibiburo men bestowed two pinnaces on us to make up our voyage with fish . Then we departed over to the other side of the Bay , where we arrived in and harbour which is called Pesmarck , and there made our stage and fished so long , that in the end the Savages came , and in the night , when our men were at rest , cut both our pinnace and our ships boat away to our great hindrance of our voyage , yet it was our good fortune to find out our pinnaces and get them again . Then for fear of a shrewder turn of the Savages , we departed for Cape Saint Marry , and having passed Cape Raz , we passed Northward fourteene leagues and arrived in Farrillon , and finding there two and twentie sails of Englishmen , we made up our fishing voyage to the full in that harbour the twentieth foure of August to our good content : and departing thence we arrived first in Comb and stayed there a seven night , and afterwards in Hungrod in the river of Bristoll by the grace of God the 24 of September . 1594. 
 . 