The first relation of Jaques Carthier of S. Malo , of the new land called New France , newly discovered in the year of our Lord 1534. 
 How M. Jaques Carthier departed from the Port of S. Malo , with two ships , and came to Newfoundland , and how he entered into the Port of Buona Vista . 
 Fter that Sir Charles of Mouy knight lord of Meylleraye , & Viceadmiral of France had caused the Captains , Master's , and Mariners of the ships to be sworn to behave themselves truly and faithfully in the service of the most Christian King of France , under the charge of the said 
 Carthier , upon the twentieth day of April 1534 , we departed from the Port of S. Malo with two ships of threescore tun apiece burden , and 61 well appointed men in each one : and with such prosperous weather we sailed onward , that upon the tenth day of May we came to Newfoundland , where we entered into the Cape of Buona Vista , which is in latitude 48 degrees and a half , and in longitude * . But because of the great store of the ice that was alongst the said land , we were constrained to enter into and haven called S. Katherins haven , distant from the other Port about five leagues towards Southsoutheast : there did we stay tenne days looking for fair weather ; and in the mean while we mended and dressed our boats . 
 183 
 A great white bear . 
 How we came to the Island of Birds , and of the great quantity of birds that there be . 
 UPon the 2i of May the wind being in the West , we hoist sail , and sailed towards North and by East from the cape of Buona Vista until we came to the Island of Birds , which was environed about with a bank of ice , but broken and cracked : notwithstanding the said bank , our two boats went thither to take in some birds , whereof there is such plenty , that unless a man did see them , he would think it and incredible thing : for albeit the Island ( which containeth about a league in circuit ) be so full of them , that they seem to have be brought thither , and sowed for the nonce , yet are there and hundred fold as many hovering about it as within ; some of the which are as big as jays , black and white , with beaks like unto crows : they lie always upon the sea ; they cannot fly very high , because their wings are so little , and no bigger then half ones hand , yet do they fly as swiftly as any birds of the air level to the water ; they are also exceeding fat ; we nam them Aporath . In less then half and hour we filled two boats full of them , as if they had be with stones : so that beside them which we did eat fresh , every ship did powder and salt five or sixe barrels full of them . 
 Of two sorts of birds , the one called Godetz , the other Margaulx ; and how we came to Carpunt . 
 Beside these , there is another kind of birds which hover in the air , and over the sea , lesser then the others ; and these do all gather themselves together in the Island , and put themselves under the wings of other birds that are greater : these we nam Godetz . There are also of another sort , but bigger , and white , which bite even as dogs : those we nam Margaulx . And albeit the said Island be 14 leagues from the main land , notwithstanding bears come swimming thither to eat of the said birds : and our men found one there as great 184 
 as any cow , and as white as any swan , who in their presence leapt into the sea ; and upon Whitsunmunday ( following our voyage towards the land ) we met her by the way , swimming towards land as swiftly as we could sail . So soon as we saw her , we pursued her with our boats , and by main strength took her , whose flesh was as good to be eaten as the flesh of a calf of two years old . The Les Chas-Wednesday following , being the 27 of the month , we ieaux ' came to the entrance of the bay of the Castles ; but because the weather was ill , and the great store of ice we found , we were constrained to enter into and harbour about the said entrance called Carpunt , where , because we could not come out of it , we stayed till the ninth of June , what time we departed , hoping with the help of God to sail further then the said Carpunt , which is in Carpunt . latitude 51 degrees . 
 The description of Newfoundland , from Cape Razo to Cape Degrade . 
 THe land from Cape Razo to Cape Degrade , which is the point of the entrance of the bay that trendeth from head to head towards Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest . All this part of land is parted into Islands one so never the other , that there are but small rivers between them ; thorough the which you may pass with little boats , and therefore there are certain good har-borows , among which are those of Carpunt and Degrade . In one of these Islands that is the highest of them all , being the top of it you may plainly see the two low Islands that are never to Cape Razo , from whence to the port of Carpunt they count it five and twenty leagues ; and there are two entrances thereat , one on the East , the other on the South side of the Island . But you must take heed of the side & point of the East , because that every where there is nothing else but shelves , and the water is very shallow : you must go about the Island towards the West the length of half a cable or thereabouts , and then to go towards the South to the said Carpunt . 
 185 
 Also you are to take heed of three shelves that are in the channel under the water : and towards the Island on the East side in the channel , the water is of three or foure fathom deep , and clear ground . The other trendeth towards Eastnortheast , and on the West you may go on shore . 
 Of the Island which now is called S. Katherins Island . 
 GOing from the point Degrade , and entering into the said bay towards the West & by North : there is some doubt of two Islands that are on the right side , one of the which is distant from the said point three leagues , and the other seven , either more or less then the first , being a low and plain land , and it seems to be part of the main land . I nam it Saint Katherines Island ; in which , towards the Northeast there is very dry soil ; but about a quarter of a league from it , very ill ground , so that you must go a little about . The said Island 8c the Port of Castles trend towards North northeast , and 
 South southwest , and they are about 15. leagues asunder . From the said port of Castles to the port of Gut , which is in the northern part of the said Bay , that trendeth towards East northeast , and West southwest , there are 12. leagues and and half : and about two leagues from the port of Balances , that is to say , the third part athwart the said Bay the depth being sounded it is about 38. fathoms : and from the said port of Balances to the Blanc 8ablon , white Sands towards West southwest there is 15. leagues , arwhite8ands . yOU mus ( - take heed of a shelf that lies about 3. 
 leagues outward from the said white Sands on the Southwest side above water like a boat . 
 Of the place called Blanc Sablon , or the white Sand : of the Hand of Breast , and of the Hand of Birds , of the sorts and quantity of birds that there are found : and of the Port called the Islettes . 
 WHite Sand is a Road in the which there is no place guarded from the South , nor southeast . But towards South southwest from the said road there are two 186 
 Hands , one of the which is called Breast Hand , and the other the Hand of Birds , in which there is great store of Godetz , and crows with read beaks and read feet : they make their nests in holes under the ground even as Conies . A point of land being passed about a league from white Sand , there is a Port and passage found called the Islettes , a better place then white Sand : and there is great fishing . From the said Port of the Islettes unto another called Breast , the circuit is about ten leagues . Breast a place This Port is in latitude 51. degrees and 55. minutes , and * North . in longitude * . From the Islettes to that place there are i ” and . m many other Hands : and the said Port of Breast is also among those Hands . Moreover the Hands do compass more then 3. leagues from the said Breast , being low , and over them are the other lands above mentioned seen . 
 How we with our ships entered into the Port of Breast , and sailing onward towards the West we passed amid the Islettes , which were so many in number , that it was not possible to tell them : and how we nam them the Islettes . 
 UPon the 10. of June we with our ships entered into the Port of Breast , to furnish our selves with water and wood , and to make us ready to pass the said Bay. Upon S. Barnabas day Service being herd , we with our boats went beyond the said Port towards the west , to see what harboroughes were there : we passed through the midst of the Islettes , which were so many in number that it was not possible they might be told , for they continued about 10. leagues beyond the said Port. We to rest our selves stayed in one of them a night , and there we found great store of duck eggs , and other birds that there do make their nests , we nam them all The Islettes . 
 187 
 [ Of the 
 Of the Port called S. Antonies Port , S. Servans Port , James Cartiers Port : of the river called S. James : of the customs and apparel of the inhabitants in the Hand of White Sand. 
 THe next day we passed the said Hands , and beyond them all we found a good haven , which we nam S. Antonies Haven , and one or two leagues beyond we found a little river toward the Southwest coast , that is between two other Hands , and is a good harbour . There we set up a Cross , and nam it S. Servans Port : and on the Southwest side of the said Port and river , about one league there is a small Hand as round as and Oven , environed about with many other little Hands that give notice to the said Ports . Further about two leagues there is another greater river , in which we took good store of salmon , that we nam S. James his River . Being in the said river , we saw a ship of Rochel that the night before had passed the Port of Breast , where they thought to have gone a fishing : but the Mariners knew not where they were . We with our boats approached near unto it , and did direct it to another Port one league more towards the West then the said river of S. James , which I take to be one of the best in all the world , and therefore we nam it James Carthiers Found . If the soil were as good as the harboroughes are , it were a great commodity : but it is not to be called The new Land , but rather stones and wild crags , and a place fit for wild beasts , for in all the North Hand I did not see a Cartload of good earth : yet went I on shore in many places , and in the Hand of White Sand , there is nothing else but moss and small thorns scattered here and there , withered and dry . To be short , I believe that this was the land that God allotted to Caine . There are men of and indifferent good stature and bigness , but wild and unruly : they wear their hair tied on the top like a wreathe of hay , and put a wooden pin within it , or any other such thing in stead of a nail , and with them 
 188 
 they bind certain birds feathers . They are clothed with beasts skins as well the men as women , but that the women go somewhat straiter and closer in their garments then the men do , with their wastes girded : they paint themselves with certain Roan colours : their boats are made of the bark of birch trees , with the which they fish and take great store of Seals , and as far as we could understand since our coming thither , that is not their habitation , but they come from the main land out of hotter countries' , to catch the said Seals and other necessaries for their living . 
 Of certain Capes , that is to say , The double Cape , The pointed Cape , Cape Royal , and The Cape of Milk : of the mountains of Granges : of the Hands of Dove houses : and of the great fishing of Cods . 
 UPon the 13. of that month we came to our ships again with our boats on purpose to sail forward because the weather was fair , and upon Sunday we caused Service to be said : then on munday being the 15. of the month we departed from Breast , and sailed towards the South to take a view of the lands that there we had seen , that seemed unto us to be two Hands : but when we were amid the Bay , we knew it to be firm land , where was a great double Cape one above the other , and therefore we nam it The double Cape . In the entrance of the Bay we sounded , and found it to be and hundred fathom round about us . From Breast to The double Cape there is about 20. leagues , and about five or sixe leagues beyond we sounded again and found 40 fathom water . The said land lies Northeast and Southwest . The next day being the 16 of the month we sailed along the said coast towards the Southwest , and by South about 35 leagues from the double Cape , where we found very steep and wild hills , among the which were seen certain small cabbans , which we in the country call Granges , and therefore we nam them The hills of the Granges . 
 189 
 A.D. 
 1534 - 
 Boats made of the bark of Birch trees . 
 The other lands and mountains are all craggy , cleft and cut , and betwixt them and the Sea , there are other Hands , but low . The day before through the dark mists and fogs of the weather , we could not have sighed of any land , but in the evening we spied and entrance into the land , by a river among the said Hills of Granges , and a Cape lying towards the Southwest about 3 leagues from us . The said Cape is on the top of it blunt-pointed , and also towards the Sea it endeth in a point , wherefore we nam it The pointed Cape , on the North side of which there is a plain Hand . And because we would have notice of the said entrance , to see if there were any good havens , we struck sail for that night . The next day being the 17 of the month we had stormy weather from Northeast , wherefore we took our way towards the Southwest until Thursday morning , and we went about 37 leagues , till we came athwart a Bay full of round Hands like dove houses , and therefore we nam them The dove houses . And from the Bay of S. Julian , from the which to . a Cape that lies South and by West , which we called Cape Royal , there are 7. leagues , and towards the West southwest side of the said Cape , there is another that beneath is all craggy , and above round . On the North side of which about half a league there lies a low Hand : that Cape we nam The Cape of milk . Between these two Capes there are certain low Hands , above which there are also certain others that show that there be some rivers . About two leagues from Cape royal we sounded and found 20 fathom water , and there is the greatest fishing of Cods that possible may be : for staying for our company , in less then and hour we took above and hundreth of them . 
 190 
 Of certain Hands that lie between Cape Royal , and The Cape of milk . 
 THe next day being the 18 of the month , the wind with such rage turned against us , that we were constrained to go back towards Cape Royal , thinking there to find some harbour , and with our boats went to discover between the Cape Royal , and the Cape of Milk , and found that above the low Hands there is a great and very deep gulf , within which are certain Hands . The said gulf on the Southside is shut up . The foresaid low grounds are on one of the sides of the entrance , and Cape Royal is on the other . The said low grounds do stretch themselves more then half a league within the Sea. It is a plain country , but and ill soil : and in the midst of the entrance thereof , there is and Hand . The said gulf in latitude is fourtie eight degrees and and half , and in longitude * . That night we found no harbour , and therefore we launched out into the Sea , leaving the Cape towards the West . 
 Of the Hand called S. John. 
 FRom the said day until the 24 of the month being S. Johns day we had both stormy weather and wind against us , with such darkness and mists , that until S. Johns day , we could have no sighed of any land , and then had we sighed of a Cape of land , that from Cape Royal lies Southwest about 35 leagues , but that day was so foggy and misty , that we could not come near land , and because it was S. Johns day , we nam it Cape S. John. 
 Of certain Hands called the Hands of Margaulx , and of the kinds of beasts and birds that there are found . Of the Hand of Brion , and Cape Dolphin . 
 THe next day being the 25. of the month , the weather was also stormy , dark , and windy , but yet we sailed a part of the day towards West North west , 
 191 
 and in the evening we put our selves athwart until the second quarter ; when as we departed , then did we by our compass know that we were Northwest & by West about seven leagues and and half from the Cape of S. John , and as we were about to hoist sail , the wind turned into the Northwest , wherefore we went Three Hands , Southeast , about 15. leagues , and came to three Hands , two of which are as steep and upright as any wall , so that it was not possible to climb them : and between them there is a little rock . These Hands were as full of birds , as any field or meadow is of grass , which there do make their nests : and in the greatest of them , there was a great and infinite number of those that we call Margaulx , that are white , and bigger then any geese , which were severed in one part . In the other were only Godetz , but towards the shore there were of those Godetz , and great Apponatz , like to those of that Hand that we above have mentioned : we went down to the lowest part of the least Hand , where we killed above a thousand of those Godetz , and Apponatz . We put into our boats so many of them as we pleased , for in less then one hour we might have filled thirtie such boats of The Islands them : we nam them The Hands of Margaulx . About of Margaulx . gve ] eagUes from the said Hands on the West , there is another Hand that is about two leagues in length , and so much in breadth : there did we stay all night to take in water and wood . That Island is environed round about with sand , and hath a very good road about it three or foure fathom deep . Those Hands have the best soil that ever we saw , for that one of their fields is more worth then all the New land . We found it all full of goodly trees , meadows , fields full of wild corn and peason bloomed , as thick , as rank , and as fair as any can be seen in Britaine , so that they seemed to have be plowed and sowed . There was also a great store of gooseberries , strawberries , damask roses , parsley , Morses or Sea other very sweet and pleasant herbs . About the oxen . said Island are very great beasts as great as oxen , which 
 192 
 have two great teeth in their mouths like unto Elephants teeth , & live also in the Sea. We saw one of them sleeping upon the bank of the water : we thinking to take it , went to it with our boats , but so soon as he herd us , he cast himself into the Sea. We also saw bears 8c wolves : we nam it Brions Hand . About Brions Hand . it towards Southeast , and Northwest , there are great lake's . As far as I could gather and comprehend , I think that there be some passage between New found land , and Brions land . If so it were , it would be a great shortening , aswell of the time as of the way , if any perfection could be found in it . About foure leagues from that Hand towards West-Southwest is the firm land , which seems to be as and Hand compassed about with little Hands of sands . There is a goodly Cape which we nam Cape Dolphin , for there is the beginning of good grounds . On the 27. of June we compassed the said lands about that lie West Southwest : and a far off they seem to be little hills of sand , for they are but low lands : we could neither go to them , nor land on them , because the wind was against us . That day we went 15 leagues . 
 Of the Hand called Alezai , and of the cape of S. Peter . 
 THe next day we went along the said land about 10. leagues , till we came to a Cape of red land , that is all craggy , within the which there is a bracke looking towards the North . It is a very low country . There is also between the Sea and a certain pool , a plain field : and from that Cape of land and the pool unto another Cape , there are about 14 leagues . The land is fashioned as it were half a circle , all compassed about with sand like a ditch , over which as far as ones eye can stretch , there is nothing but marrish grounds and standing pools . And before you come to the first Cape , very near the main land there are two little Hands . About five leagues from the second Cape towards the Southwest , viii 193 N 
 there is another Island very high and pointed , which we nam Alezai . The first Cape we nam S. Peters Cape , because upon that day we came thither . 
 Of the Cape called Cape Orleans : of the River of Boats : of Wild men's Cape : and of the quality and temperature of the country . 
 FRom Brions Island to this place there is good anchorage of sand , and having sounded towards Southwest even to the shore about five leagues , we found twentie and five fathom water , and within one league twelve fathom , and very near the shore sixe fathom , rather more then less , and also good anchorage . But because we would be the better acquainted with this stony and rochie ground , we stroohe our sails low and athwart . The next day being the last of the month save one , the wind blew South and by East . we sailed Westward until Tuesday morning at Sun rising , being the last of the month , without any sighed or knowledge of any land except in the evening towards Sun set , that we discovered a land which seemed to be two Hands , that were beyond us West southwest , about nine or tenne leagues . All the next day till the next morning at Sun rising we sailed Westward about fourtie leagues , and by the way we perceived that the land we had seen like Hands , was firm land , lying South southeast , and North northwest , to a very good Cape of land called Cape Orleans . And exceeding All the said land is low and plain , ’ and the fairest goodly land . may pOSSibly be seen , full of goodly meadows 
 and trees . True it is that we could find no harbour there , because it is all full of shelves and sands . We with our boats went on shore in many places , and among the rest we entered into a goodly river , but very shallow , which we nam The river of boats , because that there we saw boats full of wild men that were crossing the river . We had no other notice of the said wild men : for the wind came from 
 194 
 the sea , and so beatrice us against the shore , that we were constrained to retire our selves with our boats towards our ships . Till the next day morning at Sun rising , being the first of July , we sailed Northeast , in which time there rose great mists and storms , and therefore we struck our sails till two of the clock in the afternoon , that the weather became clear , & there we had sighed of Cape Orleance , and of another about seven leagues from us , lying North and by East , and that we called Wild men's Cape . On the Northside of this Cape about half a league , there is a very dangerous shelf , and bank of stones . Whilst we were at this Cape , we saw a man running after our boats that were going along the coast , who made signs unto us that we should return towards the said Cape again . We seeing such signs , began to turn towards him , but he seeing us come , began to flee : so soon as we were come on shore , we set a knife before him and a woollen girdle on a little stafFe , and then came to our ships again . That day we trended the said land about 9. or 10. leagues , hoping to find some good harbour , but it was not possible : for as I have said already , it is a very low land , and environed round about with great shelves . Nevertheless we went that day on shore in foure places to see the goodly and sweet smelling trees that were there : we varie^ of found them to be Cedars , ewetrees , Pines , white elms , trees‘ ashes , willows , with many other sorts of trees to us unknown , but without any fruit . The grounds where no wood is , are very fair , and all full of peason , white and read gooseberries , strawberries , blackeberies , and wild corn , even like unto Rye , which seemed to have be sown and plowed . This country is of better temperature then any other that can be seen , and very hight . There are many thrush's , stockdoves , and other birds : to be short , there wants nothing but good harboroughs . 
 [ Of the 
 195 
 Of the Bay called S. Lunario , and other notable Baize and Capes of land , and of the quality , and goodness of those grounds . 
 THe next day being the second of July we discovered and had sighed of land on the Northern side towards us , that did join unto the land abovesaid , all compassed about , and we knew that it had about * in depth , and as much athwart , we nam it S. Lunarios Bay , and with our boats we went to the Cape towards the North , and found the shore so shallow , that for the space of a league from land there was but a fathom water . On the Northeast side from the said Cape about 7. or 8. leagues there is another Cape of land , in the midst whereof there is a Bay fashioned trianglewise , very deep , & as far off as we could ken from it the same lies Northeast . The said Bay is compassed about with sands and shelves about 10. leagues from land , and there is but two fathom water : from the said Cape to the bank of the other , there is about 15. leagues . We being a cross the said Capes , discovered another land and Cape , and as far as we could ken , it lay North and by East . All that night the weather was very ill , and great winds , so that we were constrained to bear a small sail until the next morning , being the thirde of July when the wind came from the West : and we sailed Northward to have a sighed of the land that we had left on the Northeast side , above the low lands , among which high and low lands there is a gulf or breach in some places about 55. fathom deep , and 15. leagues in breadth . By reason of the great depth and breadth of the gulf , and change of the lands , we conceived hope that we should find a passage , like unto the passage of The Castles . The said gulf lies East Northeast , and West southwest . The ground that lies on the Southside of the said gulf , is as good and easy to be manured , and full of as goodly fields and meadows , as any that ever we have seen , as 196 
 plain and smooth as any die : and that which lies on the North is a country altogether hilly , full of woods , and very high and great trees of sundry sorts : among the rest there are as goodly Ceders , and Fir trees , as possibly can be seen , able to make masts for ships of three hundred Tun : neither did we see any place that was not full of the said trees , except two only that were full of goodly meadows , with two very fair lake's . The midst of the said Bay is 47. degrees and half in latitude . 
 Trees able to mast ships of 300. tons . 
 Of the Cape D’Esperance , or the Cape of Hope , and of S. Martins Creek , and how 7. boats full of wild men coming to our boat , would not retire themselves , but being terrified with our Culverins which we shot at them , and our lances , they fled with great haste . 
 THe Cape of the said South land was called The Cape of Hope , through the hope that there we had to find some passage . The fourth of July we went along the coast of the said land on the Northerly side to find some harbour , where we entered into a creek altogether open towards the South , where there is no succour against the wind : we thought good to name it S. Martines Creek . There we stayed from the fourth of July until the twelfth : while we were there , on Munday being the sixth of the month , Service being done , we with one of our boats went to discoyer a Cape and point of land that on the Western side was about seven or eight leagues from us , to see which way it did bend , and being within half a league of it , we saw two companies of boats of wild men Sortie or 5° going from one land to the other : their boats were in a number about fourtie or fiftie . One part of the which came to the said point , and a great number of the men went on shore making a great noise , beckoning unto us that we should come on land , showing us certain skins upon pieces of wood , but because we 
 197 
 had but one only boat , we would not go to them , but went to the other side lying in the Sea : they seeing us flee , prepared two of their boats to follow us , with which came also five more of them that were coming from the Sea side , all which approached near unto our boat , dancing , and making many signs of joy and mirth , as it were desiring our friendship , saying in their tongue Napeu tondamen assurtah , with many other words that we understood not . But because ( as we have said ) we had but one boat , we would not stand to their courtesy , but made signs unto them that they should turn back , which they would not do , but with great fury came towards us : and suddenly with their boats compassed us about : and because they would not away from us by any signs that we could make , we shot ofF two pieces among them , which did so terrify them , that they put themselves to flight towards the said point , making a great noise : and having stayed a while , they began anew , even as at the first to come to us again , and being come near our boat we struck at them with two lances , which thing was so great a terror unto them , that with great haste they began to flee , and would no more follow us . 
 How the said wild men coming to our ships , and our men going towards them , both parties went on land , and how the said wild men with great joy began to traffic with our men . 
 THe next day part of the said wild men with nine of their boats came to the point and entrance of the Creek , where we with our ships were at road . We being advertised of their coming , went to the point where they were with our boats : but so soon as they saw us , they began to flee , making signs that they came to traffic with us , showing us , such skins as they cloth themselves withal , which are of small valve . We likewise made signs unto them , that we wished them no evil : and in sign thereof two of our men 198 
 ventured to go on land to them , and carry them knives with other Iron wares , and a read hat to give unto their Captain . Which when they saw , they also came on land , and brought some of their skins , and so began to deal with us , seeming to be very glad to have our iron wares and other things , still dancing with many other ceremonies , as with their hands to cast Sea water on their heads . They gave us whatsoever they had , not keeping any thing , so that they were constrained to go back again naked , and made us signs that the next day they would come again , and bring more skins with them . 
 How that we having sent two of our men on land with wares , there came about 300. wild men with great gladness . Of the quality of the country , what it brings forth , and of the Bay called Bay du Chaleur , or The Bay of heat . 
 UPon thursday being the eight of the month , because the wind was not good to go out with our ships , we set our boats in a readiness to go to discover the said Bay , and that day we went 25. leagues within it . The next day the wind and weather being fair , we sailed until noon , in which time we had notice of a great part of the said Bay , and how that over the low lands , there were other lands with high mountains : but seeing that there was no passage at all , we began to turn back again , taking our way along the coast : 8c sailing , we saw certain wild men that stood upon the shore of a lake , that is among the low grounds , who were making fires and smokes : we went thither , 8c found that there was a channel of the sea that did enter into the lake , and setting our boats at one of the banks of the channel , the wild men with one of their boats came unto us , and brought up pieces of Seals ready sodden , putting them upon pieces of wood : then retiring themselves , they would make signs unto us , that they did give them us . we sent two men unto them with 
 199 
 hatchet's , knives , beads , & other such like ware , whereat they were very glad , and by and by in clusters they came to the shore where we were , with their boats , bringing with them skins and other such things as they had , to have of our wares . They were more then 300. men , women and children : some of the women which came not over , we might see stand up to the knees in water , singing and dancing : the other that had passed the river where we were , came very friendly to us , rubbing our arms with their own hands , then would they lift them up towards heaven , showing many signs of gladness : and in such wise were we assured one of another , that 
 we very familiarly began to traffic for whatsoever they had , till they had nothing but their naked bodies ; for they gave us all whatsoever they had , and that was but of small valve . We perceived that this people might very easily be converted to our Religion . They go from place to place . They live only with fishing . They have and ordinary time to fish for . their provision . The country is hotter then the country of Spaine , and the fairest that can possibly be found , altogether smooth , and level . There is no place be it never so little , but it hath some trees ( yea albeit it be sandy ) or else is full of wild corn , that hath and ear like unto Rye : the corn is like oats , and small peason as thick as if they had be sown and plowed , white and read gooseberries , strawberries , blackberies , white and read Roses , with many other flowers of very sweet and pleasant smell . There be also many goodly meadows full of grass , and lake's wherein great plenty of salmons be . They call a hatchet in their tongue Cochi , and a knife Bacon : we nam it Ray du Cha - The bay of heat . 
 leur , or the 
 Bay of heat . Of another nation of wild men : of their 
 manners , living and clothing . 
 BEing certified that there was no passage through the said Bay , we hoist sail , and went from S. Martines Creek upon Sunday being the 12. of July , to go and dis-200 
 cover further beyond the said Bay , and went along the sea coast Eastward about eighteene leagues , till we came to the Cape of Prato , where we found the tide very great , but shallow ground , and the Sea stormy , so that we were constrained to draw towards shore , between the said Cape and and Hand lying Eastward , about a league from the said Cape , where we cast anchor for that night . The next morning we hoist sail to trend the said coast about , which lies North Northeast . But there rose such a stormy and raging wind against us , that we were constrained to come to the place again , from whence we were come : there did we stay all that day till the next that we hoist up sail , and came to the midst of a river five or sixe leagues from the Cape of Prato Northward , and being overthwart the said River , there arose again a contrary wind , with great fogs and storms . So that we were constrained upon Tuesday being the fourteenth of the month to enter into the river , and there did we stay till the sixteenth of the month looking for fair weather to come out of it : on which day being Thursday , the wind became so raging that one of our ships lost and anchor , and we were constrained to go up higher into the river seven or eight leagues , into a good harbour and ground that we with our boats found out , and through the evil weather , tempest , and darkness that was , we stayed in the said harbour till the five and twentieth of the month , not being able to put out : in the mean time we saw a great multitude of wild men that were fishing for mackerels , whereof there is great store . Their boats were about 40 , and the persons what with men , women & children two hundred , which after they had haunted our company a while , they came very familiarly with their boats to the sides of our ships . We gave them knives , combes , beads of glass , and other trifles of small valve , for which they made many signs of gladness , lifting their hands up to heaven dancing and singing in their boats . These men may very well and truly be called Wild , because there is no poorer people 
 201 
 in the world . For I think all that they had together , beside their boats and nets was not’worth five souse . They go altogether naked saving their privities , which are covered with a little skin , and certain old skins that they cast upon them . Neither in nature nor in language , do they any whit agree with them which we found first : their heads be altogether shaved , except one bush of hair which they suffer to grow upon the top of their crown as long as a horse tail , & then with certain leather strings bind it in a knot upon their heads . They have no other dwelling but their boats , which they turn upside down , and under them they lay themselves all along upon the bore ground . They eat their flesh almost raw , save only that they heat it a little upon embers of coals , so do they their fish . Upon Magdalens day we with our boats went to the bank of the river , and freely went on shore among them , whereat they made many signs , and all their men in two or three companies began to sing and dance , seeming to be very glad of our coming . They had caused all the young women to flee into the wood , two or three excepted , that stayed with them , to each of which we gave a comb , and a little bell made of Tin , for which they were very glad , thanking our Captain , rubbing his arms and breasts with their hands . When the men saw us give something unto those that had stayed , it caused all the rest to come out of the wood , to the end they should have as much as the others : These women were about twenty , who altogether in a knot fell upon our Captain , touching and rubbing him with their hands , according to their manner of cherishing and making much of one , who gave to each of them a little Tin bell : then suddenly they began to dance , and sing many songs . There we found great store of Mackrels , that they had taken upon the shore , with certain nets that they make to fish , of a kind of Hemfe . Hemp that grows in that place where ordinarily they abide , for they never come to the sea , but only in fishing time . As far as I understand , there grows likewise a 
 202 
 kind of Millet as big as Peason , like unto that which Maiz. grows in Bresil , which they eat in stead of bred . They had great store of it . They call it in their tongue Kapaige . They have also Prunes ( that is to say Dam - Tamsins , figs , sins ) which they dry for winter as we do , they call them a^es-Honesta . They have also Figs , Nuts , Apples , and other fruits , and Beans , that they call Sahu , their nuts Cahehya . If we showed them any thing that they have not , nor know not what it is , shaking their heads , they will say Nohda , which is as much to say , they have it not , nor they know it not . Of those things they have , they would with signs show us how to dress them , and how they grow . They eat nothing that hath any taste of salt . They are very great thieves , for they will filch and steal whatsoever they can lay hold of , and all is fish that comes to net . 
 fl How our men set up a great Cross upon the point of the said Porte , and the Captain of those wild men , after a long Oration , was by our Captain appeased , and contented that two of his Children should go with him . 
 UPon the 24 of the month , we caused a fair high Cross to be made of the height of thirty foot , which was made in the presence of many of them , upon the point of the entrance of the said haven , in the midst whereof we hanged up a Shield with three Flower de Luces in it , and in the top was carved in the wood with Antic letters this posy , Vive le kaven 
 Roy de France . Then before them all we set it upon t0 be the said point . They with great heed beheld both thee ? y ’ making and setting of it up . So soon as it was up , we altogether kneeled down before them , with our hands towards Heaven , yielding God thanks : and we made signs unto them , showing them the Heavens , and that all our salvation dependeth only on him which in them dwells : whereat they showed a great admiration , looking first one at another , and then upon 
 203 
 the Cross . And after we were returned to our ships , their Captain clad with and old Bears skin , with three of his sons , and a brother of his with him , came unto us in one of their boats , but they came not so near us as they were wont to do : there he made a long Oration unto us , showing us the cross we had set up , and making a cross with two fingers , then did he show us all the Country about us , as if he would say that all was his , and that we should not set up any cross without his leave . His talk being ended , we showed him and Axe , feigning that we would give it him for his skin , to which he listened , for by little and little he came near our ships . One of our fellows that was in our boat , took hold on theirs , and suddenly leapt into it , with two or three more , who inforced them to enter into our ships , whereat they were greatly astonished . But our Captain did straightways assure them , that they should have no harm , nor any injury offered them at all , & entertained them very friendly , making them eat and drink . Then did we show them with signs , that the cross was but only set up to be as a light and leader which ways to enter into the port , and that we would shortly come again , and bring good store of iron wares & other things , but that we would take two of his children with us , & afterwards bring them to the said port again : and so we clothed two of them in shirts , and coloured coats , with read caps , and put about every ones neck a copper chain , whereat they were greatly contented : then gave they their old clothes to their fellows that went back again , and we gave to each one of those three that went back , a hatchet , and some knives , which made them very glad . After these were gone , and had told the news unto their fellows , in the after noon there came to our ships sixe boats of them , with five or sixe men in every one , to take their farewells of those two we had detained to take with us , and brought them some fish , uttering many words which we did not understand , 
 204 
 I53+-making signs that they would not remove the cross we had set up . 
 ^ [ How after we were departed from the said port , following our voyage along the said coast , we went to discover the land lying Southeast , and Northwest . 
 THe next day , being the 25 of the month , we had fair weather , and went from the said port : and being out of the river , we sailed Eastnortheast , for after the entrance into the said river , the land is environed about , and makes a bay in manner of half a circle , where being in our ships , we might see all the coast sailing behind , which we came to seek , the land lying Southeast and Northwest , the course of which was distant from the river about twentie leagues . 
 Of the Cape S. Alvise , and Cape Memorancie , and certain other lands , and how one of our Boats touched a Rock and suddenly went over it . 
 ON munday being the 27 of the month , about sunset we went along the said land , as we have said , lying Southeast & Northwest , till Wednesday that we saw another Cape where the land begins to bend towards the East : we went along about 15 leagues , then doth the land begin to turn Northward . About three leagues from the said Cape we sounded , and found 24 fathom water . The said lands are plain , and the fairest and most without woods that we have seen , with goodly green fields and meadows : we nam the said Cape S. Alvise Cape , because that was his day : it is 49 degrees and a half in latitude , and in longitude* . On Wednesday morning we were on the East side of the Cape , and being almost night we went Northwestward for to approach near to the said land , which trendeth North and South . From S. Alvise Cape to another called Cape Memorancie , about fifteene leagues , the land begins to bend Northwest . About three leagues from the said Cape we would needs found , 
 205 
 but we could find no ground at 150 fathom , yet went we along the said land , about tenne leagues , to the latitude of 50 degrees . The Saturday following , degrees being the first of August , by Sun rising , we had of latitude , certain other lands , lying North and Northeast , that were very high and craggy , and seemed to be mountains : between which were other low lands with woods and rivers : we went about the said lands , as well on the one side as on the other , still bending Northwest , to see if it were either a gulf , or a passage , until the fift of the month . The distance from one land to the other is about fifteene leagues . The middle between them both is 50 degrees and a terce in latitude . We had much ado to go five miles farther , the winds were so great , and the tide against us . And at five miles end , we might plainly see and perceive land on both sides , which there begins to spread it self , but because we rather fell , then god way against the wind , we went towards land , purposing to go to another Cape of land , lying Southward , which was the farthermost out into the sea that we could see , about five leagues from us , but so soon as we came thither , we found it to be nought else but Rocks , stones , 8c craggy clifFes , such as we had not found any where since we had sailed Southward from S Johns Cape : and then was the tide with us , which carried us against the wind Westward , so that as we were sailing along the said coast , one of our boats touched a Rock , and suddenly went over , but we were constrained to leap out for to direct it on according to the tide . 
 How after we had agreed and consulted what was best to be done , we purposed to return : and of S. Peters Straight , and of Cape Tiennot . 
 AFter we had sailed along the said coast , for the space of two hours , behold , the tide began to turn against us , with so swift and raging a course , that it was not possible for us with 13 oars to row 206 
 or get one stones cast farther , so that we were constrained to leave our boats with some of our men to guard them , and io or 12 men went ashore to the said Cape , where we found that the land begins to bend Southwest , which having seen , we came to our boats again , and so to our ships , which were still ready under sail , hoping to go forward : but for all that , they were fallen more then foure leagues to leeward from the place where we had left them , where so soon as we came , we assembled together all our Captains , Master's , and Mariners , to have their advice and opinion what was best to be done : and after that every one had said , considering that the Easterly winds began to bear sway , and blow , & that the flood was so great , that we did but fallen , and that there was nothing to be got , and that storms and tempests began to reign in Newfound land , and that we were so far from home , not knowing the perils and dangers that were behind , for either we must agree to return home again , or else to stay there all the year . Moreover , we did consider , that if the Northern winds did take us , it were not possible for us to depart thence . All which opinions being herd and considered , we altogether determined to address our selves homeward . Now because upon Saint Peters day we entered into the said Streite , we nam it Saint Peters Streite . The Strait of we sounded it in many places , in some we found S-Peter-150 fathom water , in some 100 , and near the shore sixtie , and clear ground . From that day till Wednesday following , we had a good and prosperous gale of wind , so that we trended the said North shore East , Southeast , West Northwest : for such is the situation of it , except one Cape of low lands that bendeth more towards the Southeast , about twenty five leagues from the Straight . In this place we saw certain smokes , that the people of the country made upon the said cape : but because the wind blew us towards the coast , we went not to them , which when they saw , they came 
 207 
 with two boats and twelve men unto us , and as freely came unto our ships , as if they had be French men , and gave us to understand , that they came from the great gulf , and that Tiennot was their Captain , who then was upon that Cape , making signs unto us , that they were going home to their Countries' whence we were come with our ships , and that they were laden with Fish . We Cape Tiennot . nam the said Cape , Cape Tiennot . From the said Cape all the land trendeth Eastsoutheast , and Westnorthwest . All these lands lie low , very pleasant , environed with sand , where the sea is intermingled with marishes and shallows , the space of twentie leagues : then does the land begin to trend from West to Eastnortheast altogether environed with Islands two or three leagues from land , in which as far as we could see , are many dangerous shelves more then foure or five leagues from land . 
 How that upon the ninth of August we entered within White Sands , and upon the fift of September we came to the Port of S. Malo . 
 FRom the said Wednesday until Saturday following , we had a great wind from the Southwest , which caused us to run Eastnortheast , on which day we came to the Easterly parts of Newfoundland , between the Granges and the Double Cape . There began great stormy winds coming from the East with great rage : wherefore we coasted the Cape Northnorthwest , to search the Northern part , which is ( as we have said ) all environed with Islands , and being near the said Islands and land , the wind turned into the South , which brought us within the said gulf , so that the next day being the 9 of August , we by the grace of God entered within the White Sands . And this is so much as we have discovered . After that , upon the 15 of August , being the feast of the Assumption of our Lady , after that we had herd service , we altogether departed from the port of White Sands , and with a happy and prosperous weather we came into 208 
 the middle of the sea , that is between Newfoundland and Britanie , in which place we were tossed and turmoiled three days long with great storms and windy tempests coming from the East , which with the aid and assistance of God we suffered : then had we fair weather , and upon the fift of September , in the said year , we came to the port of S. Malo whence we departed . 
 A.D. 
 1534 - 
 . 