The voyage of M. Charles Leigh , and diverse others to Cape Briton and the Isle of Ramea . 
 He Hopewell of London of the burden of 120 tons , whereof was M. William Crafton , and the Chancewel of London of the burden of 70 tons , whereof was M. Steven Bennet , bound unto the river of Canada , set to sea at the sole and proper charge of Charles Leigh and 
 Abraham Van Herwick of London merchant's ( the said Charles Leigh himself , and Steven Van Herwick brother to the said Abraham , going themselves in the said ships as chief commanders of the voyage ) departed from Gravesend on Fryday morning the 8 of April 1597^ And after some hindrances , arriving at Falmouth in Cornewal the 28 of the said month put to sea again . And with prosperous winds the 18 of May we were upon the bank of Newfoundland . The 19 we lost the Chancewel . The 20 we had sighed of land and entered within the bay of Assumption , where our men contrary to my knowledge fought with a French ship : and afterwards in the same bay we met with our consort . Whereupon we presently put to sea again : and the next day we arrived at Caplen bay , where we remained by extremity of foul weather , and to mend a pins of 7 or 8 tons ( which was given us at Farrillon by M. Wil. Sayer of Dartmouth the Admiral of that place ) until the last of May . On which day departing from thence in the afternoon we put in to Rogneuse to seek Shallops but could find none . The first of June we set sail from Rogneuse , and the second we put room to a bay under the Northside of Cape Raz being enforced in by and extreme storm . The 4 we set sail , and this day we saw a great Island of ice . The 5 at night we lost the Chancewell in a fog at the mouth of the bay of Placentia . The 11 at Sun setting we had sighed of Cape Briton . And the 12 by 166 
 reason of contrary winds we cast anchor under the Northeast end of the Isle of Menego to the North of Cape Isle of Briton in 16 fathom reasonable ground . In that place we caught great store of Cods , which were larger and better fish then any in Newfoundland . The 13 we weighed anchor again , and being becalmed about a league from the shore we fell to fishing where the Cods did bite at least 20 fathoms above ground , and almost as fast as we could hale them into the ship . The 14 we came to the 2 Islands of Birds , some 23 leagues from Menego : 2 Islands 
 where there were such abundance of Birds , as is almost °fStrdes-incredible to report . And upon the less of these Islands of Birds , we saw great store of Morsses or Sea Oxen , Store of which were a sleep upon the rocks : but when we approached never unto them with our boat they cast themselves into the sea and pursued us with such fury as that we were glad to flee from them . The 16 we arrived at Brians Island , which lies 5 leagues West from the Island of Birds . About this Island there is as great abundance of cods as in any place can be found . In little more then and hour we caught with 4 hooks 250 of them . Here we caught also a great Turbut which was and elle long and a yard broad : which was so great that the hook could not hold her into the ship : but when she was above water she bent the hook & escaped . In this I ” Bryans Island we found exceeding good ground both for corn and meadow , & great store of wood , but of small grows . for forne and Springs of fresh water we found none in all the Island , meadow . but some standing pools of rain water . The same day at night we weighed anchor again . The 17 we had stormy weather . The 18 we came to the Isle of Ramea , where The Is ! e of we appointed to meet with ' our consort . And approach - Ramea-ing near unto the harbour of Halabolina we cast anchor in 3 fathoms water and sent our great boat into the harbour , with the master's mate and some dozen more of the company : who when they came in , found 4 ships . Namely 2 of Saint Malo in Britaigne , and two of Sibiburo adjoining to Saint John de luz being the French 
 167 
 Kings subject's , whom they supposed to have be of Spaine , and so affirmed unto us . Whereupon we went presently into harbour , finding but eleven foot and and half of water upon the bar and a mighty great current in , when we had cast anchor we sent presently to speak with the master's of all the ships : but those only of Saint Malo came aboard , whom we entertained very friendly , and demanded of whence the other two ships were . They said as they thought of Saint John de Luz or Sibiburo . Then we presently sent our boat for the Master's of both the said ships , to request them to come aboard , and to bring with them their Charters parties and other evidences , to the end we might know of whence they were . At which message one of the said Master's came aboard , with the Pilot and Master's mate of the other ship : whom when we had examined , they said that they were of Sibiburo , and the French Kings subjects . We requested them for our better security in the harbour peaceably to deliver up their powder and munition : promising them that if we found them to be the French Kings subjects it should be kept in safety for them without diminishing . But they would not consent thereunto : whereunto we replied , that unless they would consent thereunto we would hold them to be our enemies . They not consenting , we sent the boat well manned to fetch their powder and munition from aboard their ship : but straightly commanded our men not to touch any thing else in the ship upon their further peril : which they promised to perform . When they came aboard the said ships which were mored together , they were resisted by force of arms , but quickly they god the victory : which done , they fell presently to pillaging of the Basks , contrary to their promise : whereupon we sent another to forbid them ; but when he came to them , none was more ready of pillage then he . Whereupon I went my self , and took away from our men whatsoever they had pillaged , and gave it again to the owners : only I sent aboard our own ship their powder 
 168 
 and munition to be kept in safety until we knew farther what they were . When I had done , I gave the Basks possession of their ship again and told them they should not lose the valve of one penny if they were the French Kings subject's . Then I carried away all our men , and also took with me two or three of the chiefest of them , and when I came aboard went to examining of them , and by circumstances found one of the ships to belong to France : whereupon I told the master of the said ship , that I was thoroughly satisfied that he was of France and so dismissed him in peace . Of the other ship we had great presumption that she was of Spaine , but had no certain proof thereof , wherefore we dismissed them likewise in peace . After I had thus dismissed them , our ships company fell into a mutiny , and more then half of them resolved to carry one of those ships away . But they were prevented of their evil purpose by aid which the said ships received from their countrymen in the other Another har-harborough : For the next morning , which was the in twentieth of June , very early there were gathered ' together out of all the ships in both harboroughs , at the least 200 Frenchmen and Britons , who had planted upon the shore three pieces of Ordinance against us , and had prepared them selves in all readiness to fight with us , which so soon as we had descried them gave the onset upon us with at least and hundred small shot out of the woods . There were also in a readiness to assault us about three hundred Savages . But after we had skirmished a skirmish while with them , we procured a parley by one of the men between the of Saint Malo , whose ship rowed hard by us : In which andus . parley they required some of our men to come on shore unto them : whereupon we requested M. Ralph Hill and the Boatswains mate to go on shore to them : whom when they had they detained as prisoners ; and then required the powder and munition , which we had of the Basks in possession ; which we surrendered unto them in safety as our intent always was , which done , there a new treason came aboard unto us one Captain Charles , who was of the Britons . 
 169 
 captain of the great ship of Saint Malo , which road in the other harbour : who challenged our great boat which we had at Farrillon to be his . And while we were in talk with him about the two Basks which at first we thought to be Spaniards , we had almost be betrayed . For the said Captain Charles with half a dozen more of his company kept themselves aboard of our ship and held us in a talk , while thirtie or fortie others should have entered our ship unawares from one of the ships of S. Malo , which professed to be our friend , & unto whom we showed all courtesy . But we perceiving their treacherous intent , threatened to set fire on the said ship , which was then thwart our hawse , from which they would have entered . By which resolution of ours God did discourage them from effecting their mischievous purposes . Now the said captain Charles when he saw himself prevented of his wicked intents , took his boat presently to go on shore , and promised that all things should be ended in peace between us , and that he would send us our two men again . But when he was on shore he presently sent for our great boat which he claimed to be his , & withal commanded us out of the harbour ; but he sent not our men as he promised , we being now the weaker side did not only deliver his boat but also deter - mined to be gone and then requested them to help us with our anchor which was on shore ; but they would not . Then we desired them to cut the bent of the cable upon the anchor on shore ( for we durst not send our boat lest they should have kept from us both our boat and men ) which they promised to do for us , as also to send our men ; but when they were on shore , they would do neither . We therefore seeing their falsehood in every thing , durst no longer tarry for fear of farther treachery ; wherefore we concluded to cut our cable in the hawse ; which we did , & so departed the harbour about 9 of the clock , leaving two of our men with our cable & anchor , and 20 fathoms of a new hawser behind us . And as we were going away , they made great shows of friendship , 
 170 
 * 597-and drank unto us from the shore ; but more for fear then love , and requested us to come on shore for our men , whom then they delivered . The same morning in passing over the bar before the harborowes mouth , and ar °f by that time that we had all our men aboard , our ship came on ground upon the sands ; where we lay some 8 ' 
 hours : during which time , at low water we trimmed our ship without board , and by the great providence of God found our leak which then we stopped . About six of the clock at night we god our ship on float again , and that night anchored within part of the bar , which then because of the wind we could not pass . But it pleased God to send us fair weather all that night , and the next fnm day by noon we had got our ship clean over the bar . The 21 day after we god over the bar the wind arose at east & eastsoutheast , we blew right into the bay : which if it had come before we were clear of the bar , we had both ship and men perished in the sands . The same day , because the wind kept us within the bay , we went to the Isle Blanch , where the ships of the other harbour Isle Bland or had their stages : but it was at least two leagues from theWJllielse-their ships : where we hoped by friendship to procure a shallope & assurance of our cable and anchor again . But when we had approached never the shore with our ship , & weaved them with a white flag , they in stead of coming unto us , sent their message by a bullet out of a piece of great ordinance , which they had placed on shore of purpose against us ; so that they would neither speak with us , nor permit us to come never them . Thus we departed , and would have put to sea that night : but there was much wind at East , which kept us within the bay , & enforced us to come to and anchor under Isle Blanch . The next morning being the 22 , we put to sea , and about 12 of the clock the same day , the wind being at Northeast and foul weather , the master said he could not ply up to 
 Grande Coste , because of the leeshore , & the wind . 
 against us , and therefore asked what we should do . I Qa ? e Briton . asked then how far we had to the river of cape 
 171 
 Briton : he said a little way . Then said I , If it be not far , we were best to go thither to trade with the Savages while the wind is contrary , and to take in water & balist , which we wanted . To which the master said , that if I would he would carry us thither . I thinking it to be the best course , said I was content , so far forth as that from thence we took the first fair wind for Grande Cost . Hereupon the master willed him at the helm to keep his course southeast and southeast and by south . Presently after I asked him how many leagues we had to the said river , and from the said river to Grande Cost . He then said that we had 40 leagues to the river , and from the river to Grande Cost 120 leagues . Hereupon I said I would not consent to go so far out of our way , but willed him to keep his directest course for Grande Cost ; which he did . Within one half hour afterwards the 23 day the gunner and company of the ship presented me & the master with a request in writing to return for England or to go for the Islands of Azores for a man of war , for they would not proceed on their voyage to Grande Cost ; and therefore do what I could they turned the helm homeward . The Their arrival 14 of June we sent our boat on shore in a great bay in the high of UpOn the jsje of Cape Briton for water . The 25 we ape nton . arrjvej on West side of the Isle of Menego , where we left some cask on shore in a sandy bay , but could not tarry for foul weather . The 26 we cast anchor in another bay upon the main of Cape Briton . The 27 about tenne of the clock in the morning we met with The Chance - eight men of the Chancewell our consort in a shallope ; who told us that their ship was cast away upon the within Cape main of Cape Briton , within a great bay eighteene Briton . leagues within the Cape , and upon a rock within a mile of the shore , upon the 23 of this month about one of the clock in the afternoon : and that they had cleared their ship from the rock : but being bilged and full of water , they presently did run her up into a 
 172 
 sandy bay , where she was no sooner come on ground , but presently after there came aboard many shallops with store of French men , who robbed and spoiled all they could lay hands on , pillaging the poor men even to their very shirts , and using them in savage manner : whereas they should rather as Christians have aided them in that distress . Which news when we herd , we blessed God , who by his divine providence and unspeakable mercy had not only preserved all the men , but brought us thither so miraculously to aid and comfort them . So presently we put into the road where the Chancewell lay ; where was also one ship of Sibiburo , whose men that help to pillage the Chancewell were run away into the woods . But the master thereof which on thee had dealt very honestly with our men stayed in his ship , and came aboard of us : whom we used well , not taking j 
 any thing from him that was his , but only such things L as we could find of our own . And when we had dispatched our business , we gave him one good cable , one old cable and and anchor , one shallop with mast , sails , and other furniture , and other things which belonged to the ship . In recompense whereof he gave us two hogsheads of sider , one barrel of pease , and 25 score of fish . The 29 betimes in the morning we departed from that road towards a great Biskaine some 7 leagues off of 300 tun , whose men dealt most doggedly with the Chancewels company . The same night we anchored at the mouth of the harbour , where the Biskain was . The 30 betimes in the morning we put into the harbour ; and approaching never their stage , we saw it uncovered , and so suspected the ship to be gone : whereupon we sent our pinnace on shore with a dozen men , who when they came , found great store of fish on shore , but all the men were fled : neither could they perceive whither the ship should be gone , but as they thought to sea . This day about twelve of the clock we took a Savages boat which our men pursued : but all the Savages ran away into the 
 173 
 The Savages of Cape Briton come aboard of our ship . 
 Cibo and harbour in the Isle of Cape Briton . 
 New Port. 
 Port Ingles . 
 woods , and our men brought their boat on board . The same day in the afternoon we brought our ship to and anchor in the harbour : and the same day we took three hogsheads and and half of train , and some 300 of green fish . Also in the evening three of the Savages , whose boat we had , came unto us for their boat ; to whom we gave coats and knives , and restored them their boat again . The next day being the first of July , the rest of the Savages came unto us , among whom was their king , whose name was Itarey , and their queen , to whom also we gave coats and knives , and other trifles . These Savages called the harbour Cibo . In this place are the greatest multitude of lobsters that ever we herd of : for we caught at one hawle with a little draw net above 140. The fourth of July in the morning we departed from Cibo . And the fift we cast anchor in a reasonable good harbour called New Port under and Island some eight leagues from Cibo , and within three leagues from the English port . At this place in pursuing certain shallops of a ship of Rochel , one of them came aboard , who told us , that the Biskainer whom we sought , was in the English port with two Biskainers more , and two ships of Rochel . Thereupon we sent one of our men in the Rochellers shallop to parley with the admiral & others our friends in the English port , requesting them aid for the recovery of our things , which the other ship called the Santa Maria of S. Vincent ( whereof was Master Johannes de Heart , and Pilot Adame de Lauandote ) had robbed from the Chancewell . To which they answered , that if we would come in unto them in peace , they would assist us what they might . This answer we had the sixt day : and the seventh in the fornoone we arrived in the English port , and cast anchor aloof from the other ships : which done , I went aboard the Admiral , to desire the performance of his promise : who sent for Johannes de Heart , who was contented to restore most of our things again : whereupon I went aboard his ship to have 
 174 
 them restored . This day and the eighth I spent in procuring such things as they had robbed ; but yet in the end we wanted a great part thereof . Then we were brief with them , and willed them either to restore us the rest of our things which they had , or else we would both enforce them to do it , and also have satisfaction for our victuals and merchandises which by their means were lost in the Chancewell . The ninth in the morning we prepared our ship to go near unto them . Whereupon their Admiral sent his boat aboard , and desired to speak with me : then I went aboard unto him , and desired to have our things with peace and quietness , proffering to make him and the Master's of the two ships of Rochel our umpires , and what they should advice I would stand unto . Hereupon he went aboard the other ship to make peace ; but they would hear no reason , neither yet condescend to restore any thing else which they had of ours . Then I desired that as I came in peace unto them , they would so set me aboard my ship again : which they denied to do , but most unjustly detained me and Stephen van Herwicke who was with me . A while after our shallop came with foure men to know how I did , and to fetch me aboard : but so soon as she came to the Admirals ships side , his men entered , and took her away , detaining our men also as prisoners with us . Then presently all the three Biskainers made towards our ship , which was not careless to get the wind of them all : and having by the mercy of God obtained the same , she then stayed for them : but when they saw they had lost their advantage , they presently turned their course , making as great haste in again as they did out before . Afterwards I attempted twice to go aboard , but was still inforced back by the two other Biskainers , who sought our lives : so that in the end the Master of the Admiral was enforced to man his great boat to waft us : and yet notwithstanding they bent a piece of great ordinance at us : for we were to pass by them unto our ship : but 
 175 
 we rescued our shallop under our Master's great boat ; and by that means passed in safety . The next morning being the tenth of the month , we purposed if the wind had served our turn , to have made them to 
 repent their evil dealing , and to restore us our own 
 again , or else to have sunk their ships if we could . But the wind served not our turn for that purpose ; 
 They departed but carried us to sea : so that the same morning we 
 to°ke our course towards the bay of S. Laurence in 
 ‘ Newfoundland : where we hoped to find a Spanish ship , which as we had intelligence , did fish at that place . S. Peters The thirteenth day we had sighed of S. Peters Islands . 
 Islands . And the foureteenth day being foggy and misty weather , 
 while we made towards the land , we sent our shallop before the ship to discover dangers : but in the fog , through the men's negligence which were in her , she lost us : yet we kept on our course , thinking that although we could not see them , yet they might see our ship : and coming into sixteene fathoms water we cast anchor , supposing our selves to be near the shore : and in the evening it pleased God to give us for the space of one quarter of and hour clear weather , by which we found our selves to be imbayed , and also had sighed of our shallop , which was at the point of a land about one league from us . The same night we went further into the same bay , where we had very good riding . The fifteenth we went on shore , and in that place found footing of deer , and before we returned we killed one . The eighteenth we departed towards S. Laurence : the same evening we had sighed of S. Laurence , and sent off our boat in the night with our Master and sixteene men to surprise the A Spanish . Spanyard , which lay in Little S. Laurence ; who pre - 
 shlp taken . sently upon the entrance of our men surrendered up 
 their ship and goods . The nineteenth in the morning before day , the Master of our ship with two more , and three Spanyards , took a boat and came forth to meet our ship , but being foggy , he cast anchor by the mouth of the harbour ( thinking in fair weather to put out 
 to our ship , which through the current and foggy weather was put five or sixe leagues to leeward : & while they were at anchor in the boat they were surprised again by certain Basks of S. John de Luz who were in Great S. Laurence hard by . These Basks with their forces ( having received intelligence by one of the Spanyards , who sleeping on shore , escaped unto them overland ) on the sudden surprised the said boat with our Master and others : and then presently made unto the ship ; but our men aboard defended them ofF . In the end they threatened that unless they would yield , they would kill M. Crafton and our other men before M. Crafton . their eyes . So at last upon M. Craftons entreaty and our men's , to save their lives , they yielded up the ship again , upon condition , that they should not injury any of our men , but should let them all with their weapons peaceably depart : yet when our men had yielded , they brake their covenant , proffering them great violence , threatening to kill them , disarming them , stripping their clothes from their backs , and using them more like dogs then men . After they had thus robbed our men of their prize and weapons , they presently towed the ship with their boats out of that harbour into Great S. 
 Laurence , where their own ships did ride , and within less then and hour after they had carried our prize away , our ship arrived in the bay : where after we had be a while at anchor , our shallop came aboard unto us , with most part of our sixteene men , who told us the whole story before recited , as also that captain Laurence had carried away our Master , and Stephen van Herwicke prisoners , and turned the rest of our men on shore in the woods , without either meat , drink , or almost any apparel . The 20 all our men came aboard , except the two prisoners : and the same day we took with our boats three of the Spanyards shallops , with five hogsheads of train oil in each of them , & in one boat foure Spanyards ; but the men of the other two sha lops fled on shore . The same day also we took vni 177 m 
 the Master of one of the ships which was in the harbour with three other of his men , whom we detained prisoners to ransom M. Crafton & Stephen van Herwick . The 22 captain Laurence sent them aboard , and we also released all our prisoners , except one Spanyard , who was boatswain of the Spanish ship , whom we kept with us : and the same day we set sail from thence . The 24 we had advice of our Spanyard of certain The harbour Leaguers which were in the harbour of cape S. Marry . °Marie § Whereupon the same night , being within five or six 
 ' leagues of the harbour , I sent ofF our two shallops with thirty men to discover the harbour , and to surprise the enemy . The 25 in the morning we approached the harbour with our ship , and in the mouth thereof we espied three shallops , two whereof were ours , and the third of a ship of Rochel , which they had surprised with foure men in her : who told them that there were but two ships in the harbour , whereof one was of Rochel , and the other of Bell isle . And as we were discoursing with the Rochellers , we had sighed of the ships : whereupon we sent our boat aboard the Rocheller to certify him that we were his friends , and to request him not to hinder our fight with the enemy . This message being sent , we made all the haste we could unto the ship of Bell isle , which first began with us with three great shot , one whereof hit our maintopsaile , but both the other missed us . And we also sent one unto them : then being approached never unto them ten or twelve of us went in a shallop to enter them , and we carried also a warp with us to make fast unto their ship , whereby our ship might the better come up to aid us . And when we boarded them in our boat , they betook themselves to their close fights , playing chiefly upon us with shot & pikes out at two ports , between which we entered very dangerously , escaping near dangers both by shot & pike . Some of our men were wounded , but no great harm was done . And mine own piece in entering , was shot out of my hand into 
 178 
 the sea ; which shot also burst one side of the ladder , by which I entered . We had not long be aboard , but through the help of God we caused them to yield unto our mercy . There were of them in the ship above forty A Briton ship men , most whereof we sent aboard of our ship , there ial°°tUnnes ’ to be kept in hold , with order to our chirurgeon to dress the wounded men , one of which was wounded unto death . That done , we had then time to view our prize , which we found of great defence , and a notable strong ship , almost two hundred tun in burden , very well appointed , and in all things fitted for a man of war . They had also foureteene or fifteene men more , which were then absent from the ship ; otherwise we should have had the hotter fight . The same day we god our sails to the yard , and our top masts on end , and rigged the ship what we could . The 26 day we god some oil aboard , and there we tarried until the second of August , fitting our selves for the sea , and getting fish aboard as weather served us . During our abided there we divided our men , and appointed to each ship their company , my self and my friends being resolved to take our passage in the prize ; wherein when we were shipped , and the company , there arose great enmity against us by the other ship , which afterwards was quieted . The second day of August , having taken in water and wood , we put to sea from that harbour in company of the Hopewell , with purpose to go directly to Parlican , which is and harbour in the North part of Newfoundland , where we expected another prize . But when we came to sea we found our sails so old , our ropes so rotten , and our provision of bred and drink so short , as that we were constrained to make our resolution directly for England : whereupon we drew out our reasons the fourth day of August , and sent them aboard the Hopewell , to certify them the cause of our resolution for England : whereat they were generally offended , thinking and saying , that we in the prize went about to cousin and deceive them . To conclude , they sent us 
 179 
 word that they would keep us company for England . But I had given William Crafton commission before to go for the Islands of the Azores , and there to spend his victuals for a man of war . The next day being the fift of August , having a fair wind , we put off from the coast of Newfoundland , and kept our course directly for England , the Hopewell keeping us company until midday , whenas having lost us in a fog , she shot off two pieces of ordinance , and we answered her with three : afterwards we spoke not with her , supposing that she went for the Islands . The 27 of August , drawing near the coast of England , we sounded and found ground at seventy fathoms . Some of the mariners thinking we were in Bristow channel , and other in Silly channel : so that through variety of judgements , and evil marinership we were feign to dance the hay foure days together , sometime running to the Northeast , sometime to the Southeast , then again to the East , and Eastnortheast . Thus did we spend fair winds , and loose our time until the last of August . And then it pleased God that we fell with the Island of Lundy within the channel of Bristoll ; from whence we shaped our course : and after diverse dangers , the third of September we met with the Tramontane of the Queen off of Dartmouth ; to the captain whereof we gave certain things that he had need of . The fift of September I landed on the outside of the Isle of Wight , and within few days after it pleased God to bring the ship in safety to London , where she was made prize as belonging to the enemies of this land . 
 . 