A short and brief narration of the Navigation made by the commandment of the King of France , to the Islands of Canada , Hochelaga , Saguenay , and diverse others which now are called New France , with the particular customs , and manners of the inhabitants therein . 
 Chap. i . 
 N the year of our Lord 1535 , upon Whitsunday , being the 16. of May , by the commandment of our Captain James Cartier , and with a common accord , in the Cathedral Church of S. Malo we devoutly each one confessed our selves , and received the Sacrament : 
 and all entering into the Quire of the said Church , we presented our selves before the Reverend Father in Christ , the Lord Bishop of S. Malo , who blessed us all , being in his Bishops robes . The Wednesday following , being the 19 of May , there arose a good gale of wind , and therefore we hoised sail with three ships , that is to say , the great Hermina , being in burden about a hundredth , or a hundreth and twenty tun , wherein the foresaid Captain James Cartier was general , and master Thomas Frosmont chief Master , accompanied with master Claudius de Pont Briand , son to the Lord of Montcevell , and Cupbearer to the Dolphin of France , Charles of Pomeraies , John Powlet , and other Gentlemen . In the second ship called the little Hermina , being of 210 
 threescore tun burden , were Captains under the said Cartier , Mace Salobert , and master William marry . In the third ship called the Hermerillon , being of forty tun in burden , were Captains M. William Britton , and M. James Maingare . So we sailed with a good and prosperous wind , until the 20 of the said month , at which time the weather turned into storms and tempests , the which with contrary winds , and darkness , endured so long that our ships being without any rest , suffered as much as any ships that ever went on seas : so that the 25 of June , by reason of that foul and foggy weather , all our ships lost sighed one of another again till we came to Newfound land where we had appointed to meet . After we had lost one another , we in the Generals ship were with contrary winds tossed to and from on the sea , until the seventh of July , upon which day we arrived in New found land , and came to the Island called The Island of Birds , which lies from the main land 14 leagues . This Island is so full of birds , that all our ships might easily have be freighted with them , & yet for the great number that there is , it would not seem that any were taken away . We to victuali our selves filled two boats of them . This Island hath the Pole elevated 49 degrees , and 40 minutes . Upon the eight of the said month we sailed further , & with a prosperous weather came to the Port called The Port of white sands , that is in the Bay called The Bay of Castles , where we had purposed to meet & stay together the 15 of the said month . In this place therefore we looked for our fellows , that is to say , the other two ships , till the 26 of the month , on which day both came together . So soon as our fellows were come , we set our ships in a readiness , taking in both water , wood , & other necessaries . And then on the 29 of the said month , early in the morning we hoist sail to pass on further , & sailing along the Northern coast that runneth Northeast and Southwest , till two hours after Sunset or thereabouts , then we crossed along two Islands , which 
 211 
 The Isle oj birds in 49 degrees 40 minutes . 
 The Bay des Chaste aux er The Grand Bay. 
 do stretch further forth then the others , which we called S. Williams Islands , being distant about 20 leagues or more from the Port of Breast . All the coast from the Castles to that place lies East & West , Northeast & Southwest , having between it sundry little Islands , altogether barren and full of stones , without either earth or trees , except certain valleys only . The next day being the 30 of July , we sailed on Westward to find out other Islands which as yet we had not found 12 leagues and a half , among which there is a great Bay towards the North all full of Islands and great creeks where many good harboroughs seem to be : them we nam S. Marthas Islands , from which about a league and a half further into the sea there is a dangerous shallow , wherein are five rocks , which lie from Saint Marthas Islands about seven leagues as you pass into the said Islands , on the East & on the West side , to which we came the said day and hour after noon , & from that hour until midnight we sailed about fifteene leagues athwart a cape of the lower Islands , which we nam S. Germanes Islands Southeastward , from which place about three leagues , there is a very dangerous shallow . Likewise between S. Germanes cape and Saint Marthas , about two leagues from the said Islands , there lies a bank of sand , upon which bank the water is but foure fathom deep , and therefore seeing the danger of the coast , we struck sail and went no further that night : The next day being the last of July , we went all along the coast that runneth East and West , and somewhat Southeasterly which is all environed about with Islands and dry sands , and in truth is very dangerous . The length from S. Germanes Cape to the said Islands is about 17 leagues and a half , at the end of which there is a goodly plot of ground full of huge and high trees , albeit the rest of the coast be compassed about with sands without any sign or show of harboroughs , till we came to Cape Thiennot , which trendeth Northwest about seven leagues from the foresaid Islands , which Cape Thiennot we noted in 
 212 
 our former voyage , and therefore we sailed on all that night West and Westnorthwest , till it was day , and then the wind turned against us , wherefore we went to seek a haven wherein we might harbour our ships , and by good hap , found one fit for our purpose , about seven leagues and a half beyond Cape Thiennot , & that we nam S. Nicholas Haven , it lies amid 4 Islands that stretch into the sea : Upon the nearest we for a token Nicholas . set up a wooden cross . But note by the way , that this cross must be brought Northeast , & then bending towards it , leave it on the left hand and you shall find sixe fathom water , and within the haven foure . Also you are to take heed of two shelves that lean outward half a league . All this coast is full of shoulds and very dangerous , albeit in sighed many good havens seem to be there , yet is there nought else but shelves and sands . We staled and rested our selves in the said haven , until the seventh of August being Sonday : on which day we hoised sail , and came towards land on the South side towards Cape Rabast , distant from the Cape Rabast . said haven about twentie leagues Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest : but the next day there rose a stormy and a contrary wind , and because we could find no haven there towards the South , thence we went coasting along towards the North , beyond the abovesaid haven about ten leagues , where we found a goodly great gulf , full of Islands , passages , and entrances towards what wind soever you please to bend : for the knowledge of this gulf there is a great Island that is like to a Cape of land , stretching somewhat further forth than the others , and about two leagues within the land , there is and hill fashioned as it were and heap of corn . We nam the 
 said gulf Saint Laurence his bay . The twelfth of thee The gulf of said month we went from the said Saint Laurence s - Laurence-his Bay , or gulf , sailing Westward , and discovered a Cape of land towards the South , that runneth West and Cape of 
 by South , distant from the said Saint Laurence his We of 
 Bay , about five and twenty leagues . And of the two tm " 
 213 
 wild men which we took in our former voyage , it was told us , that this was part of the Southern coast , & that there was and Island , on the Southerly part of which is the way to go from Honguedo ( where the year before we had taken them ) to Canada , and that two days journey from the said Cape , and Island began the Kingdom of Saguenay , on the North shore extending towards Canada , and about three leagues athwart the said A mighty Cape , there is above a hundreth fathom water . Moreover 
 Shales I believe that there were never so many Whale's seen 
 ‘ as we saw that day about the said Cape . The next day after being our Lady day of August the fifteenth of the month , having passed the Straight , we had notice of certain lands that we left towards the South , which lands are full of very great and high hills , and this The Isle of Cape we nam The Island of the Assumption , and Assumption . one Qape of the sajj high countries' lies Eastnortheast , and Westsouthwest , the distance between which is about five and twenty leagues . The Countries' lying North may plainly be perceived to be higher then the Southerly , more then thirty leagues in length . We trended the said lands about towards the South : from the said day until Tewesday noon following , the wind came West , and therefore we bent towards the North , purposing to go and see the land that we before had spied . Being arrived there , we found the said lands , as it were joined together , and low towards the Sea. And the Northerly mountains that are upon the said low lands stretch East , and West , and a quarter of the South . Our wild men told us that there was the beginning of Saguenay , and that it was land inhabited , and that thence comes the read Copper , of them nam Caignetdaze . There is between the Southerly lands , and the Northerly about thirtie leagues distance , The mouth of and more then two hundreth fathom depth . The said ocheu f men moreover certify unto us , that there was the about thirty and beginning of the great river of Hochelaga leagues broad , and ready way to Canada , which river the further it 
 214 
 went the narrower it came , even into Canada , and that then there was fresh water , which went so far upward , that they had never herd of any man who had gone to the head of it , and that there is no other passage but with small boats . Our Captain hearing their talk , and how they did affirm no other passage to be there , would not at that time proceed any further , till he had seen and noted the other lands , & coast towards the North , which he had omitted to see from S. Laurence his gulf , because he would know , if between the lands towards the North any passage might be discovered . 
 How our Captain caused the ships to return back again , only to know if in Saint Laurence gulf there were any passage towards the North . 
 Chap. 2. 
 UPon the 18 of August being Wednesday , our Captain caused his ships to wind back , and bend towards the other shore , so that we trended the said Northerly cost , which runneth Northeast and Southwest , being fashioned like unto half a bow , and is a very high land , but yet not so high as that on the South parts . The Thursday following we came to seven very The seven high Islands , which we nam The round Islands . These IslesIslands are distant from the South shore about 40 leagues , and stretch out into the sea about 3 or 4 leagues . Against these there are goodly low grounds to be seen full of goodly trees , which we the Friday following , with our boats compassed about . Overthwart these lands there are diverse sandy shelves more then two leagues into the sea , very dangerous , which at a low water remain almost dry . At the furthest bounds of these low lands , that contain about ten leagues , there is a river of fresh water , that with such swiftness runneth A swift river . into the sea , that for the space of one league within it the water is as fresh as any fountain water . We with our boats entered into the said river , at the entrance of which we found about one fathom & a half of water . 
 215 
 Seahorses . There are in this river many fish shaped like horses , which as our wild men told us , all the day long lie in the water , and the night on land : of which we saw therein a great number . The next day being the 21 of the month , by break of day we hoised sail , and sailed so long along the said coast , that we had sighed of the rest of the said Northern coast , which as yet we had The Isle of not seen , and of the Island of the Assumption which Assumption , we went to discover , departing from the said land : ' which thing so soon as we had done , & that we were certified not other passage to be there , we came to our ships again , which we had left at the said Islands , where is a good harbour , the water being about nine or ten fathom . In the same place by occasion of contrary winds & foggy mists , we were constrained to stay , not being either able to come out of it , or hoist sail , till the 24 of the month : On which day we departed & came to a haven on the Southerly coast about 80 leagues from A haven on the said Islands . This haven is over against three flat the Southern isiands that lie amid the river , because on the midway ’ between those Islands , & the said haven towards the 
 great North , there is a very great river that runneth between 
 rwer ' the high and low lands , and more then three leagues into the sea it hath many shelves , & there is not altogether two fathom water , so that the place is very dangerous : and near unto the said shelves , there is either fifteene or 20 fathoms from shore to shore . All the Northerly coast runneth Northeast and by North , and Southwest 8c by South . The said haven wherein we stayed on the South side , is as it were but a sluice of the waters that rise by the flood , 8c but of small S. Johns Islets , account : we nam them S. Johns Islets , because we found them , 8c entered into them the day of the beheading of that Saint . And before you come to the said haven , there is and Island lying Eastward about 5 leagues distant from the same : between which and the land there is no passage saving only for small boats . The haven of S. Johns Islets drieth up all the waters that rise 216 
 by flowing , although they flow two fathom at the least . The best place to harbour ships therein is on the South part of a little Island that is over against the said haven , whereby the bank or shore of the Island riseth . Upon the first of September we departed out of the said haven , purposing to go towards Canada ; & about 15 leagues from it towards the West , & Westsouthwest , amid the river , there are three Islands , over against the which there is a river which runneth swift , and is of a great depth , & it is that which leads , and runneth into the country and kingdom of Saguenay , as by the two wild men of Canada it was told us . This river passes and runneth along very high and steep hills of bore stone , where very little earth is , & notwithstanding there is great quantity of sundry sorts of trees that grow in the said bore stones , even as upon good & fertile ground , in such sort that we have seen some so great as well would suffice to make a mast for a ship of 30 tun burden , and as green as possibly can be , growing in a stony rock without any earth at all . At the entrance of the said river we met with 4 boats full of wild men , which as far as we could perceive , very fearfully came towards us , so that some of them went back again , & the other came as near us as easily they might hear & understand one of our wild men , who told them his name , and then took acquaintance of them , upon whose word they came to us . The next day being the 2 of September , we came out of the said river to go to Canada , and by reason of the seas flowing , the tide was very swift and dangerous , for that on the South part of it there lie two Islands , about which , more then three leagues compass , lie many rocks and great stones , & but two fathom water : and the flowing amid those Islands is very unconstant and doubtful , so that if it had not be for our boats , we had been in great dailger to loose our Pinnace : & coasting along the said dry sands , there is more then 30 fathom water . 
 217 
 This is the river of Tadascu or of Saguenay . 
 About five leagues beyond the river of Saguenay Southwest , there is another Hand on the Northside , aguenay . wherein are certain high lands , and thereabouts we thought to have cast anchor , on purpose to stay the next tide , but we could found no ground in a 120 fathom , within a flight shoot from shore , so that we were constrained to wind back to the said Hand , where we sounded again and found 3 5 fathom . The next morning we hoised sail and went thence , sailing further on , where we had notice of a certain kind of fish never before of any man seen or known . They are about the bigness of a Porpose , yet nothing like them , of body very well proportioned , headed like Grayhounds , altogether as white as snow without any spot , within which river there is great quantity of them : they do live altogether between the Sea and the fresh water . These people of the Country call them Adhothuys , they told us that they be very savoury and good to be eaten . Moreover they affirm none to be found elsewhere but in the mouth of that river . The sixth of the month , the weather being calm and fair , we went about 15 leagues more upward into the river , and there lighted on and Hand that looks Northward , and it makes a little Innumerable haven or creek wherein are many and innumerable great Tortoises . Tortoyzes , continually lying about that Hand . There are likewise great quantity of the said Adhothuys taken by the inhabitors of the country , and there is as great a current in that place as is at Bordeaux in France at every tide . This Hand is in length about three leagues , and in breadth two , and is a goodly and fertile plot of ground , replenished with many goodly and great trees of many sorts . Among the rest there are many Filbert-trees , which we found hanging full of them , somewhat bigger and better in savour then ours , but somewhat The We of harder , and therefore we called it The Hand of Filberts . iaerds^ sevent^ month being our Ladies even , after ‘ service we went from that Hand to go up higher into the river , and came to 14 Hands seven or eight leagues 218 
 from the Hand of Filberts , where the country of Canada begins , one of which Lands is ten leagues in length , and five in breadth , greatly inhabited of such men as only live by fishing of such sorts of fish as the river affords , according to the season of them . After we 
 had cast anchor between the said great Hand , & the This great Northerly coast , we went on land and took our two 
 wild men with us , meeting with many or those country Qrieans _ people , who would not at all approach unto us , but rather fled from us , until our two men began to speak unto them , telling them that they were Taignoagny and Domagaia , who so soon as they had taken acquaintance of them , began greatly to rejoice , dancing and showing many sorts of ceremonies : and many of the chiefest of them came to our boats & brought many Eels and other sorts of fish , with two or three burdens of great Millet Matz . wherewith they make their bred , and many great musk millions . The same day came also many other boats full of those countrymen and women , to see and take acquaintance of our two men , all which were as courteously received and friendly entertained of our Captain , as possibly could be . And to have them the better acquainted with him , and make them his friends , he gave them many small gifts , but of small valve : nevertheless they were greatly contented with them . The next day following , the Lord of Canada ( whose proper name was Donnacona , but by the name of Lord they call him Agouhanna ) with twelve boats came to our ships , accompanied with many people , who causing ten of his boats to go back with the other two , approached unto us with sixteene men . Then began the said Agouhanna over against the smallest of our ships , according to their manner and fashion , to frame a long Oration , moving all his body and members after a strange fashion , which thing is a ceremony and sign of gladness and security among them , and then coming to the Generals ship , where Taignoagny and Domagaia were , he spoke with them & they with him , where they began 
 219 
 to tell and show unto him what they had seen in France , and what good entertainment they had had : hearing which things the said Lord seemed to be very glad thereof , and prayed our Captain to reach him his arm , that he might kiss it , which thing he did : their Lord taking it , laid it about his neck , for so they use to do when they will make much of one . Then our Captain entered into Agouhannas boat , causing bred and wine to be brought to make the said Lord and his company to eat and drink , which thing they did , and were greatly thereby contented and satisfied . Our Captain for that time gave them nothing , because he looked for a fitter opportunity . These things being done , each one took leave of others , and the said Lord went with his boats again to his place of abided . Our Captain then caused our boats to be set in order , that with the next tide he might go up higher into the river , to find some safe harbour for our ships : and we passed up the river against the stream about tenne leagues , coasting the said Hand , at the end whereof , we found a goodly and pleasant found , where is a little river and haven , where by reason of the flood there is about three fathom water . This place seemed to us very fit and commodious to harbour our ships therein , and so we did very safely , Santa Croix , we nam it the holy Cross , for on that day we came thither . Near unto it , there is a village , whereof Donna-cona is Lord , and there he keepeth his abided : it is called Stadacona . Stadacona , as goodly a plot of ground as possibly may be seen , and therewithal ! very fruitful , full of goodly trees even as in France , as Okes , Elms , Ashes , Walnut trees , Maple tres , Cydrons , Vines , and white Thorns , that bring forth fruit as big as any damsons , and many other sorts of trees , under which grows as fair tall Goodly hemp , hemp , as any in France , without any seed or any men work or labour at all . Having considered the place , and finding it fit for our purpose , our Captain withdrew himself on purpose to return to our ships : but behold , as we were coming out of the river we met coming 
 220 
 against us one of the Lords of the said village of Stada-cona , accompanied with many others , as men , women , and children , who after the fashion of their country , in sign of mirth and joy , began to make a long Oration , the women still singing and dancing up to the knees in water . Our Captain knowing their good will and kindness towards us , caused the boat wherein they were , to come unto him , and gave them certain trifles , as knives , and beads of glass , whereat they were marvellous glad , for being gone about three leagues from them , for the pleasure they conceived of our coming , we might hear them sing , and see them dance for all they were so far . 
 How our Captain went to see and note the bigness of the Hand , and the nature of it , and then returned to the ships , causing them to be brought to the river of The holy Cross . 
 Chap. 3. 
 AFter we were come with our boats unto our ships again , our Captain caused our barks to be made ready to go on land in the said Hand , to note the trees that in show seemed so fair , and to consider the nature and quality of it : which thing we did , and found it full of goodly trees likes to ours . Also we saw many goodly Vines , a thing not before of us seen in those countries , and therefore we nam it Bacchus Hand . It is in length about twelve leagues , in sighed very pleasant , but full of woods , no part of it manured , unless it be in certain places , where a few cottages be for Fishers dwellings as before we have said . The next day we departed with our ships to bring them to the place of the holy Cross , and on the 14 of that month we came thither , and the Lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , with 25 boats full of those people , came to meet us , coming from the place whence we were come , and going towards Stadacona , where their abiding is , and all came to our ships , showing sundry and diverse gestures of gladness 
 221 
 A.D. 
 I535 - 
 The lie of Bacchus , or the Ik of Orleans . 
 and mirth , except those two that we had brought , to wit , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , who seemed to have altered and changed their mind and purpose , for by no means they would come unto our ships , albeit sundry times they were earnestly desired to do it , whereupon we began to mistrust somewhat . Our Captain asked them if according to promise they would go with him to Hochelaga ? They answered yea , for so they had purposed , and then each one withdrew himself . The next day being the fifteenth of the month , our Captain went on shore , to cause certain poles and piles to be driven into the water , and set up , that the better and safelier we might harbour our ships there : and many of those country people came to meet us there , among whom was Donnacona and our two men , with the rest of their company , who kept themselves aside under a point or nook of land that is upon the shore of a certain river , and no one of them came unto us as the other did that were not on their side . Our Captain understanding that they were there , commanded part of our men to follow him , and he went to the said point where he found the said Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and diverse other : and after salutations given on each side , Taignoagny settled himself foremost to speak to our Captain , saying that the Lord Donnacona did greatly grieve and sorrow that our Captain and his men did wear warlike weapons , and they not . Our Captain answered , that albeit it did grieve them , yet would not he leave them off , and that ( as he knew ) it was the manner of France . But for all these words our Captain and Donnacona left not ofF to speak one to another , and friendly to entertain one another . Then did we perceive , that whatsoever Taignoagny spoke , was only long of himself and of his fellow , for that before they departed thence our Captain and Donnacona entered into a marvellous steadfast league of friendship , whereupon all his people at once with a loud voice , cast out three great cries , ( a horrible thing to hear ) and each one having taken leave of the 
 222 
 other for that day , we went aboard again . The day following we brought our two great ships within the river and harbour , where the waters being at the highest , are three fathom deep , and at the lowest , but half a fathom . We left our Pinnace without the road to the end we might bring it to Hochelaga . So soon as we had safely placed our ships , behold we saw Donnacona , Taignoagny & Domagaia , with more then five hundred persons , men , women and children , and the said Lord with ten or twelve of the chiefest of the country came aboard of our ships , who were all courteously received , and friendly entertained both of our Captain and of us all : and diverse gifts of small valve were given them . 
 Then did Taignoagny tell our Captain , that his Lord did greatly sorrow that he would go to Hochelaga , and that he would not by any means permit that any of them should go with him , because the river was of no importance . Our Captain answered him , that for all his saying , he would not leave off his going thither , if by any means it were possible , for that that he was commanded by his king to go as far as possibly he could : and that if he ( that is to say Taignoagny ) would go with him , as he had promised , he should be very well entertained , beside that , he should have such a gift given him , as he should well content himself : for he should do nothing else but go with him to Hochelaga and come again . To whom Taignoagny answered , that he would not by any means go , and thereupon they suddenly returned to their houses . The next day being the 17 of September , Donnacona and his company returned even as at the first , and brought with him many Eels , with sundry sorts of other fish , whereof they take great store in the said river , as more largely hereafter shall be showed . And as soon as they were come to our ships , according to their wonted use they began to sing and dance . This done , Donnacona caused all his people to be set on the one side : then making a round circle upon the sand he caused our Captain with all his people to enter thereinto , 
 223 
 then he began to make a long Oration , holding in one of his hands a maiden child of ten or twelve years old , which he presented unto our Captain : then suddenly began all his people to make three great shrieks , or howls , in sign of joy and league of friendship : presently upon that he did present unto him two other young male children one after another , but younger then the other , at the giving of which even as before they gave out shrieks and howls very loud , with other ceremonies : for which presents , our Captain gave the said Lord great and hearty thanks . Then Taignoagny told our Captain , that one of the children was his own brother , and that the maiden child was daughter unto the said Lords own sister , and the presents were only given him to the end he should not go to Hochelaga at all : to whom our Captain answered , that if they were only given him to that intent , if so he would , he should take them again , for that by no means he would leave his going off , for as much as he was so commanded of his King . But concerning this , Domagaia told our Captain that their Lord had given him those children as a sign and token of goodwill and security , and that he was contented to go with him to Hochelaga , upon which talk great words arose between Taignoagny and Domagaia , by which we plainly perceived that Taignoagny was but a crafty knave , and that he intended but mischief and treason , as well by this deed as others that we by him had seen . After that our Captain caused the said children to be put in our ships , and caused two Swords and two copper Basons , the one wrought , the other plain , to be brought unto him , and them he gave to Donnacona , who was therewith greatly contented , yielding most hearty thanks unto our Captain for them , and presently upon that he commanded all his people to sing and dance , and desired our Captain to cause a piece of artillery to be shot off , because Taignoagny and Domagaia made great brags of it , and had told them marvellous things , and also , because they had never herd nor seen 
 224. 
 any before : to whom our Captain answered , that he was content : and by and by he commanded his men to shoot off twelve cannons charged with bullets into the wood that was hard by those people and ships , at whose noise they were greatly astonished and amazed , for they thought that heaven had fallen upon them , and put themselves to flight , howling , crying , and shrieking , so that it seemed hell was broken lose . But before we went thence , Taignoagny caused other men to tell us , that those men which we had left in our Pinnace in the road , had slain two men of their company , with a piece of ordinance that they had shot ofF , whereupon the rest had put themselves all to flight , as though they should all have be slain : which afterwards we found untrue , because our men had not shot off any piece at all that day . 
 How Donnacona and Taignoagny with others , devised a pretty sleight or policy : for they caused three of their men to be attired like Devils , feigning themselves to be sent from their God Cudruaigny , only to hinder our voyage to Hochelaga . 
 Chap. 4. 
 THe next day being the eighteenth of September , these men still endeavoured themselves to seek all means possible to hinder and let our going to Hochelaga , and devised a pretty guile , as hereafter shall showed . They went and dressed three men like Devils , being wrapped in dogs skins white and black , their faces besmeared as black as any coals , with homes on their heads more then a yard long , and caused them secretly to be put in one of their boats , but came not near our ships as they were wont to do , for they lay hidden within the wood for the space of two hours , looking for the tide , to the end the boat wherein the Devils were , might approach and come near us , which when time was , came , and all the rest issued out of the wood coming to us , but yet not so near as they were wont to do . There began Taignoagny to salute 
 viii 225 p 
 our Captain , who asked him if he would have the boat to come for him ; he answered , not for that time , but after a while he would come unto our ships : then presently came that boat rushing out , wherein the three counterfeit Devils were with such long homes on their heads , and the middlemost came making a long Oration and passed along our ships without turning or looking towards us , but with the boat went towards the land . Then did Donnacona with all his people pursue them , and lay hold on the boat and Devils , who so soon as the men were come to them , fell prostrate in the boat even as if they had been dead : then were they taken up and carried into the wood , being but a stones cast off , then every one withdrew himself into the wood , not one staying behind with us , where being , they began to make a long discourse , so loud that we might hear them in our ships , which lasted above half and hour , & being ended we began to espy Taignoagny and Domagaia coming towards us , holding their hands upward together , carrying their hats under their upper garment , showing a great admiration , and Taignoagny looking up to heaven , cried three times Jesus , Jesus , Jesus , and Domagaia doing as his fellow had done before , cried , Jesus Maria , James Cartier . Our Captain hearing them , and seeing their gestures and ceremonies , asked of them what they ailed , and what was happened or chanced anew ; they answered , that there were very ill tidings befallen , saying in French , Nenni est il bon , that is to say , it was not good : our Captain asked them again what it was , then answered they , that their God Cudruaigny had spoken in Hochelaga : and that he had sent those three men to show unto them that there was so much ice and snow in that country , that whosoever went thither should die , which words when we herd , we laughed and mocked them saying , that their God Cudruaigny was but a fool and a noddy , for he knew not what he did or said : then bade we them show his messengers from us , that Christ would defend them all 
 226 
 from cold , if they would believe in him . Then did they ask of our Captain if he had spoken with Jesus : he answered no , but that his Priests had , and that he told them they should have fair weather : which words when they had herd , they thanked our Captain , and departed towards the wood to tell those news unto their fellows , who suddenly came all rushing out of the wood , seeming to be very glad for those words that our Captain had spoken , and to show that thereby they had had , and felt great joy , so soon as they were before our ships , they altogether gave out three great shrieks , and thereupon began to sing and dance , as they were wont to do . But for a resolution of the matter Taignoagny and Domagaia told our Captain , that their Lord Donnacona would by no means permit that any of them should go with him to Hochelaga , unless he would leave him some hostage to stay with him : our Captain answered them , that if they would not go with him with a good will , they should stay , and that for all them he would not leave off his journey thither . 
 How our Captain with all his Gentlemen and fiftie Mariners departed with our Pinnace , and the two boats from Canada to go to Hochelaga : and also there is described , what was seen by the way upon the said river . 
 Chap. 5. 
 THe next day being the 19 of September we hoised sail , and with our Pinnace and two boats departed to go up the river with the flood , where on both shores of it we began to see as goodly a country as possibly can with eye be seen , all replenished with very goodly trees , and Vines laden as full of grapes as could be all laden along the river , which rather seemed to have been planted 8Wes-by men hand than otherwise . True it is , that because they are not dressed and wrought as they should be , their bunches of grapes are not so great nor sweet as ours : also we saw all along the river many houses 
 227 
 inhabited of Fishers , which take all kinds of fish , and they came with as great familiarity and kindness unto us , as if we had been their Countrymen , and brought us great store of fish , with other such things as they had , which we exchanged with them for other wares , who lifting up their hands towards heaven , gave many signs of Hochelay . joy : we stayed at a place called Hochelai , about five and twentie leagues from Canada , where the river waxes very narrow , and runneth very swift , wherefore it is very dangerous , not only for that , but also for certain great stones that are therein : Many boats and barks came unto us , in one of which came one of the chief Lords of the country , making a long discourse , who being come near us , did by evident signs and gestures show us , that the higher the river went , the more dangerous it was , and bade us take heed of our selves . The said Lord presented and gave unto our Captain two of his own children , of which our Captain took one being a wench 7 or 8 years old , the man child he gave him again , because it was too young , for it was but two or three years old . Our Captain as friendly and as courteously as he could did entertain and receive the said Lord and his company , giving them certain small trifles , and so they departed towards the shore again . Afterwards the said Lord and his wife came unto Canada to visit his daughter , bringing unto our Captain certain small presents . From the nineteenth until the eight and twentieth of September , we sailed up along the said river , never losing one hour of time , all which time we saw as goodly and pleasant a country as possible can be wished for , full ( as we have said before ) of all sorts of goodly trees , that is to say , Oaks , Elms , Walnut-trees , Cedars , Firres , Ashes , Box , Willows , and great store of Vines , all as full of grapes as could be , so that if any of our fellows went on shore , they came home laden with them : there are likewise many Cranes , Swans , Geese , Ducks , Feasants , Partridges , Thrush's , Blackbirds , Turtles , Finches , Redbreasts , Nightingales , 228 
 Sparrows of diverse kinds , with many other sorts of Birds , even as in France , and great plenty and store . Upon the 28 of September , we came to a great wide lake in the middle of the river five or sixe leagues broad , The la^e of and twelve long , all that day we went against the tide , having but two fathom water , still keeping the said scantling : being come to one of the heads of the lake , we could espy no passage or going out , nay , rather it seemed to have be closed and shut up round about , and there was but a fathom and a half of water , little more or less . And therefore we were constrained to cast anchor , and to stay with our Pinnace , and went with our two boats to seek some going out , and in one place we found foure or five branches , which out of the river come into the lake , and they came from Hochelaga . But in the said branches , because of the great fierceness and swiftness wherewith they break out , and the course of the water , they make certain bars and shoulds , and at that time there was but a fathom water . 
 Those Shouldes being passed , we found foure or five fathom , and as far as we could perceive by the flood , it was that time of the year that the waters are lowest , for at other times they flow higher by three fathoms . All these foure or five branches do compass about five or sixe Hands very pleasant , which make the head of the lake : about fifteene leagues beyond , they do all come into one . That day we landed in one of the said Hands , and met with five men that were hunting of wild beasts , who as freely and familiarly came to our boats without any fear , as if we had ever be brought up together . Our boats being somewhat near the shore , one of them took our Captain in his arms , and carried him on shore , as lightly and as easily as if he had be a child of five years old : so strong and sturdy was this fellow . We found that they had a great heap of wild Rats that live in the water , as big as a Conny , rats as and very good to eat , which they gave unto our Cap - as taine , who for a recompense gave them knives and 
 229 
 Hochelaga distant from the lake of Angolesme 45. leagues . 
 glassen Beads . We asked them with signs if that was the way to Hochelaga , they answered yea , and that we had yet three days sailing thither . 
 How our Captain caused our boats to be mended and dressed to go to Hochelaga : and because the way was somewhat difficult and hard , we left our Pinnace behind : and how we came thither , and what entertainment we had of the people . 
 Chap. 6. 
 THe next day our Captain seeing that for that time it was not possible for our Pinnace to go on any further , he caused our boats to be made ready , and as much munition and victuals to be put in them , as they could well bear : he departed with them , accompanied with many Gentlemen , that is to say , Claudius of Ponte Briand , Cupbearer to the Lord Dolphin of France , Charles of Pommeraye , John Gouion , John Powlet , with twentie 8c eight Mariners : and Mace Jallobert , and William Briton , who had the charge under the Captain of the other two ships , to go up as far as they could into that river : we sailed with good and prosperous weather until the second of October , on which day we came to the town of Hochelaga , distant from the place where we had left our Pinnace five and fortie leagues . In which place of Hochelaga , and all the way we went , we met with many of those countrymen , who brought us fish and such other victuals as they had , still dancing and greatly rejoicing at our coming . Our Captain to lure them in , and to keep them our friends , to recompense them , gave them knives , beads , and such small trifles , wherewith they were greatly satisfied . So soon as we were come near Hochelaga , there came to meet us above a thousand persons , men , women and children , who afterwards did as friendly and merrily entertain and receive us as any father would do his child , which he had not of long time seen , the men dancing on one side , the women on another , and likewise the children on 
 230 
 * 535-another : after that they brought us great store of fish , & 
 of their bred made of Millet , casting them into our boats so thick , that you would have thought it to fallen from heaven . Which when our Captain saw , he with many of his company went on shore : so soon as ever we were aland they came clustering about us , making very much of us , bringing their young children in their arms , only to have our Captain and his company to touch them , making signs and shows of great mirth and gladness , that lasted more than half and hour . Our Captain seeing their loving kindness and entertainment of us , caused all the women orderly to be set in array , and gave them Beads made of Tin , and other such small trifles , and to some of the men he gave knives : then he returned to the boats to supper , and so passed that night , all which while all those people stood on the shore as near our boats as they might , making great fires , and dancing very merrily , still crying Aguiaze , which in their tongue signifies Mirth and Safety . 
 How our Captain with five Gentlemen and twentie armed men all well in order , went to see the town of Hochelaga , and the situation of it . 
 Chap. 7. 
 OUr Captain the next day very early in the morning , The third of having very gorgeously attired himself , caused all Qct0^r . 
 his company to be set in order to go to see the town and habitation of those people , and a certain mountain that is somewhat near the city : with whom went also five Gentlemen and twentie Mariners , leaving the rest to keep and look to our boats : we took with us three men of Hochelaga to bring us to the place . All along as we went we found the way as well beaten and frequented as can be , the fairest and best country that possibly can be seen , full of as goodly great Oaks as are in any wood in France , under which the ground was all covered over . with fair Acorns . After we had gone about foure or Berniks from five miles , we met by the way one of the chiefest Lords of the rivet side . 
 231 
 the city , accompanied with many more , who so soon as he saw us beckoned and made signs upon us , that we must rest us in that place where they had made a great fife and so we did . After that we had rested our selves there a while , the said Lord began to make a long discourse , even as we have said above , they are accustomed to do in sign of mirth and friendship , showing our Captain and all his company a joyful countenance , and good will , who gave him two hatchet's , a pair of knives and a cross which he made him to kiss , and then put it about his neck , for which he gave our Captain hearty thanks . This done , we went along , and about a mile and a half farther , we began to find goodly and large fields , full of such corn as the country yields . It is even as the Millet of Bresil , as great and somewhat bigger then small peason , wherewith they live even as we do with ours . In the midst of those fields is the city of Hochelaga , placed near , and as it were joined to a great mountain that is tilled round about , very fertili , on the top of which you may see very far , we nam it Mount Royal . The city of Hochelaga is round , compassed about with timber , with three course of Rampires , one within another framed like a sharp Spire , but laid across above . The middlemost of them is made and built , as a direct line , but perpendicular . The Rampires are framed and fashioned with pieces of timber , laid along on the ground , very well and cunningly joined together after their fashion . This enclosure is in height about two rods . It hath but one gate or entry thereat , which is shut with piles , stakes , and bars . Over it , and also in many places of the wall , there be places to run along , and ladders to get up , all full of stones , for the defence of it . There are in the town about fiftie houses , about fiftie paces long , and twelve , or fifteene broad , built all of wood , covered over with the bark of the wood as broad as any board , very finely and cunningly joined together . Within the said houses , there are many rooms , lodgings and chambers . In the midst of every one there is a great 
 232 
 Court , in the middle whereof they make their fire . They live in common together : then do the husbands , wives and children each one retire themselves to their chambers . They have also on the top of their houses certain garrets , wherein they keep their corn to make their bred withal : they call it Carraconny , which they make as hereafter shall follow . They have certain pieces of wood , made hollow like those whereon we beat our hemp , and with certain beetles of wood they beatrice their corn to powder : then they make past of it , and of the past , cakes or wreathes , then they lay them on a broad and hight stone , and then cover it with hight stones , and so they bake their bred in stead of Ovens . They make also sundry sorts of pottage with the said corn and also of peas and of beans , whereof they have great store , as 
 ... - ... ~ - cumbers , and 
 also with other fruits , as Musk-millions , and very great other fruits . 
 Cucumbers . They have also in their houses certain vessels as big as any But or Tun , wherein they preserve and keep their fish , causing the same in summer to be dried in the sun , and live therewith in winter , whereof they make great provision , as we by experience have seen . All their viands and meats are without any taste or savour of salt at all . They sleep upon barks of trees laid all along upon the ground being overspread with the skins of certain wild Beasts , wherewith they also cloth and cover themselves . The thing most precious that they have in all the world they call Asurgny : it is as white as any snow : they take it in the said river of Cornibotz , in the manner following . When any one hath deserved death , or that they take any of their enemies in Wars , first they kill him , then with certain knives they give great slashes and strokes upon their buttocks , flanks , thighs , and shoulders : then they cast the same body so mangled down to the bottom of the river , in a place where the said Esurgny is , and there leave it ten dr 12 hours , then they take it up again , and in the cuts find the said Esurgny or Cornibotz . Of them they make beads , and wear them about their 233 
 Matz , peas , beans , muskmilltons , cu - 
 Plenty offish and the preserving thereof . 
 necks , even as we do chains of gold and silver , accounting it the preciousest thing in the world . They have this virtue and property in them , they will stop or staunch bleeding at the nose , for we have proved it . These people are given to no other exercise , but only to husbandry and fishing for their sustenance : they have no care of any other wealth or commodity in this world , for they have no knowledge of it , and that is , because they never travel and go out of their country , as those of Canada and Saguenay do , albeit the Canadians with eight or nine Villages more alongst that river be subject's unto them . 
 How we came to the Town of Hochelaga , and the entertainment which there we had , and of certain gifts which our Captain gave them , with diverse other things . 
 Chap. 8. 
 SO soon as we were come near the Town , a great number of the inhabitants thereof came to present themselves before us after their fashion , making very much of us : we were by our guides brought into the midst of the town . They have in the middlemost part of their houses a large square place , being from side to side a good stones cast , whither we were brought , and there with signs were commanded to stay : then suddenly all the women and maidens of the town gathered themselves together , part of which had their arms full of young children , and as many as could came to rub our races , our arms , and what part of the body soever they could touch , weeping for very joy that they saw us , showing us the best countenance that possibly they could , desiring us with their signs , that it would please us to touch their children . That done , the men caused the women to withdraw themselves back , then they every one sat down on the ground round about us , as if they would have shown and rehearsed some Comedy or other show : then presently came the women again , 234 
 every one bringing a foure square Mat in manner of Carpets , and spreading them abroad on the ground in that place , they caused us to fit upon them . That done , the Lord & King of the country was brought upon 9 or 10 men's shoulders , ( whom in their tongue they call Agouhanna ) sitting upon a great Stags skin , and they laid him down upon the foresaid mats near to the Captain , every open beckoning unto us that he was their Lord and King . This Agouhanna was a man about fiftie years old : he was no whit better appareled then any of the rest , only excepted , that he had a certain thing made of the skins of Hedgehogs like a read wreathe , and that was in stead of his Crown . He was full of the palsy , and his members shrunk together . After he had with certain signs saluted our Captain and all his company , and by manifest tokens bid all welcome , he showed his legs and arms to our Captain , and with signs desired him to touch them , and so he did , rubbing them with his own hands : then did Agouhanna take the wreathe or crown he had about his head , and gave it unto our Captain : that done they brought before him diverse diseased men , some blind , some cripple , some lame and impotent , and some so old that the hair of their eyelids came down and covered their cheeks , and laid them all along before our Captain , to the end they might of him be touched : for it seemed unto them that God was descended and come down from heaven to heal them . Our Captain seeing the misery and devotion of this poor people , recited the Gospel of Saint John , that is to say , In the beginning was the word ; touching every one that were diseased , praying to God that it would please him to open the hearts of this poor people , and to make them know his holy word , and that they might receive Baptism and Christendome : that done , he took a Service-book in his hand , and with a loud voice read all the passion of Christ , word by word , that all the Standers by might hear him : all which while this poor people kept silence , & were 
 235 
 marvellously attentive , looking up to heaven , and imitating us in gestures . Then he caused the men all orderly to be set on one side , the women on another , & likewise the children on and other , & to the chiefest of them he gave hatchet's , to the other knives , & to the women beads & such other small trifles . Then where you children were , he cast rings , counters , & brooches made of Tin , whereat they seemed to be very glad . That done , our 
 Captain commanded Trumpets and other musical instruments to be sounded , which when they herd , they were very merry . Then we took our leave and went to our boat : the women seeing that , put themselves before to stay us , and brought us out of their meats that they had made ready for us , as fish , pottage , beans , and such other things , thinking to make us eat , and dine in that place : but because the meats had no savour at all of salt , we liked them not , but thanked them , and with signs gave them to understand that we had no need to eat . When we were out of the Town , diverse of the men and women followed us , and brought us to the top Mount Royal . of the foresaid mountain , which we nam Mount 
 Royal , it is about a league from the Town . When as we were on the top of it , we might discern and A ridge of plainly see thirtie leagues about . On the Northside of mountains to ; tO there are many hills to be seen running West and Hochelaga h . ast , and as many more on the South , among and 
 and another between the which the Country is as fair and as to the South , pleasant as possibly can be seen , being level , smooth , and very plain , fit to be husbanded and tilled : and in the midst of those fields we saw the river further up a great way then where we had left our boats , where was the greatest and the swiftest fallen of water that any where hath been seen , and as great , wide and large as our sighed might discern , going Southwest along three fair The 3 saults and round mountains that we saw , as we judged about Later in ? Afteene leagues from us . Those which brought us degrees of^ thither told and showed us , that in the said river there latitude . were three such falls of water more , as that was where we 236 
 1535-had left our boats : but because we could not understand their language , we could not know how far they were one from another . Moreover they showed us with signs , that the said three falls being passed , a man might sail the space of three months more alongst that River , and that along the hills that are on the North side there is a great river , which ( even as the other ) comes from 
 the West , we thought it to be the river that runneth 2% mor of through the Country of Saguenay : and without any a&uenay sign or question moved or asked of them , they took West the chain of our Captains whistle , which was of silver , where there is and the dagger-haft of one of our fellow Mariners , gold and hanging on his side being of yellow copper guilt , and showed us that such stufFe came from the said River , and that there be Agouionda , that is as much to say , as evil people , who go all armed even to their fingers ends . Also they showed us the manner and making of their armour : they are made of cords and wood , finely and cunningly wrought together . They gave us also to understand that those Agouionda do continually war one against another , but because we did not understand them well , we could not perceive how far it was to that Country . Our Captain showed them red Copper , which in their language they call Caignetadze , and looking toward that Country , with signs asked them if any came from thence , they shaking their heads answered no : but they showed us that it came from Saguenay , and that lies clean contrary to the other . Red copper in After we had herd and seen these things of them , we drew to our boats accompanied with a great multitude of those people : some of them when as they saw any of our fellows weary , would take them up on their shoulders , and carry them as on horseback . So soon as we came to our boats we hoised sail to go towards our Pinnace , doubting of some mischance . Our departure grieved and displeased them very much , for they followed us along the river as far as they could : we went so fast that on munday being the fourth of October 
 237 
 we came where our Pinnace was . The Tuesday following being the fift of the month , we hoised sail , and with our Pinnace and boats departed from thence towards the Province of Canada , to the port of the Holy Cross , where we had left our ships . The seventh day we came against a river that comes from the North , and entered into that river , at the entrance whereof are foure little Hands full of fair and goodly trees : we nam that river The river of Fovetz : But because one of those Islands stretcheth it self a great way into the river , our Captain at the point of it caused a goodly great Cross to be set up , and commanded the boats to be made ready , that with the next tide he might go up the said river , and consider the quality of it , which we did , and that day went up as far as we could : but because we found it to be of no importance , and very shallow , we returned and sailed down the river . 
 How we came to the Port of the Holy Cross , and in what state we found our ships : and how the Lord of the Country came to visit our Captain , and our Captain him : and of certain particular customs of the people . 
 Chap. 9. 
 UPon Monday being the 11 of October we came to the Port of the Holy Cross , where our ships were , and found that the Master's and Mariners we had left there , had made and reared a trench before the ships , altogether closed with great pieces of timber set upright [ III . 223. J and very well fastened together : then had they beset the said trench about with pieces of Artillery and other necessary things to shield and defend themselves from the power of all the country . So soon as the Lord of the country herd of our coming , the next day being the twelfth of October , he came to visit us , accompanied with Taignoagny , Domagaia and many others , feigning to be very glad of our coming , making 238 
 much of our Captain , who as friendly as he could , entertained them , albeit they had not deserved it . Donnacona their Lord desired our Captain the next day to come and see Canada , which he promised to do : for the next day being the 13 of the month , he with all his Gentlemen and fiftie Mariners very well appointed , went to visit Donnacona and his people , about a league from our ships . The place where they make their abided is called Stadacona . When we were about a stones cast from their houses , many of the inhabitants came to meet us , being all set in a rank , and ( as their custom is ) the men all on one side , & the women on the other , still dancing and singing without any ceasing : and after we had saluted and received one another , our Captain gave them knives and such other sleight things : then he caused all the women and children to pass along before him , giving each one a ring of Tin , for which they gave him hearty thanks : that done , our Captain was by Donnacona and Taignoagny , brought to see their houses , which ( the quality considered ) were very well provided , and stored with such victuals as the country yields , to pass away the winter withal . Then they showed us the skins of five men's heads spread upon boards as we do use parchment : Donnacona told us that they were skins of Toudamani , a people dwelling towards the South , who continually do war against them . Moreover they told us , that it was two years passed that those Toudamans came to assault them , yea even into the said river , in and Hand that lies over against Saguenay , where they had been the night before , as they were going a warfaring in Hognedo , with 200 persons , men , women , and children , who being all asleep in a Fort that they had made , they were assaulted by the said Toudamans , who put fire round about the Fort , and as they would have come out of it to save themselves , they were all slain , only five excepted , who escaped . For which loss they yet sorrowed , showing 
 Stadacona . 
 Toudamani dwelling Southward of Canada . 
 239 
 with signs , that one day they would be revenged : that done , we came to our ships again . 
 The manner how the people of that Country live : and of certain conditions : of their faith , manners , and customs . 
 Chap. io . 
 THis people believe no whit in God , but in one whom they call Cudruaigni : they say that often he speaks with them and telleth them what weather shall follow , whither good or bad . Moreover they say , that when he is angry with them he casts dust into their eyes : they believe that when they die they go into the stars , & thence by little & little descend down into the Horizon , even as the stars do , & that then they go into certain green fields full of goodly fair & precious trees , flowers , & fruits . After that they had given us these things to understand , we showed them their error , and told that their Cudruaigni did but deceive them , for he is but a Devil & and evil spirit : affirming unto them , that there is but one only God , who is in heaven , and who gives us all necessaries , being the Creator of all himself , and that only we must believe in him : moreover , that it is necessary for us to be baptised , otherwise we are damned into hell . These and many other things concerning our faith and religion we showed them , all which they did easily believe , calling their Cudruaigni , Agouiada , that is to say , nought , so that very earnestly they desired and prayed our Captain that he would cause them to be baptised , and their Lord , and Taignoagny , Doma-They desire io gaia , and all the people of the town came unto us , be baptised , hoping to be baptised : but because we did not thoroughly know their mind , and that there was no body could teach them our belief & religion , we excused our selves , desiring Taignoagny , & Domagaia , to tell the rest of their countrymen , that he would come again another time , & bring Priests & chrisome with us , for 
 240 
 without them they could not be baptised : which they did easily believe , for Domagaia & Taignoagny had seen many children baptised in Britain while they were there . Which promise when they herd they seemed to be very glad . They live in common together : and of such commodities as their country yields they are indifferently well stored , the inhabitants of the country cloth themselves with the skins of certain Wild beasts , but very miserably . In winter they wear hosen and shoes made of wild beasts skins , and in Summer they go barefooted . They keep and observe the rites of matrimony , saving that every one weddeth 2 or 3 wives , which ( their husbands being dead ) do never marry again , but for the death of their husbands wear a certain black weed all the days of their life , besmearing all their faces with coaldust & grease mingled together as thick as the back of a knife , and by that they are known to be widow's . They have a filthy and detestable use in marrying of their maidens , and that is this , they put them all ( after they are of lawful age to marry ) in a common place , as harlots free for every man that will have to do with them , until such time as they find a match . This I say , because I have seen by experience many housen full of those Damosels , even as our schools are full of children in France to learn to read . Moreover , the misrule and riot that they keep in those houses is very great , for very wantonly they sport and dally together , showing whatsoever God hath sent them . They are no men of great labour . They dig their grounds with certain pieces of wood , as big as half a sword , on which ground grows their corn , which they call Offici : it Their Maiz. is as big as our small peason : there is great quantity of it growing in Bresill . They have also great store of Musk-millions , Pompions , Gourds , Cucumbers , Peason and Beanes * of every colour , yet differing from ours . There grows also a certain kind of herb , whereof in Summer they make great provision for all the year , 
 vin 241 Q 
 making great account of it , and only men use of it , and first they cause it to be dried in the sun , then wear it about their necks wrapped in a little beasts skin made like a little bag , with a hollow piece of stone or wood like a pipe : then when they please they make powder of it , and then put it in one of the ends of the said Cornet or pipe , and laying a coal of fire upon it , at the other end suck so long , that they fill their bodies full of smoke , till that it comes out of their mouth and nostrils , even as out of the Tonnell of a chimney . They say that this does keep them warm and in health : they nev^r go without some of it about them . We our selves have tried the same smoke , and having put it in our mouths , it seemed almost as hight as Pepper . The women of that country do labour much more then the men , as well in fishing ( whereto they are greatly given ) as in tilling and husbanding their grounds , and other things : as well the men as women and children , are very much more able to resist cold then savage beasts , for we with our own eyes have seen some of them , when it was coldest ( which cold was extreme raw and bitter ) come to our ships stark naked going upon snow & ice , which thing seems incredible to them that have not seen it . When as the snow and ice lies on the ground , they take great store of wild beasts , as Fans , Stags , Bears , Marterns , Hares & Foxes , with diverse other sorts whose flesh they eat raw , having first dried it in you sun or smoke , and so they do their fish . As far forth as we could perceive and understand by these people , it were a very easy thing to bring them to some familiarity & civility , and make them learn what one would . The Lord God for his mercies sake set thereunto his helping hand when he sees cause . Amen . 
 242 
 Of the greatness and depth of the said river , and of the sorts of beasts , birds , fish , and other things that we have seen , with the situation of the place . 
 Chap. 11. 
 THe said river begins beyond the Hand of the Assumption , over against the high mountains of Hognedo , and of the seven Hands . The distance over from one side to the other is about 35 or 40 leagues . In the midst it is above 200 fathom deep . The surest way to sail upon it is on the South side . And towards the North , that is to say , from the said 7 Hands , from side to side , there is seven leagues distance , where are also two great rivers that come down from the hills of Saguenay , and make diverse very dangerous shelves in the sea . At the entrance of those two rivers we saw many & great store of Whale's and Sea horses . Overthwart the said Hands there is another little river that runneth along those marrish grounds about 3 or 4 leagues , wherein there is great store of water fowls . From the entrance of that river to Hochelaga there is about 300 leagues distance : the originali beginning of it is in the river that comes from Saguenay , which riseth and springs among high & steep hills : it entereth into that river before it comes to the Province of Canada on the North side . That river is very deep , high , and straight , wherefore it is very dangerous for any vessel to go upon it . After that river follows the Province of Canada , wherein are many people dwelling in open boroughs and villages . There are also in the circuit and territory of Canada , along , and within the said river , many other Hands , some great & some small , among which there is one that containeth above ten leagues in length , full of goodly and high trees , and also many Vines . You may go into it from both sides , but yet the surest passage is on the South side . On the shore or bank of that river Westward , there is a goodly , fair , and delectable bay or creek , convenient and fit for to 243 
 It is now found to be but 200 leagues . 
 harbour ships . Hard by there is in that river one place very narrow , deep , & swift running , but it is not passing the third part of a league , over against the which there is a goodly high piece of land , with a town therein : and the country about it is very well tilled & wrought , & as good as possibly can be seen . That is the place and abided of Donnacona , and of our two men we took in our first voyage , it is called Stadacona . But before we come to it , there are 4 other peopled towns , that is to say , Ayraste , Starnatan , Tailla , which stands upon a hill , Scitadin , and then Stadagona , under which town towards the North the river and port of the holy cross is , where we stayed from the 15 of September , until the 16 of May 1536 , and there our ships remained dry , as we have said before . That place being passed , we found the habitation of the people called Teguenondahi , standing upon and high mountain , and the valley of Hochelay , which stands in a Champagne country . All the said country on both sides of the river as far as Hochelay & beyond , is as fair and plain as ever was seen . There are certain mountains far distant from the said river , which are to be seen above the foresaid Rivers falling towns , from which mountains diverse rivers descend , from moun - which fallen into the said great river . All that country 
 ‘ is full of sundry sorts of wood and many Vines , unless 
 it be about the places that are inhabited , where they have pulled up the trees to till and labour the ground , and to built their houses and lodgings . There is great store of Beasts . Stags , Dear , Bears , and other such like sorts of beasts , as Connies , Hares , Marterns , Foxes , Otters , Bevers , Weasels , Badgers , and Rats exceeding great , and diverse other sorts of wild beasts . They cloth themselves with the skins of those beasts , because they have nothing else to make them apparel ! withal . There are Birds . also many sorts of birds , as Cranes , Swans , Bustards , wild Geese white and grey , Ducks , Thrush's , Blackbirds , Turtles , wild Pigeons , Lenites , Finches , Redbreasts , Stares , Nightingales , Sparrows , and other Birds , 
 244 
 even as in France . Also , as we have said before , the said river is the plentifullest of fish that ever hath of any man Fish . be seen or herd of , because that from the mouth to the end of it , according to their seasons , you shall find all sorts of fresh water fish and salt . There are also 
 many Whale's , Porposes , Seahorses , and Adhothuis , which is a kind of fish that we had never seen nor herd of 
 before . They are as great as Porposes , as white as any snow , their body and head fashioned as a grayhound , they are wont always to abide between the fresh & salt water , 
 which begins between the river of Saguenay and Canada . 
 Of certain advertisements and notes given unto us by those countrymen , after our return from Hochelaga . 
 Chap. 12. 
 AFter our return from Hochelaga , we dealt , trafficked , and with great familiarity and love were conversant with those that dwelled nearest unto our ships , except that sometime we had strife and contention with certain naughty people , full soar against the will of the others . we understood of Donnacona and of others , that the said river is called the river of Saguenay , and goes to ' Saguenay , being somewhat more then a league farther Westnorthwest , and that 8 or 9 days journey beyond , it will bear but small boats . But the right and ready The right way way to Saguenay is up that river to Hochelaga , and then t0 Saguenay . into another that comes from Saguenay , and then entereth into the foresaid river , & that there is yet one months sailing thither . Moreover , they told us and gave us to understand , that there are people clad with cloth as we are , very honest , and many inhabited towns , and that they have great store of Gold and read Copper : and that tore °f about the land beyond the said first river to Hochelaga read copper . and Saguenay , is and Hand environed round about with that and other rivers , and that beyond Saguenay the said Twg or three river entereth into two or 3 great lake's , and that there is great lake's . 
 245 
 The river of Irrouacasfalling into the lake ofAngo-lesme . 
 a Sea of fresh water found , and as they have herd say of those of Saguenay , there was never man herd of that found out the end thereof : for , as they told us , they themselves were never there . Moreover they told us , that where we had left our Pinnace when we went to Hochelaga , there is a river that goes Southwest , from whence there is a whole months sailing to go to a certain land , where there is neither ice nor snow seen , where the inhabitants do continually war one against another , where is great store of Oranges , Almonds , Nuts , and Apples , with many other sorts of fruits , and that the men and women are clad with beasts skins even as they : we asked them if there were any gold or read copper , they answered no . I take this place to be towards Florida , as far as I could perceive and understand by their signs and tokens . 
 Of a strange and cruel disease that came to the people of Stadacona , wherewith because we did haunt their company , we were so infected , that there died 25 of our company . 
 Chap. 13. 
 IN the month of December , we understood that the pestilence was come among the people of Stadacona , in such sort , that before we knew of it , according to their confession , there were dead above 50 : whereupon we charged them neither to come near our Fort , nor about our ships , or us . And albeit we had driven them from us , the said unknown sickness began to spread itself among us after the strangest sort that ever was either herd of or seen , insomuch as some did loose all their strength , and could not stand on their feet , then did their legs swell , their sinnowes shrink as black as any cole* Others also had all their skins spotted with spots of blood of a purple colour : then did it ascend up to their ankels , . knees , thighs , shoulders , arms , and neck : their mouth became stinking , their gums so rotten , that all the flesh did fallen off , even to the roots of the teeth , which . 
 246 
 did also almost all fallen out . With such infection did this sickness spread it self in our three ships , that about the middle of February , of a hundreth and tenne persons that we were , there were not ten whole , so that one could not help the other , a most horrible and pitiful case , considering the place we were in , forsomuch as the people of the country would daily come before our fort , and saw but few of us . There were already eight dead , and more then fifty sick , and as we thought , passed all hope of recovery . Our Captain seeing this our misery , & that the sickness was gone so far , ordained and commanded , that every one should devoutly prepare himself to prayer , and in remembrance of Christ , caused his Image to be set upon a tree , about a flight shot from the fort amid the ice and snow , giving all men to understand , that on the Sunday following , service should be said there , and that whosoever could go , sick or whole , should go thither in Procession , singing the seven Psalms of David , with other Litanies , praying most heartily that it would please the said our Christ to have compassion upon us . Service being done , and as well celebrated as we could , our Captain there made a vow , that if it would please God to give him leave to return into France , he would go on Pilgrimage to our Lady of Rocquemado . That day Philip Rougemont , born in Amboise , died , being 22 years old , and because the sickness was to us unknown , our Captain caused him to be ripped to see if by any means possible we might know what it was , and so seek means to save and preserve the rest of the company : he was found to have his heart white , but rotten , and more then a quart of read water about it : his liver was indifferent fair , but his lungs black and mortified , his blood was altogether shrunk about the heart , so that when he was opened great quantity of rotten blood issued out from about his heart : his milt towards the back was somewhat perished , rough as if it had be rubbed against a stone . Moreover , because one of his thighs was very black without , it was 
 247 
 opened , but within it was whole and found : that done , as well as we could he was buried . In such sort did the sickness continue and increase , that there were not above three found men in the ships , and none was able to go under hatches to draw drink for himself , nor for his fellows . Sometime we were constrained to bury some of the dead under the snow , because we were not able to dig any graves for them the ground was so hard frozen , and we so weak . Beside this , we did greatly fear that the people of the country would perceive our weakness and misery , which to hide , our Captain , whom it pleased God always to keep in health , would go out with two or three of the company , some sick and some whole , whom when he saw out of the Fort , he would throw stones at them and chide them , feigning that so soon as he came again , he would beat them , and then with signs show the people of the country that he caused all his men to work and labour in the ships , some in calking them , some in beating of chalk , some in one thing , and some in another , and that he would not have them come forth till their work was done . And to make his tale seem true and likely , he would make all his men whole & found to make a great noise with knocking sticks , stones , hammers , and other things together , at which time we were so oppressed and grieved with that sickness , that we had lost all hope ever to see France again , if God of his infinite goodness and mercy had not with his pitiful eye looked upon us , and revealed a singular and excellent remedy against all diseases unto us , the best that ever was found upon earth , as hereafter shall follow . 
 248 
 How long we stayed in the Port of the holy Cross amid the snow and ice , and how many died of the said disease , from the beginning of it to the midst of March . 
 Chap. 14. 
 FRom the midst of November until the midst of 
 March , we were kept in amid the ice above two fathoms thick , and snow above foure foot high and more , higher then the sides of our ships , which lasted till that time , in such sort , that all our drinks were frozen in the Vessels , and the ice through all the ships was above a handbreadth thick , as well above hatches as beneath , and so much of the river as was fresh , even to Hochelaga , was frozen , in which space there died five and twentie of our best and chiefest men , and all the rest were so sick , that we thought they should never recover again , only three or foure excepted . Then it pleased God to cast his pitiful eye upon us , and sent us the knowledge of remedy of our healths and recovery , in such manner as in the next Chapter shall be showed . 
 How by the grace of God we had notice of a certain tree , whereby we all recovered our health : and the manner how to use it . 
 Chap. 15. 
 OUr Captain considering our estate ( and how that sickness was increased and hight among us ) one day went forth of the Fort , and walking upon the ice , he saw a troop of those Countrymen coming from Stadacona , among which was Domagaia , who not passing ten or twelve days afore , had be very sick with that disease , and had his knees swollen as big as a child of two years old , all his sinews shrunk together , his teeth spoiled , his gums rotten , and stinking . Our Captain seeing him whole and found , was thereat marvellous glad , hoping to understand and 
 249 
 A perfect remedy against the French Pocks . 
 know of him how he had healed himself , to the end he might ease and help his men . So soon as they were come near him , he asked Domagaia how he had done to heal himself : he answered , that he had taken the juice and sap of the leaves of a certain Tree , and therewith had healed himself : For it was a singular remedy against that disease . Then our Captain asked of him if any were to be had thereabouts , desiring him to show him , for to heal a servant of his , who whilst he was in Canada with Donnacona , was stricken with that disease : That he did because he would not show the number of his sick men . Domagaia straight sent two women to fetch some of it , which brought ten or twelve branches of it , and therewithal ! showed the way how to use it , and that is thus , to take the bark and leaves of the said tree , and boil them together , then to drink of the said decoction every other day , and to put the dregs of it upon his legs that is sick : moreover , they told us , that the virtue of that tree was , to heal any other disease : the tree is in their language called Ameda or Hanneda , this is thought to be the Sassafras tree . Our Captain presently caused some of that drink to be made for his men to drink of it , but there was none durst taste of it , except one or two , who ventured the drinking of it , only to taste & prove it : the other seeing that did the like , and presently recovered their health , and were delivered of that sickness , & what other disease soever , in such sort , that there were some had be diseased and troubled with the French Pocks foure or five years , and with this drink were clean healed . After this medicine was found and proved to be true , there was such strife about it , who should be first to take of it , that they were ready to kill one another , so that a tree as big as any Oak in France was spoiled and lopped bore , and occupied all in five or sixe days , and it wrought so well , that if all the physicians of Mountpelier and Lovaine had be there with all the drugs of Alexan - 
 250 
 dria , they would not have done so much in one year , as that tree did in sixe days , for it did so prevail , that as many as used of it , by the grace of God recovered their health . 
 How the Lord Donnacona accompanied with Taignoagny and diverse others , feigning that they would go to hunt Stags , and Dear , tarried out two months , and at their return brought a great multitude of people with them , that we were not wont to see before . 
 A.D. 
 * 535 - 
 Chap. 16. 
 WHile that disease lasted in our ships , the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , with many others went from home , feigning that they would go to catch Stags and Dear , which are in their tongue called Ajounesta , and Asquenoudo , because the ice and snow was not so broken along the river that they could sail : it was told us of Domagaia and others , that they would stay out but a fortnight , & we believed it , but they stayed above two months , which made us mistrust that they had be gone to raise the country to come against us , and do us some displeasure , we seeing our selves so weak & faint . Albeit we had used such diligence and policy in our Fort , that if all the power of the country had be about it , they could have done nothing but look upon us : and whilst they were forth , many of the people came daily to our ships , and brought us fresh meat , as Stags , Dear , fish , with diverse other things , but held them at such and excessive price , that rather then they would fell them any thing cheap , many times they would carry them back again , because that year the Winter was very long , and they Alongwmter . had some scarcity and need of them . 
 [ How Donnacona 25x 
 How Donnacona came to Stadacona again with a great number of people , and because he would not come to visit our Captain , feigned himself to be soar sick , which he did only to have the Captain come see him . 
 Chap. 17. 
 ON the one and twentieth day of April Domagaia came to the shore side , accompanied with diverse lusty and strong men , such as we were not wont to see , and told us that their lord Donnacona would the next day come and see us , and bring great store of Deeres flesh , and other things with him . The next day he came and brought a great number of men to Stadacona , to what end , and for what cause we knew not , but ( as the proverb say ) he that takes heed and shields himself from all men , may hap to escape from some : for we had need to look about us , considering how in number we were diminished , and in strength greatly weakened , both by reason of our sickness and also of the number that were dead , so that we were constrained to leave one of our ships in the Port of the Holy Cross . Our Captain was warned of their coming , and how they had brought a great number of men with them , for Domagaia came to tell it us , and durst not pass the river that was betwixt Stadacona and us , as he was wont to do , whereupon we mistrusted some treason . Our Captain seeing this , sent one of his servants to them , accompanied with John Poulet being best beloved of those people , to see who were there , and what they did . The said Poulet & the other feigned themselves only to be come to visit Donnacona , & bring him certain presents , because they had been together a good while in the said Donnaconas Town . So soon as he herd of their coming , he god himself to bed , feigning to be very sick . That done , they went to Taignoagny his house to see him , and wheresoever they went , they saw so many people , that in a manner one 
 252 
 could not stir for another , and such men as they were never wont to see . Taignoagny would not permit our men to enter into any other houses , but still kept them company , and brought them half way to their ships , and told them that if it would please our captain to show him so much favour as to take a Lord of the Country , whose name was Agonna , of whom he had received some displeasure , and carry him with him into France , he should therefore for ever be bound unto him , and would do for him whatsoever he would command him , and bade the servant come again the next day , and bring and answer . Our Captain being advertised of so many people that were there , not knowing to what end , purposed to play a pretty prank , that is to say , to take their Lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and some more of the chiefest of them prisoners , in so much as before he had purposed , to bring them into France , to show unto our King what he had seen in those Western parts , and marvels of the world , for that Donnacona had told us , that he had be in the Country of Saguenay , in which are infinite Rubies , Gold , and other riches , and Rubles , Gold , that there are white men , who cloth themselves with woollen cloth even as we do in France . Moreover he riches in reported , that he had be in another country of a Saguenay . people called Picquemians , and other strange people . A people called The said Lord was and old man , and even from his Picquemians . childhood had never left off nor ceased from travailing into strange Countries' , as well by water and rivers , as by land . The said Poulet , and the other having told our Captain their Embassage , and showed him what Taignoagny his will was , the next day he sent his servant again to bid Taignoagny come and see him , and show what he should , for he should be very well entertained , and also part of his will should be accomplished . Taignoagny sent him word , that the next day he would come and bring the Lord Donnacona with him , and him that had so offended him , which he did not , but stayed two days , in which time none came from Stadacona to 
 253 
 our ships , as they were wont to do , but rather fled from us , as if we would have slain them , so that then we plainly perceived their knavery . 
 The town of But because they understood , that those of Sidatin did tdatm . frequent our company , and that we had forsaken the bottom of a ship which we would leave , to have the old nails out of it , the third day following they came from Stadacona , and most of them without difficulty did pass from one side of the river to the other with small Skiffs : but Donnacona would not come over : Taignoagny , and Domagaia stood talking together above and hour before they would come over , at last they came to speak with our Captain . There Taignoagny prayed him that he would cause the foresaid man to be taken and carried into France . Our Captain refused to do it , saying , that his King had forbidden him to bring any man or woman into France , only that he might bring two or three young boys to learn the language , but that he would willingly carry him to Newfoundland , and there leave him in and Island . Our Captain spoke this , only to assure them , that they should bring Donnacona with them , whom they had left on the other side : which words , when Taignoagny herd , he was very glad , thinking he should never return into France again , and therefore promised to come the next day , which was the day of the Holy Cross , and to bring Donnacona and all the people with him . 
 How that upon Holyrood day our Captain caused a Cross to be set up in our Fort : and how the Lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and others of their company came : and of the taking of the said Lord . 
 Chap. 18. 
 THe third of May being Holyroode day , our Captain for the solemn nitie of the day , caused a goodly fair cross of 35 foot in height to be set up , under the crosset of which he caused a shield to be hanged , 254 
 wherein were the Arms of France , and over them was written in antique letters , Franciscus primus Dei gratia Francorum Rex regnat . And upon that day about noon , there came a great number of the people of Stadacona , men , women , and children , who told us that their Lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia were coming , whereof we were very glad , hoping to retain them . About two of the clock in the afternoon they came , & being come near our ships , our Captain went to salute Donnacona , who also showed him a merry countenance , albeit very fearfully his eyes were still bent towards the wood . Shortly after came Taignoagny , who bade Donnacona that he should not enter into our Fort , and therefore fire was brought forth by one of our men , Sc kindled where their Lord was . Our Captain prayed him to come into our ships to eat & drink as he was wont to do , and also Taignoagny , who promised , that after a while he would come , and so they did , & entered into our ships : but first it was told our Captain by Domagaia that Taignoagny had spoken ill of him , & that he had bid Donnacona he should not come aboard our ships . Our Captain perceiving that , came out of the Fort , and saw that only by Taignoagny his warning the women ran away , and none but men stayed in great number , wherefore he straight commanded his men to lay hold on Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , & Donnacona , two more of the chiefest whom he pointed unto : then Taignoagny , he commanded them to make the other to retire . Presently after , the said lord entered into the Fort with the Captain , but by & by Taignoagny came to make him come out again . Our Captain seeing that there was no other remedy , began to call unto them to take them , at whose cry and voice all his men came forth , and took the said Lord with the others , whom they had appointed to take . The Canadians seeing their Lord taken , began to run away , even as sheep before the wolf , some crossing over the river , some through the woods , each one seeking for his own advantage . That 
 255 
 Foure and twenty chains of Esurgny 
 done , we retired our selves , and laid up the prisoners under good guard and safety . 
 How the said Canadians the night following came before our ships to seek their men , Crying and howling all night like Wolves : of the talk and conclusion they agreed upon the next day : and of the gifts which they gave our Captain . 
 Chap. 19. 
 THe night following they came before our ships , ( the river being betwixt us ) striking their breasts , and crying and howling like wolves , still calling Agouhanna , thinking to speak with him , which our Captain for that time would not permit , neither all the next day till noon , whereupon they made signs unto us , that we had hanged or killed him . About noon , there came as great a number in a cluster , as ever we saw , who went to hide themselves in the Forest , except some , who with a loud voice would call and cry to Donnacona to speak unto them . Our Captain then commanded Donnacona to be brought up on high to speak unto them , and bade him be merry , for after he had spoken , and showed unto the King of France what he had seen in Saguenay and other countries' , after ten or twelve months , he should return again , and that the King of France would give him great rewards , whereat Donnacona was very glad , and speaking to the others , told it them , who in token of joy , gave out three great cries , and then Donnacona and his people had great talk together , which for want of interpreters , cannot be described . Our Captain bade Donnacona that he should cause them to come to the other side of the river , to the end they might better talk together without any fear , & that he should assure them : which Donnacona did , and there came a boat full of the chiefest of them to the ships , and there anew began to talk together , giving great praise to our captain , and gave him a present of foure and twenty chains of Esurgny , for that is the greatest 256 
 and preciousest riches they have in this world , for they esteem more of that , then of any gold or silver . After they had long talked together , and that their Lord saw that there was no remedy to avoid his going into France , he commanded his people the next day , to bring him some victuals to serve him by the way . Our Captain gave Donnacona , as a great present , two Frying pans of copper , eight Hatchet's , and other small trifles , as Knives , and Beads , whereof he seemed to be very glad , who sent them to his wives and children . Likewise , he gave to them that came to speak with Donacona , they thanked him greatly for them , and then went to their lodgings . 
 How the next day , being the fift of May , the said people came again to speak unto their Lord , and how foure women came to the shore to bring him victuals . 
 Chap. 20. 
 UPon the fifth of May , very early in the morning , a great number of the said people came again to speak unto their Lord , and sent a Boat , which in their tongue they call Casnoni , wherein were only foure women , without any man , for fear their men should be retained . 
 These women brought great store of victuals , as great Millet , which is their corn that they live withal , flesh , fish , and other things , after their fashion . 
 These women being come to our ships , our Captain did very friendly entertain them . Then Donnacona prayed our Captain to tell those women that he should come again after ten or twelve months , and bring Donnacona to Canada with him : this he said only to appease them , which our captain did : wherefore the women , as well by words as signs , seemed to be very glad , giving our Captain thanks , and told him , if he came again , and brought Donnacona with him , they would give him many things : in sign whereof , each one gave our Captain a chain of Esurgny , and then passed vin 257 R 
 Coudres . 
 A knife of read copper brought from Saguenay . 
 The Isle of Hares . 
 to the other side of the river again , where stood all the people of Stadacona , who taking all leave of their Lord , went home again . On Saturday following , being the sixt of the month , we departed out of the said Port of Santa Croix , and came to harbour a little beneath the Island of Orleans , about twelve leagues from the Port of the Holy Cross , and upon Sonday we came to the Island of Filberts , where we stayed until the sixteenth of that month , till the fierceness of the waters were passed , which at that time ran too swift a course , and were too dangerous to come down along the river , and therefore we stayed till fair weather came . In the mean while many of Donnaconas subject's came from the river of Saguenay to him , but being by Domagaia advertised , that their Lord was taken to be carried into France , they were all amazed : yet for all that they would not leave to come to our ships , to speak to Donnacona , who told them that after twelve months he should come again , and that he was very well used by the Captain , Gentlemen , and Mariners . Which when they herd , they greatly thanked our Captain and gave their Lord three bundles of Beavers , and sea Wolves skins , with a great knife of read copper that comes from Saguenay , and other things . They gave also to our Captain a chain of Esurgny , for which our Captain gave them ten or twelve Hatchet's , and they gave him hearty thanks , and were very well contented . The next day , being the sixteenth of May , we hoised sail , and came from the said Island of Filberts , to another about fifteene leagues from it , which is about five leagues in length , and there , to the end we might take some rest the night following , we stayed that day , in hope the next day we might pass and avoid the dangers of the river of Saguenay , which are great . That evening we went aland and found great store of Hares , of which we took a great many , and therefore we called it The Island of Hares : in the night there arose a contrary wind , with such storms and tempest , that we were constrained to 258 
 return to the Island of Filberts again , from whence we were come , because there was none other passage among the said Islands , and there we stayed till the one and twentieth of that month , till fair weather and good wind came again : and then we sailed again , and that so prosperously , that we passed to Honguedo , which passage until that time had not be discovered : we caused our ships to course athwart Cape Prat which is the beginning of the Port of Chaleur : and because the wind was good and convenient , we sailed all day and all night without staying , and the next day we came to the middle of Brions Island , which we were not minded lsle °f to do , to the end we might shorten our way . These Brion-two lands lie Northwest , and Southeast , and are about fiftie leagues one from another . The said Island is in latitude 47 degrees and a half . Upon Thursday being the twenty sixe of the month , and the feast of the Ascension of our Lord , we coasted over to a land and shallow of low sands , which are about eight leagues Southwest from Brions Island , above which are large Champains , full of trees and also and enclosed sea , whereas we could neither see , nor perceive any gap or way to enter thereinto . On Friday following , being the 27 of the month , because the wind did change on the coast , we came to Brions Island again , where we stayed till the beginning of June , and towards the Southeast of this Island , we saw a land , seeming unto us as and Island , we coasted it about two leagues and a half , and 
 by the way we had notice of three other high Islands , lying towards the Sands : after we had known these things we returned to the Cape of the said land , which doth divide it self into two or three very high Capes : the waters there are very deep , and the flood of the sea runneth so swift , that it cannot possibly be swifter . That day we came to Cape Loreine , which is in forty seven degrees and a half towards the South : on which cape there is a low land , and it seems that there is some entrance of a river , but there is no haven of any worth . 
 259 
 Above these lands we saw another cape towards the South , we nam it Saint Paules Cape , it is at 47 degrees and a quarter . 
 The Sonday following , being the fourth of June , and Whitsonday , we had notice of the coast lying Eastsoutheast , distant from the Newfoundland about two and twenty leagues : and because the wind was against us , we went to a Haven , which we nam S. Spiritus Porte , where we stayed till Tewesday that we departed thence , sailing along that coast until ! we came to Saint Peters Islands . we found along the said coast many very dangerous Islands and shelves , which lie all in the way Eastsoutheast and Westnorthwest , about three and twenty leagues into the sea . Whilst we were in the said Saint Peters Islands we met with many ships of France and of Britaine , we stayed there from Saint Barnabas day , being the eleventh of the month , until the sixteenth that we departed thence & came to Cape Raze , and entered into a Port called Rognoso , where we took in fresh water , and wood to pass the sea : there we left one of our boats . Then upon Monday , being the nineteenth of June , we went from that Port , and with such good and prosperous weather we sailed along the sea , in such sort , that upon the sixt of July 1536 we came to the Porte of S. Malo , by the grace of God , to whom we pray , here ending our Navigation , that of his infinite mercy he will grant us his grace and favour , and in the end bring us to the place of everlasting felicity . Amen . 
 Here follows the language of the country , and kingdoms of Hochelaga and Canada , of 
 us called New France : But first the names 
 of their numbers . 
 Secada 1 Indahir 6 
 Tigneni 2 Aiaga 7 
 Hasche 3 Addigue 8 
 Hannaion 4 Madellon 9 
 Oviscon S 260 Assem 10 
 Here follow the names of the chiefest parts of man , 
 and other words necessary to be known . 
 the Head aggonzi God cudragny 
 the Brow the Eyes hegueniascon higata give me " | some drink 1 quazahoaquea 
 the Ears abontascon give me to | [ f quaso hoa 
 the Mouth esahe breakfast j I [ quascaboa 
 the Teeth esgongay give me my ] 1 J quaza hoa | J quatfriam 
 the Tongue osnache supper J 
 the Throat a gonhon let us go ] 1 J casigno ag - [ ( nydahoa 
 the Beard hebelim to bed j 
 the Face h tegouascon a Man aguehum 
 the Hairs aganiscon a woman agruaste 
 the Arms ajayascon a Boy addegesta 
 the Flanks aissonne a Wench agniaquesta 
 theStomacke aggruascon a Child exiasta 
 the Belly eschehenda a Gown cabata 
 the Thighs < [ hetnegradas-l con a Doublet Hosen caioza hemondoha 
 the Knees 1 agochine - [ godascon Shoes a Shirt atha amgoua 
 the Legs [ agouguene-I hand a Cap Corn castrua osizi 
 the Feet onchidascon Bred carraconny 
 the Hands aignoascon Water ame 
 the Fingers agenoga Flesh quahouascon 
 the Nails a gedascon Reisins queion 
 a men 1 Damsons honnesta 
 member 1 > ainoascon Figs absconda 
 a Woman's 1 Grapes ozoba 
 member j > castaigne Nuts quahoya 
 and Eel esgueny a Hen sahomgahoa 
 a Snail L indeguezi a Lamprey zisto 
 a Tortois heuleuxima a Salmon ondacon 
 Woods conda a Whale ainne honne 
 leaves of ] I k ioga a Goose sadeguenda 
 Trees J r a Street 6i add 
 2 
 Cucumber 1 seed J to Morrow the Heaven the Earth the Sun the Moon the Stars the Wind 
 good morrow aignag 
 let us go to play . come & J speak with me J 1 1 casigno j ( caudy I J assigniquad - [ ( dadia 
 look upon me 1 > quagathoma 
 hold your 1 peace J let us go | with you boat J > aista 1 f casigno cas-j ( novy 
 give me a ] knife j 1 ( buazahca ag - 1 ( oheda 
 a Hatchet a Bow adogne ahenca 
 casconda 
 achide quenhia damga ysmay assomaha stagnehoham cohoha 
 quahetan H Casigno 
 donnascat aionnesta asquenondo Sourhanda 
 agaya Canada 
 agogasy coda 
 cohena agacha honnesca 
 camsa athau odazani azista 
 quea canoca sahe adhotathny addathy adanahoe addagrim adhoasseve 
 a Dart let us go a hunting a Stag a Sheep a Hare a Dog a Town the Sea the waves of the sea and Island and Hill the ice Snow Cold Hot Fire Smoke a House Beanes Cinnamom my Father my Mother my Brother my Sister 
 They of Canada say , that it is a months sailing to go to a land where Cinnamom and Cloves are gathered . 
 Here endeth the Relation of James Cartiers discovery and Navigation toi the Newfoundlands , by him nam New France . 
 . 