A brief and true report of the new found land of Virginia : of the commodities there found , and to be raised , aswell merchantable as others : Written by Thomas Heriot , servant to Sir Walter Ralegh , a member of the Colony , and there employed in discovering a full twelvemonth . 
 Rafe Lane one of her Majesties Esquires , and Governor of the Colony in Virginia , above mentioned , for the time there resident , to the gentle Reader wishes all happiness in the Lord . 
 Lbeit ( gentle Reader ) the credit of reports in this Treatise contained 
 the 
 can 
 little be furthered by the testimony of one as my self , through affection judged partiali , though without desert : nevertheless , forsomuch as I have be requested by some my particular friends , who 
 conceive more rightly of me , to deliver freely my knowledge of the same , not only for the satisfying of them , but also for the true information of any other whosoever , that comes not with a prejudicate mind to the reading thereof : thus much upon my credit I am to affirm , that things universally are so truly set down 348 
 in this Treatise by the author thereof , and actor in the Colony , and a man no less for his honesty then learning commendable , as that I dare boldly avouch , it may very well pass with the credit of truth even among the most true relations of this age . Which as for mine own part I am ready any way with my word to acknowledge , so also ( of the certainty thereof assured by mine own experience ) with this my public assertion I do affirm the same . Farewell in the Lord . 
 To the Adventurers , Favourers , and Wellwillers of the enterprise for the inhabiting and planting in Virginia . 
 Ince the first undertaking by Sir Walter Ralegh to deal in the actium of discovering of that country which is now called and known by the name of Virginia , many voyages having been thither made at sundry times to his great charge ; as first in the year 1584 , and 
 afterwards in the years 1585 , 1586 , and now of late this last year 1587 : there have be diverse and variable reports , with some slanderous and shameful speeches bruited abroad by many that returned from thence : especially of that discovery which was made by the Colony transported by Sir Richard Grinvile in the year 1585 , being of all others the most principali , and as yet of most effect , the time of their abided in the country being a whole year , when as in the other voyage before they stayed but sixe weeks , and the others after were only for supply and transportation , nothing more being discovered then had be before . Which reports have not done a little wrong to many that otherwise would have also favoured and adventured in the actium , to the honour and benefit of our nation , beside the particular profit and credit which would redound to themselves the dealers therein , as I hope by the sequel of 349 
 events , to the shame of those that have avouched the contrary , shall be manifest , if you the adventurers , favourers and wellwillers do but either increase in number , or in opinion continue , or having been doubtful , renew your good liking and furtherance to deal therein according to the worthiness thereof already found , and as you shall understand hereafter to be requisite . Touching which worthiness through cause of the diversity of relations and reports , many of your opinions could not be firm , nor the minds of some that are well disposed be settled in any certainty . 
 I have therefore thought it good , being one that have been in the discovery , and in dealing with the natural inhabitants specially employed : and having therefore seen and known more then the ordinary , to impart so much unto you of the fruits of our labours , as that you may know how injuriously the enterprise is slandered , and that in public manner at this present , chiefly for two respects . 
 First , that some of you which are yet ignorant or doubtful of the state thereof , may see that there is sufficient cause why the chief enterpriser with the favour of her Majesty , notwithstanding such reports , hath not only since continued the actium by sending into the country again , and replanting this last year a new Colony , but is also ready , according as the times and means will affbord , to follow and prosecute the same . 
 Secondly , that you seeing and knowing the continuance of the actium , by the view hereof you may generally know and learn what the country is , and thereupon consider how your dealing therein , if it proceed , may return you profit and gain , be it either by inhabiting and planting , or otherwise in furthering thereof . 
 And least that the substance of my relation should be doubtful unto you , as of others by reason of their diversity , I will first open the cause in a few words , wherefore they are so different , referring my self to 35° 
 your favourable constructions , and to be adjudged of , as by good consideration you shall find cause . 
 Of our company that returned , some for their misdemeanour and ill dealing in the country have be there worthily punished , who by reason of their bad nature's , have maliciously not only spoken ill of their Governors , but for their sakes slandered the country it self . The like also have those done which were of their consort . 
 Some being ignorant of the state thereof , notwithstanding since their return among their friends & acquaintance , and also others , especially if they were in company where they might not be gainsaid , would seem to know so much as no men more , and make no men so great travellers as themselves . They stood so much , as it may seem , upon their credit and reputation , that having be a twelvemonth in the country , it would have be a great disgrace unto them , as they thought , if they could not have said much , whither it were true or false . Of which some have spoken of more then ever they saw , or otherwise knew to be there . Other some have not be ashamed to make absolute denial of that , which although not by them , yet by others is most certainly and there plentifully known , & other some make difficulties of those things they have no skill of . 
 The cause of their ignorance was , in that they were of that many that were never out of the Island where we were seated , or not far , or at the least wise in few places else , during the time of our abided in the country : or of that many , that after gold & silver was not so soon found , as it was by them looked for , had little or no care of any other thing but to pamper their bellies : or of that many which had little understanding , less discretion , and more tongue then was needful or requisite . 
 Some also were of a nice bringing up , only in cities or towns , or such as never ( as I may say ) had seen 351 
 A.D. 
 I587 - 
 the world before . Because there were not to be found any English cities , nor such fair houses , nor at their own wish any of their old accustomed dainty food , nor any soft beds of down or feathers , the country was to them miserable , and their reports thereof according . 
 Because my purpose was but in brief to open the cause of the variety of such speeches , the particularities of them , and of many envious , malicious , and slanderous reports and devices else , by our own countrymen beside , as trifles that are not worthy of wise men to be thought upon , I mean not to trouble you withal , but will pass to the commodities , the substance of that which I have to make relation of unto you . 
 The Treatise whereof , for your more ready view and easier understanding , I will divide into three speciali parts . In the first I will make declaration of such commodities there already found or to be raised , which will not only serve the ordinary turns of you which are and shall be the planters and inhabitants , but such and overplus sufficiently to be yielded , or by men of skill to be provided , as by way of traffic and exchange with our own nation of England , will enrich your selves the providers : those that shall deal with you , the enterprisers in general , and greatly profit our own countrymen , to supply them with most things which heretofore they have be feign to provide either of strangers or of our enemies , which commodities , for distinction sake , I call Merchantable . 
 In the second I will set down all the commodities which we know the country by our experience does yield of it self for victuali and sustenance of men life , such as are usually fed upon by the inhabitants of the country , as also by us during the time we were there . 
 In the last part I will make mention generally of such other commodities beside , as I am able to remember , and as I shall think behooveful for those that shall 
 352 
 1586. inhabit , and plant there , to know of , which specially concern building , as also some other necessary uses : with a brief description of the nature and manners of the people of the country . 
 The first part of Merchantable commodities . 
 like of grass , or Grass silk . There is a kind of grass in the country , upon the blades whereof there grows very good silk in form of a thin glittering skin to be stripped off . It grows two foot & and half high or better : the blades are about two foot in length , and 
 half and inch broad . The like grows in Persia , which is in the self same climate as Virginia , of which very many of the Silk works that come from thence into Europe are made . Hereof if it be planted and ordered as in Persia , it cannot in reason be otherwise , but that there will rise in short time great profit to the dealers therein , seeing there is so great use and vent thereof aswell in our country as elsewhere . And by the means of sowing and planting it in good ground , it will be far greater , better , and more plentiful then it is . Although notwithstanding there is great store thereof in many places of the country growing naturally and wild , which also by proof here in England , in making a piece of Silk grogran , we found to be excellent good . 
 Worm silk . In many of our journeys we found Silkworms fair and great , as big as our ordinary Walnuts . Although it hath not be our hap to have found such plenty , as elsewhere to be in the country we have herd of , yet seeing that the country does naturally breed and nourish them , there is no doubt but if art be added in planting of Mulberry trees , and others , fit . for them in commodious places , for their feeding & nourishing , and some of them carefully gathered & husbanded in that sort , as by men of skill um 353 z 
 is known to be necessary : there will rise as great profit in time to the Virginians , as thereof does now to the Persians , Turks , Italians and Spanyards . 
 Flax and Hemp . The truth is , that of Hemp and Flax there is no great store in any one place together , by reason it is not planted but as the soil does yield of it self : and howsoever the leaf and stem or stalk do differ from ours , the stufFe by judgement of men of skill is altogether as good as ours : and if not , as further proof should find otherwise , we have that experience of the soil , as that there cannot be showed any reason to the contrary , but that it will grow there excellent well , and by planting will be yielded plentifully , seeing there is so much ground whereof some may well be applied to such purposes . What benefit hereof may grow in cordage and linens who cannot easily understand ? 
 Alum . There is a vein of earth along the sea coast for the space of forty or fifty miles , whereof by the judgement of some that have made trial here in England , is made good Alum , of that kind which is called Roch alum . The richness of such a commodity is so well known , that I need not to say any thing thereof . The same earth does also yield White coprasse , Nitrum , and Alumen plumeum , but nothing so plentifully as the common Alum , which be also of price , and profitable . 
 Wapeih . A kind of earth so called by the natural inhabitants , very like to Terra sigillata , and having be refined , it hath be found by some of our Physicians and Chyrurgians , to be of the same kind of virtue , and more effectual . The inhabitants use it very much for the cure of sores and wounds : there is in diverse places great plentv . and in some places of a blue sort . 
 Pitch , Tar , Rozen and Turpentine . There are those kinds of trees which yield them abundantly and great store . In the very same Island where we were seated , being fifteene miles of length , and five or sixe 35+ 
 miles in breadth , there are few trees else but of the same kind , the whole Island being full . 
 Sassafras , called by the inhabitants Winauk , a kind of wood of most pleasant and sweet smell , and of most rare virtues in physic for the cure of many diseases . It is found by experience to be far better and of more uses then the wood which is called Guaiacum , or Lignum vitas . For the description , the manner of using , and the manifold virtues thereof , I refer you to the book of Monardes , translated and entitled in English , The joy full news from the West Indies . 
 Cedar . A very sweet wood , and fine timber , whereof if nests of chests be there made , or timber thereof fitted for sweet and fine bedsteds , tables , desks , lutes , virginals , and many things else , ( of which there hath be proof made already ) to make up fraught with other principali commodities , will yield profit . 
 Wine . There are two kinds of grapes that the soil does yield naturally , the one is small and sour , of the ordinary bigness as ours in England , the other far greater and of himself luscious sweet . When they are planted and husbanded as they ought , a principali commodity of wines by them may be raised . 
 Oil . There are two sorts of Walnuts , both holding oil ; but the one far more plentiful then the other . When there are mills and other devices for the purpose , a commodity of them may be raised , because there are infinite store . There are also three several kinds of berries in the form of Oke-akornes , which also by the experience and use of the inhabitants , we find to yield very good and sweet oil . Furthermore , the bears of the country are commonly very fat , and in some places there are many . Their fatness , because it is so liquid , may well be termed oil , and hath many speciali uses . 
 Furs . All along the Sea coast there are great store of Otters , which being taken by wears and other engines made for the purpose , will yield good profit . We hope 
 355 
 A.D. 
 1586. 
 also of Martern furs , and make no doubt by the relation of the people , but that in some places of the country there are store , although there were but two skins that came to our hands . Luzernes also we have understanding of , although for the time we saw none . 
 Deers skins dressed after the manner of Chamoes , or undressed , are to be had of the natural inhabitants thousands yearly by way of traffic for trifles , and no more waste or spoil of Dear then is and hath be ordinarily in time before . 
 Civet-cats . In our travels there was found one to have been killed by a Savage or inhabitant , & in another place the smel where one or more had lately be before , whereby we gather , beside then by the relation of the people , that there are some in the country : good profit will rise by them . 
 Iron . In two places of the country specially , one about fourescore , & the other six score miles from the fort or place where we dwelled , we found never the water side the ground to be rocky , which by the trial of a Minerali man was found to hold iron richly . It is found in many places of the country else : I know nothing to the contrary , but that it may be allowed for a good merchantable commodity , considering there the small charge for the labour & feeding of men , the infinite store of wood , the want of wood & deerenesse thereof in England , and the necessity of ballasting of ships . 
 Copper . And hundred and fifty miles into the main in two towns we found with the inhabitants diverse small plataeae of Copper , that had be made as we understood by the inhabitants that dwell further into the country , where as they say are mountains and rivers that yield also white grains of mettle , which is to be deemed Silver . For confirmation whereof , at the time of our first arrival in the country , I saw , with some others with me , two small pieces of Silver grossly beaten , about the weight of a testron , hanging in the ears of a 356 
 Wiroans or chief lord that dwelled about fourescore miles from us : of whom through inquiry , by the number of days and the way , I learned that it had come to his hands from the same place or near , where I after understood the Copper was made , and the white grains of metal found . The aforesaid Copper we also found by trial to hold Silver . 
 Pearl . Sometime in feeding on Muscles we found some Pearl : but it was our happen to meet with rags , or of a pide colour : not having yet discovered those places where we herd of better and more plenty . One of our company , a man of skill in such matters , had gathered together from among the Savage people about five thousand : of which number he chosen so many as . thousand made a fair chain , which for their likeness and fea^s uniformity in roundness , orientness , and pidenesse of * ‘ 
 many excellent colours , with equality in greatness , were very fair and rare : and had therefore been presented to her Majesty , had we not by casualty , and through extremity of a storm lost them , with many things else in coming away from the country . 
 Sweet gums of diverse kinds , and many other Apothecary drug , of which we will make speciali mention , when we shall receive it from such men of skill in that kind , that in taking reasonable pains shall discover them more particularly then we have done , and then now I can make relation of , for want of the examples I had provided and gathered , and are now lost , with other things by casualty before mentioned . 
 Die of diverse kinds : There is Shoemake well known , and used in England for black : the seed of and herb called Wasebur , little small roots called Chap-pacor , and the bark of the tree called by the inhabitants Tangomockonomindge : which die are for diverse sorts of read : their goodness for our English clothes remain yet to be proved . The inhabitants use them only for the dying of hair , and colouring of their faces , and mantles made of Dear skins : and also for the dying 
 357 
 of rushes to make artificiali works withal in their mats and baskets : having no other thing beside that they account of , apt to use them for . If they will not prove merchantable , there is no doubt but the planters there shall find apt uses for them , as also for other colours which we know to be there . 
 Woad : a thing of so great vent and uses among English Dyers , which can not be yielded sufficiently in our own country for spare of ground , may be planted in Virginia , there being ground enough . The growth thereof need not to be doubted , when as in the Islands of the Azores it grows plentifully , which are in the same climate . So likewise of Madder . 
 We carried thither Sugar-canes to plant , which being not so well preserved as was requisite , and beside the time of the year being passed for their setting when we arrived , we could not make that proof of them as we desired . Notwithstanding , seeing that they grow in the same climate , in the South part of Spaine , and in Barbary , our hope in reason may yet continue . So likewise for Oranges and Limmons . There may be planted also Quinses . Whereby may grow in reasonable time , if the actium be diligently prosecuted , no small commodities in Sugars , Suckets , and Marmelades . 
 Many other commodities by planting may there also be raised , which I leave to your discreet and gentle considerations : and many also may be there , which yet we have not discovered . Two more commodities of great valve , one of certainty , and the other in hope , not to be planted , but there to be raised and in short time to be provided , and prepared , I might have specified . So likewise of those commodities already set down I might have said more : as of the particular places where they are found , and best to be planted and prepared : by what means , and in what reasonable space of time they might be raised to profit , and in what proportion : but because others then wellwillers might be there withal acquainted , not to the good of the actium , I have wittingly omitted 358 
 them : knowing that to those that are well disposed , I have uttered , according to my promise and purpose , for this part sufficient . 
 The second part of such commodities as Virginia is known to yield for victuali and sustenance of men life , usually fed upon by the natural inhabitants ; as also by us , during the time of our abided : and first of such as are sowed and husbanded . 
 Agatowr , a kind of grain so called by the inhabitants : the same in the West Indies is called Mayz : English men call it Guiny-wheat or Turkey-wheat , according to the names of the countries' from whence the like hath been brought . The grain is about the bigness of our 
 ordinary English pease , and not much different in form and shape : but of diverse colours : some white , some read , some yellow , and some blue . All of them yield a very white and sweet flower : being used according to his kind , it makes a very good bred . We made of the same in the country some Malt , whereof was brewed as good Ale as was to be desired . So likewise by the help of Hops , thereof may be made as good Beer . It is a grain of marvellous great increase : of a thousand , fifteene hundred , and some two thousand fold . There are three sorts , of which two are ripe in eleven & twelve weeks at the most , sometime in tenne , after the time they are set , and are then of height in stalk about sixe or seven foot . The other sort is ripe in foureteene , and is about tenne foot high , of the stalks some bear foure heads , some three , some one , and some two : every head containing five , sixe , or seven hundred grains , within a few more or less . Of these grains , beside bred , the inhabitants make victuali , either by parching them , or seething them whole until they 359 
 be broken : or boiling the flower with water into a 
 PaP - .... 
 Okindgier , called by us Beans , because in greatness and partly in shape they are like to the beans in England , saving that they are flatter , of more diverse colours , and some pide . The leaf also of the stem is much different . In taste they are altogether as good as our English pease . 
 Wickonzowr , called by us Pease , in respect of the Beans , for distinction sake , because they are much less , although in form they little differ : but in goodness of taste much like , and are far better then our English Pease . Both the beans and pease are ripe in ten weeks after they are set . They make them victuali either by boiling them all to pieces into a broth , or boiling them whole until they be soft , and begin to break , as is used in England , either by themselves , or mixedly together : sometime they mingle of the Wheat with them : sometime also , being whole sodden , they bruise or pun them in a mortar , and thereof make loaves or lumps of doughish bred , which they use to eat for variety . 
 Macocquer , according to their several forms , called by us Pompions , Melons , and Gourds , because they are of the like forms as those kinds in England . In Virginia such of several forms are of one taste , and very good , and do also spring from one seed . There are of two sorts : one is ripe in the space of a month , and the other in two months . 
 There is and herb which in Dutch is called Melden . Some of those that I describe it unto take it to be a kind of Orage : it grows about foure or five foot high : of the seed thereof they make a thick broth , and pottage of a very good taste : of the stalk by burning into ashes they make a kind of salt earth , wherewithal ! many use sometime to season their broths : other salt they know not . We our selves used the leaves also for potherbs . 
 360 
 There is also another great herb , in form of a Marigold , about sixe foot in height , the head with the flower is a span in breadth . Some take it to be Planta Solis : of the seeds hereof they make both a kind of bred and broth . 
 All the aforesaid commodities for victuali are set or sowed , sometime in grounds apart and severally by themselves , but for the most part together in one ground mixedly : the manner thereof , with the dressing and preparing of the ground , because I will note unto you the fertility of the soil , I think good briefly to describe . 
 The ground they never fatten with muck , dung , or any other thing , neither blow nor dig it as we in England , but only prepare it in sort as follows . A few days before they sow or set , the men with wooden instruments made almost in form of mattocks or hoes with long handles : the women with short peckers or parers , because they use them sitting , of a foot long , and about five inches in breadth , do only break the upper part of the ground to raise up the weeds , grass , and old stubs of corn stalks with their roots . The which after a day or two days drying in the Sun , being scrapped up into many small heaps , to save them labour for carrying them away , they burn into ashes . And whereas some may think that they use the ashes for to better the ground , I say that then they would either disperse the ashes abroad , which we observed they do not , except the heaps be too great , or else would take speciali care to set their corn where the ashes lie , which also we find they are careless of . And this is all the husbanding of their ground that they use . 
 Then their setting or sowing is after this manner . First for their corn , beginning in one corner of the plot , with a pecker they make a hold , wherein they put foure grains , with care that they touch not one another ( about and inch asunder ) & cover them with the mould 361 
 again : and so throughout the whole plot making such holes , and using them after such manner , but with this regard , that they be made in ranks , every rank differing from other half a fathom or a yard , and the holes also in every rank as much . By this means there is a yard spare ground between every hold : where according to discretion here and there , they set as many Beans and Peaze ; in diverse places also among the seeds of Macocquer , Melden , and Planta solis . 
 The ground being thus set according to the rate by us experimented , and English acre containing forty perches in length , and foure in breadth , does there yield in crop or ofcome of corn , Beans and Peaze , at the least two hundred London bushels , beside the Macocquer , Melden , and Planta solis ; when as in England forty bushels of our Wheat yielded out of such and acre is thought to be much . 
 I thought also good to note this unto you , that you which shall inhabit , and plant there , may know how specially that country corn is there to be preferred before ours : beside , the manifold ways in applying it to victual , the increase is so much , that small labour & pains is needful in respect of that which must be used for ours . For this I can assure you that according to the rate we have made proof of , one man may prepare and husband so much ground ( having once born corn before ) with less then foure and twenty hours labour , as shall yield him victual in a large proportion for a twelvemonth , if he have nothing else but that which the same ground will yield , and of that kind only which I have before spoken of : the said ground being also but of five and twenty yards square . And if need require , but that there is ground enough , there might be raised out of one and the selfsame ground two harvests or ofcomes : for they sow or set , and may at any time when they think good , from the midst of March until the end of June : so that they also set when they have eaten of their first crop . In some 362 
 1586. places of the country notwithstanding they have two harvests , as we have herd , out of one and the same ground . 
 For English corn nevertheless , whither to use or not to use it , you that inhabit may do as you shall have further cause to think best . Of the growth you need not to doubt : for Barley , Oats , and Pease , we have seen proof of , not being purposely sown , but fallen casually in the worst sort of ground , and yet to be as fair as any we have ever seen here in England . But of Wheat , because it was musty , and had taken salt water , we could make no trial : and of Rye we had none . Thus much have I digressed , and I hope not unnecessarily : now will I return again to my course , and entreat of that which yet remains , aPPERTAINING to this chapter . 
 There is and herb which is sowed apart by it self , and is called by the inhabitants Uppowoc : in the West Indies it hath diverse names , according to the several places and countries' where it grows and is used : the Spanyards generally call it Tobacco . The leaves thereof Tobacco . being dried and brought into powder , they use to take the fume or smoke thereof , by sucking it thorough pipes made of clay , into their stomach and head ; from whence it purgeth superfluous flame and other gross humours , and openeth all the pores and passages of the body : by which means the use thereof not only preserveth the body from obstructions , but also ( if any be , so that they have not be of too long continuance ) in short time breaks them : whereby their bodies are notably preserved in health , and know not many grievous diseases , wherewithal ! we in England are often times afflicted . 
 This Uppowoc is of so precious estimation among them , that they think their gods are marvellously delighted therewith : whereupon sometime they make hallowed fires , and cast some of the powder therein for a sacrifice : being in a storm upon the waters , to pacific their gods , they cast some up into the air and into the 363 
 water : so a wear for fish being newly set up , they cast some therein and into the air : also after and escape of danger , they cast some into the air likewise : but all done with strange gestures , stamping , sometime dancing , clapping of hands , holding up of hands , and staring up into the heavens , uttering therewithal ! , and chattering strange words and noises . 
 We our selves , during the time we were there , used to suck it after their manner , as also since our return , and have found many rare and wondered experiments of the virtues thereof : of which the relation would require a volume by it self : the use of it by so many of late men and women of great calling , as else , and some learned Physicians also , is sufficient witness . 
 And these are all the commodities for sustenance of life , that I know and can remember , they use to husband : all else that follow , are found growing naturally or wild . 
 Of Roots . 
 OPenauk are a kind of roots of round form , some of the bigness of Walnuts , some far greater , which are found in moist and marish grounds growing many together one by another in ropes , as though they were fastened with a string . Being boiled or sodden , Mmardes they are very good meat . Monardes calls these roots , part z . lib . 1. gea ( js or pater nostri of Santa Helena . 
 caP - 4 - Okeepenauk are also of round shape , found in dry grounds : some are of the bigness of a men head . They are to be eaten as they are taken out of the ground : for by reason of their dryness they will neither rost nor seethe . Their taste is not so good as of the former roots : notwithstanding for want of bred , and sometime for variety the inhabitants use to eat them with fish or flesh , and in my judgement they do as well as the household bred made of Rye here in England . 
 Kaishucpenauk , a white kind of roots about the bigness of hens eggs , and near of that form : their taste was not so good to our seeming as of the other , and 364 
 1586. therefore their place and manner of growing not so much cared for by us : the inhabitants notwithstanding used to boil and eat many . 
 Tsinaw , a kind of root much like unto that which in England is called the China root brought from the East Indies . And we know not any thing to the contrary but that it may be of the same kind . These roots grow many together in great clusters , and do bring forth a brier stalk , but the leaf in shape far unlike : which being supported by the trees it grows nearest unto , will reach or climb to the top of the highest . From these roots while they be new or fresh , being chopped into small pieces , and stamped , is strained with water a juice that makes bred , and also being boiled , a very good spoonmeat in manner of a jelly , and is much better in taste , if it be tempered with oil . This Tsinaw is not of that sort , which by some was caused to be brought into England for the China root ; for it was discovered since , and is in use as is aforesaid : but that which was brought hither is not yet known , neither by us nor by the inhabitants to serve for any use or purpose , although the roots in shape are very like . 
 Coscushaw some of our company took to be that kind of root which the Spanyards in the West Indies call Cassavy , whereupon also many called it by that name : it grows in very muddy pools , and moist grounds . Being dressed according to the country manner , it makes a good bred , and also a good spoonmeat , and is used very much by the inhabitants . The juice of this root is The juice of poison , & therefore heed must be taken before any thing Cofushaw u be made therewithal ! : either the roots must be first sliced and dried in the Sun , or by the fire , and then being punned into flower , will make good bred : or else while they are green they are to be pared , cut in pieces , and stamped : loaves of the same to be laid never or over the fire until it be sour ; and then being well punned again , bred or spoonmeat very good in taste and wholesome may be made thereof . 
 365 
 Habascon is a root of hight taste , almost of the form and bigness of a Parsnip : of it self it is no victuali , but only a help , being boiled together with other meats . 
 There are also Leeks , differing little from ours in England , that grow in many places of the country ; of which , when we came in places where they were , we gathered and eat many , but the natural inhabitants never . 
 Of Fruits . 
 CHestnuts there are in diverse places great store : some they use to eat raw , some they stamp and boil to make spoonmeat , and with some being sodden , they make such a manner of dough bred as they use of their beans before mentioned . 
 Walnuts . There are two kinds of Walnuts , and of them infinite store : in many places , where are very great woods for many miles together , the third part of trees are Walnut trees . The one kind is of the same taste and form , or little differing from ours of England , but that they are harder and thicker shelled : the other is greater , and hath a very ragged and hard shell : but the kernel great , very oily and sweet . Beside their eating of them after our ordinary manner , they break them with stones , and pun them in mortars with water , to make a milk which they use to put into some sorts of their spoonemeat : also among their sod wheat , pease , beans and pompions , which makes them have a far more pleasant taste . 
 Medlars , a kind of very good fruit : so called by us chiefly for these respects : first in that they are not good until they be rotten , then in that they open at the head as our Medlars , and are about the same bigness : otherwise in taste and colour they are far different ; for they are as read as cherries , and very sweet : but whereas the cheery is sharp sweet , they are luscious sweet . 
 Mutaquesunnauk , a kind of pleasant fruit almost of the shape and bigness of English pears , but that they are 366 
 of a perfect read colour aswell within as without . They There are Hi. grow on a plant whose leaves are very thick , and full of ^dfofTmua prickles as sharp as needles . Some that have been in 
 the Indies , where they have seen that kind of read die of nofruithbring-great price , which is called Cochinile , to grow , do de - eth forth . the scribe his plant right like unto this of Metaquesunnauk ; Gothinillo . but whither it be the true Cochinile , or a bastard or wild kind , it cannot yet be certified , seeing that also , as I herd , Cochinile is not of the fruit , but found on the leaves of the plant : which leaves for such matter we have not so specially observed . 
 Grapes there are of two sorts , which I mentioned in the merchantable commodities . 
 Strawberries there are as good and as great as those which we have in our English gardens . 
 Mulberries , Applecrabs , Hurts or Hurtleberies , such as 
 we have in England . 
 Sacquenummener , a kind of berries almost like unto Capers , but somewhat greater , which grow together in clusters upon a plant or herb that is found in shallow waters : being boiled eight or nine hours according to their kind , are very good meat and wholesome ; otherwise if they be eaten they will make a man for the time frantic or extremely sick . 
 There is a kind of Reed which bears a seed almost like unto our Rye or Wheat ; and being boiled is good meat . 
 In our travels in some places we found Wild pease like unto ours in England , but that they were less , which are also good meat . 
 Of a kind of fruit or berry in form of Acorns . 
 THere is a kind of berry or acorn , of which there are five sorts that grow on several kinds of trees : the one is called Sagatemener , the second Osamener , the third Pummuckoner . These kind of acorns they use to dry upon hurdles made of reeds , with fire underneath , almost after the manner as we dry Malt in England . When they 367 
 are to be used , they first water them until they be soft , and then being sod , they make a good victuali , either to eat so simply , or else being also punned to makes loaves or lumps of bred . These be also the three kinds , of which I said before the inhabitants used to make sweet oil . 
 Another sort is called Sapummener , which being boiled or parched , does eat and taste like unto Chestnuts . They sometime also make bred of this sort . 
 The fift sort is called Mangummenauk , and is the acorn of their kind of Oak , the which being dried after the manner of the first sorts , and afterwards watered , they boil them , and their servants , or sometime the chief themselves , either for variety or for want of bred , do eat them with their fish or flesh . 
 Of Beasts . 
 DEere , in some places there are great store : near unto the Sea coast they are of the ordinary bigness of ours in England , and some less : but further up into the country , where there is better food , they are greater : they differ from ours only in this , their tails are longer , and the snags of their homes look backward . 
 Conies . Those that we have seen , and all that we can hear of are of a grey colour like unto Hares : in some places there are such plenty that all the people of some towns make them mantles of the fur or slew of the skins of those which they usually take . 
 Saquenuckot and Maquowoc , two kinds of small beasts greater then Conies , which are very good meat . We never took any of them our selves but sometime eat of such as the inhabitants had taken and brought unto us . 
 Squirrels , which are of a gray colour , we have taken and eaten . 
 Bears , which are of black colour . The bears of this country are good meat . The inhabitants in time of Winter do use to take & eat many : so also sometime did we . They are taken commonly in this sort : In 368 
 some Islands or places where they are , being hunted for , assoon as they have espial of a man , they presently run away , and then being chased , they climb and get up the next tree they can : from whence with arrows they are shot down stark dead , or with those wounds that they may after easily be killed . We sometime shot them down with our calivers . 
 I have the names of eight and twenty several sorts of beasts , which I have herd of to be here and there dispersed in the country , especially in the main : of which there are only twelve kinds that we have yet discovered ; and of those that be good meat we know only them before mentioned . The inhabitants sometime kill the Lion , and eat him : and we sometime as they came to our hands of their Wolves or Wolvish dogs , which I have not set down for good meat , lest that some would understand my judgement therein to be more simple then needs , although I could allege the difference in taste of those kinds from ours , which by some of our company have be experimented in both . 
 Of Foul . 
 TUrkie cocks and Turkey hens , Stockdoves , Partridges , Cranes , Hernes , and in Winter great store of Swans and Geese . Of all sorts of fowl I have the names in the country language of fourescore and sixe , of which number , beside those that be nam , we have taken , eaten , & have the pictures as they were there drawn , with the names of the inhabitants , of several strange sorts of water fowl eight , and seventeen kinds more of land fowl , although we have seen and eaten of many more , which for want of leisure there for the purpose , could not be pictured : and after we are better furnished and stored upon further discovery with their strange beasts , fish , trees , plants , and herbs , they shall also published . 
 There are also Parrots , Falcons , and Marlin hauks , vin 369 2 a 
 In the gulf of California they use the like fishing . 
 which although with us they be not used for meat , yet for other causes I thought good to mention . 
 Of Fish . 
 FOr foure months of the year , February , March , Aprill and May , there are plenty of Sturgeons . 
 And also in the same months of Herrings , some of the ordinary bigness of ours in England , but the most part far greater , of eighteene , twenty inches , and some two foot in length and better : both these kinds of fish in those months are most plentiful ! , and in best season , which we found to be most delicate and pleasant meat . 
 There are also Trouts , Porpoises , Rays , Oldwives , Mullets , Plaice , and very many other sorts of excellent good fish , which we have taken and eaten , whose names I know not but in the country language : we have the pictures of twelve sorts more , as they were drawn in the country , with their names . 
 The inhabitants use to take them two manner of ways ; the one is by a kind of wear made of reeds , which in that country are very strong : the other way , which is more strange , is with poles made sharp at one end , by shooting them into the fish after the manner as Irish men cast darts , either as they are rowing in their boats , or else as they are wading in the shallows for the purpose . 
 There are also in many places plenty of these kinds which follow : 
 Sea-crabs , such as we have in England . 
 Oysters , some very great , and some small , some round , and some of a long shape : they are found both in salt water and brackish , and those that we had out of salt water are far better then the other , as in our country . 
 Also Muscles , Scalops , Periwinkles , and Crevices . 
 Seekanauk , a kind of crusty shellfish , which is good meat , about a foot in breadth , having a crusty tail many legs like a crab , and her eyes in her back . They 37° 
 1586. are found in shallows of waters , and sometime on the shore . 
 There are many Tortoises both of land and sea kind , their backs and bellies are shelled very thick ; their head , feet , and tail , which are in appearance , seem ugly , as though they were members of a serpent or venomous beasts ; but notwithstanding they are very good meat , as also their eggs . Some have be found of a yard in breadth and better . 
 And thus have I made relation of all sorts of victuali that we fed upon for the time we were in Virginia , as also the inhabitants themselves , as far forth as I know and can remember , or that are specially worthy to be remembered . 
 The third and last part of such other things as are behooveful for those which shall plant and inhabit to know of , with a description of the nature and manners of the people of the Country . 
 Of commodities for building and other necessary uses . 
 Hose other things which I am more to make rehearsal of , are such as concern building , & other mechanical necessary uses , as diverse sorts of trees for house and ship-timber , and other uses else : Also lime , stone , and brick , lest that being not mentioned some might have 
 be doubted of , or by some that are malicious the contrary reported . 
 Oaks there are as fair , straight , tall , and as good timber as any can be , and also great store , and in some places very great . 
 Walnut trees , as I have said before very many , some have be seen excellent fair timber of foure and five 
 371 
 fathom , and above fourescore foot straight without bough . 
 Fir trees fit for masts of ships , some very tall and great . 
 Rakiock , a kind of trees so called that are sweet wood , of which the inhabitants that were near unto us do commonly make their boats or Canoas of the form of trows , only with the help of fire , hatchet's of stones , and shells : we have known some so great being made in that sort of one tree , that they have carried well 20. men at once , beside much baggage : the timber being great , tall , straight , soft , light , and yet tough enough I think ( beside other uses ) to be fit also for masts of ships . 
 Cedar , a sweet wood good for seelings , chests , boxes , bedsteads , lutes , virginals , and many things else , as I have also said before . Some of our company which have wandered in some places where I have not be , have made certain affirmation of Cyprus , which for such and other excellent uses is also a wood of price and no small estimation . 
 Maple , and also Which-hazel , whereof the inhabitants use to make their bows . 
 Holly , a necessary thing for the making of birdlime . 
 Willows good for the making of wears and weeles to take fish after the English manner , although the inhabitants use only redes , which because they are so strong as also flexible , do serve for that turn very well and sufficiently . 
 Beech and Ashe , good for cask-hoops , and if need require , plow work , as also for many things else . 
 Eime . } { Sassafras trees . 
 Ascopo a kind of tree very like unto Laurel , the bark is hight in taste and spicy , it is very like to that tree which Monardes describeth to be Cassia Lignea of the West Indies . 
 There are many other strange trees whose names I know not but in the Virginian language , of which I am 372 
 not now able , neither is it so convenient for the present to trouble you with particular relation : seeing that for timber and other necessary uses , I have nam sufficient . And of many of the rest , but that they may be applied to good use , 1 know no cause to doubt . 
 Now for stone , brick , and lime , thus it is . Near unto the Sea coast where we dwelled , there are no kind of stones to be found ( except a few small pebbles about foure miles off ) but such as have be brought from further out of the main . In some of our voyages we have seen diverse hard raggy stones , great pebbles , and a kind of grey stone like unto marble of which the inhabitants make their hatchet's to cleave wood . Upon inquiry we herd that a little further up into the Country were of all sorts very many , although of quarries they are ignorant , neither have they use of any store whereupon they should have occasion to seek any . For if every household have one or two to crack nuts , grind shells , whet copper , and sometime other stones for hatchet's , they have enough : neither use they any digging , but only for graves about three foot deep : and therefore no marveile that they know neither quarries , nor lime-stones , which both may be in places nearer then they wot of . 
 In the mean time until there be discovery of sufficient store in some place or other convenient , the want of you which are & shall the planters therein may be as well supplied by brick : for the making whereof in diverse places of the Country there is clay both excellent good , and plenty , and also by lime made of oyster shells , and of others burned , after the manner as they use in the Isles of Tenet and Shepy , and also in diverse other places of England : Which kind of lime is well known to be as good as any other . And of oyster shells there is plenty enough : for beside diverse other particular places where are abundance , there is one shallow Found along the coast , where for the space of many miles together in length , and two or three miles in breadth , the ground is 
 373 
 Jaques Cartier , voyage 2 , chap. 8. 
 nothing else , being but half a foot or a foot under water for the most part . 
 Thus much can I say furthermore of stones , that about 120. miles from our fort near the water in the side of a hill , was found by a Gentleman of our company , a great vein of hard rag stones , which I thought good to remember unto you . 
 . 