Of the nature and manners of the people . 
 TO rests I speak a word or two of the natural inhabitants , their nature's and manners , leaving large discourse thereof until time more convenient hereafter : now only so far forth , as that you may know , how that they in respect of troubling our inhabiting and planting , 
 are not to be feared , but that they shall have cause both to fear and love us , that shall inhabit with them . 
 They are a people clothed with lose mantles made of deer skins , and aprons of the same round about their middles , all else naked , of such a difference of statures only as we in England , having no edge tools or weapons of iron or steel to offend us withal , neither know they how to make any : those weapons that they • have , are only bows made of Witch-hazel , and arrows of redes , flat edged truncheons also of wood about a yard long , neither have they any thing to defend themselves but targets made of barks , and some armours made of sticks wickered together with thread . 
 Their towns are but small , and near the Sea coast but few , some containing but tenne or twelve houses ; some 20. the greatest that we have seen hath be but of 30. houses : if they be walled , it is only done with barks of trees made fast to stakes , or else with poles only fixed upright , and close one by another . 
 Their houses are made of small poles , made fast at the tops in round form after the manner as is used in many arbories in our gardens of England , in most . V . 4 
 towns covered with barks , and in some with artificiali mats made of long rushes , from the tops of the houses down to the ground . The length of them is commonly double to the breadth , in some places they are but 12. and 16. yards long , and in other some we have seen of foure and twentie . 
 In some places of the Country , one only town belongeth to the government of a Wiroans or chief Lord , in other some two or three , in some sixe , eight , and more : the greatest Wiroans that yet we had dealing with , had but eighteene towns in his government , and able to make not above seven or eight hundreth fighting men at the most . The language of every government is different from any other , and the further they are distant , the greater is the difference . 
 Their manner of wars among themselves is either by sudden surprising one and other most commonly about the dawning of the day , or moonlight , or else by ambushes , or some subtle devises . Set battles are very rare , except it fallen out where there are many trees , where either part may have some hope of defence , after the delivery of every arrow , in leaping behind some or other . 
 If there fallen out any wars between us and them , what their fight is likely to be , we having advantages against them so many manner of ways , as by our discipline , our strange weapons and devises else , especially Ordinance great and small , it may easily be imagined : by the experience we have had in some places , the turning up of their heals against us in running away was their best defence . 
 In respect of us they are a people poor , and for want of skill and judgement in the knowledge and use of our things , do esteem our trifles before things of greater valve : Notwithstanding , in their proper manner ( considering the want of such means as we have ) , they seem very ingenious . For although they have no such tools , nor any such crafts , Sciences and Arts as 375 
 we , yet in those things they do , they show excellende of wit . And by how much they upon due consideration shall find our manner of knowledges and crafts to exceed theirs in perfection , and speed for doing or execution , by so much the more is it probable that they should desire our friendship and love , and have the greater respect for pleasing and obeying us . Whereby may be hoped , if means of good government be used , that they may in short time be brought to civility , and the embracing of true Religion . 
 Some religion they have already , which although it be far from the truth , yet being as it is , there is hope it may be the easier and sooner reformed . 
 They believe that there are many gods , which they call Mantoac , but of different sorts & degrees , one only chief and great God , which hath be from all eternity . Who , as they affirm , when he purposed to make the world , made first other gods of a principali order , to be as means and instruments to be used in the creation and government to follow , and after the Sun , moon , and stars as petty gods , and the instruments of the other order more principal . First ( they say ) were made waters , out of which by the gods was made all diversity of creatures that are visible or invisible . 
 For mankind they say a woman was made first , which by the working of one of the gods , conceived and brought forth children : And in such sort they say they had their beginning . But how many years or ages have passed since , they say they can make no relation , having no letters nor other such means as we to keep Records of the particularities of times passed , but only tradition from father to son . 
 They think that all the gods are of humane shape , and therefore they represent them by images in the forms of men , which they call Kewasowok , one alone is called Kewas : them they place in houses appropriate or temples , which they call Machicomuck , where they 376 
 worship , pray , sing , and make many times offering unto them . In some MachicOmuck we have seen but one Kewas , in some two , and in other some three . The common sort think them to be also gods . 
 They believe also the immortality of the soul , that after this life as soon as the soul is departed from the body , according to the works it hath done , it is either carried to heaven the habitacle of gods , there to enjoy perpetuali bliss and happiness , or else to a great pit or hold , which they think to be in the furthest parts of their part of the world towards the Sun set , there to burn continually : the place they call Popogusso . 
 For the confirmation of this opinion , they told me two stories of two men that had be lately dead and revived again , the one happened but few years before our coming into the Country of a wicked man , which having be dead and buried , the next day the earth of the grave being seen to move , was taken up again , who made declaration where his soul had be , that is to say , very near entering into Popogusso , had not one of the gods saved him , and gave him leave to return again , and teach his friends what they should do to avoid that terrible place of torment . The other happened in the same year we were there , but in a town that was 60. miles from us , and it was told me for strange news , that one being dead , buried , and taken up again as the first , showed that although his body had lain dead in the grave , yet his soul was alive , & had travailed far in a long broad way , on both sides whereof grew most delicate and pleasant trees , bearing more rare and excellent fruits , then ever he had seen before , or was able to express , and at length came to most brave and fair houses , near which he met his father that had be dead before , who gave him great charge to go back again , and show his friends what good they were to , do to enjoy the pleasures of that place , which when he had done he should after come again . 
 377 
 What subtlety soever be in the Wiroances and priests , this opinion works so much in many of the common and simple sort of people , that it makes them have great respect to their Governors , and also great care what they do , to avoid torment after death , and to enjoy bliss , although notwithstanding there is punishment ordained for malefactors , as stealers , whoremongers , and other sorts of wicked doers , some punished with death , some with forfeitures , some with beating , according to the greatness of the facts . 
 And this is the sum of their Religion , which I learned by having speciali familiarity with some of their priests . Wherein they were not so sure grounded , nor gave such credit to their traditions and stories , but through conversing with us they were brought into great doubts of their own , and no small admiration of ours , with earnest desire in many , to learn more then we had means for want of perfect utterance in their language to express . 
 Most things they saw with us , as Mathematical ! instruments , sea Compasses , the virtue of the loadstone in drawing iron , a perspective glass whereby was showed many strange sights , burning glasses , wild firewoorkes , guns , hooks , writing and reading , spring-clocks that seem to go of themselves and many other things that we had were so strange unto them , and so far exceeded their capacities to comprehend the reason and means how they should be made and done , that they thought they were rather the works of gods then of men , or at the leastwise they had be given and taught us of the gods . Which made many of them to have such opinion of us , as that if they knew not the truth of God and Religion already , it was rather to be had from us whom God so specially loved , then from a people that were so simple , as they found themselves to be in comparison of us . Whereupon greater credit was given unto that we spoke of , concerning such matters . 
 378 
 Many times and in every town where I came , according as I was able , I made declaration of the contents of the Bible , that therein was set forth the true and only God , and his mighty works , that therein was contained the true doctrine of salvation through Christ , with many particularities of Miracles and chief points of Religion , as I was able then to utter , and thought fit for the time . And although I told them the book materially and of it self was not of any such virtue , as I thought they did conceive , but only the doctrine therein contained : yet would many be glad to touch it , to embrace it , to kiss it , to hold it to their breasts and heads , and stroke over all their body with it , to show their hungry desire of that knowledge which was spoken of . 
 The Wiroans with whom we dwelled called Wingina , and many of his people would be glad many times to be with us at our Prayers , and many times call upon us both in his own town , as also in others whither he sometime accompanied us , to pray and sing Psalms , hoping thereby to be partaker of the same effects which we by that means also expected . 
 Twice this Wiroans was so grievously sick that he was like to die , and as he lay languishing , doubting of any help by his own priests , and thinking he was in such danger for offending us and thereby our God , sent for some of us to pray and be a means to our God that it would please him either that he might live , or after death dwell with him in bliss , so likewise were the requests of many others in the like case . 
 On a time also when their corn began to wither by reason of a drought which happened extraordinarily , fearing that it had come to pass by reason that in some thing they had displeased us , many would come to us and desire us to pray to our God of England , that he would preserve their Corn , promising that when it was ripe we also should be partakers of the fruit . 
 379 
 There could at no time happen any strange sickness , losses , hurts , or any other cross unto them , but that they would impute to us the cause or means thereof , for offending or not pleasing us . One other rare and strange accident , leaving others , will I mention before I end , which moved the whole Country that either knew or herd of us , to have us in wonderful admiration . 
 There was no town where we had any subtle devise practised against us , we leaving it unpunished or not revenged ( because we sought by all means possible to win them by gentleness ) but that within a few days after our departure from every such Town , the people began to die very fast , and many in short space , in some Towns about twentie , in some fourtie , and in one sixe score , which in truth was very many in respect of their numbers . This happened in no place that we could learn , but where we had been , where they used some practise against us , & after such time . The disease also was so strange , that they neither knew what it was , nor how to cure it , the like by report of the oldest men in the Country never happened before , time out of mind . A thing specially observed by us , as also by the natural inhabitants themselves . Insomuch that when some of the inhabitants which were our friends , and especially the Wiroans Wingina , had observed such effects in foure or five Towns to follow their wicked practises , they were persuaded that it was the work of our God through our means , and that we by him ' might kill and slay whom we would without weapons , and not come near them . And thereupon when it had happened that they had understanding that any of their enemies had abused us in our journeys , hearing that we had wrought no revenge with our weapons , and fearing upon some cause the matter should so rest : did come and entreat us that we would be a means to our God that they as others that had dealt ill with us might in like sort die , 380 
 alleging how much it would be for our credit and profit , as also theirs , and hoping furthermore that we would do so much at their requests in respect of the friendship we professed them . 
 Whose entreaties although we showed that they were ungodly , affirming that our God would not subject himself to any such prayers and requests of men : that indeed all things have be and were to be done according to his good pleasure as he had ordained : and that we to show our selves his true servants ought rather to make petition for the contrary , that they with them might live together with us , be made partakers of his truth , and serve him in righteousness , but notwithstanding in such sort , that we refer that , as all other things , to be done according to his divine will and pleasure , and as by his wisdom he had ordained to be best . 
 Yet because the effect fell out so suddenly and shortly after according to their desires , they thought nevertheless it came to pass by our means , & that we in using such speeches unto them , did but dissemble the matter , and therefore came unto us to give us thanks in their manner , that although we satisfied them not in promise , yet in deeds and effect we had fulfilled their desires . 
 This marvelous accident in all the Country wrought so strange opinions of us , that some people could not tell whither to think us gods or men , and the rather because that all the space of their sickness , there was no man of ours known to die , or that was specially sick : they noted also that we had no women among us , neither that we did care for any of theirs . 
 Some therefore were of opinion that we were not born of women , and therefore not mortal , but that we 
 were men of and old generation many years past , then risen again to immortality . 
 Some would likewise seem to prophecy that there 
 were more of our generation yet 3 » i 
 to come to kill theirs 
 and take their places , as some thought the purpose was , by that which was already done . Those that were immediately to come after us they imagined to be in the air , yet invisible and without bodies , and that they by our intreaty and for the love of us , did make the people to die in that sort as they did , by shooting invisible bullets into them . 
 To confirm this opinion , their Physicians ( to excuse their ignorance in curing the disease ) would not be ashamed to say , but earnestly make the simple people believe , that the strings of blood that they sucked out of the sick bodies , were the strings wherewithal ! the invisible bullets were tied and cast . Some also thought that we shot them our selves out of our pieces , from the place where we dwelled , and killed the people in any Town that had offended us , as we listed , how far distant from us soever it were . And other some said , that it was the speciali work of God for our sakes , as we our selves have cause in some sort to think no less , whatsoever some do , or may imagine to the contrary , specially some Astrologers , knowing of the Eclipse of the Sun which we saw the same year before in our voyage thitherward , which unto them appeared very terrible . And also of a Comet which began to appear but a few days before the beginning of the said sickness . But to exclude them from being the speciali causes of so speciali and accident , there are further reasons then I think fit at this present to be alleged . These their opinions I have set down the more at large , that it may appear unto you that there is good hope they may be brought through discreet dealing and government to the embracing of the truth , and consequently to honour , obey , fear and love us . 
 And although some of our company towards the end of the year , showed themselves too fierce in slaying some of the people in some Towns , upon causes that on our part might easily enough have be born 382 
 withal : yet notwithstanding , because it was on their part justly deserved , the alteration of their opinions generally and for the most part concerning us is the less to be doubted . And whatsoever else they may be , by carefulness of our selves need nothing at all to be feared , 
 The conclusion . 
 Owe I have ( as I hope ) made relation not of so few and small things , but that the Country ( of men that are indifferent and well disposed ) may be sufficiently liked : If there were no more known 
 then I have mentioned , which doubtless and in great reason is nothing to that which remains to be discovered , neither the soil , nor commodities . As we have reason so to gather by the difference we found in our travails , for although all which I have before spoken of , have be discovered and experimented not far from the Sea coast , where was our abided and most of our travailing : yet sometime as we made our journeys further into the main and Country ; we found the soil to be fatter , the trees greater and to grow thinner , the ground more firm and deeper mould , more and larger champions , finer grass , and as good as ever we saw any in England ; in some places rocky and far more high and hilly ground , more plenty of their fruits , more abundance of beasts , the more inhabited with people , and of greater policy and larger dominions , with greater towns and houses . 
 Why may we not then look for in good hope from the inner parts of more and greater plenty , as well of other things , as of those which we have already discovered ? Unto the Spaniards happened the like in discovering the main of the West Indies . The main also of this Country of Virginia , extending some ways so many hundreds of leagues , as otherwise then by the relation of the inhabitants we have most certain knowledge of , where yet no Christian prince hath 383 
 any possession or dealing , cannot but yield many kinds of excellent commodities , which we in our discovery have not yet seen . 
 What hope there is else to be gathered of the nature of the Climate , being answerable to the Hand of Japan , the land of China , Persia , Jury , the Hands of Cyprus and Candy , the South parts of Greece , Italy and Spaine , and of many other notable and famous Countries' , because I mean not to be tedious , I leave to your own consideration . 
 Whereby also the excellent temperature of the air there at all seasons , much warmer then in England , and never so vehemently hight , as sometime is under and between the Tropikes , or near them , cannot be known unto you without further relation . 
 For the wholesomeness thereof I need to say but thus much : that for all the want of provision , as first of English victuali , excepting for twentie days , we lived only by drinking water , and by the victuali of the Country , of which some sorts were very strange unto us , and might have be thought to have altered our temperatures in such sort , as to have brought us into some grievous and dangerous This want is diseases : Secondly the want of English means , f°r taking beasts , fish and foul , which ' by the help only of the inhabitants and their means could not be so suddenly and easily provided for us , nor in so great number and quantities , nor of that choice as otherwise might have be to our better satisfaction and contentment . Some want also we had of clothes . Furthermore in all our travails , which were most specially and often in the time of Winter , our lodging was in the open air upon the ground . And yet I say for all this , there were but r foure of our whole company ( being one hundreth and eight ) that died all the year , and that but at the latter end thereof , and upon none of the aforesaid causes . For all foure , especially three , were feeble , weak , and 384 
 sickly persons before ever they came thither , and those that knew them , much marveled that they lived so long being in that case , or had adventured to travail . 
 Seeing therefore the air there is so temperate and wholesome , the soil so fertile , and yielding such commodities , as I have before mentioned , the voyage also thither to and from being sufficiently experimented to be performed twice a year with ease , and at any season thereof : And the dealing of Sir Walter Ralegh so liberali in large giving and granting land there , as is already known , with many helps and furtherances else : ( The least that he hath granted hath be five hundreth acres to a man only for the adventure of his person ) I hope there remains no cause whereby the actium should be misliked . 
 If that those which shall thither travail to inhabit and plant be but reasonably provided for the first year , as those are which were transported the last , and being there , do use but that diligence and care , that is requisite , and as they may with ease : There is no doubt , but for the time following , they may have victuals that are excellent good and plenty enough , some more English sorts of cattle also hereafter , as some have be before , and are there yet remaining , may , and shall be ( God willing ) thither transported . So likewise , our kind of fruits , roots , and herbs , may be there planted and sowed , as some have be already , and prove well : And in short time also they may raise so much of those sorts of commodities which I have spoken of , as shall both enrich themselves , as also others that shall deal with them . 
 And this is all the fruit of our labours , that I have thought necessary to advertise you of at this present : What else concerns the nature and manners of the inhabitants of Virginia , the number with the particularities of the voyages thither made , and of the actions of such as have be by Sir Walter Ralegh therein , and there employed , many worthy to be remembered , as of 
 VIII 385 2B 
 the first discoverers of the Country , of our general for the time Sir Richard Grinvil , and after his departure of our Governor there Master Ralph Lane , with diverse other directed and employed under their government : Of the Captains and Master's of the voyages made since for transportation , of the Governor and assistants of those already transported , as of many persons , accidents , and things else , I have ready in a discourse by it self in manner of a Chronicle , according to the course of times : which when time shall be thought convenient , shall be also published . 
 Thus referring my relation to your favourable constructions , expecting good success of the actium , from him which is to be acknowledged the author and governor , not only of this , but of all things else , I take my leave of you , this month of February 1587. 
 . 