The Preface of M. Rene Laudonniere . 
 Here are two things , which according to mine opinion have be the principali causes , in consideration whereof aswell they of ancient times , as those of our age have be induced to travel into far and remote regions . The first hath been the natural desire which we have 
 to search out the commodities to live happily , plentifully , and at ease : be it whither one abandon his natural Country altogether to dwell in a better , or be it that men make voyages thither , there to search out and bring from thence such things as are there to be found , and are in greatest estimation and in most request in our Countries' . The second cause hath be the multitude of people too fruitful in generation , which being no longer able to dwell in their native soils , have entered upon their neighbours limits , and oftentimes passing further have pierced even unto the uttermost regions . After this sort the North climate , a fruitful father of so many nations hath oftentimes sent forth this way and that way his valiant people , and by this mean hath peopled infinite Countries' : so that most of the nations of Europe draw their originali from these parts . Contrariwise the more Southern regions , because they be too barren by reason of their insupportable heat which reigneth in them , need not any such sending forth of their inhabitants , and have be oftentimes constrained to receive other people more often by force of arms then willingly . All Afrike , Spaine , and Italie can also testify the same , which never so abounded with people that they had need to send them abroad to inhabit elsewhere : as on the contrary Scythia , Norway , Gotland , and France have done . The posterity of which nations remains yet not only in Italy , Spaine & Afrike , but also in fruitful and fair Asia . Nevertheless I find 446 
 that the Roman proceeding further , or rather adding unto these two chief causes aforesaid , ( as being most curious to plant not only their ensigns and victories , but also their laws , customs , & religion in those provinces which they had conquered by force of arms ) have oftentimes by the decree of their sovereign Senate Planting of sent forth inhabitants , which they called Colonies ( think - Colomesing by this way to make their name immortali ) even to the unfurnishing of their own Country of the forces which should have preserved the same in her perfection : a thing which hindered them much more , then advanced them to the possession of the universal monarchy , whereunto their intention did aspire . For it came to pass that their Colonies here and there being miserably sacked by strange people did utterly ruin and overthrow their Empire . The brinks of the river of Rhene are yet read , those of Danubius are no less bloody , and our France became fat with their blood which they lost . These are the effects and rewards of all such as being pricked forward with this Roman and tyrannical ambition will go about thus to subdue strange people : effects , I say , contrary to the profit which those shall receive , which only are affectioned to the common benefit , that is to say , to the general policy of all men , and endeavour to unite them one with another as well by traffic and civil conversations , as also by military virtues , and force of When force of arms , when as the Savages will not yield unto their a ™ s is t0 endeavours so much tending unto their profit . ' 
 For this cause princes have sent forth out of their Dominions certain men of good activity to plant themselves in strange Countries' , their to make their profit to bring the Country to civility , and if it might be , to reduce the inhabitants to the true knowledge of our God : and end so much more commendable , as it is far from all tyrannical ! and cruel government : and so they have always thrived in their enterprises , and by little and little gained the hearts of them which they have conquered or won unto them by any means . Hereof 
 447 
 we may gather that sometime it is good , yea very expedient to send forth men to discover the pleasure Twoconditions and ( j commodity of strange Countries' : But so , that the n^uests* ? Country out of which these companies are to pass Countries' remain not weakened , nor deprived of her forces : And newly dis - again in such sort that the company sent forth be of covered . so just & sufficient number , that it may not be defeated °ta‘ by strangers , which every foot endeavour nothing else but to surprise the same upon the sudden . As within these few days passed the French have proved to my great grief , being able by no means possible to withstand the same , considering that the elements , men , and all the favours which might be hoped for of a faithful and Christian alliance fought against us : which thing I purpose to discover in this present historic with so evident truth , that the Kings Majesty my sovereign prince shall in part be satisfied of the diligence which I have used in his service , and mine adversaries shall find themselves so discovered in their false reports , that they shall have no place of refuge . But before I begin , I will briefly set down the situation and description of the land whereunto we have sailed and where we have inhabited from the year 1561. unto sixty five , to the end that those things may the more easily be born away , which I mean to describe in this discourse . 
 . 