The contents of those letters were these . 
 CAptaine Laudonniere , because some of them which Letters of thee are returned from Florida speak indifferently of LordAdmtrall the Country , the King desires your presence , to the end , that according to your trial , he may resolve to ’ bestow great cost thereon , or wholly to leave it : and therefore I send Captain John Ribault to be governor there , to whom you shall deliver whatsoever vou have 
 85 ' 
 in charge , and inform him of all things you have discovered . And in a postscript of the letter was thus written . Think not , that whereas I send for you , it is for any evil opinion or mistrust that I have of you , but that it is for your good and for your credit , and assure your self that during my life you shall find me your good Master . Chastillon . 
 Now after I had long discoursed with Captain Ribault , Captain la Grange accosted me , and told me of and Accusations infinite number of false reports which had be made of against him . me to my great hindrance : and among other things ’ he informed me , that my Lord Admiral took it very 2. evil that I had carried a woman with me : likewise that some body had told him that I went about to counters ’ feit the King , and to play the tyrant : that I was too +• cruel unto the men that went with me : that I sought to be advanced by other means then by my Lord 5 - Admiral : and that I had written to many Lords of thee . i - Court , which I ought not to have done . Whereunto Laudonnieres j answerej that the woman was a poor chambermaid , answer there - .. , TO , , , . TO / . ' 
 unto . which 1 had taken up in and Inn , to oversee my household business , to look to and infinite sort of diverse beasts , as sheep and poultry which I carried over with me to store the country withal : that it was not meet to put a man to attend this business : likewise , considering the length of the time that I was to abide there , me thought it should not offend any body to take a woman with me , aswell to help my soldiers in their sicknesses , as in mine own , whereinto I fell afterwards . And how necessary her service was for us , each one at that time might easily perceive : That all my men thought so well of her , that at one instant there were sixe or seven which did demand her of me in manage ; as in very 2. deed one of them had her after our return . Touching that which was said that I played the King , these reports were made , because I would not bear with any thing which was against the duty of my charge , and the 
 Kings service . Moreover , that in such enterprises it is necessary for a Governor to make himself known and obeyed , for fear lest every body would become a master , perceiving themselves far from greater forces . And that 3. if the tale-tellers called this rigour , it rather proceeded of their disobedience , then of my nature less subject to cruelty then they were to rebellion . For the two 4-last points , that I had not written to any of the Lords of the Court but by the advice & commandment of my Lord Admiral , which willed me at my departure to send part of such things as I should find in the country unto the Lords of the Counsel : to the end that being moved by this mean , they might deal with the Queen mother for the continuance of this enterprise : that having be so small time in the country , continually hindered with building of fortresses , and unlading of my ships , I was not able to come by any new or rare things to send them , whereupon I thought it best to content them in the mean while with letters , until such time as I might have longer space to search out the Country , and might recover something to send them : the distribution of which letters I meant not otherwise but to refer to my Lord Admirals good pleasure : that if the bearer had forgotten himself so far , as that he had broken the covering of the letters , and presented them himself for hope of gain , it was not my commandment . And 5. that I never honoured noble man so much , nor did to any man more willing and faithful service then to my Lord Admiral , nor ever sought advancement but by his means . You see how things passed for this day . The next day the Indians came in from all parts , to know what people these were : to whom I signified that this was he which in the year 1562. arrived in this country , and erected the pillar which stood at the entry of the river . Some of them knew him : for in truth he was easy to be known by reason of the great beard which he beware . He received many presents of them which were of the villages near adjoining , 87 
 The mountains of Apalatcy wherein are mines of perfect gold . 
 Sieroa Pira read mettle . 
 Perfect gold . 
 Good means to avoid the danger of fire . 
 September 4. 
 among whom there were some that he had not yet forgotten . The kings Homoloa , Serauahi , Alimacani , Malica , and Casti came to visit him and welcome him with diverse gifts according to their manner . I advertised them that he was sent thither by the king of France , to remain there in my room , and that I was sent for . Then they demanded and prayed him , if it might stand with his good pleasure , to cause the merchandise that he had brought with him to be delivered them , and that in few days they would bring him to the mountains of Apalatcy , whither they had promised to conduct me , and that in case they performed not their promise , that they were content to be cut in pieces . In those mountains , as they said , is found red copper , which they call in their language Sieroa Pira , which is as much to say as read mettle , whereof I had a piece , which at the very instant I showed to Captain Ribault , which caused his gold-finer to make and assay thereof , which reported unto him that it was perfect gold . About the time of these conferences , comings and goings of the kings of the country , being weakened with my former travail , and fallen into a melancholy upon the false reports that had be made of me , I fell into a great continual fever , which held me eight or nine days : during which time Captain Ribault caused his victuals to be brought on shore , and bestowed the most part thereof in the house which my Lieutenant had built about two hundred pases without the fort : which he did to the end they might be the better defended from the weather , and likewise to the intent that the meal might be nearer to the bakehouse , which I had built of purpose in that place , the better to avoid the danger of the fire , as I said before . But lo how oftentimes misfortune does search and pursue us , even then when we think to be at rest 1 lo see what happened after that captain Ribault had brought up three of his small ships into the river , which was the fourth of September ! Sixe great Spanish ships arrived in the road , where four 
 of our greatest ships remained , which cast anchor , assuring our men of good amity . They asked how the chief T& Spaniards captain of the enterprise did , & called them all by 
 their names and surnames . I report me to you if it y prench . could be otherwise but these men before they went out of Spaine must needs be informed of the enterprise & of those that were to execute the same . About the break of day they began to make towards our men : but our men which trusted them never a deal , had hoised their sails by night , being ready to cut the strings that tied them . Wherefore perceiving that this making towards our men of the Spaniards was not to do them any pleasure , and knowing well that their furniture was too small to make head against them , because that the most part of their men were on shore , they cut their cables , left their anchors , and set sail . 
 The Spaniards seeing themselves discovered , lent them certain volleis of their great ordinance , made sail after them , and chased them all day long : but our men god way of them still towards the sea . And the Spaniards seeing they could not reach them , by reason that the French ships were better of sail then theirs , and also because they would not leave the coast , turned back and went on shore in the river Seloy , which we call the The river river of Dolphins 8 or 10 leagues distant from the orJ^t place where we were . Our men therefore finding them - g ' or selves better of sail then they , followed them to descry iO leagues what they did , which after they had done , they returned over land from unto the river of May , where captain Ribault having but descried them , embarked himself in a great boat to know what news they had . Being at the entry of the cape sea . river he met with the boat of captain Cousets ship , wherein there was a good number of men which made relation unto him of all the Spaniards doings : and how the great ship nam the Trini tie had kept the sea , and that she was not returned with them . They told him moreover that they had seen three Spanish ships enter into the river of Dolphins , & the other 
 Dangerous flaws of wind on the coast of Florida in September . 
 King Emola . 
 A village and river both of that name . 
 three remained in the road ; farther that they had put their soldiers , their victuals & munition on land . After he understood these news he returned to the fortress , and came to my chamber where I was sick , and there in the presence of the captains , La Grange , S. Marry , Ottigny , Visty , Yonville , and other gentlemen , he propounded , that it was necessary for the kings service , to embark himself with all his forces , and with the three ships that were in the road to seek the Spanish fleet , whereupon he asked our advice . I first replied , and showed unto him the consequence of such and enterprise , advertising him among other things of the perilous flaws of winds that rise on this coast , and that if it chanced that he were driven from the shore , it would be very hard for him to recover it again , that in the mean while they which should stay in the Fort should be in fear and danger . The Captains , Saint Marry , and La Grange declared unto him farther , that they thought it not good to put any such enterprise in execution , that it was far better to keep the land , Sc do their best endeavour to fortify themselves : And that after that the Trinitie ( which was the principali ship ) were returned , there would be much more likelihood to enterprise this voyage . This notwithstanding he resolved to undertake it , and that which more is , after he understood by king Emola , one of our neighbours which arrived upon the handling of these matters , that the Spaniards in great numbers were gone on shore , which had taken possession of the houses of Seloy , in the most part whereof they had placed their Negroes , which they had brought to labour , and also lodged themselves and had cast diverse trenches about them . Thus for the considerations which he had , and doubting ( as he might well do ) that the Spanyards would encamp themselves there to molest us , and in the end to chase us out of the Country , he resolved and continued in his embarkment , caused a Proclamation to be made , that all soldiers that were under his charge 
 should presently with their weapons embark them , and that his two ensigns should march : which was put in execution . He came into my chamber , and prayed me to lend him my Lieutenant , mine ensign , and my sergeant , and to let all my good soldiers , which I had , go with him , which I denied him , because my self being sick , there was no man to stay in the fort . Thereupon he answered me that I needed not to doubt at all , and that he would return the morrow after , that in the mean space Monsieur de Lys should stay behind to look to all things . Then I showed unto him that he was chief in this Country , and that I for my part had no further authority : that therefore he would take good advisement what he did , for fear lest some inconvenience might ensue . Then he told me that he could do no less , then to continue this enterprise , and that in the letter which he had received from my Lord Admiral , there was a postscript , which he showed me written in these words : Captain John Ribault , as I was enclosing up this letter , I received a certain advice , that DONE Pedro Melendes departeth from Spaine to go to the coast of New France : see you that you suffer him not to encroach upon you , no more then he would that you should encroach upon him . You see ( quoth he ) the charge that I have , and I leave it unto your self to judge , if you could do any less in this case , considering the certain advertisement that we have , that they are already on land , and will invade us . This stopped my mouth . Thus therefore confirmed or rather obstinate in this enterprise , and having regard rather unto his particular opinion then unto the advertisements which I had given him , and the inconveniences of the time whereof I had forewarned him , he embarked himself the eight of September , and took mine ensign and eight and thirtie of my men away with him . I report me to those that know what wars mean , if when and ensign marches , any soldier that hath any courage in him will stay behind , to forsake his ensign : Thus no man 
 9i 
 A.D. 
 1565. 
 And advertisement of my Lord Admiral to Captain Ribault . 
 Captain Ri-baidts em-barkment Sept. 8. 
 of commandement stayed behind with me , for each one followed him as chief , in whose name straight after his arrival , all cries and proclamations were made . Captain Grange , which liked not very well of this enterprise , The tenth of was unto the tenth of the month with me , and would September . not have gone aboard , if it had not been for the instant requests that Captain Ribault made unto him , which stayed two days in the road attending until La Grange was come unto him : Who being come aboard , they set sail altogether , and from that time forward I never saw A mighty them more . The very day that he departed , which was l^uhof^eit th® tenth September , there rose so great a tempest ’ accompanied with such storms , that the Indians themselves assured me that it was the worst weather that ever was seen on the coast : whereupon two or three days after , fearing lest our ships might be in some distress , I sent for Monsieur du Luys unto me , to take order to assemble the rest of our people to declare unto them what need we had to fortify our selves : which was done accordingly : and then I gave them to understand the necessity and inconveniences whereinto we were like to fallen , aswell by the absence of our ships , as by the nearness of the Spanyards , at whose hands we could look for no less then and open and sufficient proclaimed war , seeing they had taken land and fortified themselves so near unto us . And if any misfortune were fallen unto our men which were at Sea , we ought to make a full account with our selves that we were to endure many great misery's , being in so small number , and so many ways afflicted as we were . Thus every one promised me to take pains : and therefore considering that their proportion of victuals was small , and that so continuing , they would not be able to do any Laudtmmere great work , I augmented their allowance : although that 
 after the arrival of Captain Ribault my portion of victuals was allotted unto me as unto a common soldier , neither was I able to give so much as part of a bottle of wine to any man which deserved it : for I was so far from 92 
 A muster of the men left in the fort by Ribault . 
 RENE LAUDONNIERE a.d. 
 ... 15651 having means to do so , that the Captain himself took two of my boats , wherein the rest of the meal was , which was left me of the biscuits which I caused to be made to return into France : so that if I should say that I received more favour at the hands of the Englishmen being Strangers unto me , I should say but a truth . we began therefore to fortify our Laudonniere selves and to repair that which was broken down , counterfeit ™ ~ principally towards the water side , where 1 caused three - fortify them . score foot of trees to be planted , to repair the Palissado with the planks which I caused to be taken of the Ship which I had built . Nevertheless notwithstanding all our diligence and travail , we were never able fully to repair it by reason of the storms , which commonly did us so great annoy , that we could not finish our enclosure . Perceiving my self in such extremity I took a muster of the men , which captain Ribault had left me , to see if there were any that wanted weapon : I found nine or ten of them whereof not passed two or three had ever drawn sword out of a scabbard , as I think . Let them which have be bold to say , that I had men enough left me , so that I had means to defend my self , give ear a little now unto me , and if they have eyes in their heads , let them see what men I had . Of the nine there were foure but young striplings , which served Captain Ribault and kept his dogs , the fift was a cook : among those that were without the fort , and which were of the foresaid company of Captain Ribault , there was a Carpenter of threescore years old , one a Beer-brewer , one old Crossbow maker , two Shoemakers , and foure or five men that had their wives , a player on the Virginals , two servants of Monsieur du Luys , one of Monsieur de Beauhaire , one of Monsieur de la Grange , and about fourescore and five or sixe in all , counting aswell Lackeys as women and children . Behold the goodly troop so sufficient to defend themselves , and so courageous as they have esteemed them to be : and for my part I leave it to 
 93 
 Fourescore and five left in the fort with Laudonniere . 
 others consideration to imagine whither Captain Ribault would have left them with me to have borrowed my men , if they had be such . Those that were left me of mine own company were about sixeteene or seventeene that could bear arms , and all of them poor and lean : the rest were sick and maimed in the conflict which my Lieutenant had against Utina . This view being thus taken , we set our watches , whereof we made two Centinels , that the soldiers might have one night free . Then we bethought our selves of those which might be most sufficient , among whom we chosen two , one of whom was nam Monsieur Saint Cler , and the other Monsieur de la Vigne , to whom we delivered candles and Lanterns to go round about the fort to view the watch , because of the foul and foggy weather . I delivered them also a sandglasse or clock , that the Centinels might not be troubled more one then another . In the mean while I ceased not , for all the foul weather nor my sickness which I had , to oversee the Corpse de garde . The night between the nineteenth and twentieth of September La Vigne kept watch with his company , wherein he used all endeavour , although it rained without ceasing . When the day was therefore come , and that he saw that it rained still worse then it did before , he pitied the Centinels so too moiled and wet : and thinking the Spanyardes would not have come in such a strange time , he let them depart , and to say the truth , he went himself unto his lodging . In the mean while one which had something to do without the fort , and my trumpet which went up unto the TheSpanyards rampart perceived a troop of Spanyards which came down from a little knap . Where incontinently they J p ' began to cry alarm , and the Trumpeter also : Which assoon as ever I understood , forthwith I issued out , with my target and sword in my hand , and gat me into the midst of the Court , where I began to cry upon my soldiers . Some of them which were of the forward sort went towards the breach , which was on the 
 Southside , and where the munitions of the artillery lay , where they were repulsed and slain . By the self same place two ensigns entered , which immediately were The Spaniards planted on the walls . Two other ensigns also entered enter firton the other side towards the West , where there was another breach : and those which were lodged in this quarter , & which showed themselves , were likewise defeated . As I went to succour them which were defending the breach on the southwest side , I encountered by chance a great company of Spaniards , which had already repulsed our men and were now entered , which drave me back unto the court of the fort : being there I espied with them one called Francis Jean , which Francis Jean was one of the Mariners which stole away my barks , atraitourto and had guided and conducted the Spanyards thither . ts na tm ' Assoon as he saw me , he began to say , This is the Captain . This troop was led by a captain whose name , as I think , was DONE Pedro Melendes : these DONE Pedro made certain pushes at me with their pikes which lighted on my tarket . But perceiving that 1 was not able Spaniards . to withstand so great a company , and that the court was already won , and their ensigns planted on the ramparts , & that I had never a man about me , saving one only whose name was Bartholomew , I entered into the yard of my lodging , into which they followed me , and had it not be for a tent that was set up , I had been taken : but the Spanyards which followed me were occupied in cutting of the cords of the tent , and in the mean while I saved my self by the breach which was on the West side near unto my Lieutenants lodging , and gate away into the woods : where I found certain Laudonniers of my men which were escaped , of which number there esC0Pe-were three or foure which were soar hurt . Then spoke I thus unto them : Sirs , since it hath pleased God that this mischance is happened unto us , we must needs take the pains to get over the marshes unto the ships which are at the mouth of the river . Some would needs go to a little village which was in the woods , the rest fol - 
 John du Che-min a faithful servant . 
 The diligence of the Mariners to save them that escaped out of the fort . 
 Among these was Jaques Morgues painter sometime living in the Blackfryers in London . 
 lowed me through the redes in the water , where being able to go no farther by reason of my sickness which I had , I sent two of my men which were with me , which could swim well , unto the ships , to advertise them of that which had happened , and to send them word to come and help me . They were not able that day to get unto the ships to certify them thereof : so I was constrained to stand in the water up to the shoulders all that night long , with one of my men which would never forsake me . The next day morning , being scarcely able to draw my breath any more , I betook me to my prayers with the soldier which was with me , whose name was John du Chemin : for I felt my self so feeble , that I was afraid I should die suddenly : and in truth if he had not embraced me in both his arms , and so held me up , it had not be possible to save me . After we had made and end of our prayers , I herd a voice , which in my judgement was one of theirs which I had sent , which were over against the ships and called for the ship boat , which was so in deed : and because those of the ships had understanding of the taking of the fort by one called John de Hais , master Carpenter , which fled unto them in a shallop ; they had set sail to run along the coast to see if they might save any : wherein doubtless they did very well their endeavour . They went straight to the place where the two men were which I had sent , and which called them . Assoon as they had received them in and understood where I was , they came and found me in a pitiful case . Five or sixe of them took me and carried me into the shallop : for I was not able by any means to go one foot . After I was brought into the shallop some of the Mariners took their clothes from their backs to lend them me , and would have carried me presently to their ships to give me a little Aqua vitae . Howbeit I would not go thither , until I had first gone with the boat along the reeds , to seek out the poor souls which were scattered abroad , where we gathered up 18 or 20 of them . The last that I took 96 
 in was the nephew of the Treasurer le Beau. After we were all come to the ships , I comforted them as well as I could , and sent back the boat again with speed to see if they could find yet any more . Upon her return , the Mariners told me how that captain James Ribault which was in his ship about two muskets shot distant from the fort , had parted with the Spaniards , and that Francis Jean came unto his ship , where he stayed a long space , whereat they greatly marveiled , considering he was the cause of this enterprise , how he would let him escape . After I was come into the ship called the Greyhound , captain James Ribault & captain Valvot came to see me : and there we concluded to return into France . Now forasmuch as I found the ship unfurnished of Captain , Pilot , Master , and Masters-mate , I gave advice to choose out one of the most able men among all the mariners , & that by their own voices . I took also sixe men out of another small ship , which we had sunk because it wanted ballast and could not be saved . Thus I increased the furniture of the ship wherein I was my self embarked , and made one , which had be Masters-mate in the foresaid small ship , Master of mine . And because I lacked a pilot , I prayed James Ribault that he would grant me one of the foure men that he had in his ship , which I should name unto him , to serve me for a Pilot : he promised to give me them , which nevertheless he did not at the instant when we were ready to depart , notwithstanding all the speech I used to him , in declaring that it was for the kings service . I was constrained to leave the ship behind me which I had bought of the English Captain , because I wanted men to bring her away . For captain James Ribault had taken away her furniture : I took away her ordinance only , which was all dismounted , whereof I gave nine pieces to James Ribault to carry into France , the other five I put into my ship . The 25 of September we set sails to return into France , and Captain James Ribault and I kept company all that ix 97 g 
 A.D. 
 1565. 
 Francis Jean cause of this enterprise . 
 The bad dealing of James Ribault . 
 Our return into France the 25. of September 1565. 
 day and the next until three or foure a clock in the afternoon : but because his ship was better at bowline then ours , he kept him to the wind and left us the same day . Thus we continued our voyage , wherein we had marvelous flaws of wind . And about the October 28. eight and twentieth of October in the morning at the break of the day we descried the Isle of Flores , one of the Azores , where immediately upon our approaching to the land we had a mighty gust of wind which came from the Northeast , which caused us to bear against it foure days : afterwards the wind came South and Southeast , and was always variable . In all the time of our passage we had none other food saving November 10. biscuit and water . About the tenth or eleventh of November , after we had sailed a long time , and supposing we were not far from land , I caused my men to found , where they found threescore and Afteene fathoms water , whereat we all rejoiced , and praised God because we had sailed so prosperously . Immediately after I caused them to set sail again and so we continued our way : but forasmuch as we had born The channel of too much towards the Northeast we entered into Saint Saint George . Georges channel , a place much feared of all Sailors , and whereas many ships are cast away : But it was a fair gift of God that we entered in it when the weather was clear . We sailed all the night , supposing we had be shot into the narrow Sea between England and France , and by the next day to reach Diepe , but we were deceived of our longing : for about two or three of the clock after midnight as I walked upon the hatches , I descried land round about me , whereat we were astonished . Immediately I caused them to strike sail and found : we found we had not under us passed 8 fathoms of water , whereupon I commanded them to stay till break of day : which being come , and seeing my Mariners told me that they knew not this land , I commanded them to approach unto it . Being near thereunto I made them cast anchor , & sent the boat on 
 1565-shore to understand in what Country we were . Word was brought me that we were in Wales a province of England . I went incontinently on land , where after I had taken the air , a sickness took me whereof I thought I should have died . In the mean while I caused the ship to be brought into the bay of a small town called Swansey , where I found merchant's of S. Laudonnieres Malo , which lent me money , wherewith I made certain apparel for my self and part of my company that was in Qiamorgan . with me : and because there were no victuals in the ship , fare in South I bought two Oxen , and salted them , and a tun of Wales . Beer , which I delivered into his hands which had charge of the ship , praying him to carry it into France , which he promised me to do : for mine own part I purposed with my men to pass by land , and after I had taken leave of my Mariners , I departed from Swansey , and came that night with my company to a place called Morgan , where the Lord of the place , understanding what I was , stayed me with him for the space of 6 or 7 days , and at my departure moved with pity to see me go on foot , especially being so weak as I was , gave me a little Hackney . Thus I passed on my journey first to Bristoll , & then to London , where I went to do my duty to Monsieur de Foix , which for the present was the kings Ambassador , and help me with money in my necessity . From thence I passed to Caleis , afterwards to Paris , where I was informed that the king was gone to Molins to sojourn there : incontinently , & with all the haste I could possibly make , I gate me thither with part of my come 
 pany . Thus briefly you see the discourse of all that The conclusion . happened in New France since the time it pleased the kings Majesty to send his subject's thither to discover those parts . The indifferent and unpassionate readers may easily weigh the truth of my doings , and be upright judges of the endeavour which I there used . For mine own part I will not accuse nor excuse any : it suffices me to have followed the truth of the history , whereof many are able to bear witness , which 
 99 
 The courtesy of one Master Morgan . 
 Bristoll . 
 London . 
 Monsieur de Foix Ambassador for the French king in England . 
 Thecauseswhy the French lost Florida . 
 The French Fleet cast away on the coast of Florida . 
 were there present . I will plainly say one thing , That the long delay that Captain John Ribault used in his embarking , and the 15. days that he spent in roving along the coast of Florida , before he came to our fort Caroline , were the cause of the loss that we sustained . For he discovered the coast the 14 of August , and spent the time in going from river to river , which had be sufficient for him to have discharged his ships in , and for me to have embarked my self to return into France . I wot well that all that he did was upon a good intent : yet in mine opinion he should have had more regard unto his charge , then to the devises of his own brain , which sometime he printed in his head so deeply , that it was very hard to put them out : which also turned to his utter undoing : for he was no sooner departed from us , but a tempest took him , which in fine wracked him upon the coast , where all his ships were cast away , and he with much ado escaped drowning , to fallen into their hands which cruelly massacred him and all his company . 
 . 