And extract of a letter of captain Francis Vasques de Coronado , written to a Secretary of the right noble DONE Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy of Nueva Espanna . Dated in Culiacan , the 8. of March 1539. 
 HE says that Frier Marcus de Ni$a arrived in the Province of Topira , where he found all the Indians fled unto the mountains for fear of the Christians , and that for his sake they came all down to see him , with great joy & boldness . They are men of good making , and whiter then others , and their women are more beautiful then others of the neighbourprovinces . There are no great cities there , yet are the houses built of stone , and are very good , and in them Store of gold , they have great store of gold , which is as it were silver , and [ ost } because they know not what use to put it to . ^inTopira^5 The people wear Emeralds and other precious jewels upon their bodies : they are valiant , having very strong armour made of silver , fashioned after diverse shapes 116 
 of beasts . They worship for their gods such things as they have in their houses , as namely herbs , and birds , and sing songs unto them in their language , which differeth but little from that of Culiacan . They told the Friar that they were willing to become Christians , and the Emperor's subject's , for they were without a governor ; with condition that no man should hurt them : and that they would change their gold for such things as they wanted . Commandment was given , that they should be received without doing them any displeasure . Near unto this country there is another Province heretofore discovered by our men , where the people go naked without any thing before them : they are very hardly reduced to Christianitie , and they are valiant and stout . Their houses are covered with straw : They seek no other riches but to feed cattle . They go at certain seasons to their sacrifices into a valley situate in that Province , which is inhabited with people , esteemed by those of the country as saints and priests , whom they call Chichimecas , which dwell in the woods without houses : and they eat such things as they of the country give them of alms . They go naked , and are tanned in the smoke , and tie their privy member with a string unto their knee , and the women likewise go stark naked . They have certain temples covered with straw , with small round windows full of the skulls of dead men ; before their temple is a great round ditch , the brim whereof is compassed with the figure of a serpent made of gold and silver , and with another mixture of unknown metals : and this serpent holds his tail in his mouth . They of this valley from time to time cast lots , whose luck it shall be to be sacrificed , and they make him great cheer , on whom the lot falls , and with great joy they crown him with flowers upon a bed prepared in the said ditch all full of flowers and sweet herbs , on which they lay him along , and lay great store of dry wood on both sides of him , and set it on fire on either part , and so 
 117 
 he dyeth . Where he continueth so quietly without being bound , as though he did something , wherein he took great pleasure . And they say that he is a Saint , and do worship him for that year , and sing praises , and Hymns unto him , and afterwards set up his head with the rest in order within those windows . Also they sacrifice their prisoners , whom they burn in another deeper ditch , and not with the foresaid ceremonies . The Spanyards which are in Xalisco write , that having good assistance , they hope that those people will become Christians . The Country is very good and fruitful , and hath great store of good and wholesome waters . 
 . 