The second voyage unto Florida , made and written by Captain Laudonniere , which fortified and inhabited there two Summer's and one whole Winter . 
 Fter our arrival at Diepe , at our coming home , from our first voyage ( which was the twentieth of July 1562 ) we found the civil wars begun , which was in part the cause why our men were not succoured , as Captain John Ribault had promised them : whereof it followed that 
 The civil wars the cause why the Frenchmen were not sup - 
 Captain Albert was killed by his soldiers , and the phed , which country abandoned , as heretofore we have sufficiently ^re , ty* discoursed , and as it may more at large be understood j^rst VOyase by those men which were there in person . After the peace was made in France , my Lord Admiral De Chastillon showed unto the king , that he herd no news at all of the men which Captain John Ribault had left in Florida , & that it were pity to suffer them to perish . In which respect , the king was content he should cause 3 ships to be furnished , the one of sixe score tons , the other of 100 , and the third of 60 , to seek them out , and to succour them . 
 My Lord Admiral therefore being well informed of the faithful service which I had done , aswell unto his Majesty as to his predecessors kings of France , advertised the king how able I was to do him service in this voyage , which was the cause that he made me chief Captain over these 3 ships , and charged me to 
 IX 
 Laudonniers second voyage to Florida , with three ships the 22 of Aprill 1564. 
 The Isle of Teneriffa , or the Pike . 
 depart with diligence to perform his commandment , which for mine own part I would not gainsay , but rather thinking my self happy to have be chosen out among such and infinite number of others , which in my judgement were very well able to have quit themselves in this charge , I embarked my self at New Haven the 22 of Aprill 1564 , and sailed so , that we fell near unto the coast of England : and then I turned towards the South , to sail directly to the fortunate Islands , at this present called the Canaries , one of which called the Isle Salvage ( because as I think it is altogether without inhabitants ) was the first that our ships passed . Sailing therefore on forward , we landed the next day in the Isle of Teneriffa , otherwise called the Pike , because that in the midst thereof there is and exceeding high mountain , near as high as that of Etna , which riseth up like a pike , into the top whereof no man can go up but from the midst of May until the midst of August , by reason of the over great cold which is there all the year : which is a wonderful strange thing , considering that it is not passed 27 degrees and and half distant from the Equator . We saw it all covered over with snow , although it were then but the fift of May . The inhabitants in this Isle being heretofore pursued by the Spaniards , retired themselves into this mountain , where for a space they made war with them , and would not submit themselves to their obedience , neither by foul nor fair means , they disdained so much the loss of their Island . For those which went thither on the Spaniards behalf , left their carcases there , so that not so much as one of them returned home to bring news . Notwithstanding in the end , the inhabitants not able to live in that place according to their nature , or for want of such things as were necessary for the commodity of their livelihood , did all die there . After I had furnished my self with some fresh water , very good and excellent , which 
 .. 15640 sprang out of a rock at the foot of this mountain , I continued my course towards the West , wherein the winds favoured me so well , that 15 days after our ships arrived safe and found at the Antilles : and going on land at the Isle of Martinino , one of thee The e _ °f first of them , the next day we arrived at Dominica , Mat-ttnino . twelve leagues distant from the former . island . 
 Dominica is one of the fairest Islands of the West , full of hills , and of very good smell . Whose singularities desiring to know as we passed , and seeking also to refresh our selves with fresh water , I made the Mariners cast anchor , after we had sailed about half along the coast thereof . As soon as we had cast anchor , two Indians ( inhabitants of that place ) sailed towards us in two Canoas full of a fruit of great excellency which they call Ananas . As they Ananas a approached unto our Bark , there was one of them fruit of great which being in some misdoubt of us , went back eMe enae ' again on land , and fled his way with as much speed as he could possibly . Which our men perceived and entered with diligence into the other Canoa , wherein they caught the poor Indian , & brought him unto me . But the poor fellow became so astonished in beholding us , that he knew not which way to behave himself , because that ( as afterwards I understood ) he feared that he was fallen into the Spaniards hands , of whom he had be taken once before , and which , as he showed us , had cut of his stones . At length this poor Indian was secure of us , and discoursed unto us of many things , whereof we received very small pleasure , because we understood not his mind but by his signs . Then he desired me to give him leave to depart , and promised me that he would bring me a thousand presents , whereunto I agreed on condition that he would have patience until the next day , when I purposed to go on land , where I suffered him to depart after I had given him a shirt , and certain small trifles , wherewith he departed very well contented from us . 
 The place where we went on shore was hard by a very high Rock , out of which there ran a little river of sweet and excellent good water : by which river we stayed certain days to discover the things which were worthy to be seen , and trafficked daily with the Indians : which above all things besought us that none of our men should come near their lodgings nor their gardens , otherwise that we should give them great cause of jealousy , and that in so doing , we should not want of their fruit which they call Ananas , whereof they offered us very liberally , receiving in recompense certain things of small valve . This notwithstanding , it happened on a day that certain of our men desirous to see some new things in these strange countries , walked through the woods : and following still the little rivers side , they spied two serpents of exceeding bigness , which went side by side overthwart the way . My soldiers went before them thinking to let them from going into the woods : but the serpents nothing at all astonished at these gestures glanced into the bushes with fearful hyssings : yet for all that , my men drew their swords and killed them , and found them afterwards 9 great foot long , and as big as a men leg . During this combat , certain others more undiscreet went and gathered their Ananas in the Indians gardens , trampling through them without any discretion : and not therewithal ! contented they went towards their dwellings ; whereat the Indians were so much offended , that without regarding any thing they rushed upon them and discharged their shot , so that they hit one of my men nam Martine Chaveau , which remained behind . We could not know whither he were killed on the place , or whither he were taken prisoner : for those of his company had enough to do to save themselves without thinking of their companion . Whereof Monsieur de Ottigni my Lieutenant being advertised , sent unto me to know whither I thought good that he should lay and ambush 
 for the Indians which had either taken or killed our 
 man , or whither he should go directly to their dwellings to know the truth . I sent unto him after good deliberation hereupon , that he should not attempt any thing , and that for diverse occasions : but contrariwise that he should embark himself with all diligence , & consequently all they that were on land : which he did with speed . But as he sailed towards our ships he perceived along the shore a great number of Indians which began to charge them with their arrows : he for his part discharged store of shot against them , yet was not able to hurt them , or by any means to surprise them : for which cause he quite forsook them , and came unto our ship . Where staying until the next day morning we set sail following our wonted course , and keeping the same , we discovered diverse Isles conquered by the Spaniards , as the Isles of S. Christopher , and of the Saints , of Monserrate , and La Redonda : Afterwards we passed between Anguilla and Anegada , sailing towards New France . Where we arrived 15 days after , to wit , on Thurseday the 22 of June about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , and landed near a little river which is 30 degrees distant from the Equator , and 10 lagues above Cape Francois drawing towards the South , and about thirtie leagues above the River of May . After we had strooken sail and cast anchor athwart the River , I determined to go on shore to discover the same . Therefore being accompanied with Monsieur Ottigni , with Monsieur de Arlac mine Ensign , & a certain number of Gentlemen and soldiers , I embarked my self about 3 or 4 of the clock in the evening . And being arrived at the mouth of the river , I caused the channel to be sounded , which was found to be very shallow , although that farther within the same the water was there found reasonable deep , which separateth it self into two great arms , whereof one runneth towards the South , and the other 
 His arrival in Florida the zz of June 1564. 
 Cape Francois being between the river of Dolphins and the river of May , make that the distance 30 leagues about , which is but 10 leagues over land . 
 towards the North . Having thus searched the River , I went on land to speak with the Indians which waited for us upon the shore , which at our coming on land , came before us , crying with a loud voice in their Indian language , Antipola Bonassou , which is as much to say , as brother , friend , or some such like thing . After they had made very much of us , they showed us their Paracoussy , that is to say , their King and Governor , to whom I presented certain toys , wherewith he was well pleased . And for mine own The great love part , I praise God continually , for the great love andc^eof which I have found in these Savages , which were sorry tO e on tans . nothing , but that the night approached , and made us retire unto our ships . 
 For though they endeavoured by all means to make us tarry with them , and showed by signs the desire that they had to present us with some rare things , yet nevertheless for many just and reasonable occasions I would not stay on shore all night : but excusing my self for all their offers , I embarked my self again and returned towards my ships . Howbeit , before my The river of departure , I nam this River , the river of Dolphins , Dolphins , because that at mine arrival , I saw there a great the Savages , number or Dolphins , which were playing in the mouth thereof . The next day the 23 of this month ( because that towards the South I had not found any commodious place for us to inhabit , and to built a fort ) I gave commandment to weigh anchor , & to hoist our sails to sail towards the river of May , Their arrival where we arrived two days after , & cast anchor . at the river of Afterwards going on land , with some number of ay ' Gentlemen and Soldiers to know for a certainty the singularities of this place , we espied the Paracoussy of the country , which came towards us ( this was the very same that we saw in the voyage of Captain John Ribault ) which having espied us , cried very far ofF , Antipola , Antipola : and being so joyful that he could not contain himself , he came to meet us , accompanied then 
 .... I564 ' with two of his sons , as fair and mighty persons as might be found in all the world , which had nothing in their mouths but this word , Amy , Amy : that is to say , friend , friend : yea , and knowing those which were there in the first voyage , they went principally to them to use this speech unto them . There was in their train a great number of men and women , which still made very much of us , and by evident signs made us understand how glad they were of our arrival . This good entertainment past , the Paracoussy prayed me to go see the pillar which we had erected in the voyage of John Ribault ( as we have declared heretofore ) as a thing which they made great account of . 
 Having yielded unto him and being come to the place The f^ar set where it was set up , we found the same crowned with crowns of Bay , and at the foot thereof many little crownedwith baskets full of Mill which they call in their language garlands of Tapaga Tapola . Then when they came thither they Laurelland kissed the same with great reverence and besought us ironedmth to do the like , which we would not deny them , to the f^rne end we might draw them to be more in friendship worshipped'by with us . This done , the Paracoussy took me by the the Savages . hand , as if he had desire to make me understand some great secret , & by signs showed me very well up within the river the limits of his dominion , and said that he was called Paracoussy Satourioua , which is as much as King Paracoussy Satourioua . His children have the self same title of Satourioua . Paracoussy : The eldest is nam Athore , a man , I dare say , perfect in beauty , wisdom , and honest sobriety , showing by his modest gravity that he deserveth the name which he bears , besides that he is gentle and tractable . After we had sojourned a certain space with them , the Paracoussy prayed one of his sons to present unto me a wedge of silver , which he did & that wedge oj with a good will : in recompense whereof I gave him a silver-cutting hook and some other better present : wherewith he seemed to be very well pleased . Afterwards we took our leave of them , because the night approached , & then 
 returned to lodge in our ships . Being allured with this good entertainment I failed not the next day to embark my self again with my Lieutenant Ottigni and a number of soldiers to return towards the Paracoussy of the river of May , which of purpose waited for us in the same place , where the day before we conferred with him . We found him under the shadow of and arbour accompanied with fourescore Indians at the least , and appareled at that time after the Indian fashion , to wit , with a great Hearts skin dressed like Chamois , and painted with devices of strange and diverse colours , but of so lively a portraiture , and representing antiquity , with rules so justly compassed , that there is no Painter so exquisite that could find fault therewith : the natural disposition of this strange people is so perfect and well guided that without any aid and favour of arts , they are able by the help of nature only to content the eye of artisans , yea even of those which by their industry are able to aspire unto things most absolute . 
 Then I advertised Paracoussy Satourioua , that my desire was to discover farther up into the river , but that this should be with such diligence that I would come again unto him very speedily : wherewith he was content , promising to stay for me in the place where he was : and for and earnest of his promise , he offered me his goodly skin , which I refused then , and promised to receive it of him at my return . For my part I gave him certain small trifles , to the intent to retain him in our friendship . 
 Departing from thence , I had not sailed three leagues up the river , still being followed by the Indians , which coasted me a long the river , crying still , Amy , Amy , that is to say friend , friend : but I discovered and hill of mean height , near which I went on land , hard by the fields that were sowed with mil , at one corner whereof there was and house built for their lodging , which keep and guard the mill : for there are such numbers of Cor-Gnsses . nish choughs in this Country , which continually devour 
 .. 15641 and spoil the mill , that the Indians are constrained to keep and watch it , otherwise they should be deceived of their harvest . 1 rested my self in this place for certain hours , & commanded Monsieur de Ottigni , and Monsieur de my Sergeant to enter into the woods to search out the dwellings of the Indians : where after they had gone awhile , they came unto a Marish of Reeds , where finding their way to be stopped , they rested under the shadow of a mighty Bay tree to refresh themselves a little and to resolve which way to take . Then they discovered , as it were on the sudden , five Indians half hidden in the woods , which seemed somewhat to distrust our men , until they said unto them in the Indian language Antipola Bonassou , to the end that understanding their speech they might come unto us more boldly , which they did incontinently . But because they saw , that the foure that went last , bore up the train of the skin wherewith he that went foremost was appareled our men imagined that the foremost must needs be some man of greater quality then the rest , seeing that withal they called him Paracoussy , Paracoussy , wherefore , some of our company went towards him , and using him courteously showed him , Monsieur de Ottigni , their Lieutenant , for whom they had made and harbour with Bay and Palm boughs after the Indian fashion , to the end that by such signs the Savages might think the Frenchmen had compained with such as they at other times . 
 The Indian Paracoussy drew near to the French , and courtesy began to make him a long Oration , which tended to no other end , but that he besought the Frenchmen very earnestly to come and see his dwelling and his parents , which they granted him , and straight for pledge of better amity , he gave unto my Lieutenant Ottigni , the very skin that he was clad with . 
 Then he took him by the hand , leading him right towards the Marishes , over which the Paracoussy , Monsieur Ottigni , and certain other of our men were born 
 upon the Indians shoulders : and the rest which could not pass because of the mire and redes , went through the woods , and followed a narrow path which led them forth until they came unto the Paracoussyes dwelling ; out of which there came about fiftie Indians to receive our men gallantly , and to feast them after their manner . After which they brought at their entrance a great vessel of earth , made after a strange fashion full of fountain water clear and very excellent . 
 This vessel was born by and Indian , and there was another younger which bore of this water in another little vessel of wood , and presented thereof to every one to drink , observing in doing the same , a certain order and reverence , which he made to each of them , to whom he gave drink . Our thirst well quenched by this means , and our men being sufficiently refreshed , the Paracoussy brought them to his father's lodging , one of the oldest men that lived upon the earth . Our men regarding his age , began to make much of him , using this speech , Amy , Amy , that is to say , friend , friend , whereat the old sier showed himself very glad . 
 Afterwards they questioned with him concerning the course of his age : whereunto he made answer , showing that he was the first living originali , from whence five generations were descended , as he showed unto them by another old man that sat directly over against him , Men of ex - which far exceeded him in age . And this man was his ceedmg old father ? which seemed to be rather a dead carkeis then a living body : for his sinews , his veins , his artiers , his bones , and other parts , appeared so clearly thorough his skin , that a man might easily tell them , and discern them one from another . Also his age was so great , that the good man had lost his sighed , and could not speak one only word but with exceeding great pain . Monsieur de Ottigni having seen so strange a thing , turned to the younger of these two old men , praying him to vouchsafe to answer him to that which he demanded touch - 
 Savages in Florida of 250. years old . 
 Eagles in Florida . 
 RENE LAUDONNIERE a.d. 
 1564. 
 ing his age . Then the old man called a company of Indians , and striking twice upon his thigh , and laying his hand upon two of them , he showed him by signs , that these two were his sons : again smiting upon their thighs , he showed him others not so old , which were the children of the two first , which he continued in the same manner until the fift generation . But though this old man had his father alive more old then himself , and that both of them did wear their hair very long , and as white as was possible , yet it was told them , that they might yet live thirtie or fortie years more by the course of nature : although the younger of them both was not less then two hundred and fiftie years old . After he had ended his communication , he commanded two young Eagles to be given to our men , which he had bred up for his pleasure in his house . He caused also little Paniers made of Palm leaves full of Gourds read and blew to be delivered unto them . For recompense of which presents he was satisfied with French toys . 
 These two old men caused our men to be guided back again to the place from whence they came , by the young Paracoussy which hath brought them thither . And having taken leave of the Paracoussy , they came and sought me out in the place where I stayed , and rehearsed unto me all that they had seen , praying me also that I would reward their guide , which so frankly and heartily had received them into his house , which I would not fail to do by any means . 
 Now was I determined to search out the qualities of the hill . Therefore I went right to the top thereof , where we found nothing else but Cedars , Palm , and Baytrees of so sovereign odour , that Balm smelleth nothing like in comparison . The trees were environed round about with Vines bearing grapes in such quantity , that the number would suffice to make the place habitable . Beside this fertility of the soil for Vines , a man may see Esquine wreathed about the shrubs in 11 
 Cedars , Palms , Baize exceeding sweet . Abundance of grapes . 
 Esquine a drug excellent against the pocket . 
 Silver certain days journey up within the river of May . 
 Thimogoamor-tall enemies to Satourioua . 
 great quantity . Touching the pleasure of the place , the Sea may be seen plain and open from it , and more then sixe great leagues off , near the River Belle , a man may behold the meadows divided asunder into Isles and Islets interlacing one another : Briefly the place is so pleasant , that those which are melancholic would be enforced to change their humour . 
 After I had stayed there a while , I embarked again my people to sail towards the mouth of the River , where we found the Paracoussy , which according to his promise waited for us . Wherefore to content him , we went on shore , and did him that reverence that on our part was requisite . Then he gave me the skin so richly painted , and I recompensed him with somewhat of our merchandise . I forgot not to demand of him the place whence the wedge of silver came which he had given me before : whereunto he made me a very sudden answer , which notwithstanding I understood not , which he well perceived . And then he showed me by evident signs that all of it came from a place more within the River by certain days journeys from this place , and declared unto us that all that which they had thereof , they got it by force of arms of the inhabitants of this place , nam by them Thimogoa , their most ancient and natural enemies , as he largely declared . Whereupon when I saw with what affection he spoke when he pronounced Thimogoa , I understood what he would say . And to bring my self more into his favour , I promised him to accompany him with all my force , if he would fight against them : which thing pleased him in such sort , that from thenceforth he promised himself the victory of them , and assured me that he would make a voyage thither within a short space , would cause store of Mill to be prepared , and would command his men to make ready their Bows , and furnish themselves with such store of arrows , that nothing should be wanting to give battle to Thimogoa . In fine he prayed me very earnestly not to fail of 
 my promise , and in so doing , he hoped to procure me Gold and Silver in such good quantity , that mine affairs should take effect according to mine own and his desire . 
 The matter thus fully resolved upon , I took my leave of him to return unto my ships , where after we had rested our selves all the night following , we hoised sails the next day very early in the morning , and sailed toward the River of Seine , distant from thee The river of River of May about foure leagues : and there continue - Seine-ing our course toward the North , we arrived at the mouth of Somme , which is not passed sixe leagues The river of distant from the River of Seine : where we cast Anchor , Somme-and went on shore to discover that place as we had done the rest . There we were graciously and cour - The courtesy teously received of the Paracoussy of the Country , °^the which is one or the tallest men and best proportioned river of that may be found . His wife sat by him , which Somme . beside her Indian beauty , wherewith she was greatly endued , had so virtuous a countenance and modest gravity , that there was not one among us but did greatly commend her ; she had in her train five of her daughters of so good grace and so well brought up , that I easily persuaded my self that their mother was their Mistress , and had taught them well and straightly to preserve their honesty . After that the Paracoussy had received us as I have said , he commanded his wife to present me with a certain number of bullets of silver , for his own part he presented me with his bow and his arrows , as he had done unto Captain John Ribault in our first voyage , which is a sign of a perpetuali amity and alliance with those which they honour with such a kind of present . In our discoursing with one another , we entered into speech as touching the exercise of arms . 
 Then the Paracoussy caused a corselet to be set on end , and prayed me to make a proof of our Harquebusses and their bows : but this proof pleased him very little ; for assoon as he knew that our Harquebusses did easily 13 
 pierce that which all the force of their bows could not hurt , he seemed to be sorry , musing with himself how this thing might be done . Nevertheless going about to dissemble in his mind that which his countenance could not do by any means , he began to fallen into another matter , and prayed us very earnestly to stay with him that night in his house or lodging , affirming that no greater happiness could come unto him then our long abided , which he desired to recompense with a thousand presents . 
 Nevertheless we could not grant him this point , but took our leave of him to return to our ships : Laudonnleres where soon after I caused all my company to be consultation assembled , with the Master's and Pilots of my ships , anywlureit to consult together of the place whereof we should might be best make choice to plant our habitation . First I let them fir them to understand , how none of them were ignorant , that the part which was toward the Cape of Florida , was altogether a marish Country , and therefore unprofitable for our inhabitation : A thing which could yield neither profit to the King , nor any contentment or pleasure to us , if peradventure we would inhabit there . On the other side if we passed further towards the North to seek out Port Royal , it would be neither very profitable nor convenient : at the least if we should give credit to the report of them which remained there a long time , although the Haven were one of the fairest of the West Indies : but that in this case the question was not so much of the beauty of the place , as of things necessary to sustain life . And that for our inhabiting it was much more needful for us to plant in places plentiful of victuali , then in goodly Havens , fair , deep and pleasant to the view . In consideration whereof that I was of opinion , if it seemed good unto them , to Gold and sil - seat our selves about the River of May : seeing also that in our first v°yaSe we f°und the same only among rtver of ajj the rest tQ abQun ( je jn Mafz anj cornC ) besijes the ' Gold and Silver that was found there : a thing that 14 
 put me in hope of some happy discovery in time to come . 
 After I had proposed these things , every one gave his opinion thereof : and in fine all resolved , namely those which had been with me in the first voyage , that it was expedient to seat themselves rather on the River of May then on any other , until they might hear news out of France . This point being thus agreed upon , we sailed towards the River , and used such diligence , that with the favour of the winds we arrived there the morrow after about the break of day , which was on Thursday the 29. of the month of June . Have - June the 29. king cast anchor , I embarked all my stuff and the soldiers of my company , to sail right towards the opening of the River : wherein we entered a good way up , and found a Creek of a reasonable bigness , which invited us to refresh our selves a little , while we reposed our selves there . Afterwards we went on shore to seek out a place plain without trees , which we perceived from the Creek . 
 But because we found it not very commodious for us to inhabit there : we determined to return unto the place which we had discovered before , when we had ace is joining to a is more fit and come - 
 modious to built a fortress , then that where we were last . Therefore we took our way towards the forests being guided therein by the young Paracoussy which had led us before to his father's lodging . Afterwards we found a large plain covered with high Pinetrees distant a little from the other : under which we perceived and infinite number of Stags which brayed amid the plain , athwart the which we passed : then we discovered a little hill adjoining unto a great vale very green and in form flat : wherein were the fairest meadows of the world , and grass to feed cattle . Moreover it is environed with a great number of brooks of fresh water , & high woods , which make the vale J5 
 sailed up the River . This pl mountain , and it seemed unto 1 
 more delectable to the eye . After I had taken the view thereof at mine ease , I nam it at the request of our The Vale of soldiers , The Vale of Laudonniere . Thus we went Laudonniere . forwar ( £ Anon having gone a little forward , we met and Indian woman of tall stature , which also was and And Herma - Hermaphrodite , who came before us with a great ves-phrodite . sep of c | ere fountain water , wherewith she greatly 
 refreshed us . For we were exceeding faint by reason of the ardent heat which molested us as we passed through those high woods . And I believe that without the succour of that Indian Hermaphrodite , or rather , if it had not be for the great desire which we had to make us resolute of our selves , we had taken up our lodging all night in the wood . Being therefore refreshed by this mean , we gathered our spirits together , and marching with a cheerful courage , we came to the place which we had chosen to make our habitation in : whereupon at that instant near the rivers brink we strowed a number of boughs and leaves , to take our rest on them the night following , which we found exceeding sweet , because of the pain which before we had taken in our travel . 
 On the morrow about the break of day , I commanded a trumpet to be sounded , that being assembled They began we might give God thanks for our favourable and their planting happy arrival . There we sang a Psalm of thankes-mth^ prayer to givjng unto God , beseeching him that it would please ' him of his grace to continue his accustomed goodness towards us his poor servants , and aid us in all our enterprises , that all might turn to his glory and the advancement of our King . The prayer ended , every man began to take courage . 
 Afterwards having measured out a piece of ground in form of a triangle , we endeavoured our selves of all sides , some to bring earth , some to cut faggots , and others to raise and make the rampire , for there was not a man that had not either a shovel , or cutting hook , or hatchet , as well to make the ground plain by cutting down the 16 
 1564-trees , as for the building of the Fort , which we did hasten w‘ such cheerfulness , that within few days the effect of our diligence was apparent : in which mean space the Paracoussy Satourioua our nearest neighbour , & on whose ground we built our Fort , came usually accompanied with his two sons and a great number of Indians to offer to do us all courtesy . And I likewise for my part bestowed diverse of our trifles frankly on him , to the end he might know the good will we bore him , and thereby make him more desirous of our friendship , in such sort , that as the days increased , so our amity and friendship increased also . 
 After that our Fort was brought into form , I began to built a Grange to retire my munition and things necessary for the defence of our Fort : praying the Paracoussy to command his subject's to make us a covering of Palm leaves , and this to the end that when that ln Florida was done , I might unfreight my ships , and put under coverture those things that were in them . Suddenly the palm Paracoussy commanded in my presence all the Indians leaves . of his company to dress the next day morning so good a number of Palm leaves , that the Grange was covered in less then two days : so that business was finished . For in the space of those two days , the Indians never ceased from working , some in fetching Palm leaves , others in interlacing of them : in such sort that their Kings commandment was executed as he desired . 
 Our Fort was built in form of a triangle . The side The form of towards the West , which was towards the land , was in - fortcaro-closed with a little trench and raised with traves made in The West side . form of a Battlement of nine foot high : the other side which was towards the River , was enclosed with a Palisado of planks of timber after the manner that Gabions are made . On the South side there was a kind of bastion TheSouthside . within which I caused and house for the munition to be built : it was all built with faggots and sand , saving about two or three foot high with turfs , whereof the battlements were made . In the midst I caused a great 
 ix 17 B 
 Caroline . 
 The first voyage twentie leagues . 
 Court to be made of eighteene paces long and broad , in the midst whereof on the one side drawing towards the South I built a Corpse de guard , and and house on the other side towards the North , which I caused to be raised somewhat too high : for within a short while after the wind beatrice it down : and experience taught me , that 
 High building may not built with high stages in this Country , is mtlipod fi > r by reason of the winds whereunto it is subject . One OUntrey . fl-iA 1 rt / ' locxarl mv Cmirf Trrliir’K TO morlA 
 of the sides that enclosed my Court , which I made very fair and large , reached unto the Grange of my muni 
 tions : and on the other side towards the River was mine own lodging , round about which were galleries all covered . The principali door of my lodging was in the midst of the great place , and the other was toward the River . A good distance from the Fort I built and Oven to avoid the danger against fire , because the houses are of Palm leaves , which will soon be burned after the fire catches hold of them , so that with much ado a man shall have leisure to quench them . Loe here in brief the description of our Four tress , which I nam Caroline in the honour of our Prince King Charles . 
 After we were furnished with that which was most necessary , I would not loose a minute of and hour , without employing of the same in some virtuous exercise : therefore I charged Monsieur de Ottigni my Lieutenant , a man in truth worthy of all honour for his honesty and virtue , to search up within the River , what this Thimogoa might be , whereof the Paracoussy Satourioua had spoken to us so often at our coming on shore . For execution hereof the Paracoussy gave him two Indians for his guides , which taking upon them to led him in this voyage , seemed to go unto a wedding , so desirous they were to fight with their enemies . 
 Being embarked they hoist sail , and having sailed about twentie leagues , the Indians which still looked on this side and that side to espy some of their enemies , discovered three Canoas . And immediately they began to 18 
 cry Thimogoa , Thimogoa , and spoke nothing else but to hasten forward to go fight with them : which the Captain seemed to be willing to do , to content them . When they came to board them , one of the Indians got hold of and halberd , another of and Coutelas in such a rage , that he would have leapt into the water to have fought with them alone . Nevertheless Ottigni would not let them do it , for while he deferred to board them , he gave the others respite to turn the prowess of their Canoas towards the shore , and so to escape into the woods . Again , the meaning of Ottigni was not to make war upon them of Thimogoa , but rather to make them friends , and to make them thenceforth to live in peace one with another if it were possible , hoping by this mean to discover daily some new thing , & especially the certain course of the River . For this purpose he caused the bark to retire , wherein were the two Indians his guides , and went with his men toward the Canoas which were on the Rivers side . Being come unto them , he put certain trifles into them , and then retired a good way from them , which thing caused the Indians which were fled away to return to their boats , and to understand by this sign , that those of our Bark were none of their enemies , but rather come only to traffic with them . Wherefore being thus assured of us , they called to our men to come near unto them : which they did incontinently and set foot on land , and spoke freely unto them , with diverse ceremonies over long to recount . In the end Ottigni demanded of them by signs if they had any Gold or Silver among them . But they told him they had none as then : and that if he would send one of his men with them , they would bring him without danger into a place where they might have some . Ottigni seeing them so willing , delivered them one of his men which seemed very resolute , to undertake this voyage : this fellow stayed with them until tenne of the clock the next morning , so that Captain Ottigny somewhat Ten ieagues offended with his long stay , sailed ten great leagues further . 
 Mayrraaking rich in gold and silver . 
 The second voyage . 
 KingMolloua . Olata Ouae Utina a great king . 
 further up the River : although he knew not which way he should go , yet he went so far up that he espied the Boat wherein his soldier was : which reported unto him , that the Indians would have carried him three great days journey further , & told him that a King nam Mayrra rich in Gold and Silver , dwelled in those quarters , and that for small quantity of merchandise enough might be had of him : yet that he would not hazard himself without his leave , and that he brought but a very little Gold . This being done , our men returned towards our Fort Caroline , after they had left the soldier with the Indians to inform himself more and more of such things as he might discover more at leisure . 
 Fifteene days after this voyage to Thimogoa , I dispatched Captain Vasseur and my Sergeant also to return again into this Country , and to seek out the soldier which remained there in the former voyage . Being therefore embarked , they sailed two whole days : and before they came to the dwelling of the Indians , they found two of them on the Rivers side , which were expressly sent unto that place to descry whither any of their enemies were come to that part , with intention to surprise them , as they did usually . 
 When they perceived Captain Vasseur , they knew incontinently that he was none of their enemies , and therefore made no difficulty to come near unto the Bark , and showed him by signs that the Soldier which they sought was not in that place , but was at that present in the house of King Molloua which was vassal unto another great King nam by them Olata Ouae Utina : and that if the Captain would sail thitherward , he should come thither very quickly : wherewith he was content , and caused his men to row to that part which the Indians showed him : whereat they were so glad , that they ran quickly before by land to declare his arrival , which was at the lodging of king Molloua , after he had rowed not passed half a 
 league . While king Molloua had ended entertaining Captain Vasseur and his men , the soldier came in with five or sixe pounds weight of silver which he had trucked Five or stxe and trafficked with Indians . ofluver^ 
 This King caused bred to be made , and fish to be ’ dressed after the Indian fashion to feast our men : to whom , while they were at meat , he made a discourse of diverse other Kings his friends & allies , reckoning up to the number of nine of them by name , to wit , Cadecha , Chilili , Eclauou , Enacappe , Calany , Anacharaqua , Omit-taqua , Aequara , Moquoso : all which with him to the number of more then fortie , he assured us to be the vassals of the most renowned Olata Ouae Utina . ^uthia t0 
 This done , he went about likewise to discover the enemies of Ouae Utina , in which number he placed as the first the Paracoussy Satourioua Monarch of the confines of the river of May , which hath under his obeisance thirtie other Paracoussies , whereof there were ten which were all his brothers , and that therefore he was greatly esteemed in those parts : then he nam three others not less puissant then Satourioua , whereof the first dwelled two days journey from his lord Olata Ouae Utina , and ordinarily made war upon him , whose name was Potanou , a man cruel in war , but pitiful in the King Potanou . execution of his fury . For he took the prisoners to mercy , being content to mark them on the left arm with a great mark like unto a seal , and so imprinted as if it had be touched with and hot iron , then he let them go without any more hurt . The two others were nam Onatheaqua , and Houstaqua , being great Lords , and abounding in riches , and principally Onatheaqua , which dwelled near unto the high mountains , wherein there was abundance of many rare things , exceeding & infinite quantity of a kind of slate stone , wherewith they made wedges to cleave their wood . The occasion which ( as he said ) moved Potanou to wage war against Olata Ouae Utina , was the fear that he had , lest he and his companions should get of that hard 
 Some paint their faces with black , and some with read . 
 stone in his Country , wherewith they headed their arrows , and could not get it in any nearer place . 
 Beside all this , Molloua recited to Captain Vasseur , that the kings allies the vassals of the great Olata , armed their breasts , arms , thighs , legs & foreheads with large plataeae of gold and silver : and that by this means the arrows that were discharged upon them could do them no manner of hurt at all , but rather were broken against them . Hereupon Captain Vasseur inquired whither the Kings Onetheaqua and Houstaqua were like unto us . For by the description that they made of them , he began to doubt whither they were Spaniards or no : but Molloua told him that they were not , but that they were Indians like the rest , saving that they painted their faces with black , and that the rest as Molloua , painted them with read . Then my Lieutenant Vasseur , and my Sergeant promised him , that one day I should march with my forces into those Countries' , and that joining my self with his Lord Olata , I would subdue the inhabitants of the highest of those mountains . He was very glad of this speech , and answered that the least of these Kings which he had nam , should present unto the general of these succours the height of two foot of gold and silver , which by force of arms they had already got of those two Kings , Onatheaqua , and Houstaqua . 
 The good cheer being done , and the discourses ended , my men embarked themselves again , with intention to bring me those good news unto the Fort Caroline . But after they had sailed a very long while down the River , and were come within three leagues of us , the tIED was so strong against them , that they were constrained to go on land , and to retire themselves because of the night , unto the dwelling of a certain Paracoussy nam Molona , which showed himself very glad of their arrival : for he desired to know some news of Thimogoa , and thought that the French men went thither for none other occasion but for to invade 
 ... I564 ' them . Which Captain Vasseur perceiving , dissembled so well , that he made him believe that he went to Thimogoa with none other intention , but to subdue them , and to destroy them with the edge of the sword without mercy , but that their purpose had not such success as they desired , because that the people of Thimogoa being advertised of this enterprise , retired into the woods , and saved themselves by flight : that nevertheless they had taken some as they were fleeing away , which carried no news thereof unto their fellows . 
 The Paracoussy was so glad of this relation , that he interrupted him , and asked Vasseur of the beginning and manner of his execution , and prayed him that he would show him by signs how all things passed . Immediately Francis la Caille the Sergeant of my band took his sword in his hand , saying , that with the point thereof he had thrust through two Indians which ran into the woods , and that his companions had done no less for their parts . And that if fortune had so favoured them , that they had not been discovered by the men of Thimogoa , they had had a victory most glorious and worthy of eternal memory . Hereupon the Paracoussy showed himself so well satisfied , that he could not devise how to gratify our men , which he caused to come into his house to feast them more honourably : and having made Captain Vasseur to fit next him , and in his own chair ( which the Indians esteem for the chiefest honour ) and then underneath him two of his sons , goodly and mighty fellows , he commanded all the rest to place themselves as they thought good . This done , the Indians came according to their good custom , to present their drink Cassine to the Paracoussy , and then to certain of his chiefest friends , and the Frenchmen . Then he which brought it set the cup aside , and drew out a little dagger stuck up in the roof of the house , and like a mad man he lift his head aloft , and ran apace , and went and smote and Indian which sat 
 alone in one of the corners of the hall , crying with a loud voice , Hyou , the poor Indian stirring not at all for the blow , which he seemed to endure patiently . He which held the dagger went quickly to put the same in his former place , and began again to give us drink as he did before : but he had not long continued , and had scarce given three or foure thereof , but he left his bowl again , took the dagger in his hand , and quickly returned unto him which he had strocken before , to whom he gave a very soar blow on the side , crying Hyou , as he had done before : and then he went to put the dagger in his place , and set himself down among the rest . A little while after he that had be stricken fell down backwards , stretching out his arms and legs , as if he had be ready to yield up the latter gasp . And then the younger son of the Paracoussy appareled in a long white skin , fell down at the feet of him that was fallen backward , weeping bitterly half a quarter of and hour : after , two other of his brothers clad in like apparel , came about him that was so stricken , and began to sighs pitifully . Their mother bearing a little infant in her arms came from another part , and going to the place where her sons were , at the first she used infinite numbers of outcries , then one while lifting up her eyes to heaven , another while falling down unto the ground , she cried so dolefully , that her lamentable mournings would have moved the most hard and stony heart in the world with pity . Yet this sufficed not , for there came in a company of young girls , which did never leave weeping for a long while in the place where the Indian was fallen down , whom afterwards they took , and with the saddest gestures they could devise , carried him away into another house a little way off from the great hall of the Paracoussy , and continued their weepings and mournings by the space of two long hours : in which mean while the Indians ceased not to drink Cassine , but with such silence that one word was not herd in the parlour . 
 Vasseur being grieved that he understood not these ceremonies , demanded of the Paracoussy what these things meant : which answered him slowly , Thimogoa , Thimogoa , without saying any more . Being more displeased then he was before with so sleight and answer , he turned unto another Indian the Paracoussyes brother , who was a Paracoussy as well as his brother , called Malica , which made him a like answer as he did at the KlngMalica . first , praying him to ask no more of these matters , and to have patience for that time . The subtle old Paracoussy prayed him within a while after , to show him his sword , which he would not deny him , thinking that he would have beheld the fashion of his weapons : but he soon perceived that it was to another end : for the old man holding it in his hand , beheld it a long while on every place , to see if he could find any blood upon it , which might show that any of their enemies had be killed : for the Indians are wont to bring their weapons wherewith their enemies have been defeated , with some blood upon them , for a token of their victories . But seeing no sign thereof upon it , he was upon the point to say unto him , that he had killed none of the men of Thimogoa : when as Vasseur preventing that which he might object , declared and showed unto him by signs , the manner of his enterprise , adding , that by reason of the two Indians which he had slain , his sword was so bloody , that he was enforced to wash and make it clean a long while in the River : which the old man believed to be like to be true , and made no manner of reply thereunto . 
 Vasseur , La Caille , and their other companions went out of the hall to go into the room whither they had carried the Indian : there they found the Paracoussy sitting upon tapestries made of small redes , which was Tapistrymade at meat after the Indian fashion , and the Indian that Qfsmailreeds-was smitten hard by him , lying upon the self same tapestry , about whom stood the wife of the Paracoussy , with all the young damsels which before bewailed him in 
 They lap the hall ; which did nothing else but warm a great deal moss about of moss instead of napkins to rub the Indians side . their wounds TT i j t* • r 
 and use it in Hereupon our men asked the Paracoussy again tor stead of nap - what occasion the Indian was so persecuted in his kins . presence : he answered , that this was nothing else but A ceremony a kind of ceremony , whereby they would call to mind death'of death and persecutions of the Paracoussies their their ancestors ancestors executed by their enemy Thimogoa : alleging slalne by their moreover , that as often as he himself , or any of his enemies . friends and allies returned from the Country , without they brought the heads of their enemies , or without bringing home some prisoner , he used for a perpetuali memory of all his predecessors , to beat the best beloved of all his children with the self same weapons wherewith they had be killed in times past : to the end that by renewing of the wound their death should be lamented afresh . Now when they were thus informed of those ceremonies , they thanked the Paracoussy for their good intertai nement which they had received , & so setting sail came to me unto the fort : where they declared all unto me as I have recited it The return of heretofore . The eight and twentieth of July our ^ardFrance s^TPes departed to return into France . And within a the 28. of while , about two months after our arrival in Florida , July . the Paracoussy Satourioua sent certain Indians unto me to know whither I would stand to my promise which I had made him at my first arrival in that Country , which was that I would show my self friend to his friends , and enemy unto his - enemies , and also to accompany him with a good number of Harquebusses , when he should see it expedient , and should find a fit occasion to go to war . Now seeing he rested upon this promise , he prayed me not to defer the same : seeing also that making account thereof , he had taken such good order for the execution of his enterprise , that he was ready , and was furnished with all things that were necessary for the voyage : I made him answer , that for his amity I would not purchase the enmity of the other , and 
 that albeit I would , yet notwithstanding I wanted means to do it . For it behooved me at that present to make provision of victuals and munition for the defence of my Fort. On the other side , that my Barks were nothing ready , and that this enterprise would require time : Moreover , that the Paracoussy Satourioua might hold himself ready to depart within two months , and that then I would think of fulfilling my promise to him . 
 The Indians carried this answer to their Paracoussy , which was little pleased with it , because he could not defer his execution or expedition , aswell because all his victuals were ready , as also because tenne other Paracoussies were assembled with him for the performance of this enterprise . The ceremony which this Savage used before he embarked his army deserveth not to be forgotten . For when he was set down by the Rivers side , being compassed about with ten other Paracoussies , he commanded water to be brought him speedily . This done , looking up into heaven , he fell to discourse of diverse things with gestures that showed him to be in exceeding great choler , which made him one while shake his head hither and thither , and by and by with I wot not what fury to turn his face towards the Country of his enemies , and to threaten to kill them . He oftentimes looked upon the Sun , praying him to grant him a glorious victory of his enemies . Which when he had done by the space of half and hour , he sprinkled with his hand a little of the water which he held in a vessel 
 A.D. 
 I564 . 
 The ceremony which they use before they go to war . 
 upon the heads of the Paracoussies , and cast the rest as it were in a rage and despite into a fire which was there prepared for the purpose . This done , he cried out thrice , He Thimogoa , and was followed with five hundreth Satourioua fol-Indians at the least , which were there assembled , which lowed with cried all with one voice , He Thimogoa . This ceremony , as a certain Indian told me familiarly , signified nothing else , but that Satourioua besought the Sun to grant unto him so happy a victory , that he might shed his enemies blood , as he had shed that water at his pleasure . 
 Moreover , that the Paracoussies which were sprinkled with a part of that water , might return with the heads of their enemies , which is the only and chief triumph of their victories . 
 The Paracoussy Satourioua had no sooner ended his ceremonies and had taken a view of all his company , but he embarked himself , and used such diligence with his Almadies or boats , that the next day two hours before the Suns set , he arrived on the territories of his enemies about eight or tenne leagues from their villages . Consultation Afterwards causing them all to go on land , he assembled ^ { saulnheir counse^ > wherein it was agreed that five of the Paraenemies , coussies should sail up the River with half of the troops , and by the break of the day should approach unto the dwelling of their enemy : for his own part , that he would take his journey through the woods and forests as secretly as he could : that when they were come thither , as well they that went by water as he which went by land should not fail by the break of the day to enter into the village , and cut them all in pieces , except the women and little children . 
 How they use These things which were thus agreed upon , were ^Hch^the^ executed with as great fury as was possible : which when take In war they had done , they took the heads of their enemies which they had slain , and cut off their hair round about with a piece of their skulls : they took also foure and twentie prisoners , which they led away , and retired themselves immediately unto their Boats which waited for them . Being come thither , they began to sing praises unto the Sun , to whom they attributed their victory . And afterwards they put the skins of those heads on the end of their javelins , and went altogether towards the King Omoloa . territories of Paracoussy Omoloa , one of them which was in the company . Being come thither , they divided their prisoners equally to each of the Paracoussies , and left thirteene of them to Satourioua , which straightway dispatched and Indian his subject , to carry news before of the victory to them which stayed at home to guard their 28 
 ... I564 ' houses , which immediately began to weep . But assoon as night was come , they never left dancing and playing a thousand gambols in honour of the feast . 
 The next day the Paracoussy Satourioua came home , who before he entered into his lodging caused all the hairy skulls of his enemies to be set up before his door , and crowned them with branches of Laurel , showing by this glorious spectacle the triumph of the victory which °f triumfh-hee had obtained . Straightway began lamentation and mournings , which assoon as the night began were turned into pleasures and dances . 
 After that I was advertised of these things , I sent a Soldier unto Satourioua , praying him to send me two of his prisoners : which he denied me , saying that he was nothing beholding unto me , and that I had broken my promise , against the oath which I had sworn unto him at my arrival . Which when I understood by my Soldier , which was come back with speed , I devised how I might be revenged of this Savage , and to make him know how dearly this bold bravado of his should cost him : therefore I commanded my Sergeant to provide me twentie Soldiers to go with me to the house of Satourioua : Where after I was come and entered into the hall without any manner of salutation , I went and sat me down by him , and stayed a long while without speaking any word unto him , or showing him any sign of friendship , which thing put him deeply in his dumps : beside that certain Soldiers remained at the gate , to whom I had given express commandment to suffer no Indian to go forth : having stood still about half and hour with this countenance , at length I demanded where the prisoners were which he had taken at Thimogoa , and commanded them presently to be brought unto me . 
 Whereunto the Paracoussy angry at the heart , and astonished wonderfully , stood a long while without making any answer , notwithstanding at last he answered me very stoutly , that being afraid to see us coming 
 thither in such warlike manner they fled into the woods , and that not knowing which way they were gone , they were not able by any means to bring them again ; Then I seemed to make as though I understood not what he said , and asked for his prisoners again , and for some of his principali allies . Then Satourioua commanded his son Athore to seek out the prisoners , and to cause them to be brought into that place , which thing he did within and hour after . 
 After they were come to the lodging of the Paracoussy , they humbly saluted me , and lifting up their hands before me , they would have fallen down prostrate as it were at my feet : but I would not suffer them , and soon after led them away with me unto my own Fort. The Paracoussy being wonderfully offended with this bravado , bethought himself by all means how he might be revenged of us . But to give us no suspicion thereof , and the better to cover his intention , he sent his messengers oftentimes unto us bringing always with them some kind of presents . Among others one day he sent three Indians , which brought us two baskets full of great Pumpions , much more excellent then those which we have in France , and promised me in their Kings behalf , that during mine abided in that Country , I should never want victuals : I thanked them for their Kings good will , and signified unto them the great desire which I had , aswell for the benefit of Satourioua , as for the quiet of his Subject's , to make a peace between him and those of Thimogoa : which thing could not choose but turn to their great benefit , seeing that being allied with the Kings of those parts , he had and open passage against Onatheaqua his ancient enemy , which otherwise he could not set upon . Moreover that Olata Ouae Utina was so mighty a Paracoussy , that Satourioua was not able to withstand his forces : but being agreed together they might easily overthrow all their enemies , and might pass the confines of the farthest Rivers that were towards the South . The messengers prayed me to have patience until the morrow , 30 
 at what time they would come again unto me to certify me of their Lords inclination : which they failed not to do , advertising me that Paracoussy Satourioua was the gladdest man in the world to treat of this accord ( although indeed he was quite contrary ) and that he besought me to be diligent therein , promising to observe and perform whatsoever I should agree upon with those of Thimogoa : which things the messengers also rehearsed unto the prisoners which I had led away . After they were departed , I resolved within two days to send back again the prisoners to Olata Ouae Utina , whose subject's they were : but before I embarked them , I gave them certain small trifles , which were little knives or tablets of glass , wherein the image of King Charles the ninth was drawn very lively , for which they gave me very great thanks , as also for the honest entertainment which was given them at the Fort Caroline . After this they embarked themselves , with Captain Vasseur , and with Monsieur de Arlac mine Ensign , which I had sent of purpose to remain a certain time with Ouae Utina , hoping that the favour of this great Paracoussy would serve my turn greatly to make my discoveries in time to come . I sent with him also one of my Sergeants , and sixe gallant Soldiers . 
 Thus things passed on this manner , and the hatred of Paracoussy Satourioua against me did still continue , until that on the nine and twentieth of August a lightning [ HIM . 331. I from heaven fell within half a league of our Fort , - AwanderfM more worthy I believe to be wondered at , and to be ofjugut put in writing , then all the strange signs which have be seen in times past , and whereof the histories have never written . For although the meadows were at that season all green , and half covered over with water , nevertheless the lightning in one instant consumed above five hundred acres therewith , and burned with the ardent heat thereof all the fowls which took their pastime in the meadows , which thing continued for three days space , which caused us not a little to muse , not being 
 able to judge whereof this fire proceeded : for one while we thought that the Indians had burned their houses , and abandoned their places for fear of us : another while we thought that they had discovered some ships in the Sea , and that according to their custom they had kindled many fires here and there , to signify that their Country was inhabited : nevertheless being not assured , KingSar - I determined to send to Paracoussy Serrany to know ranay . the truth thereof . But even as I was upon the point to send one by boat to discover the matter , sixe Indians King Allima - came unto me from Paracoussy Allimacany , which at can3 ' their first entry made unto me a long discourse , and a very large and ample oration ( after they had presented me with certain baskets full of Maiz , of Pompions and of Grapes ) of the loving amity which Allimacany desired to continue with me , and that he looked from day to day when it would please me to employ him in my service . Therefore considering the serviceable affection that he bore unto me , he found it very strange , that I The Savages thus discharged mine Ordinance against his dwelling , ‘ lightning to be and burned up and infinite sighed of green meadows , discharging of and consumed even down unto the bottom of the the Christians water , and came so near unto his mansion , that he Ordinance . thought he saw the fire in his house : wherefore he besought me most humbly to command my men that they would not shoot any more towards his lodging , otherwise that hereafter he should be constrained to abandon his country , and to retire himself into some place further off from us . 
 Having understood the foolish opinion of this man , which notwithstanding could not choose but be very profitable for us , I dissembled what I thought thereof for that time , and answered the Indians with a cheerful countenance , that the relation which they made unto me of the obedience of their Paracoussy did please me right well , because that before he had not behaved himself in such sort towards me , especially when I summoned him to send me the prisoners of great Olata Ouae 
 Utina which he detained , whereof notwithstanding he made no great account , which was the principali cause wherefore I had discharged mine Ordinance against him : not that I meant to reach unto his house ( as I might have done easily , if it had pleased me ) but that I was content to shoot the half way to make him know my force : assuring him furthermore , that on condition that Laudonniere he would continue in his good affection , no more ordinance should be discharged against him hereafter : and ^ “ profit beside that I would become his faithful protector against his greatest enemies . 
 The Indians contented with mine answer returned to assure their Paracoussy , which notwithstanding the assurance withdrew himself from his dwelling twentie or five and twentie leagues off and that for the space of more then two months . After that three days were expired , the fire was quite extinguished . But for two days after there followed such and excessive heat in the air , that A wonderfuU the River near unto which we planted our habitation , heate-became so hot , that I think it was almost ready to sees . For there died so great abundance of fish , and that of so many diverse sorts , that in the mouth of the River only there were found dead enough to have loaded fiftie Fiftie cart load Carts , whereof there issued a putrefaction in the air , deadph which bred many dangerous diseases among us , insomuch that most of my men fell sick , and almost ready to end their days . Yet notwithstanding it pleased our merciful God so to provide by his providence , that all our men recovered their health without the loss of any one of them . 
 Monsieur de Arlac , Captain Vasseur , and one of my The thirde Sergeants being embarked with their tenne Soldiers voyage thee about the tenth of September , to carry back the prisoners unto Utina , sailed so far up the River , that they dis - e^Um er ' covered a place called Mayarqua distant from our Fort Mayarqua a about fourescore leagues , where the Indians gave them fa* 8o-good entertainment , and in many other villages which ^ “ erSgfMay they found . From this place they rowed to the dwell - 
 ix 33 c 
 ling of Paracoussy Utina , which after he had feasted them according to his ability and power , prayed Monsieur de Arlac and all his Soldiers to stay a while with him , to aid and assist him in battle against one of his KingPatanou . enemies called Potanou , whereunto Monsieur de Arlac consented willingly . And because he knew not how long he might have occasion to stay in these parts , he sent me Captain Vasseur and the Bark back again , which brought home only five Soldiers with him . 
 The Indians Now because the custom of the Indians is always to manner of war . wage war by surprise , Utina resolved to take his enemy Potanou in the morning by the break of the day : to bring this to pass , he made his men to travail all the Two hundreth night , which might be in number two hundred persons , Indians . so wep advised , that they prayed our French-shot to be in the forefront , to the end ( as they said ) that the noise of their pieces might astonish their enemies : notwithstanding they could not march so secretly , but that those of the village of Potanou , distant from the dwelling of Utina about five and twentie leagues , were aware of them : which suddenly employed and bestowed A village in - all their endeavour to defend their village enclosed all dosed with with trees , and issued out in great companies : but 
 ' finding themselves charged with shot , ( a thing where - 
 with they never had be acquainted ) also beholding the Captain of their band fallen down dead in the beginning of their skirmish , with a shot of and Harquebus which struck him in the forehead , discharged by the hand of Monsieur de Arlac , they left the place : and the Indians of Utina gate into the village , taking Utina gets men , women , and children prisoners . Thus Paracoussy the victory of Utina obtained the victory by the aid of our men , ^iMofth^ which slew many of his enemies , and lost in this conflict Trench . one their companions , wherewith Utina was very much grieved . Eight or tenne days after , I sent Captain Vasseur back again with a Bark to fetch home Monsieur de Arlac and his Soldiers , which at their return brought me certain presents from Utina , as 
 .... I564 ' some silver , a small quantity of gold , painted skins , silver , and and other things , with a thousand thanks , which the geld , and Paracoussy gave me , which promised that if in any enterprise of importance I should have need of his s tnnes ' men , he would furnish me with three hundreth and above . 
 While I thus travailed to purchase friends , & to practise one while with one here , and other while with another there , certain Soldiers of my company were suborned under hand by one nam la Roquette of the Country La Coquettes of Perigort , which put in their heads that he was a cmspirade . great Magician , and that by the secrets of Art-magicke he had discovered a Mine of gold and silver far up within the River , whereby ( upon the loss of his life , ) every Soldier should receive in ready Bullion the valve of tenne thousand Crowns , beside and above fifteene hundred thousand which should be reserved for the Kings Majesty : wherefore they allied themselves with La Roquette and another of his confederates , whose name was Le Genre , in whom notwithstanding I had great affiance . This Genre exceeding desirous to enrich Monsieur de himself in those parts , and seeking to be revenged , Genre . because I would not give him the carriage of the Paquet into France , secretly informed the Soldiers that were already suborned by La Roquette , that I would deprive them of this great gain , in that I did set them daily on work , not sending them on every side to discover the Countries' : therefore that it were a good deed , after they had made me understand so much , to seek means to dispatch me out of the way , and to choose another Captain in my place , if I would not give them victuals according to their disordinate appetite . He also brought Genres mes-mee word hereof himself , making a large discourse unto me of the good affection of the Soldiers , which all be - Soldiers sought me that I would conduct them to the Countries' name . where the Mine was : I made him answer that all could His answer . not go thither , and that it was necessary before their departure to settle our Fortress in such estate , that 
 those which were to stay at home behind should remain in security against the Indians which might surprise them . Furthermore , that their manner of proceeding seemed strange unto me , for that they imagined , that the Kings Majesty was at the charges of our voyage for none other end , but only to enrich them at their first arrival , in as much as they showed themselves much more given unto covetousness , then unto the service of their Prince : But seeing mine answer tended unto none other end but to make our Fortress strong and defensible , they determined to travail in the work , and made and ensign of old linen , which ordinarily they bore upon the rampart when they went to work , always wearing their weapons , which I thought they had done to encourage themselves to work the better . But as I perceived afterwards , and that by the confession of Genre sent me in letters which he writ to me of that matter , these gentle Soldiers did thee same for 
 hisLieutenant . none other end , but to have killed me , and my Lieutenant also , if by chance I had given them any hard speeches . 
 About the twentieth of September , as I came home from the woods and coppicdes to finish the building of my Fort , ( and that according to my usuali manner , I marched first to give encouragement unto my Soldiers ) I chafed my self in such sort , that I fell into a soar and grievous sickness , whereof I thought I should have Laudonniers died : During which sickness , I called Le Genre often sickness . unto me , as one that I trusted above all others , and of whose conspiracies I doubted not any whit at all . In this mean while assembling his accomplices , sometime in his chamber and sometime in the woods to consult with them , he spoke unto them to choose another Captain beside me , to the intent to put me to death : but being not able by open force to execute his mis-^ “ ot^carie c^^eYous intention , he gate him unto mine Apothecary praying him instantly to mingle in my medicine , which ‘ ’ I was to receive one or two days after , some drug 
 that should make me pitch over the perch , or at the least that he would give him a little Arsenike or quick Silver , which he himself would put into my drink . But the Apothecary denied him , as did in like manner Master S. which was Master of the fireworks . Thus The Master of wholly disappointed of both his means , he with certain the fireworks . others resolved to hide a little barrel of gunpowder underneath my bed , and by a train to set it on fire . 
 Upon these practises a Gentleman which I had dispatched to return into France , being about to take his leave of me , advertised me , that Genre had given him a book full of all kind of lewd invectives and slanders against me , against Monsieur de Ottigny , and against the principal of my company : upon which occasion I assembled all my Soldiers together , and Captain Captain Bourdet with all his , which on the fourth of September Bourdet ar-arrived in the road , and were come into our River . 
 In their presence 1 caused the contents of the book to ofsepteml£ ' bee read allowed , that they might bear record of the untruths that were written against me . Genre , which had got him into the woods for fear of being taken , ( where he lived for a while after with the Savages by my permission , ) writ unto me often , and in many of his letters confessed unto me , that he had deserved death , condemning himself so farrefoorth , that he referred all to my mercy and pity . 
 The seventh or eighth day of November , after I had The 4. voyage caused sufficient provision of such victuals as were need - 7 - ofNo-full to be made , I sent two of my men , to wit , La vember-Roche Ferriere , and and other toward King Utina , to discover every day more and more of the Country : where he was the space of five or sixe months , during which he discovered many small villages , and among others one nam Hostaqua , the King whereof being Hostaqua a desirous of my friendship , sent unto me a quiver made village . of a Luserns skin ne full of arrows , a couple of bows , foure or five skins painted after their manner , and a cheine of Silver weighin about a pound weight . In 
 recompense of which presents I sent him two whole suits of apparel , with certain cutting hooks or hatchet's . 
 After these things therefore in this sort passed , about the tenth of this month , Captain Bourdet determined to leave me and to return into France . Then I 
 requested him , yea rather was exceeding importunate with him , to carry home with him some sixe or seven Soldiers , whom I could not trust by any means : which he did for my sake , and would not charge himself with Genre , which offered him a great sum of money , if it would please him to carry him into France : he transported him only to the other side of the River . One of his Three days after his departure thirteene Mariners which 
 Barks stolen j bad brought out of France , suborned by certain other “ Mariners* Mariners which Captain Bourdet had left me , stole away my Barks in manner following . These Mariners of Captain Bourdet put mine in the head , that if they had such Barks as mine were , they might gain very much in the Isles of the Antilles , and make and exceeding profitable voyage . Hereupon they began to devise how they might steal away my Barks , and consulted that when I should command them to go unto the 
 The village of village of Sarauahi distant about a league and and half Sarauahi . from our Fort , and situated upon and arm of the River , 
 ( whither according to my manner I sent them daily to seek clay , to make brick and mortar for our houses ) they would return no more , but would furnish themselves with victuals as well as they might possibly : and then would embark themselves all in one vessel , Another of his and would go their way : as indeed they did . And Barks stolen jbat which was worse , two Flemish Carpenters , which “ carpenters ? sa^e B°urdet had left me , stole away the other ’ Bark , and before their departure cut the cables of the Bark , and of the shipboate , that it might go away with the tIED , that I might not pursue them : so that I remained without either Bark or boat , which fell out as unluckily for me as was possible . For 1 was 
 ready to embark my self with all speed , to discover as far up our River , as I might by any means . Now my Mariners , ( as I understood afterwards ) took a Bark that was a passenger of the Spaniards near the Isle of Cuba , wherein they found a certain quantity of gold and silver , which they seized upon . And of these having this booty they lay a while at Sea , until . 
 their victuals began to fail them : which was the betrayed cause , that oppressed with famine they came unto his own counHavana the principali Town of the Isle of Cuba : trey men to the whereupon proceeded that mischief which hereafter I Spaniards , and will declare more at large . When I saw my Barks returned not at their wonted hour , and suspecting that which fell out in deed , I commanded my Carpenters with all diligence to make a little boat with a flat bottom , to search those Rivers for some news of these Mariners . The boat dispatched within a day and a night , by reason that my Carpenters found planks and timber ready sawed to their hands , as commonly I caused my Sawyers to provide it , I sent men to seek some news of my thieves : but all was in vain . Therefore I determined to cause two great A Saw-mill Barks to be built , eke of which might be thirtie five , necessary here . or thirtie sixe foot long in the keel . 
 And now the work was very well forward which I set my workmen about , when ambition and avarice , the mother of all mischief , took root in the hearts of foure or five soldiers which could not away with the work and pains taking : and which from hence forward ( namely one Fourneaux , and one La Croix , and Thethirde another called Steven le Geneuois , the three principali sedition . authors of the sedition ) began to practise with the best of my troop , showing them that it was a vile thing for men of honest parentage , as they were , to moil themselves thus with abject and base work , seeing they had the best occasion of the world offered them to make themselves all rich : which was to arm the two Barks which were in building , and 
 By Peru the French mean the coast of Carthagena and Number de Dios. 
 The captains charge at his setting forth . 
 to furnish them with good men : and then to sail unto Peru , and the other Isles of the Antilles , where every Soldier might easily enrich himself with tenne thousand Crowns . And if their enterprise should be misliked withal in France , they should be always able , by reason of the great wealth that they should gain , to retire themselves into Italy , until the heat were overpassed , and that in the mean season some war would fallen out , which would cause all this to be quite forgotten . 
 This word of riches sounded so well in the ears of my Soldiers , that in fine , after they had oftentimes consulted of their affairs , they grew to the number of threescore and sixe : which to colour their great desire which they had to go on stealing , they caused a request to be presented unto me by Francis de la Caille Sergeant of my company , containing in sum a declaration of the small store of victuals that was left to maintain us , until the time that ships might return from France : for remedy whereof they thought it necessary to send to New Spaine , Peru , and all the Isles adjoining , which they besought me to be content to grant . But I made them answer , that when the Barks were finished , I would take such good order in general , that by means of the Kings merchandise , without sparing mine own apparel , we would get victuals of the inhabitants of the Country : seeing also that we had enough to serve us for foure months to come . For I feared greatly , that under pretence of searching victuals , they would enterprise somewhat against the King of Spaines Subject's , which in time to come might justly be laid to my charge , considering that at our departure out of France , the Queen had charged me very expressly , to do no kind of wrong to the King of Spaines Subject's , nor any thing whereof he might conceive any jealousy . 
 They made as though they were content with this 40 
 answer . But eight days after , as I continued in working upon our Fort , and on my Barks , I fell sick . Then my seditious companions forgetting all honour and duty , supposing that they had found good occasion to execute their rebellious enterprise , began to practise afresh their former designs , handling their business so well , during my sickness , that they openly vowed that they would seize on the Corpse de guard , and on the Fort , yea , and force me also , if I would not consent unto their wicked desire . My Lieutenant being hereof advertised , came and told me that he suspected some evil practice : and the next day in the morning I was saluted at my gate with men in complete harness , what time my Soldiers were about to play me a shrewd trick : then I sent to seek a couple of Gentlemen whom I most trusted , which brought me word that the Soldiers were determined to come to me to make a request unto me : But I told them that this was not the fashion to present a request unto a Captain in this manner , and therefore they should send some few unto me to signify unto me what they would have . Hereupon the five chief authors of the sedition armed with Corslets , their Pistols in their hands already bent , pressed into my chamber , saying unto me , that they would go to New Spaine to seek their adventure . Then I warned them to be well advised what they meant to do : but they forthwith replied , that they were fully advised already , and that I must grant them this request . Seeing then ( quoth I ) that I am inforced to do it , I will send Captain Vasseur and my Sergeant , which will make answer and give me and account of every thing that shall be done in this voyage : And to content you , I think it good that you take one man out of every chamber , that they may accompany Captain Vasseur and my Sergeant . Whereupon , blaspheming the Name of God , they answered that they must go thither : and that there 
 41 
 A.D. 
 [ 564. 
 lacked nothing , but that I should deliver them the armour which I had in my custody , for fear least I might use them to their disadvantage ( being so villan-ously abused by them : ) wherein notwithstanding I would not yield unto them . But they took all by force , and carried it out of my house , yea and after they had hurt a Gentleman in my chamber , which spoke against their doings , they laid hands on me , and carried me very sick , as I was , prisoner into a ship which road at anchor in the midst of the Laudonniere River , wherein I was the space of fifteene days , ft " attended upon with one man only without permission owne^uldiers . f°r any mY servants to come to visit me : from every one of whom , as also from the rest that took my part , they took away their armour . And they sent me a passport to sign , telling me plainly after I had denied them , that if I made any difficulty , they would all come and cut my throat in the ship . Thus was I constrained to sign their Passport , and Trenchanta forthwith to grant them certain mariners , with Tren-skilfull pilot . c } ! ant and honest and skilful Pilot. When the barks were finished , they armed them with the kings munition , with powder , with bullets , and artillery , as as they needed , and chosen one of my Sergeants for their Captain , nam Bertrand Conferrent , and for their Ensign one nam La Croix . They compelled Captain Vasseur to deliver them the flag of his ship . Then having determined to sail unto a place of the Antilles called Leauguave , belonging unto the king of Spaine , and there to go on land on Christmasse night , with intention to enter into the Church while the Mass was said after midnight , and to murder all those that they found there , they set sail the eight of December . But because the greatest part of them by this time repented them of their enterprise , and that now they began to fallen into mutinies among themselves , when they came forth of the mouth of the river , the two barks divided themselves ; the one kept 
 along the coast unto Cuba , to double the Cape more easily , and the other went right forth to pass athwart the Isles of Lucaya : by reason whereof they met not until sixe weeks after their departure . During which time the bark that took her way along the coast , wherein one of the chief conspirators nam De Orange was Captain , and Trenchant his Pilot , near unto a place called Archaha , took a Brigantine laden with a certain quantity of Cassavi , Cassavi , bred which is a kind of bred made of roots , and yet made of roots . nevertheless is very white , and good to eat , and some little Wine , which was not without some loss of their men : for in one assault that the inhabitants of Archaha made upon them , two of their men were taken , to wit , Steven Gondeau , and one nam Grand Pr£ , beside two more that were slain in the place , namely Nicolas Master and Doublet : yet nevertheless they took the Brigantine , wherein they put all their stuff that was in their own Bark , because it was of greater burden and better of sail then their own . Afterwards they sailed right unto the Cape of Santa Maria never to Leauguave , where they went on land to calk and 
 bray their ship which had a great leak . In this mean Baracouavil-while they resolved to sail to Baracou , which is a vil - luge in the Isle lage of the Isle of Jamaica : where at their arrival they °f^amaica-found a Caravel of fifty or threescore tons burden , which they took without any body in it : and after they had made good cheer in the village the space of five or sixe days , they embarked themselves in it , leaving their second ship : then they returned to the Cape of Tiburon , The cape of where they met with a Patach , which they took by Tiburon . 
 force after a long conflict . In this Patach the governor The governor of Jamaica was taken , with great store of riches , aswell of of Jamaica gold and silver as of merchandise and wine , and many taken-other things ; wherewith our seditious companions not content , determined to seek more in their caravel , and their governor of Jamaica also . After they were come to Jamaica , they missed of another caravel which did save 
 it self in the haven . The governor being fine and subtle , seeing himself brought unto the place which he desired and where he commanded , obtained so much by his fair words , that they which had taken him let him put two little boys which were taken with him into a little cock boat , and send them to his wife into the village , to advertise her that she should make provision of victuals to send unto him . But in stead of writing unto his wife , he spoke unto the boys secretly that with all diligence she should send the vessels that were in the havens near that place to succour and rescue him . Which she did so cunningly , that on a morning about the break of the day , as our seditious companions were at the havens mouth ( which reaches above two leagues up Malguallre a within the land ) there came out of the haven a malgualire kind of vessel which makes sail both forward and backward , and then two great ships , which might be each of them of foure-score or and hundred tons a piece , with good store of ordinance , and well furnished with men : at whose coming our mutinous fellows were surprised , being not able to see them when they came , aswell because of the darkness of the weather , as also by reason of the length of the haven , considering also they mistrusted nothing . True it is that five or six & twenty that were in the brigantine discovered these ships when they were never them , which seeing themselves pressed for want of leisure to weigh their anchor , cut their cable , and the trumpeter which was in it advertised the rest : whereupon the Spanyards seeing themselves descried , discharged a volley of canon shot against the French men , which they followed by the space of three leagues , and recovered their own ships : the brigantine which escaped away , passed in the sighed of the Cape des Aigrettes , and the Cape of S. Anthony situate in the Isle of Cuba , & from thence passed within the sighed of Havana ; but Trenchant their pilot , and the trumpeter , and certain other mariners of this brigantine , which were led away by force in this voyage ( as elsewhere we have declared ) desired nothing 
 44 
 The Cape of S. Antony in Cuba . 
 Havana . 
 more then to return to me : wherefore these men agreed together ( if peradventure the wind served them well ) to pass the channel of Bahama , while their seditious come - The channel of panions were asleep : which they did accomplish with Bahama . such good success , that in the morning towards the break £111 . 336. ] of the day about the five and twentieth of March they arrived upon the coast of Florida : where knowing the fault which they had committed , in a kind of mockery they counterfeited the Judges : but they played not this prank until they had tippled well of the Wine which remained yet in their prize . One counterfeited the Judge , another presented my person : one other after he had herd the matter pleaded , concluded thus : Make you your causes as good as it pleases you , but if when you come to the fort Caroline the Captain cause you not to be hanged , I will never take him for and honest man : others thought that my choler being passed , I would easily forget this matter . Their sail was no sooner descried upon our coast , but the king of the place nam 
 Patica , dwelling eight leagues distant from our fort , and King Patica . being one of our good friends , sent and Indian to advertise me that he had descried a ship upon the coast , and that he thought it was one of our nation . Hereupon the The return of brigantine oppressed with famine , came to and anchor at the fart ofLau-mouth of the river of May , when at the first blush we donnleressedi-thought they had been ships come from France ; which Aous sou iers ' gave us occasion of great joy : but after I had caused her to be better viewed , I was advertised that they were our seditious companions that were returned . Therefore I sent them word by Captain Vasseur and my Sergeant , that they should bring up their brigantine before the fortress : which they promised to do . Now there was not above two leagues distance from the mouth of the river where they cast anchor unto the fortress . The next day I sent the same Captain and Sergeant with thirty soldiers , because I saw they much delayed their coming . Then they brought them : and because certain of them had sworn at their departure , that they would never come 
 again within the fort , I was well pleased they should keep their oath . For this purpose I waited for them at the rivers mouth , where I made my barks to be built , and commanded my Sergeant to bring the foure chief authors of the mutiny on shore ; whom I caused immediately to be put in fetters : for my meaning was not to punish the rest , considering that they were suborned , and because my council expressly assembled for this purpose had concluded that these foure only should die , to serve for and example to the rest . In the same place I made and Oration unto them in this manner . 
 . 