The course which Sir Francis Drake held from the haven of Guatulco in the South sea on the back side of Nueva Espanna , to the Northwest of California as far as fourtie three degrees : and his return back along the said Coast to thirtie eight degrees : where finding a fair and goodly haven , he landed , and staying there many weeks , and discovering many excellent things in the country and great show of rich minerail matter , and being offered the dominion of the country by the Lord of the same , he took possession thereof in the behalf of her Majesty , and nam it Nova Albion . 
 Ee kept our course from the Isle of Canon ( which lies in eight degrees of Northerly latitude , and within two leagues of the main of Nicaragua , where we calked and trimmed our ship ) along the coast of Nueva Espanna , until we came to the Haven and Town of Guatulco , 
 which ( as we were informed ) had but seventeene Spaniards dwelling in it , and we found it to stand in fifteene degrees and fiftie minutes . 
 Assoon as we were entered this Haven we landed , and went presently to the town , and to the Town house , where we found a Judge sitting in judgement , he being associate with three other officers , upon three Negroes that had conspired the burning of the Town : both which Judges , and prisoners we took , and brought them a shippeboord , and caused the chief Judge to write his letter to the Town , to command all the Townsmen to avoid , that we might safely water there . 
 319 
 Which being done , and they departed , we ransacked the Town , and in one house we found a pot of the quantity of a bushel full of royals of plate , which we brought to our ship . 
 And here one Thomas Moone one of our company , took a Spanish gentleman as he was flying out of the Town , and searching him , he found a chain of Gold about him , and other jewels , which we took and so let him go . 
 At this place our general among other Spaniards , set a shore his Portugall Pilot , which he took at the Island of Cape Verde , out of a ship of Saint Marry port of Portugall , and having set them a shore , we departed thence . 
 Our General at this place and time thinking himself both in respect of his private injuries received from the Spaniards , as also of their contempts and indignities offered to our Country and Prince in generail , sufficiently satisfied , and revenged : and supposing that her Majesty at his return would rest contented with this service , purposed to continue no longer upon the Spanish coasts , but began to consider and to consult of the best way for his Country . 
 He thought it not good to return by the Straights , for two speciali causes : the one , lest the Spaniards should there wait , and attend for him in great number and strength , whose hands he being left but one ship , could not possibly escape . The other cause was the dangerous situation of the mouth of the Straights of the South side , with continual ! storms raining and blustering , as he found by experience , beside the shoals and sands upon the coast , wherefore he thought it not a good course to adventure that way : he resolved therefore to avoid these hazards , to go forward to the Islands of the Malucos , and therehence to sail the course of the Portugales by the Cape of Bona Speranda . 
 Upon this resolution , he began to think of his best way for the Malucos , and finding himself , where he 
 320 
 now was , becalmed , he saw that of necessity he must be inforced to take a Spanish course , namely to sail somewhat Northerly to get a wind . we therefore set sail , and sailed 800 leagues at the least for a good wind , and thus much we sailed from the 16 of Aprill after our old style till the third of June . 
 The fift day of June being in fortie three degrees towards the pole Arcticke , being speedily come out of the extreme heat , we found the air so cold , that our men being pinched with the same , complained of the extremity thereof , and the further we went , the more the cold increased upon us , whereupon we thought it best for that time to seek land , and did so , finding it not mountainous , but low plain land , & we drew back again without landing , till we came within thirtie eight degrees towards the line . In which height it pleased God to send us into a fair and good Bay , with a good wind to enter the same . 
 In this Bay we anchored the sevententh of June , and the people of the Country , having their houses close by the waters side , showed themselves unto us , and sent a present to our general . 
 When they came unto us , they greatly wondered at the things which we brought , but our general ( according to his natural and accustomed humanity ) courteously entreated them , and liberally bestowed on them necessary things to cover their nakedness , whereupon they supposed us to be gods , and would not be persuaded to the contrary : the presents which they sent unto our general were feathers , and calls of net work . 
 Their houses are dug round about with earth , and have from the uttermost brims of the circle cliffs of wood set upon them , joining close together at the top like a spire steeple , which by reason of that closeness are very warm . 
 Their bed is the ground with rushes strawed on it , and lying about the house , they have the fire in the midst . The men go naked , the women take bulrushes and ix 321 x 
 Sir Francis Drake sailed on the back side of America , to 43 degrees of Northerly latitude . 
 38 degrees . 
 A description of the people and Country of Nova Albion . 
 kemb them after the manner of hemp , and thereof make their lose garments , which being knit about their middles , hang down about their hips , having also about their shoulders a skin of Dear , with the hair upon it . These women are very obedient and serviceable to their husbands . 
 After they were departed from us , they came and visited us the second time , and brought with them feathers and bags of Tobacco for presents : And when they came to the top of the hill ( at the bottom whereof we had pitched our tents ) they stayed themselves , where one appointed for speaker , wearied himself with making a long oration , which done , they left their bows upon the hill and came down with their presents . 
 In the mean time the women remaining on the hill , tormented themselves lamentably , tearing their flesh from their cheeks , whereby we perceived that they were about a sacrifice . In the mean time our general , with his company , went to prayer , and to reading of the Scriptures , at which exercise they were attentive and seemed greatly to be affected with it : but when they were come unto us they restored again unto us those things which before we had bestowed upon them . 
 The news of our being there being spread through the country , the people that inhabited round about came down , and among them the king himself , a man of a goodly stature , and comely personage , with many other tall and warlike men : before whose coming were sent two Ambassadors to our general , to signify that their king was coming , in doing of which message , their speech was continued about half and hour . This ended , they by signs requested our general to send something by their hand to their king , as a token that his coming might be in peace : wherein our general having satisfied them , they returned with glad tidings to their king , who marched to us with a princely Majesty , the people crying continually after their manner , and as they drew near unto us , so did they 
 322 
 strive to behave themselves in their actions with comeliness . 
 In the before front was a man of a goodly personage , who bore the sceptre , or mace before the king , whereupon hanged two crowns , a less and a bigger , with three chains of a merveilous length : the crowns were made of knit work wrought artificially with feathers of diverse colours ; the chains were made of a bony substance and few be the persons among them that are admitted to wear them : and of that number also the persons are stinted , as some ten , some twelve , etc. Next unto him which bore the sceptre , was the king himself , with his Guard about his person , clad with Conie skins , and other skins : after them followed the naked common 
 These are like chains of Esurnoy in Canada and Hochelage . 
 sort of people , every one having his face painted , some with white , some with black , and other colours , and having in their hands one thing or other for a present , not so much as their children , but they also brought 
 their presents . 
 In the mean time , our general gathered his men together , and marched within his fenced place , making 
 against their approaching , a very warlike show . They being trooped together in their order , and a general salutation being made , there was presently a general silence . Then he that bore the sceptre before the king , being informed by another , whom they assigned to that office , with a manly and lofty voice , proclaimed 
 that which the other spoke to him in secret , continuing 
 half and hour : which ended , and a general Amen as it were given , the king with the whole number of men , and women ( the children excepted ) came down without any weapon , who descending to the foot of the hill , 
 set themselves in order . 
 In coming towards our bulwarks and tents , the sceptre bearer began a song , observing his measures in a dance , and that with a stately countenance , whom the king with his Guard , and every degree of persons following , did in like manner sing and dance , saving only 
 323 
 The king resignes his crown and kingdom to Sir Francis Drake . 
 Great riches in Nova Albion . 
 the women which danced and kept silence . The General permitted them to enter within our bulwark , where they continued their song and dance a reasonable time . When they had satisfied themselves , they made signs to our general to fit down , to whom the king , and diverse others made several orations , or rather supplication , that he would take their province and kingdom into his hand , and become their king , making signs that they would resign unto him their right and title of the whole land , and become his subject's . In which to persuade us the better , the king and the rest , with one consent and with great reverence , joyfully singing a song , did set the crown upon his head , enriched his neck with all their chains , and offered unto him many other things , honouring him by the name of Hioh , adding thereunto as it seemed a sign of triumph : which thing our general thought not meet to reject , because he knew not what honour and profit it might be to our country . Wherefore in the name , and to the use of her Majesty , he took the sceptre , crown and dignity of the said Country in his hands , wishing that the riches & treasure thereof might so conveniently be transported to the enriching of her kingdom at home , as it aboundeth in the same . 
 The common sort of the people leaving the king and his Guard with our general , scattered themselves together with their sacrifices among our people , taking a diligent view of every person ; and such as pleased their fancy , ( which were the youngest ) they enclosing them about offered their sacrifices unto them with lamentable weeping , scratching , and tearing the flesh from their faces with their nails , whereof issued abundance of blood . But we used signs to them of disliking this , and stayed their hands from force , and directed them upwards to the living God , whom only they ought to worship . They showed unto us their wounds , and craved help of them at our hands , whereupon we gave them lotions , plasters and ointments agreeing to 324 
 ... I578 , the state of their griefs , beseeching God to cure their diseases . Every thirde day they brought their sacrifices unto us , until they understood our meaning , that we had no pleasure in them : yet they could not be long absent from us , but daily frequented our company to the hour of our departure , which departure seemed so grievous unto them , that their joy was turned into sorrow . They entreated us , that being absent we would remember them , and by stealth provided a sacrifice , which we misliked . 
 Our necessary business being ended , our general Great heards with his company traveled up into the Country to their °f Dear . villages , where we found herds of Dear by a thousand in a company , being most large and fat of body . 
 We found the whole country to be a warren of a Abundance of strange kind of Conies , their bodies in bigness as be stran&conies-the Barbary Conies , their heads as the heads of ours , the feet of a Want , and the tail of a Rat being of great length : under her chin on either side a bag , into the which she gathereth her meat when she hath filled her belly abroad . The people eat their bodies , and make great account of their skins , for their Kings coat was made of them . 
 Our general called this country , Nova Albion , and Nova Albion . that for two causes : the one in respect of the white banks and cliffs , which lie towards the sea : and the other , because it might have some affinity with our Country in name , which sometime was so called . 
 There is no part of earth here to be taken up , Gold and wherein there is not some speciali likelihood of gold or silver in the silver earth of Nova 
 At our departure hence our general set up a monument of our being there ; as also of her Majesties right and title to the same , namely a plate nailed upon a fair great post , whereupon was engraven her Majesties name , the day and year of our arrival there , with the free giving up of the Province and people into her Majesties hands , together with her highness picture and arms , in 
 325 
 a piece of sixe pence of current English money under the plate , where under was also written the name of our general . 
 It seems that the Spaniards hitherto had never be in this part of the country , neither did ever discover the land by many degrees to the Southwards of this place . 
 . 