The true and perfect description of a voyage performed and done by Francisco the Gualle a Spanish Captain and Pilot , for the Viceroy of New Spaine , from the Haven of Acapulco in New Spaine , to the Islands of the Lu^ones or Philippinas , unto the Haven of Manilla , & from thence to the Haven of Macao in China , and from Macao back again to Acapulco , accomplished in the year of our Lord , 1584. 
 Chap. 1. 
 He tenth of March in the year of our Lord 1582 we set sail out of the Haven of Acapulco , lying in the country of New Spaine , directing our course towards the Islands of the Lugones , or Philippinas West Southwest , running in that manner for the space of twentie five 
 leagues , till we came under sixteene degrees , that so we might shun the calms by sailing close by the shore . From thence forward we held our course West for the space of 30 leagues , & being there , we ran West , and West & by South , for the space of 1800 leagues , to the Hand called Isla deal Enganno , which is the furthest Hand lying in the South parts of you Hands called Des los Ladrones , that is , The Hands of rovers , or Islas de las Velas , under 13. degrees and in latitude Septentrionali , and 164. degrees in longitude Orientali , upon the fixed Meridionali line , which lies 326 
 right with the Hand of Ter^era . From thence we held our course Westward for the space of 280. leagues , till we came to the point called El capo de Espirito Santo , that is , The point of the holy Ghost , lying in the Hand Tandaya , the first Hand of those that are called Philippinas , Lu^ones , or Manillas , which is a country with few hills , with some mines of brimstone in the middle thereof . From the point aforesaid , we sailed West for the space of eighteene leagues to the point or entry of the channel , which runneth in between that Hand and the Hand of Lu^on . This point or entry lies scarce under 12. degrees . All the coast that stretcheth from the entry of the channel to the point of El capo del Spirito santo , is not very fair . 
 Eight leagues from the said point lies a haven of indifferent greatness , called Baya de Lobos , that is , The Bay of wolves , having a small Hand in the mouth thereof : and within the channel about half a league from the end of the said Hand lies and Hand or clifFe , & when you pass by the point in the middle of the channel , then you have five and twentie fathom deep , with brown sand : there we found so great a stream running Westward , that it made the water to cast a skum as if it had been a sand , whereby it put us in fear , but casting out our led , we found five and twentie fathom deep . 
 From the aforesaid entry of the channel North , and North and by East about tenne leagues , lies the Island of Catanduanes , about a league distant from the land of Lu^on , on the furthest point Eastward , and from the same entry of the channel towards the West and Southwest lies the Hand Capuli about sixe leagues from thence , stretching Westsouth west , and Eastnortheast , being five leagues long , and foure leagues broad : and as we passed by it , it lay Northward from us under twelve degrees and | . and somewhat high land . Foure leagues from the aforesaid Hand of Capuli Northwestward lie the three Hands of the haven of Bollon in the 
 327 
 Hand of Lufones , stretching North and South about foure leagues , distant from the firm land half a league , whereof the furthest Southward lies under thirteene degrees : In this channel it is twentie fathom deep , with white sand , and a great stream , running Southeast : we passed through the middle of the channel . From this channel we held our course Southwest , and Southwest and by West , for the space of twentie leagues , until we came to the West end of the Hand of Tycao , which reaches East and West thirteene leagues . This point or hook lies under 12. degrees and In the middle between this Hand and the Hand Capuli there lie three Hands called the Faranias , and we ran in the same course on the Northside of all the Hands , at the depth of 22. fathom with white sand . 
 From the aforesaid West point of the Hand Tycao to the point of Buryas it is East and West to sail about the length of a league or a league and and half : we put into that channel , holding our course South , and South and by West about three leagues , until we were out of the channel at sixteene fathom deep , with half white and reddish sand in the channel , and at the mouth thereof , whereof the middle lies under 12. degrees and f . and there the streams run Northward . 
 The Hand of Buryas stretcheth Northwest and Southeast , and is low land , whereof the Northwest point is about three leagues from the coast of Lugon , but you cannot pass between them with any ship , but with small foists and barks of the country . This shallow channel lies under twelve degrees : and running thorough the aforesaid channel between the Hands Tycao and Buryas , as I said before , we sailed Southward about The Isle of two leagues from the Hand of Masbate , which stretcheth Masbate . past anj West 8. leagues long , being in breadth 4. leagues , and lies under 12. degrees and in the middle thereof , and is somewhat high land . 
 From the said channel between Tycao and Buryas , we held our course Westnorthwest for thirteene 328 
 leagues , leaving the Hand Masbate on the Southside , and the Hand Buryas on the North side : at the end of thirteene leagues we came by and Hand called Banton , which is in form like a hat , under twelve degrees and f . when we had sailed the aforesaid thirteene leagues and eight leagues more , on the South side we left the Hand called Rebuiam , which stretcheth Northwest and Northwest and by North , and Southeast , and Southeast and by South , for the space of eight leagues , being high and crooked land , whereof the North point lies under twelve degrees and and there you iinde 35. fathom deep , with white sand . 
 From the aforesaid Hand of Banton Southward nine leagues , there begin and follow three Islands , one of them being called Bantonsilla , which is a small Hand in form of a sugar loaf : the second Crymara , being somewhat great in length , reaching East and West about two leagues : the third Itaa , or the He of Goats , having certain hovels . By all these Hands aforesaid you may pass with all sorts of ships , whereof the foremost lies Southward under twelve degrees and j . From the Hand of Bantonsilla , or small Banton , we held our course Northwest for the space of foure leagues , to the channel between the Hands called the Vereies , and the Hand Marinduque , the Vereies lying on the South side under twelve degrees and ( which are two small Hands like two Frigates ) and the Hand Marinduque on the North side under twelve degrees , and which is a great Hand , stretching Westnorthwest , and Eastsoutheast , having in length 12. & in breadth 7. leagues . On the North side with the Hand Lu^on it makes a long and small channel , running somewhat crooked , which is altogether full of shallows and sands , whereby no ships can pass through it . The furthest point Westward of the same Hand lies under thirteene degrees and J. It is high land , on the East side having the form of a mine of brimstone or fiery hill , and on the West side the land runneth downward at the point thereof being round like 
 329 
 a loaf of bred : in the channel between it and the Vereies , there are 18. fathom deep with small black sand . 
 From the aforesaid channel of Vereies and Marinduque , we held our course Westnorthwest twelve leagues to the land of Mindora , to the point or hook called Dumaryn , lying full under thirteene degrees : Five leagues forward from the said channel on the South side we left and Hand called Isla deal maestro del Campo , that is , The Hand of the Colonel , lying under twelve degrees and which is a small and flat Hand : In this course we had 45 fathom deep , with white sand . 
 By this point or end of the Hand Marinduque begins the Hand of Myndoro , which hath in length East and West five and twentie leagues , and in breadth twelve leagues , whereof the furthest point Southward lies under thirteene degrees , and the furthest point Northward under thirteene degrees and f . and the furthest point Westward under thirteene degrees . This Hand with the Hand of Lu ? on makes a channel of five leagues broad , and ten or twelve fathom deep with muddy ground of diverse colours , with white sand . Five leagues forward from Marinduque lies the river of the town of Anagacu , which is so shallow , that no ships may enter into it . From thence two leagues further lie the Hands called Bacco , which are three Hands lying in a triangle , two of them being distant from the land about three hundred cubits , and between them and the land you may pass with small ships : And from the land to the other Hand , are about two hundred cubits , where it is altogether shallows and sands , so that where the ships may pass outward about 150. cubits from the land , you leave both the Hands on the South side , running between the third Hand and the river called Rio deal Bacco , somewhat more from the middle of the channel towards the Hand , which is about a league distant from the other : the channel is tenne fathom deep , with mud and shells upon the ground : the river of 33° 
 Bacco is so shallow , that no ships may enter into it . From this Hand with the same course two leagues forward , you pass by the point El Capo de Rescaseo , where we cast out our led , and found that a man may pass close by the land , and there you shall find great strong streams : and half a league forward with the same course , lies the town of Mindoro , which hath a good haven for ships of three hundred tons . Three leagues Northward from the same haven lies the Hand called Cafaa , stretching from East and West , being hilly ground . 
 From the said town of Myndoro , we held our course Westnorthwest eight leagues , till we came to the point or hook of the sands called Tulen , lying upon the Hand of Lu^on , which sand or bank reaches into the Sea half a league from the coast : you must keep about and hundred cubits from it , where you find eight fathom water , muddy and shelly ground : you run along by those sands North , and North and by West for the space of two leagues , till you come to the river called Rio de Anasebo : all the rest of the coast called De los Limbones to the mouth or entry of the Bay called Manilla , ( which are foure leagues ) is sailed with the same course . The Limbones ( which are Hands so called ) are high in form like a pair of Organs , with good havens for small ships , running along by the Limbones : and two leagues beyond them on the South side , we leave the Hands of Fortan , and foure Hands more , but the three Hands of Lubao , which are very low , lie under 13. degrees and J. and the Limbones lie in the mouth or entry of the Bay of Manilla under 14. degrees and J. 
 From thence we ran Northwest for the space of sixe leagues to the haven of Cabite , keeping along by the land lying on the West side , where it is shallow , and is called Los Baixos deal Rio de Cannas , The shallows of the river of Redes : all along this Bay in the same course , there is from ten to foure fathom deep . 
 331 
 A.D. 
 I584 . 
 The Bay of Manilla in 14 degrees and one quarter . 
 Being by the point or hook of Cabite , then we kept but and hundred paces from it , running Southwest , southsouthwest , and South , until we discovered the whole mouth or entry of the Bay , where we might anchor at foure fathom about two hundred cubits from the land , and then the town of Manilla was two leagues Northward from us . 
 Chap. 2. 
 The course and voyage of the aforesaid Francisco Gualle out of the haven or road of Manilla , to the haven of Macao in China , with all the courses and situations of the places . 
 Sailing out of the haven of Cabite , lying in the Bay of Manilla , we held our course Westward for the space of eighteene leagues , to the point called El Cabo de Sambalies : and when we were eight leagues in our way , we left the two Hands Maribillas on the South side , and sailed about a league from them : the point of Sambalies aforesaid lies under foureteene degrees , and f . being low land , at the end of the same coast of Lu^on , on the West side . 
 From the hook or point aforesaid , we ran North , and North and by West , for the space of five and twentie leagues ( about a league from the coast of Lu^on ) to the point called Cabo de Bullinao : all this coast and Cape is high and hilly ground , which Cape lies under sixteen degrees and - | . From this Cape de Bullinao we held our course North , and North and by East , for 45. leagues to the point called El Cabo de Bojador , which is the furthest land Northward from the Hand Lu ? on lying under 19. degrees . 
 The Cape de Bullinao being passed the land makes a great creek or bough , and from this creek the coast runneth North to the point of Bojador , being a land full of cliffs and rocks that reach into the Sea , and the land of the hook or point is high and hilly ground . 
 From the point of Bojador , we held our course 
 332 
 Westnorthwest and hundred and twentie leagues , until we came to the Hand called A Ilha Branca , or the white Hand , lying in the beginning of the coast and Bay of the river Canton under two and twentie degrees , having foure and twentie fathom brown muddy ground . 
 From the Hand Ilha Branca , we held the aforesaid course of Westnorthwest , for the space of sixteene leagues , to the Hand of Macao lying in the mouth of the river of Canton , and it makes the river to have two mouths or entries , and it is a small Hand about three leagues great . 
 Canton 22. degrees . 
 The Hand of Macao . 
 Chap. 3. 
 The Navigation or course of the aforesaid Francisco Gualle out of the haven of Macao to New Spaine , with the situation and stretchings of the same , with other notable and memorable things concerning the same voyage . 
 WHen we had prepared our selves , and had taken our leaves of our friends in Macao , we set sail upon the foure and twentieth of July , holding our course Southeast , & Southeast and by East , being in the wane of the Moon : for when the Moon increases , it is hard holding the course between the Hands , because as then the water and streams run very strong to the Northwest ; we travailed through many narrow channels by night , having the depth of eight or ten fathom , with soft muddy ground , until we were about the Hand Ilha Branca , yet we saw it not , but by the height we Ilha Branca . knew that we were passed it . 
 Being beyond it , we ran Eastsoutheast and hundred and fiftie leagues , to get above the sands called Os Baixos dos Pescadores , and the beginning of the Hands Lequeos on the East side , which Hands are called As s Ilhasfer-Ilhas fermosas , that is to say , The fair Hands . This mosas ' I understood by a Chinar called Santy of Chinchon , and he said that they lie under one and twentie degrees and there it is thirtie fathom deep : and although 
 333 
 we saw them not , notwithstanding by the height and depth of the water we knew we were passed them . 
 Being passed As Ilhas fermosas , or the fair Hands , we held our course East , and East and by North , for two hundred and sixtie leagues , until we were passed the length Lequeos . of the Hands Lequeos , sailing about fiftie leagues from them : the said Chinar told me , that those Hands called Lequeos are very many , and that they have many and very good havens , and that the people and inhabitants thereof have their faces and bodies painted like the Bysayas of the Hands of Lu gone or Philippinas and are Mines of gild . appareled like the Bysayas , and that there also are mines of gold : He said likewise that they did often come with small ships and barks laden with Bucks and Harts-hides , and with gold in grains or very small pieces , to traffic with them of the coast of China , which he assured me to be most true , saying that he had be nine times in the small Hands , bringing of the same wares with him to China : which I believed to be true , for that afterward I inquired thereof in Macao , and upon the coast of China , and found that he said true . The furthest or uttermost of these Hands stretching Northward and Eastward , lie under nine and twentie degrees . 
 Being passed these Hands , then you come to the Hands of Japon , whereof the first lying West and South , is Firando . the Hand of Firando , where the Portugals use to traffic : they are in length altogether and hundred and thirtie leagues , and the furthest Eastward lies under two and thirtie degrees : we ran still East , and East and by North , until we were passed the said hundred and thirtie leagues . 
 All this information I had of the aforesaid Chinar , as also that there I should see some mines of brimstone or fiery hills , being seventie leagues beyond them , and thirtie leagues further I should find foure Hands lying together , which I likewise found , as he had told me : And that being in Japon , he said he had there 334 
 seen certain men of a very small stature , with great rolls of linen cloth about their heads , that brought gold in small pieces , and some white Cangas of cotton , ( which are pieces of cotton-linen so called by the Chinars ) as also saltfish like the Spanish Atun , or Tunney , which he said came out of other Islands East - Hands ward from Japon : and by the tokens and marks which Eastward , ) f he showed me , I guessed whereabout those Hands should ‘ be , and found them not far from whence he said they lay . He said likewise that all the Hands of Japon have good havens and channels , being a Country full of Rice , Corn , Fish , and flesh , and that they are and in-difierent and reasonable people to trafiique with , and that there they have much silver . 
 Running thus East , and East and by North about three hundred leagues from Japon , we found a very hollow water , with the stream running out of the North and Northwest , with a full and very broad Sea , without any hindrance or trouble in the way that we passed : and what wind soever blew , the Sea continued all in one sort , with the same hollow water and stream , until we had passed seven hundred leagues . About JaPm 9°°-two hundred leagues from the coast and land of new Spaine we began to loose the said hollow Sea and America in stream : whereby I most assuredly think and believe , 37 degrees that there you shall find a channel or straight passage , awl 1111 between the firm land of new Spaine , and the Countries' of Asia and Tartaria . Likewise all this way from the aforesaid seven hundred leagues , we found a great number of Whale-fishes and other fish called by the Spaniards Atuns or Tunnies , whereof many are found on the coast of Gibraltar in Spaine , as also Alba-coras and Bonitos , which are all fish , which commonly keep in channels , straights , and running waters , there to disperse their seed when they breed : which makes me more assuredly believe , that thereabouts is a channel or straight to pass through . 
 Being by the same course upon the coast of new 
 335 
 Seven and Spaine , under seven and thirtie degrees and J. we aM&'and Passed by a very high and fair land with many trees , Read Francis wholly without snow , and foure leagues from the land , Ulloa chap. 16. you find thereabouts many drifts of roots , leaves of trees , reeds , and other leaves like fig leaves , the like whereof we found in great abundance in the country of Japon , which they eat : and some of those that we found , 1 caused to be sodden with flesh , and being sodden , they eat like Coleworts : there likewise we found great store of Seals : whereby it is to be presumed and certainly to be believed , that there are many rivers , bays , and havens along by those coasts to the haven of Acapulco . 
 From thence we ran Southeast , Southeast and by South , and Southeast and by East , as we found the Cabo de San wind , to the point called El Cabo de Sant Lucas , which Lucas in 22. js he beginning of the land of California , on the Northwest side , lying under two and twentie degrees , being five hundred leagues distant from Cape Mendocino . 
 In this way of the aforesaid five hundred leagues along by the coast , are many Hands : and although they be but small , yet without doubt there are in them some Havens lately good havens , as also in the firm land , where you have found out . these havens following , now lately found out , as that 
 of thee He of Sant Augustine , lying under thirtie degrees and 4. and the Hand called Isla de Cedros , scarce under eight & twentie deg . and j . and the Hand lying beneath Saint Martyn , under three and twentie degrees and J. All this coast and country , as I think , is inhabited , and shows to be a very good country : for there by night we saw fire , and by day smoke , which is a most sure token that they are inhabited . 
 From the point or hook of Saint Lucas , to the Southeast side of California , we held our course Eastsoutheast , for the space of 80. leagues , to the point called El cabo de las corrientes , that is , the Cape of the streams lying under 19. degrees and f . And running this course , Northward about a league from us we saw 33 < 5 
 1584. three Hands called Las tres Marias , ( that is to say , The three Maries ) running the same course . About foure leagues from the other Hands , there are other Hands , reaching about two or three leagues : All this way from the mouth or gulf of California aforesaid , for the space of the said fourescore leagues , there are great streams that run Westward . 
 From the point or Cape de las Corrientes , we ran Southeast , and sometime Southeast and by East , for the space of and hundred and thirtie leagues to the haven of Acapulco . In this way of and hundred and thirtie leagues , being twentie leagues on the way , we had the haven of Natividad , that is , of the birth of the Virgin Marry : and other eight leagues further , the haven of Saint Iago , or Saint James : and sixe leagues further , the sea Strand called La Playa de Colima , that is , the Strand of Colima . All this coast from California to the haven of Acapulco is Acapulco . inhabited by people that have peace and traffic with the Spaniards , and are of condition and qualities like the people of the other places of new Spaine . 
 The conclusion of the Author of this last voyage . 
 A LI this description and navigation have I my self scene , proved , and well noted in my voyage made & ended in the year of our Lord 1584. from great China out of the haven and river of Canton , as I will more at large set it down unto your honour , with the longitudes and latitudes thereof , as God shall permit me time and leisure , whom I beseech to send you long and happy days . 
 And the same was truly translated out of Spanish into low Dutch verbatim out of the Originali copy , ( which was sent unto the Viceroy of the Portugall Indies ) by John Huyghen Van Linschoten . 
 . 