The first voyage attempted and set forth by the expert and valiant captain M. Francis Drake himself , with a ship called the Dragon , and another ship and a Pinnace , to Number de Dios , and Dariene , about the year 1572 , Written and recorded by one Lopez Vaz a Portugall born in the city of Elvas , in manner follow : which Portugale , with the discourse about him , was taken at the river of Plate by the ships set forth by the Right Honourable the Earl of Cumberland , in the year 1586. 
 Here was a certain English man nam Francis Drake , who having intelligence how the town of Number de Dios in Nueva Espanna , had but small store of people remaining there , came on a night , and entered the Port with foure Pinnaces , and landed about 150 men , & 
 leaving 70 men with a trumpet , in a Fort which was there , with the other 80 he entered the town , without doing any harm , till he came to the market place , and there discharged his calivers , & sounded a trumpet very loud , and the other which he had left in the Fort answered him after the same manner , with the discharging their calivers , and sounding their trumpets : the people hereupon not thinking of any such matter , were put in great fear , and waking out of their sleep fled all into the mountains , inquiring one of another what the matter should be , remaining as men amazed , not knowing what that uproar was which happened so suddenly in the town . But 14 or 15 of them joining together with their harquebusses , went to the market place to know what they were that were in the town , and in a corner of the market place they did discover the Englishmen , and seeing them to be but few , discharged 75 
 their calivers at those Englishmen : their fortune was such that they killed the Trumpeter , and shot one of the principali men thorough the leg , who seeing himself hurt , retired to the Fort , where the rest of their company was left : they which were in the Fort sounded their Trumpet , and seeing that they in the town did not answer them , and hearing the calivers , thought that all they in the town had be slain , and thereupon fled to their Pinnaces : the English captain coming to the Fort , and not finding his men which he left there , he and his were in so great fear , that leaving their furniture behind them , and putting off their hose , they swam , and waded all to their Pinnaces , and so went with their ships again out of the Port. 
 Thus this English Captain called Francis Drake , departed from Number de Dios , & slew only one man in the town which was looking out of a window to see what the matter was , and of his men had only his Trumpeter slain . 
 The valiant But he being discontented with the repulse which he exploit of M. haj received there , came to the found of Dariene , and betwixt e having conference with certain Negroes which were fled Panama and from their master's of Panama , and Number de Dios , the Number de Negros did tell him , that certain Mules came laden with 
 Dios. gold and silver from Panama to Number de Dios , who 
 in company of these Negroes went thereupon on land , and stayed in the way where the treasure should come with and hundred shot , and so took two companies of mules , which came only with their drivers mistrusting nothing , and he carried away the ( gold only , for they were not able to carry the silver through the mountains . 
 M. Francis And two days after he came to the house of Crosses , ^heNsusef w^ere killed sixe or seven merchants , but found no Cross ? . guide nor silver but much merchandise : so he fired the 
 house , where was burned above 200000 Ducats in merchandise , and so went to his ship again : and within half and hour after he was a shipboard , there came down to the sands three hundred shot of the Spaniards 76 
 in the sighed of his ships , of purpose to seek him , but he cared little for them being out of their reach , and so departed with his treasure . 
 . 