The voyage made by M. John Hawkins Esquire , and afterwards knight , Captain of the Jesus of Lubek , one of her Majesties ships , and general of the Salomon , and other two barks going in his company , to the coast of Guinea , and the Indies of Nova Hispania , begun in An. Dom. 1564. 
 Aster John Hawkins with the Jesus of Lubek , a ship of 700. and the Salomon a ship of 140. the Tiger a bark of 50. and the Swallow of 30. tons , being all well furnished with men to the number of one hundreth threescore and tenne , as also with ordinance and victuali 
 requisite for such a voyage , departed out of Plymmouth the 18. day of October , in the year of our Lord 1564. October 18. with a prosperous wind : at which departing , in cutting the foresail , a marvelous misfortune happened to one of the officers in the ship , who by the pully of the sheat was slain out of hand , being a sorrowful beginning to them all . And after their setting out ten leagues to the sea , he met the same day with the Minion a ship of the Minion , Queens Majesty , whereof was Captain David Carlet , and also her consort the John Baptist of London , being MerUne bound bound to Guinea also , who hailed one the other after far Guinea . the custom of the sea with certain pieces of ordinance for joy of their meeting : which done , the Minion departed from him to seek her other consort the Merlin of London , which was a stern out of sighed , leaving in M. Hawkins company the John Baptist her other consort . 
 Thus sailing forward on their way with a prosperous wind until the 21. of the same month , at that time a great storm arose , the wind being at Northeast about nine a clock in the night , and continued so 23. hours together , in which storm M. Hawkins lost the company 9 
 Good order for a fleet in a long voyage . 
 A dreadful mischance by fire . 
 of the John Baptist aforesaid , and of his pinnace called the Swallow , his other 3. ships being soar beaten with a storm . The 23. day the Swallow to his not small rejoicing , came to him again in the night , 10. leagues to the Northward of Cape Finister , he having put roomer , not being able to double the Cape , in that there rose a contrary wind at Southwest . The 25. the wind continuing contrary , he put into a place in Galicia , called Ferroll , where he remained five days , and appointed all the Master's of his ships and order for the keeping of good company in this manner : The small ships to be always ahead and aweather of the Jesus , and to speak twice a day with the Jesus at least : if in the day the Ensign be over the poop of the Jesus , or in the night two lights , then shall all the ships speak with her : If there be three lights aboard the Jesus , then doth she cast about : If the weather be extreme , that the small ships cannot keep company with the Jesus , then all to keep company with the Salomon , and forthwith to repair to the Hand of Teneriffe , to the Northward of the road of Sirroes ; If any happen to any misfortune then to show two lights , and to shoot off a piece of ordinance . If any loose company , and come in sighed again , to make three yaws , and strike the Myson three times : Serve God daily , love one another , preserve your victuals , beware of fire , and keep good company . 
 The 26. day the Minion came in also where he was , for the rejoicing whereof he gave them certain pieces of ordinance , after the courtesy of the sea for their welcome : but the Minions men had no mirth , because of their consort the Merline , whom at their departure from Master Hawkins upon the coast of England they went to seek , and having met with her , kept company two days together , and at last by misfortune of fire ( through the negligence of one of their gunners ) the powder in the gunners room was set on fire , which with the first blast struck out her poop , and therewithal ! lost three men , beside many soar burned ( which escaped by the brigan-IO 
 dine being at her stern ) and immediady , to the great loss of the owners , and most horrible sighed to the beholders , she sunk before their eyes . 
 The 20. day of the month M. Hawkins with his consorts and company of the Minion , having now both the brigandines at her stern , weighed anchor , and set sail on their voyage , having a prosperous wind thereunto . 
 The fourth of November they had sighed of the Hand of Madera , and the sixt day of Teneriffe , which they thought to have been the Canary , in that they supposed themselves to have been to the Eastward of Teneriffe , and were not : but the Minion being three or foure leagues ahead of us , kept on her course to Teneriffe , having better sighed thereof then the other had , and by that means they parted company . For M. Hawkins and his company went more to the West , upon which course having sailed a while , he espied another Hand , which he thought to be Teneriffe , and being not able by means of the fog upon the hills , to discern the same , nor yet to fetch it by night , went roomer until the morning , being the seventh of November , which as yet he could not discern , but sailed along the coast the space of two hours , to perceive some certain mark of Teneriffe , and found no likelihood thereof at all , accounting that to be , as it was in deed , the He of The lie of Palms : and so sailing forward , espied another Hand Pflmes-called Gomera , and also Teneriffe , with the which he made , and sailing all night , came in the morning the next day to the port of Adecia , where he found his pinnace which had departed from him the sixt of the month , being in the weather of him , and espying the pike of Teneriffe all a high , bore thither . At his arrival somewhat before he came to anchor , he hoised out his ships pinnace rowing a shore , intending to have sent one with a letter to Peter de ponte , one of the governors of the Hand , who dwelled a league from the shore : but as he pretended to have landed , suddenly there appeared upon the two points of the road , men levelling of bases 
 and harquebusses to them , with diverse others to the number of fourescore , with halberds , pikes , swords and targets , which happened so contrary to his expectation , that it did greatly amaze him , and the more , because he was now in their danger , not knowing well how to avoid it without some mischief . Wherefore he determined to call to them for the better appeasing of the matter , declaring his name , and professing himself to be and especial friend to Peter de ponte , and that he had sundry things for him which he greatly desired . And in the mean time , while he was thus talking with them , whereby he made them to hold their hands , he willed the mariners to row away , so that at last he got out of their danger : and then asking for Peter de ponte , one of his sons being Sennor Nicolas de Ponte , came forth , whom he perceiving , desired to put his men aside , and he himself would leap a shore and commune with him , which they did : so that after communication had between them of sundry things , and of the fear they both had , master Hawkins desired to have certain necessaries provided for him . In the mean space , while these things were providing , he trimmed the main mast of the Jesus which in the storm aforesaid was sprung : here he sojourned 7. days , refreshing himself and his men . 
 Santa Cruz. In the which time Peter de ponte dwelling at S. Cruz , a city 20. leagues off , came to him , and gave him as gentle A brief de - entertainment as if he had be his own brother . To scription of the Speak somewhat of these Hands , being called in old commodities of f TO , c . , ’ S - , n • . • 
 the Canarie time Insulae fortunatae , by the means of the nourishing Hands . thereof , the fruitfulness of them doth surely exceed 
 far all other that I have herd of : for they make wine better then any in Spaine , they have grapes of such bigness , that they may be compared to damsons , and in taste inferior to none : for sugar , suckets , raisins of the Sun , and many other fruits , abundance : for rosine & raw silk , there is great store , they want neither corn , pullets , cattle , nor yet wild foul : they have many Camels also , which being young , are eaten of the people 
 for victuals , and being old , they are used for carriage of necessaries : whose property is as he is taught to kneel at the taking of his load , and unlading again : his nature is to engender backward contrary to other beasts : of understanding very good , but of shape very deformed , with a little belly , long misshapen legs , and feet very broad of flesh , without a hoof , all whole , saving the great toe , a back bearing up like a molehill , a large and thin neck , with a little head , with a bunch of hard flesh , which nature hath given him in his breast to lean upon . This beast lives hardly , and is contented with straw and stubble , but of force strong , being well able to carry 500. weight . In one of these Hands called Fierro , there is by Fierro . the reports of the inhabitants , a certain tree that rains continually , by the dropping whereof the inhabitants and cattle are satisfied with water , for other water have they none in all the Hand . And it rains in such abundance , that it were incredible unto a man to believe such a virtue to be in a tree , but it is known to be a divine matter , and a thing ordained by God , at whose power therein we ought not to marvel , seeing he did by his providence as we read in the Scriptures , when the children of Israel were going into the land of promise , feed them with Manna from heaven , for the space of 40. years . Of the trees aforesaid we saw in Guinie many , being of great Trees dropheight , dropping continually , but not so abundantly as ™ ater tn the other , because the leaves are narrower , and are like mme ' the leaves of a pear tree . About these Hands are certain flitting Hands , which have been oftentimes seen , and when men approached near them , they vanished : as the like hath be of these Hands now known by the report of the inhabitants , which were not found of long time one after the other : and therefore it should seem he is not yet born to whom God hath appointed the finding of them . In this Hand of Teneriffe there is a hill called The Pike , because it is piked , which is in heighth by The pike of their reports twentie leagues , having both winter and Teneriffe-summer abundance of snow in the top of it : this Pike 
 Cape Blanco . 
 may be seen in a clear day fiftie leagues off , but it shows as though it were a black cloud a great heighth in the element . I have herd of none to be compared with this in heighth , but in the Indias I have seen many , and in my judgement not inferior to the Pike , and so the Spaniards write . 
 The 15. of November at night we departed from Teneriffe , and the 20. of the same we had sighed of ten Caravels , that were fishing at sea , with whom we would have spoken , but they fearing us , fled into a place of Barbarie , called Cape de las Barbas . 
 The twentieth , the ships pinnace with two men in her , sailing by the ship , was overthrown by the oversight of them that went in her , the wind being so great , that before they were espied , and the ship had cast about for them , she was driven half a league to leeward of the pinnace , and had lost sighed of her , so that there was small hope of recovery , had not Gods help and the Captains deligence be , who having well marked which way the pinnace was by the Sun , appointed 24 of the lustiest rowers in the great boat , to row to the windwards , and so recovered , contrary to all men's expectations , both the pinnace and the men sitting upon the keel of her . 
 The 25 he came to Cape Blanco , which is upon the coast of Africa , and a place where the Portugals do ride , that fish there in the month of November especially , and is a very good place of fishing , for Pargoes , Mullet , and Dog fish . In this place the Portugals have no hold for their defence , but have rescue of the Barbarians , whom they entertain as their soldiers , for the time of their being there and for their fishing upon that coast of Africa , do pay a certain tribute to the king of the Moors . The people of that part of Africa are tawny , having long hair without any apparel , saving before their privy members . Their weapons in wars are bows and arrows . 
 The 26 we departed from S. Avis Bay , within Cape Blanco , where we refreshed our selves with fish , 14 
 and other necessaries : and the 29 we came to Cape Cape Verde Verde , which lies in 14 degrees , and a half . These in H degrees . people are all black , and are called Negroes , without any apparel , saving before their privities : of stature goodly men , and well liking by reason of their food , which passes all other Guyneans for kine , goats , pullin , rise , fruits , and fish . Here we took fish with heads like conies , and teeth nothing varying , of a jolly thickness , but not passed a foot long , and is not to be eaten without flaying or cutting off his head . To speak somewhat of the sundry sorts of these Guyneans : the people of Cape Verde are called Leophares , and Leophares . counted the goodliest men of all other , saving the Congo's , which do inhabit on this side the cape de Buena Esperanza . These Leophares have wars against the lelofFes , which are borderers by them : their weapons are bows and arrows , targets , and short daggers , darts also , but varying from other Negroes : for whereas the other use a long dart to fight with in their hands , they carry five or sixe small ones a piece , which they cast with . These men also are more civil then any other , because of their daily traffic with the Frenchmen , and are of nature very gentle and loving : for Ca while we were there , we took in a Frenchman , who was one of the 19 that going to Brasile , in a Bark of Diepe , of 60 tons , and being a sea board of Cape Verde , 200 leagues , the planks of their Bark with a sea brake out upon them so suddenly , that much a do they had to save themselves in their boats : but by Gods providence , the wind being Westerly , which is rarely seen there , they god to the shore , to the Isle Brava , and in great penury got to Cape Verde , where they remained sixe weeks , and had meat and drink of the same people . The said Frenchman having forsaken his fellows , which were three leagues off from the shore , and wandering with the Negroes too and from , fortuned to come to the waters side : and communing with certain of his countrymen , which were 
 15 
 The traffic of the French 
 in our ship , by their persuasions came away with us : but his entertainment among them was such , that he desired it not : but through the importunate request of his Countrymen , consented at the last . Here we stayed but one night , and part of the day : for the 7 of December we came away , in that pretending to have taken Negroes there perforce , the Minions men gave them there to understand of our coming , and our pretence , wherefore they did avoid the snares we had laid for them . 
 The 8 of December we anchored by a small Island Alcatrarses or called Alcatrarsa , wherein at our going a shore , we found Ganets . nothing but sea-birds , as we call them Ganets , but by the Portugals , called Alcatrarses , who for that cause gave the said Island the same name . Herein half of our boats were laden with young and old fowl , who not being used to the sighed of men , flew so about us , that we stroke them down with poles . In this place the two ships riding , the two Barks , with The Sapies , their boats , went into and Island of the Sapies , called La Formio , to see if they could take any of them , and there landed to the number of 80 in armour , and espying certain made to them , but they fled in such order into the woods , that it booted them not to follow : so going on their way forward till they came to a river , which they could not pass over , they espied on the otherside two men , who with their bows and arrows shot terribly at them . Whereupon we discharged certain harquebusses to them again , but the ignorant people weighed it not , because they knew not the danger thereof : but used a marvellous crying in their fight with leaping and turning their tails , that it was most strange to see , and gave us great pleasure to behold them . At the last , one being hurt with a harquebus upon the thigh , looked upon his wound and wist not how it came , because he could not see the pellet . Here Master Hawkins perceiving no good to be done among them , because we could not 16 
 find their towns , and also not knowing how to go into Rio grande , for want of a Pilot , which was the Rio grande . very occasion of our coming thither : and finding so many shoal , feared with our great ships to go in , and therefore departed on our pretended way to the Idols . The Idols . 
 The 10 of December , we had a Northeast wind , with rain and storm , which weather continuing two days together , was the occasion that the Salomon , and Tiger lost our company : for whereas the Jesus , and pinnace anchored at one of the Islands called Sambula , Island the twelfth day , the Salomon and Tiger came not thither till the 14. In this Island we stayed certain The Cambases . days , going every day on shore to take the Inhabitants , with burning and spoiling their towns , who before were Sapies , and were conquered by the Samboses , Sapies . Inhabitants beyond Sierra Leona . These Samboses had inhabited there three years before our coming thither , and in so short space have so planted the ground , that they had great plenty of Mil , Rise , Roots , Pompions , Pullin , goats , of small fry dried , every house full of the Country fruit planted by Gods providence , as Palmito trees , fruits like dates , and sundry other in no place in all that Country so abundantly , whereby they lived more deliciously then other . These inhabitants have diverse of the Sapies , which they took in the wars as their slaves , whom only they kept to till the ground , in that they neither have the knowledge thereof , nor yet will work themselves , of whom we took many in that place , but of the Samboses none at all , for they fled into the main . All the Samboses have white teeth as we have , far unlike to the Sapies which do inhabit about Rio grande , for their teeth are all filed , which they do for a bravery , to set out themselves , and do jag their flesh , both legs , arms , and bodies , as workemanlike , as a Jerkinmaker with us pinketh a jerkin . These Sapies be more civil then the Samboses : for 
 x 17 b 
 The Naples bury their dead with glide . 
 The Canoas of Affrica . 
 The firm of their towns . 
 whereas the Samboses live most by the spoil of their enemies , both in taking their victuals , and eating them also . The Sapies do not eat men flesh , unless in the war they be driven by necessity thereunto , which they have not used but by the example of the Samboses , but live only with fruits , and cattle , whereof they have great store . This plenty is the occasion that the Sapies desire not war , except they be thereunto provoked by the invasions of the Samboses , whereas the Samboses for want of food are enforced thereunto , and therefore are not wont only to take them that they kill , but also keep those that they take , until such time as they want meat , and then they kill them . There is also another occasion that provokes the Samboses to war against the Sapies which is for covetousness of their riches . For whereas the Sapies have and order to bury their dead in certain places appointed for that purpose , with their gold about them , the Samboses dig up the ground , to have the same treasure : for the Samboses have not the like store of gold , that the Sapies have . In this Island of Sambula we found about 50 boats called Almadyes , or Canoas , which are made of one piece of wood , dug out like a trough but of a good proportion , being about 8 yards long , and one in breadth , having a beakhead and a stern very proportionably made , and on the out side artificially carved , and painted read and blew : they are able to carry twenty or thirty men , but they are about the coast able to carry threescore and upward . In these canoas they row standing upright , with and oar somewhat longer then a man , the end whereof is made about the breadth and length of a men hand , of the largest sort . They row very swift , and in some of them foure rowers and one to steer make as much way , as a pair of oars in the Thames of London . 
 Their Towns are prettily divided with a main street at the entering in , that goes through their Town , and another overthwart street , which makes their towns 
 cross ways : their houses are built in a rank very orderly in the face of the street , and they are made round , like a dovecote , with stakes set full of Palmito leaves , in stead of a wall : they are not much more then a fathom large , and two of heighth , & thatched with Palmito leaves very close , other some with reed , and over the roof thereof , for the better garnishing of the same , there is a round bundle of reed , prettily contrived like a lover : in the inner part they make a loft of sticks , whereupon they lay all their provision of victuals : a place they reserve at their entrance for the kitchen , and the place they lie in is divided with certain mats artificially made with the rind of Palmito trees : their bedsteads are of small staves laid along , and raised a foot from the ground , upon which is laid a mat , and another upon them when they list : for other covering they have none . In the middle of the town there is a house larger and higher then the other , but in form alike , adjoining unto the which there is a place made of foure good stancions of wood , and a round roof over it , the ground also raised round with clay a foot high , upon the which floor were strawed many fine mats : this is the Consultation-house , the like whereof is in all Towns , as the Portugals affirm : in which place , when they sit in Counsel the King or Captain sitteth in the midst , and the Elders upon the floor by him : ( for they give reverence to their Elders ) and the common sort sit round about them . There 
 The Consultation house or towne-howse . 
 they sit to examine matters of theft , which if a man be taken with , to steal but a Portugal cloth from another , he is sold to the Portugals for a slave . They consult also , and take order what time they shall go to wars : and as it is certainly reported by the Portugals , they take order in gathering of the fruits in the season of the year , and also of Palmito wine , which is gathered by a Palmito is a hold cut in the top of a tree , and a gourde set for the mlde datereceiving thereof , which falls in by drops , and yields fresh wine again within a month , and this 
 divided part and portion-like to every man , by the judgement of the Captain and Elders , every man holds himself contented : and this surely I judge to be a very good order : for otherwise , whereas scarcity of Palmito is , every man would have the same , which might breed great strife : but of such things , as every man doth plant for himself , the sour thereof reapeth it to his own use , so that nothing is common , but that which is unset by men hands . In their houses there is more common passage of Lizards like Evats , and other greater , of black and blue colour , of near a foot long , beside their tails , then there is with us of Mise in great houses . The Sapies and Samboses also use in their wars bows , and arrows made of redes , with heads of iron poisoned A venomous with the juice of a Cucumber , whereof I had many in Cucumber . my hands . In their battles they have target-men , with broad wicker targets , and darts with heads at both ends , of iron , the one in form of a two edged sword , a foot and and half long , and at the other end , the iron long of the same length made to counterpoise it , that in casting it might fly level , rather then for any other purpose as I can judge . And when they espy the enemy , the Captain to cheer his men , cryeth Hungry , and they answer Heygre , and with that every man places himself in order , for about every target man three bowmen will cover themselves , and shoot as they see advantage : and when they give the onset , they make such terrible cries , that they may be herd two miles off . For their belief , I can hear of none that they have , but in such as they themselves imagine to see in their dreams , and so I doles like worship the pictures , whereof we saw some like unto devils . devils . In this Island aforesaid we sojourned unto the one and twentieth of December , where having taken certain Negroes , and as of their fruits , rise , and mill , as we could well carry away , ( whereof there was such store , that we might have laden one of our Barks therewith ) we departed , and at our departure diverse of our men being desirous to go on shore , to fetch Pomnions , 20 1 
 which having proved , they found to be very good , certain of the Tigers men went also , among the which there was a Carpenter , a young man , who with his fellows having fetched many , and carried them down to their boats , as they were ready to depart , desired his fellow to tarry while he might go up to fetch a few which he had The extreme laid by for him self , who being more liquorous then ne&^gence of circumspect , went up without weapon , and as he went up mfanie . alone , possibly being marked of the Negroes that were upon the trees , espying him what he did , perceiving him to be alone , and without weapon , dogged him , and finding him ocupied in binding his Pompions together , came behind him , overthrowing him and straight cut his throat , as he afterwards was found by his fellows , who came to the place for him , and there found him naked . 
 The two and twentieth the Captain went into the River , called Callowsa , with the two Barks , and the Johns Pinnace , and the Salomons boat , leaving at anchor a wsa‘ in the Rivers mouth the two ships , the River being twenty leagues in , where the Portugals road : he came thither the five and twentieth , and dispatched his business , and so returned with two Caravels , loaded with Negroes . 
 The 27. the Captain was advertised by the Portugals of a town of the Negroes called Bymba , being in the way Tie Town as they returned , where was not only great quantity of tm gold , but also that there were not above fortie men , and and hundred women and children in the Town , so that if he would give the adventure upon the same , he might get and hundreth slaves : with the which tidings he being glad , because the Portugals should not think him to be of so base a courage , but that he durst give them that , and greater attempts : and being thereunto also the more provoked with the prosperous success he had in other Islands adjacent , where he had put them all to flight , and taken in one boat twentie together , determined to stay before the Town three or foure hours , to see what he could do : and thereupon prepared his men in armour and weapon together , to the 
 Portugals not to be trusted . Want of circumspection in our men . 
 M. Field Captain of the Salomon slain . 
 number of fortie men well appointed , having to their guides certain Portugals , in a boat , who brought some of them to their death : we landing boat after boat , and diverse of our men scattering themselves , contrary to the Captains will , by one or two in a company , for the hope that they had to find gold in their houses , ransacking the same , in the mean time the Negroes came upon them , and hurt many being thus scattered , whereas if five or sixe had be together , they had be able , as their companions did , to give the overthrow to 40 of them , and being driven down to take their boats , were followed so hardly by a rout of Negroes , who by that took courage to pursue them to their boats , that not only some of them , but others standing on shore , not looking for any such matter by means that the Negroes did flee at the first , and our company remained in the town , were suddenly so set upon that some with great hurt recovered their boats ; othersome not able to recover the same , took the water , and perished by means of the oaze . While this was doing , the Captain who with a dosen men , went through the town , returned , finding 200 Negroes at the waters side , shooting at them in the boats , and cutting them in pieces which were drowned in the water , at whose coming , they ran all away : so he entered his boats , and before he could put off from the shore , they returned again , and shot very fiercely and hurt diverse of them . Thus we returned back some what discomforted , although the Captain in a singular wise manner carried himself , with countenance very cheerful outwardly , as though he did little weigh the death of his men , nor yet the great hurt of the rest , although his heart1 inwardly was broken in pieces for it ; done to this end , that the Portugals being with him , should not presume to resist against him , nor take occasion to put him to further displeasure or hindrance for the death of our men : having got by our going ten Negroes , and lost seven of our best men , whereof M. Field Captain 
 of the Salomon , was one , and we had 27 of our men hurt . In the same hour while this was doing , there happened at the same instant , a marvelous miracle to them in the ships , who road ten leagues to seaward , by many sharks or Tiburons , who came about the ships : among which , one was taken by the Jesus , and foure by the Salomon , and one very soar hurt escaped : and so it fell out of our men , whereof one of the Jesus men , and foure of the Salomons were killed , and the fift having twentie wounds was rescued , and escaped with much ado . 
 The 28 they came to their ships , the Jesus , and the Salomon , and the 30 departed from thence to Taggarin . Taggarin . 
 The first of January the two barks , and both the boats forsook the ships , and went into a river called river of the Casserroes , and the 6 having dispatched their busi - asserroes . ness , the two barks returned , and came to Taggarin , where the two ships were at anchor . Not two days after the coming of the two ships thither , they put their water cask a shore , and filled it with water , to season the same , thinking to have filled it with fresh water afterwards : and while their men were some on shore , and some at 
 their boats , the Negroes set upon them in the boats , and hurt diverse of them , and came to the casks , and cut of the hoops of twelve buts , which lost us 4 or 5 days time , beside great want we had of the same : sojourning at Taggarin , the Swallow went up the river about her traffic , where they saw great towns of the Negroes , and Canoas , that had threescore men in a piece : there they understood by the Portugals , of a great battle between them of Sierra Leona side , and them of Taggarin : they of Sierra Leona , had prepared three hundred Canoas to invade the other . The time was appointed not passed sixe days after our departure from thence , which we would have seen , to the intent we might have taken some of 
 A new assault by the Negroes . Great towns . Very great Canoas . 
 The contagion 
 them , had it not be for the death and sickness ofthecou-t of our men , which came by the contagiousness of the Jof Sierra place , which made us to make haste away . Leona . 
 The 18 of Januarie at night , we departed from 
 Taggarin , being bound for the West Indies , before 
 which departure certain of the Salomons men went 
 on shore to fill water in the night , and as they 
 came on shore with their boat being ready to leap on land , one of them espied and Negro in a white coat , standing upon a rock , being ready to have received them when they came on shore , having in sighed of his fellows also eight or nine , some in one place leaping out , and some in another , but they hid themselves straight again : whereupon our men doubting they had be a great company , and sought to have taken them at more advantage , as God would , departed to their ships , not thinking there had be such a mischief pretended towards them , as then was in deed . Which the next day we understood of a Portugal that came down to us , who had trafficked with the Negroes , by whom he understood , that the king of Sierra Leona had made all the power he could , to take some of us , partly for the desire he had to see what kind of people we were , that had spoiled his people at the Idols , whereof he had news before our coming , and as I judge also , upon other occasions provoked by the Tangomangos , but sure we were that the army was come down , by means that in the evening we saw such a monstrous fire , made by the watering place , that before was not seen , which fire is the only mark for the Tangomangos to know where their army is always . If these men had come down in the evening , they had done us great displeasure , for that we were on shore filling water : but God , who works all things for the best , would not have it so , and by him we escaped without danger , his name be praised for it . 
 The 29 of this same month we departed with all our ships from Sierra Leona , towards the West Indies , and for the space of eighteene days , we were becalmed , having now and then contrary winds , and 24 
 some Ternados , among the same calm , which happened to us very ill , being but reasonably watered , for so great a company of Negroes , and our selves , which pinched us all , and that which was worst , put us in such fear that many never thought to have reached to the Indies , without great death of Negroes , and of themselves : but the Almighty God , who never suffers his elect to perish , sent us the sixteenth of Februarie , the ordinary Brise , which is the Northwest wind , which never left us , till we came to and Island of the Canybals , called Dominica , where we arrived Dominica the ninth of March , upon a Saturday : and because it was the most desolate place in all the Island , we could see no Canybals , but some of their houses where they dwelled , and as it should seem forsook the place for want of fresh water , for we could find none there but rain water , and such as fell from the hills , and remained as a puddle in the dale , whereof we filled for our Negroes . The Canybals of that Island , and also others adjacent are the most desperate warriors that are in the Indies , by the Spaniardes Canybals exreport , who are never able to conquer them , and they are molested by them not a little , when they are driven that to water there in any of those Islands : of very late , not two months past , in the said Island , a Caravel being driven to water , was in the night set upon by the inhabitants , who cut their cable in the halser , whereby they were driven a shore , and so taken by them , and eaten . The green Dragon of Newhaven , whereof was Captain one Bontemps , in March also , came to one of those Islands , called Granada , and being driven to water , could not do the same for the Canybals , who fought with him very desperately two days . For our part also , if we had not lighted upon the desertest place in all that Island , we could not have missed , but should have be greatly troubled by them , by all the Spaniards reports , who make them devils in respect of me . 
 The Testigps Island . Margarita Island . 
 Cumana . 
 The tenth day at night , we departed from thence , and the fifteenth had sighed of nine Islands , called the Testigos : and the sixteenth of and Island , called Margarita , where we were entertained by the Alcalde , and had both Beeves and sheep given us , for the refreshing of our men : but the Governor of the Island , would neither come to speak with our Captain , neither yet give him any licence to traffic : and to displease us the more , whereas we had hired a Pilot to have gone with us , they would not only not suffer him to go with us , but also sent word by a Caravel out of hand , to Santo Domingo , to the Viceroy , who doth represent the kings person , of our arrival in those parts , which had like to have turned us to great displeasure , by the means that the same Viceroy did send word to Cape de la Vela , and to other places along the coast , commanding them that by the virtue of his authority , and by the obedience that they owe to their Prince , no man should traffic with us , but should resist us with all the force they could . In this Island , notwithstanding that we were not within foure leagues of the Town , yet were they so afraid , that not only the Governor himself , but also all the inhabitants forsook their Town , assembling all the Indians to them and fled into the mountains , as we were partly certified , and also saw the experience our selves , by some of the Indians coming to see us who by three Spaniards a horseback passing hard by us , went unto the Indians , having every one of them their bows , and arrows , procuring them away , who before were conversant with us . 
 Here perceiving no traffic to be had with them , nor yet water for the refreshing of our men , we were driven to depart the twentieth day , and the 2 and twentieth we came to a place in the main called Cumana , whither the Captain going in his Pinnisse , spoke with certain Spaniards , of whom he demanded traffic , but they made him answer , they were but 26 
 SIR JOHN HAWKINS soldiers newly come thither , and were not able to by one Negro : whereupon he asked for a watering place , and they pointed him a place two leagues off , called Santa F^ , where we found marvelous goodly watering , and commodious for the taking in thereof : for that the fresh water came into the Sea , and so our ships had aboard the shore twentie fathom water . Near about this place , inhabited certain Indians , who the next day after we came thither , came down to us , presenting mill and cakes of bread , which they had made of a kind of corn called Maiz , in bigness of a peas , the ear whereof is much like to a teasell , but a span in length , having thereon a number of granes . Also they brought down to us Hens , Potatoes and Pines , which we bought for beads , pewter whistles , glasses , knives , and other trifles . 
 These Potatoes be the most delicate roots that may be eaten , and do far exceed our passeneps or carets . Their pines be of the bigness of two fists , the outside whereof is of the making of a pineapple , but it is soft like the rind of a Cucomber , and the inside eateth like and apple , but it is more delicious then any sweet apple sugared . These Indians being of colour tawny like and Olive , having every one of them both men and women , hair all black , and no other colour , the women wearing the same hanging down to their shoulders , and the men rounded , and without beards , neither men nor women suffering any hair to grow in any part of their body , but daily pull it off as it grows . They go all naked , the men covering no part of their body but their yard , upon the which they wear a gourd or piece of cane , made fast with a thrid about their loins , leaving the other parts of their members uncovered , whereof they take no shame . The women also are uncovered , saving with a cloth which they wear a hand-breath , wherewith they cover their privities both before and behind . These people be very small feeders , for traveling they carry but two 27 
 Santa Fe. 
 The description of the Indians of Terra firma . 
 small bottles of gourds , wherein they put in one the The use of juice of Sorrell whereof they have great store , and in Sorrel . the o^er flower of their Maiz , which being moist , they eat , taking sometime of the other . These men carry every man his bow and arrows , whereof some arrows are poisoned for wars , which they keep in a Cane together , which Cane is of the bigness of a men arm , other some with broad heads of iron wherewith they stricke fish in the water : the experience whereof we saw not once nor twice , but daily for the time we tarried there , for they are so good archers that Armour of the Spaniards for fear thereof arm themselves and two^nche^ horses with quilted canvas of two inches thick , thick . and leave no place of their body open to their enemies , saving their eyes which they may not hide , and yet oftentimes are they hit in that so small a The making of scantling : their poison is of such a force , that a their poison . man being stricken therewith dyeth within foure and twentie hours , as the Spaniards do affirm , & in my judgement it is like there can be no stronger poison as they make it , using thereunto apples which are very fair and read of colour , but are a strong poison , with the which together with venomous Bats , Vipers , Adders and other serpents , they make a medley , and therewith anoint the same . 
 The manners of the young women . 
 The Indian women delight not when they are young in bearing of children , because it makes them have hanging breasts which they account to be great deforming in them , and upon that occasion while they be young , they destroy their seed , saying , that it is fittest for old women . Moreover , when they are delivered of child , they go straight to wash themselves , without making any further ceremony for it , not lying in bed as our women do . The beds which they have are made of Gossopine cotton , and wrought artificially of diverse colours , which they carry about with them when they travel , and making the same fast to two trees , lie therein they and their women . The people 28 
 1565. be surely gentle and tractable , and such as desire to live peaceably , or else had it be unpossible for the Spaniards to have conquered them as they did , and the more to live now peaceably , they being so many in number , and the Spaniards so few . 
 From hence we departed the eight and twentie , and the next day we passed between the main land , and the Island called Tortuga , a very low Island , in the The of year of our Lord God one thousande five hundred TortuSa-sixty five aforesaid , and sailed along the coast until the first of Aprill , at which time the Captain sailed along in the Jesus pinnace to discern the coast , and saw many Caribes on shore , and some also in their Canoas , which made tokens unto him of friendship , and showed him gold , meaning thereby that they would traffic for wares . Whereupon he stayed to see the manners of them , and so for two or three trifles they gave such things as they had about them , and departed : but the Caribes were very importunate to have them come on shore , which if it had not be for want of wares to traffic with them , he would not have denied them , because the Indians which we saw before were very gentle people , and such as do no man hurt . But as God would have it , he wanted that thing , which if he had had , would have be his confusion : for these were no such kind of people as we took them to be , but more devilish a thousand parts and are eaters and devourers of any man they can catch , as it was afterwards declared unto us at Burboroata , by a Caravel coming out of Spaine with certain soldiers , and a Captain generail sent by the king for those Eastward parts of the Indians , who sailing along in his pinnace , as our Captain did to descry the coast , was by the Caribes called a shore with sundry tokens made to him of friendship , and gold showed as though they desired traffic , with the which the Spaniard being moved , suspecting no deceit at all , went ashore among them : who was no sooner ashore , but with foure or five 
 Burbonata . 
 more was taken , the rest of his company being invaded by them , saved themselves by flight , but they that were taken , paid their ransom with their lives , and were presently eaten . And this is their practice to toll with their gold the ignorant to their snares : they are bloodsuckers both of Spaniards , Indians , and all that light in their laps , not sparing their own countrymen if they can conveniently come by them . Their policy in fight with the Spaniards is marvelous : for they choose for their refuge the mountains and woods where the Spaniards with their horses cannot follow them , and if they fortune to be met in the plain where one horseman may overrun 100. of them , they have a devise of late practised by them to pitch stakes of wood in the ground , and also small iron pikes to mischief their horses , wherein they show themselves politic warriors . They have more abundance of gold then all the Spaniards have , and live upon the mountains where the Mines are in such number , that the Spaniards have much ado to get any of them from them , and yet sometime by assembling a great number of them , which happeneth once in two years , they get a piece from them , which afterwards they keep sure enough . 
 Thus having escaped the danger of them , we kept our course along the coast , and came the third of April to a Town called Burboroata , where his ships came to and anchor , and he himself went a shore to speak with the Spaniards , to whom he declared himself to be and Englishman , and came thither to trade with them by the way of merchandise , and therefore required licence for the same . Unto whom they made answer , that they were forbidden by the king to traffic with any foreign nation , upon penalty to forfeit their goods , therefore they desired him not to molest them any further , but to depart as he came , for other comfort he might not look for at their hands , because they were subject's and might not go beyond the law . But he replied that his necessity was such , as he might not so do : 
 for being in one of the Queen's Armadas of England , and having many soldiers in them , he had need both of some refreshing for them , and of victuals , and of money also , without the which he could not depart , and with much other talk persuaded them not to fear any dishonest part of his behalf towards them , for neither would he commit any such thing to the dishonour of his prince , not yet for his honest reputation and estimation , unless he were too rigorously dealt withal , which he hoped not to find at their hands , in that it should as well redound to their profit as his own , and also he thought they might do it without danger , because their princes were in amity one with another , and for our parts we had free traffic in Spain and Flanders , which are in his dominions , and therefore he knew no reason why he should not have the like in all his dominions . To the which the Spaniards made answer , that it lay not in them to give any licence , for that they had a governor to whom the government of those parts was committed , but if they would stay tenne days , they would send to their governor who was threescore leagues ofF , and would return answer within the space appointed , of his mind . 
 In the mean time they were contented he should bring his ships into harbour , and there they would deliver him any victuals he would require . Whereupon the fourth day we went in , where being one day and receiving all things according to promise , the Captain advised himself , that to remain there tenne days idle , spending victuals and men's wages , and perhaps in the end receive no good answer from the governor , it were mere folly , and therefore determined to make request to have licence for the sale of certain lean and sick Negroes which he had in his ship like to die upon his hands if he kept them ten days , having little or no refreshing for them , whereas other men having them , they would be recovered well enough . And 
 31 
 A.D. 
 I565 . 
 this request he was forced to make , because he had not otherwise wherewith to pay for victuals & for necessaries which he should take : which request being put in writing and presented , the officers and town-dwellers assembled together , and finding his request so reasonable , granted him licence for thirtie Negroes , which afterwards they caused the officers to view , to the intent they should grant to nothing but that were very reasonable , for fear of answering thereunto afterwards . This being passed , our Captain according to their licence , thought to have made sale , but the day past and none came to buy , who before made show that they had great need of them , and therefore wist not what to surmise of them , whither they went about to prolong the time of the Governor his answer because they would keep themselves blameless , or for any other policy he knew not , and for that purpose sent them word , marvelling what the matter was that none came to buy them . They answered , because they had granted licence only to the poor to buy those Negroes of small price , and their money was not so ready as other men's of more wealth . More then that , as soon as ever they saw the ships , they conveyed away their money by their wives that went into the mountains for fear , & were not yet returned , & yet asked two days to seek their wives and fetch their money . Notwithstanding , the next day diverse of them came to cheapen , but could not agree of price , because they thought the price too high . Whereupon the Captain perceiving they went about to bring down the price , and meant to buy , and would not confess if he had licence , that he might fell at any reasonable rate , as they were worth in other places , did send for the principals of the Town , and made a show he would depart , declaring himself to be very sorry that he had so much troubled them , and also that he had sent for the governor to come down , seeing now his pretence was to depart , whereat they marveiled much , and asked 
 him what cause moved him thereunto , seeing by their working he was in possibility to have his licence . 
 To the which he replied , that it was not only a licence that he sought , but profit , which he perceived was not there to be had , and therefore would seek further , and withal showed him his writings what he paid for his Negroes , declaring also the great charge he was at in his shipping , and men's wages , and therefore to countervail his charges , he must fell his Negroes for a greater price then they offered . So they doubting his departure , put him in comfort to fell better there then in any other place . And if it fell out that he had no licence that he should not lose his labour in tarrying , for they would buy without licence . Whereupon , the Captain being put in comfort , promised them to stay , so that he might make sale of his lean Negroes , which they granted unto . And the next day did fell some of them , who having bought and paid for them , thinking to have had a discharge of the Customer , for the custom of the Negroes , being the Kings duty , they gave it away to the poor for Gods sake , and did refuse to give the discharge in writing , and the poor not trusting their words , for fear , lest hereafter it might be demanded of them , did refrain from buying any more , so that nothing else was done until the Governors coming down , which was the fourteenth day , and then the Captain made petition , declaring that he was come thither in a ship of the Queens Majesties of England , being bound to Guinie , and thither driven by wind and weather , so that being come thither , he had need of sundry necessaries for the reparation of the said Navy , and also great need of money for the payment of his Soldiers , unto whom he had promised payment , and therefore although he would , yet would not they depart without it , & for that purpose he requested licence for the sale of certain of his Negroes , declaring that although they were forbidden to traffic with strangers , yet for that there 
 x 33 c 
 was a great amity between their princes , and that the thing pertained to our Queens highness , he thought he might do their prince great service , and that it would be well taken at his hands , to do it in this cause . The which allegations with diverse others put in request , were presented unto the Governor , who sitting in counsel for that matter , granted unto his request for licence . But yet there fell out another thing which was the abating of the kings Custom , being upon every slave 30. ducats , which would not be granted unto . 
 Whereupon the Captain perceiving that they would neither come near his price he looked for by a great deal , nor yet would abate the Kings Custom of that they offered , so that either he must be a great looser by his wares , or else compel the officers to abate the same kings Custom which was too unreasonable , for to a higher price he could not bring the buyers : Therefore the sixteenth of April he prepared one hundred men well armed with bows , arrows , harquebusses and pikes , with the which he marched to the townewards , and being perceived by the Governor , he straight with all expedition sent messengers to know his request , desiring him to march no further forward until he had answer again , which incontinent he should have . So our Captain declaring how unreasonable a thing the Kings Custom was , requested to have the same abated , and to pay seven and a half per centum , which is the ordinary Custom for wares through his dominions there , and unto this if they would not grant , he would displease them . And this word being carried to the Governor , answer was returned that all things should be to his content , and thereupon he determined to depart , but the soldiers and Mariners finding so little credit in their promises , demanded gages for the performance of the premises , or else they would not depart . And thus they being constrained to send gages , we departed , beginning our traffic , and ending the same without disturbance . 
 Thus having made traffic in the harbour until the 28. our Captain with his ships intended to go out of the road , and purposed to make show of his departure , because now the common sort having employed their money , the rich men were come to town , who made no show that they were come to buy , so that they went about to bring down the price , and by this policy the Captain knew they would be made the more eager , for fear lest we departed , and they should go without any at all . 
 The nine and twentie we being at anchor without the road , a French ship called the Green Dragon of Newhaven , whereof was Captain one Bon Temps came in , who saluted us after the manner of the Sea , with certain pieces of Ordinance , and we resaluted him with the like again : with whom having communication , he declared that he had be at the Mine in Guinie , and 2% reports of was beaten off by the Portugals galleys , and enforced to 
 , . 1 ' , i 0 1 j the Minton tn 
 come thither to make sale or such wares as he had : 
 and further that the like was happened unto the Minion : beside the Captain Davie Carlet and a Merchant , with a dozen Mariners betrayed by the Negroes at their first arrival thither , and remaining prisoners with the Portugals ; and beside other misadventures of the loss of their men , happened through the great lack of fresh water , with great doubts of bringing home the ships : which was most sorrowful for us to understand . 
 Thus having ended our traffic here the 4. of May , [ III . 51 i . J we departed , leaving the Frenchman behind us , the night before the which the Caribes , whereof I have made mention before , being to the number of 200. came in their Canoas to Burboroata , intending by night to have burned the town , and taken the Spaniards , who being more vigilant because of our being there , then their custom was , perceiving them coming , raised the town , who in a moment being a horseback , by means their custom is for all doubts to keep their horses Horses kept ready saddled , in the night set upon them , & took one , read ? saddled - 
 but the rest making shift for themselves , escaped away . But this one , because he was their guide , and was the occasion that diverse times they had made invasion upon them , had for his travel a stake thrust through his fundament , and so out at his neck . 
 The sixt of May aforesaid , we came to and island called Cura$ao , where we had thought to have anckered , but could not find ground , and having let fall and anchor with two cables , were feign to weigh it again : and the seventh sailing along the coast to seek and harbour , and finding none , we came to and anchor where we road open in the Sea. In this place we had traffic for hides , and found great refreshing both of beef , mutton and lambs , whereof there was such plenty , that saving the skins , we had the flesh given us for nothing , the Exceeding plenty whereof was so abundant , that the worst in the ship thought scorn not only of mutton , but also of ’ sodden lamb , which they disdained to eat unroasted . 
 The increase of cattle in this island is marvelous , which from a doozen of each sort brought thither by the governor , in 25. years he had a hundreth thousand at the least , & of other cattle was able to kill without spoil of the increase 1500. yearly , which he kills for the skins , and of the flesh saveth only the tongues , the rest he leaveth to the foul to devour . And this I am able to affirm , not only upon the Governors own report , who was the first that brought the increase thither , which so remains unto this day , but also by that I saw my self in one field , where and hundred oxen lay one by another all whole , saving the skin and tongue taken away . And it is not so marvelous a thing why they do thus cast away the flesh in all the islands of the West Indies , seeing the land is great , and more then they are able to inhabit , the people few , having delicate fruits and meats enough beside to feed upon , which they rather desire , and the increase which passes men reason to believe , when they come to a great number : for in S. Domingo and island called by the 36 
 finders thereof Hispaniola , is so great quantity of cattle , and such increase thereof , that notwithstanding the daily killing of them for their hides , it is not possible to assuage the number of them , but they are devoured by wild dogs , whose number is such by suffering them Qreat first to range the woods and mountains , that they eat numbers of and destroy 60000. a year , and yet small lack found wMe worser » & - of them . And no marveile , for the said island is almost as big as all England , and being the first place that was found of all the Indies , and of long time inhabited before the rest , it ought therefore of reason to be most populous : and to this hour the Viceroy and counsel royal abideth there as in the chiefest place of all the Indies , to prescribe order to the rest for the kings behalf , yet have they but one City and 13. villages in all the same island , whereby the spoil of them in respect of the increase is nothing . 
 The 15. of the foresaid month we departed from Curasao , being not a little to the rejoicing of our Captain and us , that we had there ended our traffic : but notwithstanding our sweet meat , we had sour sauce , for by reason of our riding so open at sea , what with blasts whereby our anchors being a ground , three at once came home , and also with contrary winds blowing , whereby for fear of the shore we were feign to hale off to have anchorhold , sometime a whole day and a night we turned up and down ; and this happened not once , but half a dozen times in the space of our being there . 
 The 16. we passed by and island called Aruba , and Aruba . the 17. at night anckered sixe hours at the West end of Cabo de la vela , and in the morning being the 18. weighed again , keeping our course , in the which time the Captain sailing by the shore in the pinnace , came to the Rancheria , a place where the Spaniards use to LaRanchena . fish for pearls , and there spoke with a Spaniard , who told him how far ofF he was from Rio de la Hacha , which 7 ? » de la because he would not overshoot , he anchored that night Hac , in - 
 M. Hawkins his letter to the Treasurer of Rio de la Hacha . 
 again , & the 19. came thither ; where having talk with the kings treasurer of the Indies resident there , he declared his quiet traffic in Burboroata , & showed a certificate of the same , made by the governor thereof , & therefore he desired to have the like there also : but the treasurer made answer that they were forbidden by the Viceroy and council of S. Domingo , who having intelligence of our being on the coast , did send express commission to resist us , with all the force they could , insomuch that they durst not traffic with us in no case , alleging that if they did , they should lose all that they did traffic for , beside their bodies at the magistrates commandment . Our Captain replied , that he was in and Armada of the Queens Majesties of England , and sent about other her affairs , but driven beside his pretended voyage , was enforced by contrary winds to come into those parts , where he hoped to find such friendship as he should do in Spaine , to the contrary whereof he knew no reason , in that there was amity betwixt their princes . But seeing they would contrary to all reason go about to withstand his traffic , he would it should not be said by him , that having the force he hath , to be driven from his traffic perforce , but he would rather put it in adventure to try whither he or they should have the better , and therefore willed them to determine either to give him licence to trade , or else to stand to their own harms : So upon this it was determined he should have licence to trade , but they would give him such a price as was the one half less then he had sold for before , and thus they sent word they would do , and none otherwise , and if it liked him not , he might do what he would , for they were not determined to deal otherwise with him . Whereupon , the captain weighing their unconscionable request , wrote to them a letter , that they dealt too rigorously with him , to go about to cut his throat in the price of his commodities , which were so reasonably rated , as they could not by a great deal have the like at any other men hands . But seeing they had sent him this to 
 his supper , he would in the morning bring them as good a breakfast . And therefore in the morning being the 21. of May , he shot off a whole culverin to summon the town , and preparing one hundred men in armour , went a shore , having in his great boat two Falcons of brass , and in the other boats double bases in their noses , which being perceived by the Townsmen , they incontinent in battle array with their drum and ensign displayed , marched from the Town to the sands , of footmen to the number of and hundred and fiftie , making great brags with their cries , and weaving us a shore , whereby they made a semblance to have fought with us in deed . But our Captain perceiving them so brag , commanded the two Falcons to be discharged at them , which put them in no small fear to see , ( as they afterwards declared ) such great pieces in a boat . At every shot they fell flat to the ground , and as we approached near unto them , they broke their array , and dispersed themselves so much for fear of the Ordinance , that at last they went all away with their ensign . The horsemen also being about thirtie , made as brave a show as might be , coursing up and down with their horses , their brave white leather Targets in the one hand , and their javelins in the other , as though they would have received us at our landing . But when we landed , they gave ground , and consulted what they should do , for little they thought we would have landed so boldly : and therefore as the Captain was putting his men in array , and marched forward to have encountered with them , they sent a messenger on horseback with a flag of truce to the Captain , who declared that the Treasurer marveiled what he meant to do to come a shore in that order , in consideration that they had granted to every reasonable request that he did demand : but the Captain not well contented with this messenger , marched forward . The messenger prayed him to stay his men , and said , if he would come apart from his men , the Treasurer would come and speak with him , whereunto he did agree to commune together . The 
 Captain only with his armour without weapon , and the Treasurer on horseback with his javelin , was afraid to come near him for fear of his armour , which he said was worse then his weapon , and so keeping aloof communing together , granted in fine to all his requests . Which being declared by the Captain to the company , they desired to have pledges for the performance of all things , doubting that otherwise when they had made themselves stronger , they would have be at defiance with us : and seeing that now they might have what they would request , they judged it to be more wisdom to be in assurance then to be forced to make any more labours about it . So upon this , gages were sent , and we made our traffic quietly with them . In the mean time while we stayed here , we watered a good breadth off from the shore , where by the strength of the fresh water running into the Sea , the salt water was made fresh . In this River we saw many Crocodiles of sundry bignesses , but some as big as a boat , with 4. feet , a long broad mouth , and a long tail , whose skin is so hard , that a sword will not pierce it . His nature is to live out of the water as a frog does , but he is a great devourer , and spares neither fish , which is his common food , nor beasts , nor men , if he take them , as the proof thereof was known by a Negro , who as he was filling water in the River was by one of them carried clean away , and never seen after . His nature is ever when he would have his prey , to cry and sob like a Christian body , to provoke them to come to him , and then he snatches at them , and thereupon came this proverb that is applied unto women when they weep , Lachrymae Crocodili , the meaning whereof is , that as the Crocodile when he cries , goes then about most to deceive , so doth a woman most commonly when she weeps . Of these the Master of the Jesus watched one , and by the banks side stroke him with a pike of a bill in the side , and after three or foure times turning in sighed , he sunk down , and was not afterwards seen . In the time of our being in the Rivers Guinie , we saw many 
 of a monstrous bigness , among the which the captain being in one of the Barks coming down the same , shot a Falcon at one , which very narrowly he missed , and with a fear he plunged into the water , making a stream like the way of a boat . 
 Now while we were here , whither it were of a fear that the Spaniards doubted we would have done them some harm before we departed , or for any treason that they intended towards us , I am not able to say ; but then came thither a Captain from some of the other towns , with a dozen soldiers upon a time when our Captain and the treasurer cleared all things between them , and were in a communication of a debt of the governors of Burboroata , which was to be paid by the said treasurer , who would not answer the same by any means . Whereupon certain words of displeasure passed betwixt the Captain and him , and parting the one from the other , the treasurer possibly doubting that our Captain would perforce have sought the same , did immediately command his men to arms , both horsemen and footmen : but because the Captain was in the River on the back side of the Town with his other boats , and all his men unarmed and without weapons , it was to be judged he meant him little good , having that advantage of him , that coming upon the sudden , he might have mischieved many of his men : but the Captain having understanding thereof , not trusting to their gentleness , if they might have the advantage , departed aboard his ships , and at night returned again , and demanded among other talk , what they meant by assembling their men in that order , & they answered , that their Captain being come to town did muster his men according to his accustomed manner . But it is to be judged to be a cloak , in that coming for that purpose he might have done it sooner , but the truth is , they were not of force until then , whereby to enterprise any matter against us , by means of pikes and harquebusses , whereof they have want , and were now furnished by our Captain , and also 3. Falcons , which 
 having god in other places , they had secretly conveyed thither , which made them the bolder , and also for that they saw now a convenient place to do such a feat , and time also serving thereunto , by the means that our men were not only unarmed and unprovided , as at no time before the like , but also were occupied in hewing of wood , and least thinking of any harm : these were occasions to provoke them thereunto . And I suppose they went about to bring it to effect , in that * 1 with another gentleman being in the town , thinking of no harm towards us , and seeing men assembling in armour to the treasurers house , whereof I marveiled , and revoking to mind the former talk between the Captain and him , and the unreadiness of our men , of whom advantage might have be taken , departed out of the Town immediately to give knowledge thereof , but before we came to our men by a flightshot , two horsemen riding a gallop were come near us , being sent , as we did guess , to stay us lest we should carry news to our Captain , but seeing us so near our men they stayed their horses , coming together , and suffering us to pass , belike because we were so near , that if they had gone about the same , they had be espied by some of our men which then immediately would have departed , whereby they should have be frustrate of their pretence : and so the two horsemen rid about the bushes to espy what we did , and seeing us gone , to the intent they might shadow their coming down in post , whereof suspicion might be had , feigned a simple excuse in asking whither he could fell any wine , but that seemed so simple to the Captain , that standing in doubt of their courtesy , he returned in the morning with his three boats , appointed with Bases in their noses , and his men with weapons accordingly , where as before he carried none : and thus dissembling all injuries conceived of both parts , the Captain went ashore , leaving pledges in the boats for himself , and cleared all things between the treasurer and him , saving for the governors debt , which the one 
 1565. by no means would answer , and the other , because it was not his due debt , would not molest him for it , but was content to remit it until another time , and therefore departed , causing the two Barks which road near the shore to weigh and go under sail , which was done because that our Captain demanding a testimoniali of his good behaviour there , could not have the same until he were under sail ready to depart : and therefore at night he went for the same again , & received it at the treasurers hand , of whom very courteously he took his leave and departed , shooting off the bases of his boat for his farewell , and the townsmen also shot ofF foure Falcons and 30. harquebusses , and this was the first time that he knew of the conveyance of their Falcons . 
 The 31. of May we departed , keeping our course to Hispaniola , and the fourth of June we had sighed of and island , which we made to be Jamaica , marvelling that by the vehement course of the Seas we should be driven so far to leeward : for setting our course to the West end of Hispaniola we fell with the middle of Jamaica , notwithstanding that to all men's sighed it showed a headland , but they were all deceived by the clouds that lay upon the land two days together , in such sort that we thought it to be the head land of the said island . And a Spaniard being in the ship , who was a Merchant , and inhabitant in Jamaica , having occasion to go to Guinie , and being by treason taken of the Negroes , & afterwards bought by the Tangomangos , was by our Captain brought from thence , and had his passage to go into his country , who perceiving the land , made as though he knew every place thereof and pointed to certain places which he nam to be such a place , and such a men ground , and that behind such a point was the harbour , but in the end he pointed so from one point to another , that we were a leeboord of all places , and found our selves at the West end of Jamaica before we were aware of it , and being once to leeward , there was no getting up again , 
 The deceitful ! force of the current . 
 so that by trusting of the Spaniards knowledge , our Captain sought not to speak with any of the inhabitants , which if he had not made himself sure of , he would have done as his custom was in other places : but this man was a plague not only to our Captain , who made him lose by overshooting the place 2000. pounds by hides , which he might have got , but also to himself , who being three years out of his Country , and in great misery in Guinie , both among the Negroes and Tangomangos , and in hope to come to his wife and friends , as he made sure account , in that at his going into the pinnace , when he went to shore he put on his new clothes , and for joy flung away his old , could not afterwards find any habitation , neither there nor in all Cuba , which we sailed all along , but it fell out ever by one occasion or other , that we were put beside the same , so that he was fame to be brought into England , and it happened to him as it did to a duke of Samaria , when the Israelites were besieged , and were in great misery with hunger , & being told by the Prophet Elizaeus , that a bushel ! of flower should be sold for a fickle , would not believe him , but thought it unpossible : and for that cause Elizaeus prophesied he should see the same done , but he should not eat thereof : so this man being absent three years , and not ever thinking to have seen his own Country , did see the same , went upon it , and yet was it not his fortune to come to it , or to any habitation , whereby to remain with his friends according to his desire . 
 Thus having sailed along the coast two days , we departed the seventh of June , being made to believe by the Spaniard that it was not Jamaica , but rather Hispaniola , of which opinion the Captain also was , because that which he made Jamaica seemed to be but a piece of the land , and thereby took it rather to be Hispaniola , by the lying of the coast , and also for that being ignorant of the force of the current , he could not believe he was so far driven to leeward , and therefore setting his course to 
 Jamaica , and after certain days not finding the same , perceived then certainly that the island which he was at before was Jamaica , and that the clouds did deceive him , whereof he marveled not a little : and this mistaking of the place came to as ill a pass as the overshooting of Jamaica : for by this did he also overpass a place in Cuba , called Santa Cruz , where , as he was informed , was great store of hides to be had : & thus being disappointed of two of his ports , where he thought to have raised great profit by his traffic , and also to have found great refreshing of victuals and water for his men , he was now disappointed greatly , and such want he had of fresh water , that he was forced to seek the shore to obtain the same , which he had sighed of after certain days overpassed with storms and contrary winds , but yet not of the main of Cuba , but of certain islands in number two hundred , whereof the most part were desolate of inhabitants : by the which islands the Captain passing in his pinnace , could find no fresh water until he came to and island bigger then all the rest , called the isle of Pinas , where we anckered with our ships the 16. of June , and found water , which although it were neither so toothsome as running water , by the means it is standing , and but the water of rain , and also being near the Sea was brackish , yet did we not refuse it , but were more glad thereof , as the time then required , then we should have be another time with fine Conduit water . Thus being reasonably watered we were desirous to depart , because the place was not very convenient for such ships of charge as they were , because there were many shoals to leeward , which also lay open to the sea for any wind that should blow : and therefore the captain made the more haste away , which was not unneedful : for little sooner were their anchors weighed , and foresail set , but there arose such a storm , that they had not much to spare for doubling out of the shoals : for one of the barks not being fully ready as the rest , was feign for haste to cut the cable in 
 45 
 Two hundred islands for the most part not inhabited . 
 the hawse , and lose both anchor and cable to save her self . 
 The Cape of Thus the 17. of June , we departed and on the 20. we ^Cuba^^ ' in West end of Cuba , called Cape S. Antony , 
 of where for the space of three days we doubled along , till we came beyond the shoals , which are 20. leagues beyond S. Anthony . And the ordinary Brise taking us , which is the Northeast wind , put us the 24. from the shore , and therefore we went to the Northwest to fetch Florida . wind , and also to the coast of Florida to have the help of the current , which was judged to have set to the Eastward : so the 29. we found our selves in 27. degrees , and in the soundings of Florida , where we kept our selves the space of foure days , sailing along the coast as near as we could , in tenne or twelve fathom water , having all the while no sighed of land . 
 The fift of July we had sighed of certain Islands of The Isles of sanj3 called the Tortugas ( which is low land ) where Great store of the captain went in with his pinnace , and found such birds . a number of birds , that in half and hour he jaded her with them ; and if they had been ten boats more , they might have done the like . These Islands bear the name of Tortoises , because of the number of them , which there do breed , whose nature is to live both in the water and upon land also , but breed only upon the shore , in making a great pit wherein they lay eggs , to the number of three or foure hundred , and covering them with sand , they are hatched by the heat of the Sun ; and by this means comes the great increase . Of these we took very great ones , which have both back and belly all of bone , of the thickness of and inch : the fish whereof we proved , eating much like veil ; and finding a number of eggs in them , tasted also of them , but they did eat very sweetly . Here we anchored sixe hours , and then a fair gale of wind springing , we weighed anchor , and made sail towards Cuba , whither we came the sixt 
 A hill called day , and weathered as far as the Table , being a hill the Table . so called , because of the form thereof : here we lay 
 off and on all night , to keep that we had got to windward , intending to have watered in the morning , if we could have done it , or else if the wind had come larger , to have plied to windward to Havana , The port of which is and harbour whereunto all the fleet of thee Would ™ 1 ™ - Spanyards come , and do there tarry to have one the company of another . This hill we thinking to have been the Table , made account ( as it was indeed ) that Havana was but eight leagues to windward , but by the persuasion of a French man , who made the captain believe he knew the Table very well , and had been at Havana , said that it was not the Table , and that the Table was much higher , and nearer to the sea side , and that there was no plain ground to the Eastward , nor hills to the Westward , but all was contrary , and that behind the hills to the Westward was Havana . 
 To which persuasion credit being given by some , and they not of the worst , the captain was persuaded to go to leeward , and so sailed along the seventh and eight days , finding no habitation , nor no other Table ; and then perceiving his folly to give ear to such praters , was not a little sorry , both because he did consider what time he should spend year he could get so far to windward again , which would have be , with the weathering which we had , ten or twelve days work , & what it would have be longer he knew not , and ( that which was worst ) he had not above a days water and therefore knew not what shift to make : but in fine , because the want was such , that his men could not live with it , he determined to seek water , and to go further to leeward , to a place ( as it is set in the carded ) called Rio de los puercos , which he was in doubt of , both whither it were inhabited , & whither there were water or not , and whither for the shoalds he might have such access with his ships , that he might conveniently take in the same . And while we were in these troubles , and kept our way to the place aforesaid , almighty God our guide ( who would not suffer 47 
 us to run into any further danger , which we had be like to have incurred , if we had ranged the coast of Florida along as we did before , which is so dangerous ( by reports ) that no ship escapeth which comes thither , ( as the Spanyards have very well proved the same ) sent us the eight day at night a fair Westerly wind , whereupon the captain and company consulted , determining not to refuse Gods gift , but every man was contented to pinch his own belly , whatsoever had happened ; and taking the said wind , the ninth day of July god to the Table , and sailing the same night , unawares overshot Havana ; at which place we thought to have watered : but the next day , not knowing that we had overshot the same , sailed along the coast , seeking it , and the eleventh day in the morning , by certain known marks , we understood that we had overshot it 20 leagues : in which coast ranging , we found no convenient watering place , whereby there was no remedy but to disemboque , and to water upon the coast of Florida : for , to go further to the Eastward , we could not for the shoalds , which are very dangerous ; and because the current shoots to the Northeast , we doubted by the force thereof to be set upon them , and therefore durst not approach them : so making but reasonable way the day aforesaid , and all the night , the twelfth day in the morning we fell with the Islands upon the cape of Florida , which we could scant double by the means that fearing the shoalds to the Eastwards , The state of and doubting the current coming out of the West , the current of which was not of that force we made account of ; for 011 of we felt little or none till we fell with the cape , and then felt such a current , that bearing all sails against the same , yet were driven back again a great pace : the experience whereof we had by the Jesus pinnace , and the Salomons boat , which were sent the same day in the afternoon , while the ships were becalmed , to see if they could find any water upon the Islands aforesaid ; who spent a great part of the day in rowing 
 thither , being further off then they deemed it to be , and in the mean time a fair gale of wind springing at sea , the ships departed , making a sign to them to come away , who although they saw them depart , because they were so near the shore , would not loose all the labour they had taken , but determined to keep their way , and see if there were any water to be had , making no account but to find the ships well enough : but they spent so much time in filling the water which they had found , that the night was come before they could make and end . And having lost the sighed of the ships , they rowed what they could , but were wholly ignorant which way they should seek them again ; as indeed there was a more doubt then they knew of : for when they departed , the ships were in no current ; and sailing but a mile further , they found one so strong , that bearing all sails , it could not prevail against the same , but were driven back : whereupon the captain sent the Salomon , with the other two barks , to bear near the shore all night , because the current was less there a great deal , and to bear light , with shooting off a piece now and then , to the intent the boats might better know how to come to them . 
 The Jesus also bore a light in her top gallant , and shot off a piece also now and then , but the night passed , and the morning was come , being the thirteenth day , and no news could be herd of them , but the ships and barks ceased not to look still for them , yet they thought it was all in vain , by the means they herd not of them all the night past ; and therefore determined to tarry no longer , seeking for them till noon , and if they herd no news , then they would depart to the Jesus , who perforce ( by the vehemency of the current ) was carried almost out of sighed ; but as God would have it , now time being come , and they having tacked about in the pinnaces top , had sighed of them , and took them up : they in the boats , being to the number of one and twenty , having sighed of the ships , 
 x 49 WORSER 
 and seeing them tacking about ; whereas before at the first sighed of them they did greatly rejoice , were now in a greater perplexity then ever they were : for by this they thought themselves utterly forsaken , whereas before they were in some hope to have found them . Truly God wrought marvellously for them , for they themselves having no victuals but water , and being soar oppressed with hunger , were not of opinion to bestow any further time in seeking the ships then that present noon time ; so that if they had not at that instant espied them , they had gone to the shore to have made provision for victuals , and with such things as they could have got , either to have gone for that part of Florida where the French men were planted ( which would have be very hard for them to have done , because they wanted victuals to bring them thither , being and hundred and twenty leagues off7 ) or else to have remained among the Floridians ; at whose hands they were put in comfort by a French man , who was with them , that had remained in Florida at the first finding thereof , a whole year together , to receive victuals sufficient , and gentle entertainment , if need were , for a year or two , until which time God might have provided for them . But how contrary this would have fallen out to their expectations , it is hard to judge , seeing those people of the cape of Florida are of more savage and fierce nature , and more valiant then any of the rest ; which the Spanyards well proved , who being five hundred men , who intended there to land , returned few or none of them , but were enforced to forsake the same : and of their cruelty mention is made in the book of the Decades , of a friar , who taking upon him to persuade the people to subjection , was by them taken , and his skin cruelly pulled over his ears , and his flesh eaten . 
 In these Islands they being a shore , found a dead man , dried in a manner whole , with other heads and bodies of men : so that these sorts of men are eaters 
 of the flesh of men , aswell as the Canibals . But to return to our purpose . 
 The foureteenth day the ship and barks came to the Jesus , bringing them news of the recovery of the men , which was not a little to the rejoicing of the captain , and the whole company : and so then altogether they kept on their way along the coast of Florida , and the fifteenth day come to and anchor , and so from sixe and twenty degrees to thirty degrees and a half , where the French men abided , ranging all the coast along , seeking for fresh water , ankering every night , because we would overshoot no place of fresh water , and in the day time the captain in the ships pinnace sailed along the shore , went into every creek , speaking with diverse of the Floridians , because he would understand where the French men inhabited ; and not finding them in eight and twenty degrees , as it was declared unto him , marveled thereat , and never left sailing along the coast till he found them , who inhabited in a river , by them called the river of May , and standing in thirty degrees and better . In ranging this coast along , the captain found it to be all and Island , and therefore it is all low land , and very scant of fresh water , but the country was marvellously sweet , with both marish and meadow ground , and goodly woods among . There they found sorell to grow as abundantly as grass , and where their houses were , great store of maiz and mill , and grapes of great bigness , but of taste much like our English grapes . Also Dear great plenty , which came upon the sands before them . Their houses are not many together , for in one house and hundred of them do lodge ; they being made much like a great bairn , and in strength not inferior to ours , for they have stanchions and rafters of whole trees , and are covered with palmito-leaves , having no place divided , but one small room for their king and queen . In the midst of this house is a hearth , where they make great fires all night , and they sleep upon certain pieces of wood 
 M. Hawkins ranged all the coast of Florida . 
 The river of May . 
 Florida found to be cut into Islands . 
 Sorell . 
 The commodities of Florida . The houses of Florida . 
 hewn in for the bowing of their backs , and another place made high for their heads , which they put one by another all along the walls on both sides . In their houses they remain only in the nights , and in the day they desire the fields , where they dress their meat , and make provision for victuals , which they provide only for a meal from hand to mouth . There is one The\ manner of thing to be marveled at , for the making of their fire , ^in^lorida ™ and not one^7 ^7 ^ut a^so Negroes do the same , ” m a‘ which is made only by two sticks , rubbing them one against another : and this they may do in any place they come , where they find sticks sufficient for the purpose . In their apparel the men only use deer skins , wherewith some only cover their privy members , othersome use the same as garments to cover them before and behind ; which skins are painted , some yellow and read , some black & russet , and every man according to his own fancy . They do not omit to paint their bodies also with curious knots , or antic work , as every man in his own fancy devises , which painting , to make it continue the better , they use with a thorn to prick their flesh , and dent in the same , whereby the painting may have better hold . In their wars they use a sleighter colour of painting their faces , thereby to make themselves show the more fierce ; which after their wars ended , they wash away again . In their wars they use bows and arrows , whereof their bows are made of a kind of Yew , but blacker then ours , and for the most part passing the strength of the Negroes or Indians , for it is not greatly inferior to ours : their arrows are also of a great length , but yet of reeds like other Indians , but varying in two points , both in length and also for nocks and feathers , which the other lack , whereby they shoot very steady : the heads of the same are vipers teeth , bones of fish , flint stones , piked points of knives , which they having got of the French men , broke the same , & put the points of them in their arrows head : some of them 
 have their heads of silver , othersome that have want of these , put in a kind of hard wood , notched , which pierces as far as any of the rest . In their fight , being in the woods , they use a marvellous policy for their own safeguard , which is by clasping a tree in their arms , and yet shooting notwithstanding : this policy they used with the French men in their fight , whereby it appears that they are people of some policy : and although they are called by the Spanyards Gente triste , that is to say , Bad people , meaning thereby , that they are not men of capacity : yet have the French men found them so witty in their answers , that by the captains own report , a counseller with us could not give a more profound reason . 
 The women also for their apparel use painted skins , but most of them gowns of moss , somewhat longer then our moss , which they sow together artificially , and make the same surplesse wise , wearing their hair down to their shoulders , like the Indians . In this river of May aforesaid , the captain entering with his pinnace , found a French ship of fourescore tun , and two pinnaces of fifteene tun a piece , by her , and speaking with the keepers thereof , they told him of a fort The French two leagues up , which they had built , in which their fa ? - . captain Monsieur Laudonniere was , with certain soul - £aujmnierei diers therein . To whom our captain sending to understand of a watering-place , where he might conveniently take it in , and to have licence for the same , he straight , because there was no convenient place but up the river five leagues , where the water was fresh , did send him a pilot for the more expedition thereof , to bring in one of his barks , which going in with other boats provided for the same purpose , anchored before the fort , into the which our captain went ; where he was by the general , with other captains and soldiers , very gently entertained , who declared unto him the time of their being there , which was fourteene months , with the extremity they were driven to for want of victuals , having brought 
 very little with them ; in which place they being two hundred men at their first coming , had in short space eaten all the maiz they could buy of the inhabitants about them , and therefore were driven certain of them to serve a king of the Floridians against other his enemies , for mill and other victuals : which having got , could not serve them , being so many , so long 
 Bred made a time : but want came upon them in such sort , that 
 ofakorns . were fajne to gather acOrns , which being stamped 
 small , and often washed , to take away the bitterness 
 of them , they did use for bred , eating withal sundry times , roots , whereof they found many good and wholesome , and such as serve rather for medicines then for meats alone . But this hardness not contenting some of them , who would not take the pains so much as to fish in the river before their doors , but would have all things put in their mouths , they did rebel against the captain , taking away first his armour , and afterwards imprisoning him : and so to the number of foure-score of them , departed with a bark and a pinnace , spoiling their store of victuali , and taking away a great part thereof with them , and so went to the Islands of Hispaniola and Jamaica a roving , where they spoiled and peeled the Spanyards ; and having taken two caravels laden with wine and casavi , which is a bred made of roots , and much other victuals and treasure , had not the grace to depart therewith , but were of such haughty stomachs , that they thought their force to be such that no man durst meddle with them , and so kept harbour in Jamaica , going daily ashore at their pleasure . But God which would not suffer such evil doers unpunished , did indurate their hearts in such sort , that they lingered the time so long , that a ship and galliass being made out of Santa Domingo came thither into the harbour , and took twenty of them , whereof the most part were hanged , and the rest carried into Spaine , and some ( to the number of five and twenty ) escaped in the pinnace , and came to Florida ; where at their landing they were 
 put in prison , and incontinent foure of the chiefest being condemned , at the request of the soldiers , did pass the harquebusiers , and then were hanged upon a gibbet . This lack of threescore men was a great discourage and weakening to the rest , for they were the best soldiers that they had : for they had now made the inhabitants weary of them by their daily craving of maiz , having no wares left to content them withal , and therefore were enforced to rob them , and to take away their victual perforce , which was the occasion that the Floridians ( not well contented therewith ) did take certain of their company in the woods , and slew them ; whereby there grew great wars betwixt them and the Frenchmen : and therefore they being but a few in number durst not venture abroad , but at such times as they were enforced thereunto for want of food to do the same : and going twenty harquebusiers in a company , were set upon by eighteene kings , having seven or eight hundred men , which with one of their bows slew one of their men , and hurt a dozen , & drove them all down to their boats ; whose policy in fight was to be marveled at : for having shot at diverse of their bodies which were armed , and perceiving that their arrows did not prevail against the same , they shot at their faces and legs , which were the places that the Frenchmen were hurt in . Thus the Frenchmen returned , being in ill case by the hurt of their men , having not above forty soldiers left unhurt , whereby they might ill make any more invasions upon the Floridians , and keep their fort withal : which they must have been driven unto , had not God sent us thither for their succour ; for they had not above ten days victuali left before we came . In which perplexity our captain seeing them , spared them out of his ship twenty barrels of meal , & foure pipes of beans , with diverse other victuals and necessaries which he might conveniently spare : and to help them the better homeward , whither they were bound before our coming , at their request 
 55 
 The occasion of the falling out with the Floridians . 
 The French greatly relieved by M. Hawkins . 
 we spared them one of our barks of fifty tun . Notwithstanding the great want that the Frenchmen had , the ground does yield victuals sufficient , if they would have taken pains to get the same ; but they being soldiers , desired to live by the sweat of other men's brows : for while they had peace with the Floridians , they had fish sufficient , by wears which they made to catch the same : but when they grew to wars , the Floridians took away the same again , and then would not the Frenchmen take the pains to make any more . The ground yields naturally grapes in great store , for in Twentie the time that the Frenchmen were there , they made 20 hogsheads of ' hogsheads of wine . Also it yields roots passing good , Florida like Dear marvellous store , with diverse other beasts , and to the wine of fowl , serviceable to the use of man . These be things Orleans . wherewith a man may live , having corn or maiz wherewith to make bred : for maiz makes good savoury bred , and cakes as fine as flower . Also it makes good meal , beaten and sodden with water , and eateth like pap wherewith we feed children . It makes also good beverage , sodden in water , and nourishable ; which the Frenchmen did use to drink of in the morning , and it assuageth their thirst , so that they had no need to drink all the day after . And this maiz was the greatest lack they had , because they had no labourers to sow the same , Labourers and therefore to them that should inhabit the land it were “ inhabit new to have labourers to till and sow the ground : for 
 countries' . they having victuals of their own , whereby they neither rob nor spoil the inhabitants , may live not only quietly with them , who naturally are more desirous of peace then of wars , but also shall have abundance of victuals proffered them for nothing : for it is with them as it is with one of us , when we see another man ever taking away from us , although we have enough beside , yet then we think all too little for our selves : for surely we have herd the Frenchmen report , and I know it by the Indians , that a very little contents them : for the Indians with the head of maiz roasted , will travel a whole 56 
 day , and when they are at the Spanyards finding , they give them nothing but sodden herbs & maiz : and in this order I saw threescore of them feed , who were laden with wares , and came fifty leagues off . The Floridians when they travel , have a kind of herb Tobacco & the dried , who with a cane and and earthen cup in the end , at virtue with fire , and the dried herbs put together , do suck * thorough the cane the smoke thereof , which smoke satisfieth their hunger , and therewith they live foure or five days without meat or drink , and this all the Frenchmen used for this purpose : yet do they hold opinion withal , that it causeth water & flame to void from their stomachs . The commodities of this land are more then 
 are yet known to any man : for beside the land it self , whereof there is more then any king Christian is able to inhabit , it flourishes with meadow , pasture ground , with woods of Cedar and Cypress , and other sorts , as better can not be in the world . They have for apothecary herbs , trees , roots and gums great store , as Storax liquida , Turpintine , Gum , Myrrh , and Frankincense , with many others , whereof I know not the names . Colours both read , black , yellow , & russet , very perfect , wherewith they so paint their bodies , and Dear skins which they wear about them , that with water it neither fades away , nor altereth colour . Gold and silver they want not : for at the Frenchmens first coming thither they had the same offered them for little or nothing , for they received for a hatchet two pound weight of gold , because they knew not the estimation thereof : but the soldiers being greedy of the same , did take it from them , giving them nothing for it : the which they perceiving , that both the Frenchmen did greatly esteem it , and also did rigorously deal with them , by taking the same away from them , at last would not be known they had any more , neither durst they wear the same for fear of being taken away : so that saving at their first coming , they could get none of them : and how they came by this gold and silver the 
 57 
 The variety of commodities In Florida . 
 Colours . 
 Gold and silver . 
 This copper was found perfect gold , called by the Savages , 
 a.d. 
 1565. 
 French men know not as yet , but by guess , who having traveled to the Southwest of the cape , having found the same dangerous , by means of sundry banks , as we also have found the same : and there finding masts which were wracks of Spanyards coming from Mexico , judged that they had got treasure by them . For it is most true that diverse wracks have been made of Spanyards , having much treasure : for the Frenchmen having traveled to the capeward and hundred and fiftie Two Span - miles , did find two Spanyards with the Floridians , which yards lived they brought afterwards to their fort , whereof one was FloiidAans . '^ in a caravel coming from the Indies , which was cast away foureteene years ago , & the other twelve years ; of whose fellows some escaped , othersome were slave by the inhabitants . It seems they had estimation of Pieces of Gold their gold & silver , for it is wrought flat and graved , gr^en which they wear about their necks ; othersome made you on tan . rounj a pancake , with a hold in the midst , to bolster up their breasts withal , because they think it a deformity to have great breasts . As for mines either of gold or silver , the Frenchmen can hear of none they have upon the Island , but of copper , whereof as yet also they have not made the proof , because they were but few men : but it is not unlike , but that in the main where are high hills , may be gold and silver aswell as in Mexico , because it is all one main . The Frenchmen obtained pearls of them of great bigness , but they were black , by means of roasting of them , 
 Sycroa phyra . for they do not fish for them as the Spanyards doe , but for their meat : for the Spanyards use to keep daily afishing some two or three hundred Indians , some of them that be of choice a thousand : and their order is to go in canoas , or rather great pinnaces , with thirty men in a piece , whereof the one half , or most part Pearls . be diverse , the rest do open the same for the pearls : for it is not suffered that they should use dragging , for that would bring them out of estimation , and mar the beds of them . The oysters which have the smallest 58 
 sort of pearls are found in seven or eight fathom water , but the greatest in eleven or twelve fathom . 
 The Floridians have pieces of unicorns homes which Unicorns they wear about their necks , whereof the Frenchmen obtained many pieces . Of those unicorns they have many ; for that they do affirm it to be a beast with ma . one horn , which coming to the river to drink , putteth the same into the water before he drinketh . Of this unicorns horn there are of our company , that having got the same of the Frenchmen , brought home thereof to show . It is therefore to be presupposed that there are more commodities aswell as that , which for want of time , and people sufficient to inhabit the same , can not yet come to light : but I trust God will reveal the same before it be long , to the great profit of them that shall take it in hand . Of beasts in this country beside Beasts . deer , foxes , hares , polecats , conies , ownces , & leopards , I am not able certainly to say : but it is thought that there are lions and tigers as well as unicorns ; lions especially ; if it be true that is said , of the enmity between them and the unicorns : for there is no beast but hath his enemy , as the cony the polecat , a sheep the wolf , the elephant the rinoceros ; and so of other beasts the like : insomuch , that whereas the one is , the other can not be missing . And seeing I have made mention of the beasts of this country , it shall not be from my purpose to speak also of the venomous beasts , as crocodiles , whereof there is great abundance , adders of great bigness , whereof our men killed some of a yard and a half long . Also I herd a miracle of one of these adders , upon the which a falcon seizing , the said adder Falcons in did clasp her tail about her ; which the French captain Flori^a-seeing , came to the rescue of the falcon , and took her slaying the adder ; and this falcon being wild , he did reclaim her , and kept her for the space of two months , at which time for very want of meat he was feign to cast her off . On these adders the Frenchmen did feed , to no little admiration of us , and affirmed the 
 same to be a delicate meat . And the captain of the Frenchmen saw also a serpent with three heads and foure feet , of the bigness of a great spaniel , which for want of a harquebus he durst not attempt to slay . Of fish also they have in the river , pike , roch , salmon , trout , and diverse other small fish , and of great fish , some of the length of a man and longer , being of bigness accordingly , having a snout much like a sword of a yard long . There be also of sea fish , which we saw coming along the coast flying , which are of the bigness of a smelled , the biggest sort whereof have foure wings , but the other have but two : of these we saw coming out of Guinea a hundred in a company , which being chased by the gilt-heads , otherwise called the bonitos , do to avoid them the better , take their flight out of the water , but yet are they not able to fly far , because of the drying of their wings , which serve them not to fly but when they are moist , and therefore when they can fly no further they fallen into the water , and having wet their wings , take a new flight again . These bonitos be of bigness like a carp , and in colour like a makarell , but it is the swiftest fish in swimming that is , and follows her prey very fiercely , not only in the water , but also out of the water : for as the flying fish takes her flight , so doth this bonito leap after them , and takes them sometime above the water . There were some of those bonitos , which being galled by a fisgig , did follow our ship coming out of Guinea 500. leagues . There is a sea-foul also that chases this flying fish aswell as the bonito : for as the flying fish takes her flight , so does this fowl pursue to take her , which to behold is a greater pleasure then hawking , for both the flights are as pleasant , and also more often then and hundred times : for the fowl can fly no way , but one or other lights in her paws , the number of them are so abundant . There is and innumerable young fry of these flying fish , which commonly keep about the ship , and are not so big as butterflies , 
 and yet by flying do avoid the unsatiableness of the bonito . Of the bigger sort of these fish we took many , which both night and day flew into the sails of our ship , and there was not one of them which was not worth a bonito : for being put upon a hook drabling in the water , the bonito would leap thereat , and so was taken . Also , we took many with a white cloth made fast to a hook , which being tied so short in the water , that it might leap out and in , the greedy bonito thinking it to be a flying fish leapeth thereat , and so is deceived . We took also dolphins Dolphins . which are of very goodly colour and proportion to behold , and no less delicate in taste . Fowls also there be many , both upon land and upon sea : but concerning them on the land I am not able to name them , because my abided was there so short . But for the fowl of the fresh rivers , these two I noted to be the chief , whereof the Flemengo is one , having all Flemings . read feathers , and long read legs like a herne , a neck according to the bill , read , whereof the upper neb hangs and inch over the neither ; and and egript , which The egript . is all white as the swan , with legs like to and hearn-shaw , and of bigness accordingly , but it hath in her tail feathers of so fine a plume , that it passes the estridge his feather . Of the sea-foul above all other not common in England , I noted the pellicane , which The pellicane . is feigned to be the lovingest bird that is ; which rather then her young should want , will spare her heart blood out of her belly : but for all this lovingness she is very deformed to behold ; for she is of colour russet : notwithstanding in Guinea I have seen of them as white as a swan , having legs like the same , and a body like a hearne , with a long neck , and a thick long beak , from the neither jaw whereof down to the breast passes a skin of such a bigness , as is able to receive a fish as big as ones thigh , and this her big throat and long bill doth make her seem so ugly . 
 Here I have declared the estate of Florida , and the 
 commodities therein to this day known , which although it may seem unto some , by the means that the plenty of gold and silver , is not so abundant as in other places , that the cost bestowed upon the same 
 Means to will not be aye to qUit the charges : yet am I of the 
 °P’ni°n > that by that which I have seen in other Florida and Islands of the Indians , where such increase of cattle 
 Virginia . hath be , that of twelve head of beasts in five & 
 twenty years , did in the hides of them raise a thousand pound profit yearly , that the increase of cattle only would raise profit sufficient for the same : for we may consider , if so small a portion did raise so much gains in such short time , what would a greater doe in many years ? and surely I may this affirm , that the ground of the Indians for the breed of cattle , is not in any point to be compared to this of Florida , which all the year long is so green , as any time in the Summer with us : which surely is not to be marveled at , seeing the country stands in so watery a climate : for once a day without fail they have a shower of rain ; which by means of the country it self , which is dry , and more fervent hight then ours , doth make all things to flourish therein . And because there is not the thing we all seek for , being rather desirous of present gains , I do therefore affirm the attempt thereof to be more requisite for a prince , who is of power able to go thorough with the same , rather then for any subject . 
 From thence we departed the 28 of July , upon our voyage homeward , having there all things as might be most convenient for our purpose : and took leave of the Frenchmen that there still remained , who with diligence determined to make as great speed after , as they could . Thus by means of contrary winds oftentimes , we prolonged our voyage in such manner that victuals scanted with us , so that we were diverse times ( or rather the most part ) in despair of ever coming home , had not God of his goodness better 62 
 provided for us , then our deserving . In which state of great misery , we were provoked to call upon him by fervent prayer , which moved him to hear us , so that we had a prosperous wind , which did set us so far shot , as to be upon the bank of Newfound land , on Saint Bartholomews eve , and we sounded thereupon , finding ground at and hundred and thirty fathoms , being that day somewhat becalmed , and took a great number of fresh codfish , which greatly relieved us : and being very glad thereof , the next day we departed , and had lingering little gales for the space of foure or five days , at the end of which we saw a couple of French ships , and had of them so much fish as would serve us plentifully for all the rest of the way , the Captain paying for the same both gold and silver , to the just valve thereof , unto the chief owners of the said ships , but they not looking for any thing at all , were glad in themselves to meet with such good entertainment at sea , as they had at our hands . After which departure from them , with a good large wind the twentieth of September we came to Padstow in Cornewall , God be thanked , ThuirarrwaU in safety , with the loss of twentie persons in all the tn P^5*0 ™ ™ voyage , and with great profit to the venturers or the said eptemi , er^ voyage , as also to the whole realm , in bringing home 1565. both gold , silver , pearls and other jewels great store . 
 His name therefore be praised for evermore . Amen . 
 The names of certain Gentlemen that were in this voyage . 
 ' M. John Hawkins . 
 M. John Chester , { sir William Chesters son . 
 M. Anthony Parkhurst . 
 " M. Fitzwilliam . 
 M. Thomas Woorley . 
 M. Edward Lacie , { with diverse others . 
 The Register and true accounts of all herein expressed hath been approved by me John Spark the younger , who went upon the same voyage , and wrote the same . 
 . 