The Principal Voyages of the English Nation to the Isles of Trinidad , Margarita , Dominica , Deseada , Monserrate , Guadalupe , Martinino , and all the rest of the Antilles ; As likewise to S. 
 Juan de Puerto Rico , to Hispaniola , Jamaica and Cuba : and also to Tierra Firma , and all along the coast and Islands thereof , even from Cumana and the Caracos to the neckland of Dariene , and over it to the Gulf of S. Michael and the Isle of Pearls in the South sea : and further to Cabe£a Cativa , Number de dios , and Venta de cruzes , to Puerto Belo , Rio de Chagre , and the Isle of Escudo , along the main of Beragua , to the Cape and Gulf of the Honduras , to Truxillo , Puerto de Cavallos , and all other the principali Towns , Islands and harbours of account within the said Gulf , and up Rio dolce falling into this Gulf , above 30. leagues : As also to the Isle of Cozumel , and to Cape Cotoche , the town of Campeche , and other places upon the land of lucatan ; and lower down to S. Juan de Ullua , Vera Cruz , Rio de Panuco , Rio de Palmas , etc. within the Bay of Mexico : and from thence to the Isles of the Tortugas , the port of Havana , the Cape of Florida , and the Gulf of Bahama homeward . With the taking , sacking , ransoming , or burning 
 X I a 
 of most of the principali Cities and towns upon the coasts of Tierra firma , Nueva Espanna , and all the foresaid Islands ; since the most traitorous burning of her Majesties ship the Jesus of Lubec and murdering of her Subject's in the port of S. Juan de Ullua , and the last generail arrest of her Highness people , with their ships and goods throughout all the dominions of the King 
 of Spaine in the month of June 1585. Beside the manifold and tyrannical oppressions of the Inquisition inflicted on our nation upon 
 most light and frivolous occasions . 
 The voyage of Sir Thomas Pert , and Sebastian Cabot , about the eight year of King Henry the eight , which was the year 1516. to Brasil , Santo Domingo , and S. Juan de Puerto rico . 
 Hat learned and painful writer Richard Eden in a certain Epistle of his to the duke of Northumberland , before a work which he translated out of Munster in the year 1553 , called A treatise of new India , makes mention of a voyage of discovery undertaken 
 out of England by sir Thomas Pert and Sebastian Cabota , about the 8. year of King Henry the eight of famous memory , imputing the overthrow thereof unto the cowardice and want of stomach of the said Sir 
 Thomas Pert , in manner following . If manly courage , says he , ( like unto that which hath be seen & proved in your Grace , as well in foreign realms , as also in this our country ) had not be wanting in other in these our days , at such time as our 
 sovereign lord of famous memory king Henry the 8. about the same year of his reign , furnished and sent out certain ships under the governance of Sebastian Cabot yet living and one Sir Thomas Pert , whose faint heart was the cause that the voyage took none effect ; if , I say , such manly courage , whereof we have spoken , had not at that time been wanting , it might happily have come to pass , that that rich treasury called Perularia , ( which is now in Spaine in the city of Sivill , and so nam , for that in it is kept the infinite riches brought thither from the newfoundland of Peru ) might long since have been in the tower of London , to the kings great honour and wealth of this realm . Hereunto that also is to be referred which the worshipful M. Robert Thorne wrote to the said king Henry the 8. in the year 1527. by doctor Leigh his ambassador sent into Spaine to the Emperor Charles the fift , whose words be these . Now rest to be discovered the North parts , the which it seems unto me , is only your highness charge and duty , because the situation of this your realm is thereunto nearest and aptest of all other : and also , for that already you have taken it in hand . And in mine opinion it will not seem well to leave so great and profitable and enterprise , seeing it may so easily and with so little cost , labour and danger be followed and obtained . Though hitherto your grace have made thereof a proof , & found not the commodity thereby as you trusted , at this time it shall none impediment : for there may be now provided remedies for things then lacked , and the inconveniences and lets removed , that then were cause your graces desire took no full effect : which is , the courses to be changed , and to follow the aforesaid new courses . And concerning the mariners , ships , and provision , and order may be devised and taken meet and convenient , much better then hitherto : by reason whereof , & by Gods grace , no doubt your purpose shall take effect . And whereas 
 3 
 This sir Tho. Pert was Viceadmiral of ' England , and dwelled in Poplar at Blackwall . 
 [ HL 499-1 
 Note . 
 And English great ship at Brasill 1517. 
 San Juan de puerto Rico. 
 in the aforesaid words M. Robert Thorne say , that he would have the old courses to be changed , and the new courses ( to the North ) to be followed : It may plainly be gathered , that the former voyage , whereof twice or thrice he makes mention , wherein it is like that sir Thomas Pert and Sebastian Cabot were set forth by the king , was made toward Brasill and the South parts . Moreover it seems that Gonsalvo de Oviedo , a famous Spanish writer , alludeth unto the said voyage in the beginning of the 13. chapter of the 19. book of his generail and natural historic of the West Indies , agreeing very well with the time about which Richard Eden writeth that the foresaid voyage was begun . The authors words are these , as I find them translated into Italian by that excellent and famous man Baptista Ramusius . Nel 1517. Un Corsaro Inglese , sotto colore di venire a discoprire se ne venne con una gran nave alia volta del Brasil nella costiera di Terra ferma , & indi attraverso a questa isola Spagnuola , & giunse presso la bocca del porto di questa citta di S. Domenico , & mando in terra il suo battello pieno di gente , & chiese licentia di potere qui entrare , dicendo che venia con mercantie a negotiare . Ma in quello instant il Castellano Francesco di Tapia fence tirare alia nave un tiro d’artiglieria da questo castello , perch ella se ne veniva diritta all porto . Quando gli Inglesi viddero questo si ritirarono fuori , & quelli del battello tosto si raccolsero in nave . Et nel vero il Castellan fence errore : perch se ben fosse nave entrata nel porto , non sarebbono le genti potuto smontare a terra senza volonta & della citta & del castello . La nave adunque veggendo come vi era ricevuta , tiro la volta dell ’ isola di San Giovanni , entrata nel porto di San Germano parlarono gli Inglesi con quelli della terra , & dimanda-rono vettouaglie & fornimenti per la nave , & si lamentarono di quelli di questa citta , dicendo i essi non venivano per fare dispiacere , ma per contrattare , 
 & negotiare con suoi danari & mercantie . Hora quivi hebbero alcune vettovaglie , & in compensa essi diedero & pagarono in certi stagni lavorati & altre cose . Et poi si partirono alia volta d’Europa , dove si crede , che non gungessero , perch non se ne seppe piu nuova mai . This extract imports thus much in English , to wit : That in the year 1517. an English Rover under the colour of traveling to discover , came with a great ship unto the parts of Brasill on the coast of the firm land , and from thence he crossed over unto this Hand of Hispaniola , and arrived near unto the mouth of the haven of this city of S. Domingo , and sent his shipboate full of men on shore , and demanded leave to enter into this haven , saying that he came with merchandise to traffic . But at that very instant the governor of the castle Francis de Tapia caused a tire of ordinance to be shot from the castle at the ship , for she bore in directly with the haven . When the Englishmen saw this , they withdrew themselves out , and those that were in the shipboate , god themselves with all speed on shipboard . And in truth the warden of the castle committed and oversight : for if the ship had entered into the haven the men thereof could not have come on land without leave both of the city and of the castle . Therefore the people of the ship seeing how they were received , sailed towards the Hand of S. John , and entering into the port of S. Germaine , the English men parted with those of the town , requiring victuals and things needful to furnish their ship , and complained of the inhabitants of the city of S. Domingo , saying that they came not to do any harm , but to trade and traffic for their money and merchandise . In this place they had certain victuals , and for recompense they gave and paid them with certain vessel of wrought tin and other things . And afterwards they departed towards Europe , where it is thought they arrived not : for we never herd any more news of them . Thus far proceedeth Gonsalvo 
 de Oviedo , who though it please him to call the captain of this great English ship a rover , yet it appears by the Englishmens own words , that they came to discover , and by their traffiq'ue for pewter vessel and other wares at the town of S. Germane in the Hand of S. John de puerto rico , it cannot be denied but that they were furnished with wares for honest traffic and exchange . But whosoever is conversant in reading the Portugal ! and Spanish writers of the East and West Indies , shall commonly find that they account all other nations for pirates , rovers and thieves , which visit any heathen coast that they have once sailed by or looked on . Howbeit their passionate and ambitious reckoning ought not to be prejudicial ! to other men's chargeable and painful enterprises and honourable travels in discovery . 
 . 