The first voyage of the right worshipful and valiant knight sir John Hawkins , sometime treasurer of her Majesties navy Royal , made to the West Indies 1562. 
 received some 
 Aster John Haukins having made diverse voyages to the Isles of the Canaries , and there by his good and upright dealing being grown in love and favour with the people , informed himself among them by diligent inquisition , of the state of the West India , whereof he had knowledge by the instructions of his 
 father , but increased the same by the advertisements and reports of that people . And being among other particulars assured , that Negroes were very good merchandise in Hispaniola , and that store of Negros might easily be had upon the coast of Guinea , resolved with himself to make trial thereof , and communicated that devise with his worshipful friends of London : namely with Sir Lionell Ducket , sir Thomas Lodge , M. Gunson his father in law , sir William Winter , M. Bromfield , and others . All which persons liked so well of his intention , that they became liberali contributers and adventurers in the actium . For which purpose there were three good ships immediately provided : The one called the Salomon of the burden of 120. tun , wherein M. Haukins himself went as general : The second the Swallow of 100. tons , wherein went for Captain M. Thomas Hampton : and the third the Jonas a bark of 40. tons , wherein the Master supplied the Captains 
 7 
 M. Thomas Hampton . 
 room : in which small fleet M. Hawkins took with him not above 100. men for fear of sickness and other inconveniences , whereunto men in long voyages are commonly subject . 
 With this company he put off and departed from the coast of England in the month of October 1562. and in his course touched first at Teneriffe , where he received friendly entertainment . From thence he passed to Sierra Leona , upon the coast of Guinea , which place by the people of the country is called Tagarin , where he stayed some good time , and god into his possession , partly by the sword , and partly by other means , to the number of 300. Negros at the least , beside other merchandises which that country yields . With this pray he sailed over the Ocean sea unto the Hand of Hispaniola , and arrived first at the port of Isabella : and there he had reasonable utterance of his English commodities , as also of some part of his Negroes , trusting the Spaniards no further , then that by his own strength he was able still to master them . From the port of Isabella he went to Puerto de Plata , where he made like sales , standing always upon his guard : from thence also he sailed to Monte Christi another port on the North side of Hispaniola , and the last place of his touching , where he had peaceable traffic , and made vent of the whole number of his Negroes : for which he received in those 3. places by way of exchange such quantity of merchandise , that he did not only lade his own 3. ships with hides , ginger , sugars , and some quantity of pearls , but he freighted also two other hulks with hides and other like commodities , which he sent into Spaine . And thus leaving the Hand , he returned and disemboqued , passing out by the Hands of the Caycos , without further entering into the bay of Mexico , in this his first voyage to the West India . And so with prosperous success and much gain to himself and thee aforesaid adventurers , he came home , and arrived in the month of September 1563. 
 . 