Certain Spanish Letters intercepted by ships of the worshipful Master John Wattes written from diverse places of the islands and of the main land as well of Nueva Espanna , as of Tierra Firma and Peru , containing many secrets touching the aforesaid countries' , and the state of the South Sea , and the trade to the Philippinas . 
 A letter sent from Havana in Cuba from the general of the fleet John de Orimo to the king of Spaine the 18 of October 1590 , touching the building of certain excellent Frigates , etc. 
 TO may please your majesty that at the date hereof one of the Frigates was launched : and three more will be ready against the fleet depart from hence . They are very big and excellent of sail , which will carry 150 men a piece with soldiers and mariners . And having 
 good ordinance , there are few or none of our enemies that can ofiend us . For we shall both leave and take at all times when we list . But it behooveth your majesty to send both soldiers and mariners to man the Frigates . For we have great want of soldiers and mariners , with tackling , anchors , powder , shot , calivers , and all kind of furniture for them . For these things are not here to be had for money : and likewise to send some great ordinance for the Zabras . For the merchant's ships are so weak and so unprovided , that they have almost none to defend themselves . Also we shall be constrained to give the carena again unto all the ships ; for they are very weak by reason of the long voyage : and the mariners and soldiers are weary with their long traveling and keeping of them here . Thus if it would please your majesty to 158 
 command with all expedition that these soldiers and mariners with all kind of other furniture might be sent us , then the fleet may set forward and so proceed on their voyage . God preserve your Catholic royal majesty . From Havana the 20 of October 1590. 
 Your majesties servant , whose royal feet I kiss . 
 John de Orimo General of your Fleet . 
 A Letter sent from the Governor of Havana John de Trexeda , to the King of Spaine , the twentieth of October 1590 , touching the wants of that place . 
 Y three ships which departed from this Harbour since the Fleets arrival here , I have given your majesty at large to understand , what hath happened as much as I can , and what thing is here to be done in this city , and what your majesty must provide . And now once again I 
 will return to put your majesty in mind thereof . I beseech your majesty to command to be provided and to . 
 be sent hither two hundred Negroes , if you will have this ™ 
 fortification to go forwards : because your majesty is here at great charges with the master workman and the Officers . And for want of Pioneers the work goes not forwards . For as the work goes daily forward and increases farther and farther , so we want men to work , and to guard it , and likewise to keep it . We dare not meddle with those of the Galies . And likewise it may please your majesty to send new working tools of iron , according to a remembrance which I have sent to your majesty of late , which doth signify our wants more at large . 
 Likewise it is needful that your majesty should send powder and match to furnish these forts . And likewise Soldiers sent to send money to pay those soldiers which are newly * Havana-come hither , & for that company of soldiers which were 
 159 
 Five Frigates made at Havana , John de Orimo General of the fleet . 
 The excellency of the great Frygates built in Cuba . 
 Copper mines newly found in Cuba . 
 sent from Mexico to this place . For it behooveth your majesty not to have them as yet left , till such time as the defences about the forts be finished , and that which is in building upon the hill , which will be ended very shortly if you send the Negroes and iron tools . 
 Likewise I have certified your majesty , that with all speed I am making ready of the five Frigates , that they may carry all the treasure . Also John de Orimo seeing that it is of so great importance to have them dispatched , doth furnish me with some money , although somewhat scantly , until such time as your majesty does send him some order therefore . I beseech you to command it to be done ; considering the great charges and expenses that we are at here , as by the accounts your Majesty shall more at large perceive , what hath be spent . These Frigates will be made and end of without all doubt by the month of Februarie : but as yet their tackling and sails are not here arrived : but I do stay the coming thereof every day , according as the Duke of Medina and John de Ibarra have written unto me , that those ships which should bring the same were ready to depart from thence . All these things it behooveth your Majesty to send in time : for I can assure your Majesty that you shall not have upon the sea such good ships as these are . For as touching the other ships of the fleet , which are in this harbour , it is not convenient to venture the silver in them . This counsel your Majesty shall not take of me , for I am a soldier , and have but small skill in navigation . But every day it is told me openly and in secret by many of the pilots , captains , master's and mariners . 
 As touching the copper , 1 have put it in practice twice more , and have made proof thereof : wherein there hath be more spent , then 1 was willing there should have be , because I have got no fruit thereof : I know not the cause , but that it is not done effectually by those that have the working thereof . Therefore I beseech your Majesty to send me that same founder which I wrote to 160 
 reissue . A PDF can be downloaded from the web address given on page iv 
 , “ woa®^^^^ on 30 A ™ 2021 * “ °'24 ' " ‘ ° 
 h‘‘ps : / / doi . org / 10.1017 / CBO97'11072'6337 . 014 
 your Majesty heretofore of . Our Lord keep your Majesty many years . From Havana the 20 of October , 1590. 
 Your Majesties servant , whose royal feet I kiss , John de Trexeda governor of Havana . 
 A letter sent to DONE Petro de Xibar one of his Majesties privy Counsel of the West Indies , from DONE Diego Mendez de Valdes Governor of S. Juan de Puerto Rico the 20 of November 1590 , touching the state of that City and Island . 
 Received your honours letter the 20 of Februarie , whereby I received great content , to hear that your honour is in good health . As touching the imprisonment of our cousin DONE Pedro de Valdes , it doth grieve me to the very soul . I beseech God to send him his liberty : 
 and likewise the imprisonment of Diego Flores de Valdes grieveth me very much : I pray God to send good justice . The M. of the field Juan de Texela , and the M. workman Juan Baptista Antonio arrived here in safety , and have viewed this City with all the circuit round about and the situation as I have informed his majesty thereof . They have marked a place to built a strong Fort , whereat the country remains very well content . And it stands in a good situation , and in a convenient place on a high mount which doth lie upon the entering in of the Harbour , & so cutteth over to a point of land , leaving in the Fort as much space as will contain 3000 persons , without joining thereunto any part of the coast . So the M. deal campo hath nam the fort Citadella . He left me great store of iron work , tools eight workmen , and 200 Negroes , which are the kings . And the Island does find 400 pioneers which are continually at work . His majesty hath sent me a x i6t i* 
 Pedro de Valdes , prisoner in England . 
 John Baptista Antonio the generail Inge-nour of the West Indies . 
 A strong fort newly built in S. Juan de Puerto Rico. 
 warrant to spend the provision of the Island , & to take those rends which his majesty hath here , & to certify his majesty what there is wanting for the maintaining of the workmen & that they may have all things necessary . So I have sent to Nueva Espanna , for such things as are here wanting . I have written to the M. of the field , which is gone to Havana , informing him that it doth greatly import that the work with all expedition should go forward , seeing that it is begun for the defence of the Island . And we do defend it as well as we can from the enemy , in respect of the great danger which otherwise might happen , if the enemy should come and find it begun , and not ended . And likewise that his majesty would send me that which I do request . And the most principal thing of all is , to send more Negroes . And sending me all these things which be needful , I trust in God I shall in short time built up the fort , to defend Thisfirt was us from the enemy . The fort must be built triangle t^en by the wjse . for reach infO the bay : and we shall be able berland to plant in the same 40 pieces of good ordinance , Canon , 
 1598. Demicanon , and culverin . The M. of the field , hath 
 promised to send me some from Havana . For that he is determined to cast some there , by reason of the great Copper mines store of copper , which now of late is found in Havana : ^H^vana ™ f°r ere we have as yet but small store of ordinance to 
 ’ defend us . I look for 5 Canons which his majesty 
 should send from Spaine , with shot and powder and all kind of weapons , because that here is great want in the Island . His majesty hath sent the whole number of 200 soldiers 200 soldiers , and in the company there came two SdePuertoRico captains . The corpse de Guard is kept in the market 1500fighting place : and twice in a month I muster all the men in men inS . Juan the Hand , and find very near 1500 fighting men , and depuerto Rico go horsemen . The fort when it is ended will be the san ' strongest that his majesty hath in all the Indies . And 
 now the people of the country sleep in security . For The boldness of commonly before , the Englishmen would come and beard the English . us t0 havens mouth . God keep your honour , and 162 
 send you long health . From Puerto Rico the 20 of November 1590. 
 The Governor Diego Mendez de Valdes . 
 A letter to John Lopez Canavate , Alderman in the town of Canavate in Spaine written from his servant Juan de Porva Canavates , from Havana the seventeenth of October 1590 , touching the state of the said place . 
 His is to give you to understand , that since my departure from S. Lucar I have written unto you twice of my arrival here , and what success I have had . And now you shall understand that I am determined to go for Nueva Espanna . For I stay but opportunity of 
 time . For here is great watch daily kept and great looking to the soldiers in keeping of them together , for running away . But nevertheless I hope in God , to find some friend to convey me away from hence . This country is so close and narrow , that if a man steal not away hidden in some ship , it is not possible for him to escape , nor to go a league out of the town , no way but by sea . And because the harbour is so close , it is the best harbour and the surest in the world . The 
 harbour is made in this order . The entry in toward the land is by a narrow straight channel , which continueth as long as a caliver shot , and from that place the river openeth broader and broader : There are in the entering in , two points which make with the land , whereupon are newly built two strong forts , which are fortified with very great store of ordinance : beside another strong and famous Fort which is in the City , so that it is impossible to take it . There are in these three Forts , a thousand soldiers in Garrison . And likewise here are two galies to keep the coast . Yet for all this , the audacious Englishmen being without all shame are 163 
 The soldiers run away from Havana . 
 The boldness of the English . 
 18 ships built in Cuba against England . 
 Acapulco the harbour where the ships lie that go for China . 
 not afraid to come and dare us at our own doors . Our journey to go for England is most certain in the year 1592. Here are making with great expedition 18 ships , which are called Frigates for that effect . They are very strong ships , and will draw but very little water , whereby they may enter among the shoulds on the banks of Flanders : they are built the higher because here is great store of timber and excellent good and incorruptible . It is reported that the fleet will depart from hence in February , by reason that at that time the Englishmen are not departed out of their own country . And thus I rest , from this Island of S. Christopher in Havana this present day on S. Lukes even ; the 17 of October 1590. 
 Your Worships servant , 
 John de Porva Canavates . 
 A letter from Mexico , of Sebastian Biscaino to his Father Antonio Biscaino in Corchio in Spaine , touching the great profit of the trade to China , and somewhat of M. Thomas Candish . Written the 20 of June 1590. 
 Aving written to your worship by a friend of mine at large , now I will be somewhat short . And this is only to give you to understand , that foure months past , I came from China , and landed in Acapulco , 70 leagues from Mexico , which is the harbour where the ships that go 
 down to China lie : and all the merchants of Mexico 
 bring all their Spanish commodities down to this harbour , to ship them for that country . It is one of the best harbours in all Nueva Espanna ; and where the ships may ride most safely without all kind of danger . For it lies under a neck of land , and behind a great point . And in this harbour here are foure great ships of Mexico of 600 and 800 tons a piece , which 164 
 only serve to carry our commodities to China , and so to return back again . The order is thus . From hence to China is above two thousand leagues , farther than from hence to Spaine . And from hence their two first ships depart at one time to China : and are 13 or 14 months returning back again . And when those two ships are returned , then the other twaine two months after depart from hence . They go now from hence very strong with soldiers . I can certify you of one thing ; That 200 ducats in Spanish commodities , and some Flemish wares which I carried with me thither , I made worth 1400 ducats there in the country . So I make account that with those silks , and other commodities which I brought with me from thence to Mexico , I god 2500 ducats by the voyage : and had got more , if one pack of fine silks had not be spoiled with salt water . So as I said , there is great gain to be got if that a man return in safety . But the year 1588 I had great mischance , coming in a ship from China to Nueva Espanna : which being laden with rich commodities , was taken by and Englishman which robbed us and afterwards M - Thomas burned our ship , wherein I lost a great deal of treasure C^ish . and commodities . 
 A.D. 
 1590. 
 FromAcapulco , to China above 2000 leagues . 
 Flemish wares good in China . A wonderful gain . 
 If I should write to you of the state of this country of China , and of the strange things which are there , and of the wealth of the country , I were not able to do it , in and whole quire of paper . Only I may certify you , that it is the goodliest country , and the richest , and most plentiful in all the world . For here are great store of gold mines , silver mines , and pearl , great store of cotton cloth : for the country people weareth nothing else but fine cotton cloth , which is more accepted then silks . For here is great store of silks , & they are good cheap . All kind of victuals , as bred , flesh , wines and hens and all kinds of fowls , are very plentiful . Here are great store of fresh rivers . The people are very loving . Here are very fair cities and towns with costly buildings , better then those in Spaine . And 165 
 Gold mines , silver mines , and Pearls , in China . Fine linen cloth greatly esteemed in China . 
 the country people go very richly appareled both in silks and gold . But here we have order from the king of Spaine , that a Spaniard may not dwell in China , above 3 years , and afterwards they must return again into Nueva Espanna , and other soldiers must come in their places . The country is very unwholesome for us Spaniardes . For within these 20 years of 14000 , which have gone to the Philippinas , there are 13000 of them Not above one dead , and not passed 1000 of them left alive . There is ^iarT^t^ a P^ace in China which is and harbour , called Macaran , P^pp^ , which the king hath given to the Spaniards freely : which shall be the place where the ships shall come and traffic . For in this harbour there is a great river which goes up into the main land , unto diverse towns and cities , which are near to this river . And thus troubling you no farther I rest . From Mexico the 20 of June 1590. 
 Your obedient son , Sebastian Biscaino . 
 A Letter of Bartholomew Canon to Peter de Tapia in Sivill , from Mexico the 30 of May 1590 , touching the state of Nueva Espanna , and the Fleet of that year . 
 Ecause I have answered your letters which I have received in the last Fleet , as touching that matter I have no more to say . The occasion of my writing unto you at this time , is to give you to understand , that those commodities which came in the last Fleet , were sold at the first good 
 cheap , and those that bought them , god much by them . For now at this instant white Roan cloth is sold for 8 or 9 reals a vare . The cause of this was , by reason there came a caravel of Advice from Havana ; which brought us news , how the army that his majesty did send for England , was all spoiled and cast away : and therefore they of Spaine did write that there would come no Fleet from Spaine hither this year : And this is the cause that 166 
 all linen cloth is very deer in these parts . Wines also are very deer : for they are sold for 90 and 100 deminas a pipe . When the Frigates departed from hence in August last 1589. Cochinilia was sold at that instant for 50 pesos the quintail ; and now it is sold for 55 pesoes . And since that news came from Spaine in a caravel of S. Lucar , that it was sold there for 72 ducats the quintail , there are laden in this Fleet 14000 Arovas of Cochinilia , and 7000 Arovas more were laden in the Frigates which departed before the Fleet. There is laden in the Fleet great quantity of treasure , more then hath be sent to Spaine these many years , both for the Kings and the Viceroys account . And the merchants and gentlemen of all these provinces do send great quantity to supply the Kings wants : for that his majesty hath written to the Viceroy and to the gentlemen of these countries to aid him with much money towards the maintenance of his wars against France and other places , & therefore they have sent good store : God send it well to Spaine . There are likewise laden aboard the Fleet to the number of 100000. hides , and great store of other kinds of this country commodities . So that the Fleet goes very richly laden . Quick silver is here very deer , for here is almost none to be had for any money to work in the gold mines : for without Quick silver we cannot refine our gold . And no man upon pain of death may bring any from Spaine hither ; but all must come for the Kings account : and so the King doth fell it here : there is exceeding great gain therein . And thus I rest : From Mexico , the 30 of May 1590. 
 Bartholomew Canon . 
 167 
 [ A letter 
 A letter of Frier Alonso new elected Bishop of Mechuacan , to the king of Spaine , written in Peru in the city de los Reyes the first of March 1590 , touching the state of Arica a chief Haven in Peru. 
 The people of the River of Plate . 
 100 men wanting . 
 Pon Christmas even the year 1589 , I received your majesties commission in Potossi . For which I am and shall be continually bound to pray for your majesties long health , for the great benefits which your majesty hath bestowed upon me , in sending me to Mechuacan : 
 whereby my great travel and pains may be recompensed , which I have taken with that ungrateful and desperate people of the river of Plate , which they have be the occasion of , in dealing so badly with me their Pastor , which have counseled them , that they should have a great care to serve God , and be dutiful to your majesty , according as every good and true subject ought to do . Now for this gift which your majesty hath bestowed on me , I most humbly kiss your majesties hands a thousand times . Thus presently I departed from Potossi somewhat sickly , to accomplish that which your majesty hath commanded me . So I arrived at Lima in safety the first of February by the way of Arica , which is and haven town , where they embark all the bars of silver . And there I have seen what is done , 8c what they have provided against the Englishmen in that haven : which is ; That there is a little fort made hard by the waters side , with certain small pieces of ordinance in the said fort to offend the enemy , if occasion should serve that they should offer to come into the harbour and offer any violence . But the principali thing of all that we want is to have soldiers , foot men , and horsemen . For according as I am informed , here want 100 men which should keep the coast , if they should offer to land and march up into the 168 
 country . And likewise the people of this country have told me , that if upon and high mount which is here in the harbour near to the havens mouth , on the Southside of the harbour where the sea does beatrice , there were two or three great Canons planted on the top of the hill , ( where very good watch is continually kept ) from that place they Good watch may reach to do the enemy great hurt , a league into the c^nua^ sea . The new Viceroy DONE Garcia Urtado de Mendosa , ‘ worthy of that dignity , is in great favour with all those of 
 these realms : for that he is a great solliciter both by sea and land in all kind of diligence , not losing one hour in your service , and that which he hath in charge . 
 With as much speed as may be I will depart from hence to Mechuacan , to serve that church and your majesty : and there I will remain according to your majesties commandment , with the bulls or indulgences . Our Lord keep your majesty many years in his holy service . From the city de los Reyes the first of March 1590. 
 Frier Alonso bishop of Mechuacan . 
 A letter of DONE John de Miramontes Suasola to DONE John Garcias de Penalosa from Arica on the coast of Peru the tenth of March 1590. 
 Fter my long travel and bad success , my fortune brought me to the Indies ; where being void of all hope , and full of grief , I am become a soldier : a thing in this country which is most hated of all other things , not only of men , but of the wild beasts : and is and occupation 
 which is chosen of idle persons . The occasion of this is , that there have be in these seas , and yet are certain English rovers : and in seeking of them I have traveled these three years : the one of the years a soldier , and the other two years I have gone for captain and ensign-bearer . And at this time here is arrived DONE Garcias 
 English men in the South sea sought 3 years . 
 Urtado de Mendosa viceroy of these realms : who hath 169 
 This was M. Chidleys fleet , whereof the Delight was in the straights ofMagelan in January and Feb. 1589. 
 chosen me to be chief ensign-bearer of and army which departed from hence to scour the coast . For here we have news of the enemy , which is coming upon the coast : for we have stayed for their coming these foure months the same way which they must come , in a haven called Arica , which is the first entry of Peru. So I have 90 pezos a month , beside other profits , at nine reals the pezo ; & foure shares at nine reals the pezo . So that I have 1800 pezos every year of pay : for the viceroy is my dear friend , and makes great account of me . And I have always 400 ducats in my chest to go like a man . I beseech God send us quietness . But yet it is the part of a gentleman to serve the king his master in these actions . And thus I rest . From the harbour of Arica 
 the tenth of March 1590. 
 I kiss your worships hands , and am at your commandment DONE John de Miramontes Suasola . 
 There are foure great galleons of 350 tons a piece , which are in Arica men of war , with a general , Admiral , Viceadmiral , with great store of soldiers which keep this haven : for the viceroy hath intelligence This was M. that there are certain Englishmen of war coming fleet thither . This haven of Arica is the best harbour in all ' the South sea : for all the silver which comes from the mines of Potossi , is shipped in this harbour , and so brought to Lima. And likewise all the commodities which come from Spaine , and all the kings quicksilver , is unladen in this harbour , and so carried to the city of Lima and other places , where the mines of silver are . 
 170 
 A letter of the Licentiate Christopher Uslano to Gonsalvo de Solana in the city of Encisa in Spaine , written from the city of Potossi in Peru the 20. of July 1590 , touching a great plague in Peru , and the shortness of the passage from the river of Plate into Potossi in Peru. 
 He last year 1588 I received letters from your worship and from my sister : and since that time I have received none , nor in the fleet which came to Cartagena 1589. And this year 1590 there hath Famine . bene great want of corn in this kingdom of Potossi : for that there hath been no 
 rain in this kingdom of long time . For in March the husbandmen use to sow their corn : and in Aprill Winter does begin . And if in April there be no rain , the corn which is sown will consume away : and so for want of rain we have had two bad years of corn . And likewise here hath be in these countries' of Potossi , and in the city De la paz , great sickness among the Plague . Indians , Mullatos , and Mestizos , called the small pocks , and a certain plague , which hath destroyed all this country . And there have no old people died , nor Spanyards , but only this country people , from one year to 30 years of age : so for want of Indians we can not work in the mines . This sickness runneth all along the coast of Peru , and hath passed into the straights of Magalanes , whence we have news that those soldiers which were sent from Spain thither to built those forts are most of them dead , & especially the workmen which came to make the forts . The general DONE Diego de Abolos hath written to his majesty to send more soldiers and more workmen , whereby these three forts might be built according to the kings commandment . This sickness came first from Carta - 
 171 
 gena to this country , which is 1000 leagues distant : and , as I said , it hath gone all Peru over , to the utter Peru utterly undoing of this country : I pray God to cease it . I The^plame Pray you w^en you write any letters to me , send 
 them in those ships which come to Saint Thome , and take in Negroes . And there are great store of ships which go to Saint Thome for Negroes , and it is but 
 15. days sailing over a gulf to Brasill . And from Brasill their ships bring their Negroes to a haven called A short pas - The haven of Buenos Aeres , which is within the entrance ^Buenos1 Aeres mig^tie river of Plate . And from this harbour 
 in the river of kind of Spanish and Portugall commodities are carried Plate to Peru , to this city of Potossi in carts and on horses : for it is but 10. or 12. days journey , and the country is very plain for carts to travail . And from Potossi to this harbour is great store of treasure brought to buy that country commodities , and so they are shipped for 172 
 SPANISH LETTERS INTERCEPTED a.d. . i59° - 
 Portugall : and the ships go and come again in short time . If his majesty will consent that we may have traffic from Spaine to this harbour , it will be very profitable : and in five or sixe months I shall hear from you , & you shall do the like from me . And by the way of Cartagena it is sometime 2. years before 2% tedlous-we can receive your letters from Spaine . By this way tO 
 my brother may write , and so by this mean the letters p^ may speedily come to my hand . And thus I rest . 
 From this city of Potossi the 20. of July 1590. 
 The Licenciate Christopher Uslano . 
 A letter of Steven de Tresio to Alonso Martines Vaca in Sivil from Panama the 21. of August 1590. touching the kings desire to borrow money upon privy seals , and the want of the country . 
 TO may please your worship to understand , that I have received a packet of letters from you , wherein you write unto me of the great misery's and the calamities of Spaine . And I promise you that these countries' are in no less . For here is great want of corn and other kind of 
 provision : for here is almost none to be had for any money , by reason that from Lima there is no shipping come with maiz . Here we have had news from Spaine of the great provision which is making ready for those great wars which his majesty is in preparing , & of the great sums of money that his majesty stands in need of : So that it does put us all that are dwellers here in such a perplexity and confusion , that we know not what we shall do . I pray God his majesty take not away our money which we have sent to Spaine in the fleet . For here are merchants that have sent some 200000. pezos , some 100000. pezos , some 60000. some more some less , to have it employed in commodities of that 173 
 Privy seals to borrow money sent into Peru. 
 Abundance of money to come from Lima and from The Valles . 
 country . Although the king hath sent hither his schedule or bill of assignment signed and sealed by his majesty , which hath be proclaimed here : The contents whereof are , That what man soever merchant or other will send their money into Spaine in that fleet , his majesty will not take away any part or portion thereof , ( which in so doing will be a great comfort unto us all ) yet here we were in doubt that he would take it from us all . News from the city of Lima as yet we have none : But I can certify your worship , that all things are very deer here , and that we stand in great extremity for want of victuals ; and likewise we have great want of money . Also here is order come from the king with certain privy seals for to lend his majesty money , for that he hath great need thereof . This country at this instant is very poor , and there are none that can lend the king at this time any money at all , by reason that this land is left so unprovided of money : But we are looking for great store of money , which is to come from Lima and from the Valles . 
 From Panama the 12. of August 1590. 
 Steven de Tresio . 
 A letter of the Licentiate John de Labera to the Licentiate Alonso Sapata de Henao in Castile in Calamea de la Sorengo , written from S. Fee de Bogota in the new kingdom of Granada , the 10. of May 1590. touching the rich silver mines of Marequita newly found out , and the long way thither by the river of Magdalena . 
 Ith other letters which I dispatched from hence in August 1589. I wrote unto your worship by 2. or 3. ways : but I know not whither you have received them or not . Presently after I departed to the government of Popayan , which joins with the city of Quito in the coast of Peru , in company of the governors lieutenant DONE Diego Ordonez the 174 
 Lara of Salamanca . But I was feign to forsake his company , by reason I fell sick in the city of Marequita , where they have discovered the great silver mines : which city is above 200. leagues from Cartagena : where I remained a certain time very sick . And because this country is extreme hot , and I every day grew worse and worse , I was feign to travail 30. 
 leagues further up into the main land to a city called The atu of S. Fee in the new kingdom of Granada , being on the ta Fee in coast of Peru : which is a cold country : where I am of admitted a procurator , for that the Royal audience is Granada . kept in this city . So I find my self very healthy of body , by reason this country is full of all kind of victuals , very good and very plentiful , as bred , cheese , bacon , beef , great store of hens , and great store of comfeitures . Only here is want of gold : so that this country will be utterly undone , if the mines of Marequita help not to restore the same again : whereof there 
 is good hope : for here is great store of metal already Great store of found , and the workmen are in hand to refine the said metal : so that we are in good hope that great store of silver will be found in these mines of great valve and profit to his majesty . This river is called the great 
 river of Magdalena . There is a fish in the river called The great Cayman , which follows after the canoas : and if it can °fMag-reach any man in the canoa , it will hail him out and a of devour him . All night they lie in the sand on shore . 
 In this river as we are going up , there is at certain seasons great store of lightning and thunder , with such abundance of rain , as though the skies would fallen down : and so it does continue from midnight until morning : so that we are feign to go aboard the canoas , & with certain broad leaves which grow in the country , the mariners make a covering to cast over the wares which are laden in the canoas : and it does keep both the rain & sun from us which are passengers . The canoas are drawn up this river of Magdalena by main force of the mariners in rowing and haling them with 
 175 
 ropes . There are 7. or 8. Indians commonly which guide these canoas , beside the Master which keepeth the helm , and the passengers . We are commonly two months in going up this river . It is 150. leagues to the landing place . And there the merchants unladen their merchandise , which serve for all the cities and towns which are in this new kingdom e of Granada . And the merchants lade the canoas back again from thence with great store of silver and gold which is got out of the mines for Cartagena , and there it is shipped for Spaine . And likewise here is great quantity of treasure laden in the said canoas which is for the kings custom and other duties which are paid : But they are but a month or three weeks going down the river to Cartagena . These are the richest mines in all Peru. And thus I rest . 
 From Santa Fee de Bogota in the new kingdom of Granada in Peru the 10. of May 1590. 
 The Licentiate John de Labera . 
 A letter of Hieronymo de Nabares to the licenciat John Alonso dwelling in Valladolid , written from Panama to Sivil the 24. day of August 1590. touching the gainefulnes of the trade to the Philippinas , and the extreme fear they have of the Englishmen . 
 Ot long ago I wrote to your worship from Panama by the way of Havana : 
 giving you to understand of my being here , & of the state of these countries' . 
 \ HC1 Cj OC Ul LHC oLdLv hey Lil CSC COU . I 
 I After I departed from Spaine , in 37. days we arrived at Cartagena : ' 
 . Cartagena : and 
 from thence I took shipping to go to Number de Dios , which is 80. leagues from Cartagena : and in 4. days we god thither . And from thence I went to Panama : where I have remained 
 these 20. days , till the ships go for the Philippinas . 176 
 My meaning is to carry my commodities thither : for it is constantly reported , that for every hundred ducats a The great man shall get 600. ducats clearly . we must stay here °f in Panama from August till it be Christmasse . For in August , September , October and November it is winter here , and extreme foul weather upon this coast of Peru , and not navigable to go to the Philippinas , nor to any place else in the South sea . So that at Christmasse the ships begin to set on their voyage for those places : and then in these parts the summer begins with very fair weather , and always we shall have the winds with us . For in July until October here is terrible thundering and lightning with extreme reins , so that it is not possible to go any way in this country . Here are in Panama 10. great ships of 500 , 400 , 300 , & 200. tons apiece , & some 15. barks which use commonly to sail in the South sea to Lima , to the Valles , to Arica , and to the Philippinas . This country in the summer is so extreme hot , that it is not possible to travel in the day time : it stands in 8. deg . & and all this coast is in 9. 
 and 10. deg . Here is great store of adders , snakes and toads , which are in the houses , but they do but small hurt . Here bred , wine , and bacon are very deer , by reason the country does not yield it : for it is brought from Peru. A li . of bred is worth here 2. rials of plate : a quart of wine is sold for 4. rials : for none grows here . Here are very few sheep , and those extreme deer . The only food here for flesh , are oxen , kine , bulls & heffkers : you may buy 20. li . Twenty li . of of beef for one rial of plate . Their smallest money beefi may be of silver is a rial of plate , & very few of them , but all pieces or 4. a 8. ror the silver mines which daily be found in Peru be wonderful to be spoken of . 
 If a man did not see the silver made , he would never believe it : for the very earth which comes out of the mines , & is afterwards washed , being but 3. or 4. years on a mount , yields great store of 
 x 177 M 
 silver afterwards again . But as here we get much , so our charge in meat , drink and apparel does cost very much . As for fruit here is none that is good , but only musk melons , and they are sold for 6. or 8. rials apiece . I can certify your worship of no news , but only , that all this country is in such extreme The English - fear of the Englishmen our enemies , that the like was men extremely never seen or herd of : for in seeing a sail , presently fear earn Peru , . - . „ . • / 
 here are alarms in all the country . 1 pray you to write unto me as touching the wars that his Majesty hath with our enemies , and how his Majesty does prevail . And thus I rest . From Panama in the firm land the 28. of Aug. 1590. Hieronymo de Nabares . 
 . 