A relation of the ports , harbors , forts and cities in the west Indies which have be surveyed , edified , finished , made and mended , with those which have be built , in a certain survey by the king of Spaine his direction and commandment : Written by Baptista Antonio , surveyor in those parts for the said King . Anno 1587. 
 Santa Marta . 
 made of canes , 
 Irst Santa Marta the principali City of nta Marta the Bishopric or Diocese of the coast s^Mte w ’°-of Tierra firma , or the firm land , lies Mfe* M a in 10. degrees and J , the city being situated upon a sandy bay adjoining unto the sea side , containeth in it about 
 30. households ; all the houses being and covered over with Palmito trees , and 
 some of them be covered with tile . 
 They have traffic with none , but with the Indians of the said country , which do bring unto the City for to fell earthen Pots and Pipkins , and Coverlits of Cotton wool , and great earthen Jars . Also they do traffic to Cartagena . It is a country which hath but small store of cattle , because it is all mountainous , and hath small store of people . There is a very good harbour before the said town , environed with mighty hills & great rocks , which reach even unto the sea side , the which high land does greatly succour the harbour , as also two Hands which lie about of a league on the North side : so that although they be subject to Easterly winds , and that with great storms , yet they do no great harm to go on land . Within this Harbour there is a place which is called La Caldera , where in times passed they were wont to trim and carene their Ships . As touching the Harbour , there is no cause to fortify it , nor to make 
 135 
 any account of it , by reason there is no trade nor tramque to this place from any other places , according as I have certified your Majesty thereof . And also because here are but few dwellers or inhabitants , and losing every day so many as it doth , by reason that it is every day robbed A new course and spoiled by the enemy . But if your Majesty would an't^b the command that the fleet of Nova Hispania might direct way1 of'Santa t^le^r course to this Harbour being in their way , and here Marta less to water and refresh themselves , all the Pilots do say subject to that the Fleet may proceed on their Voyage from this danger then place , still going before the wind , and so go to the tnarS Cape of Saint Anthony which lies on the Hand of Cuba , and from thence go their direct course to Nova Hispania ; and by this means the Fleet should have no occasion to pass so many dangers as they do , by reason of the Huricanos or stormy winds which many times do come upon them , when they are upon the coast of Hispaniola : and this is the cause that there are so many ships cast away , as your Majesty doth well know . 
 And as concerning this course according as I have certified your Majesty , they shall come into no danger at all , nor shall make any further way about ; so by this means both the Fleets may come from Spaine in company , and then come to S. Marta , and the Fleet of Nova Hispania may come into this Harbour , and the Fleet which doth go unto the firm land , may go directly to Cartagena as they do . Then your Majesty may send to fortify the said Harbour , and the fortification must be thus : That on the morro or mount which is in the entering in of the said harbour , there be built a little Fort , and so to plant some small quantity of ordinance . And hard by on the South side , there to built a little Tower , and another Sconce , where we may plant some more ordinance . So by this means not only the Ships may ride here in security , but also it will be a defence for those which dwell here in the Town : and the better to effect this purpose , there is hard by the Town great 136 
 store of Lyme , Stone , Sand , and Timber , if occasion should serve . 
 Cartagena . 
 CArtagena is a City , and the principali place of the Bishopric ; it lies fourtie leagues from Santa Marta : it stands in scant u . degrees . The said City Cartagena is situated upon a sandy bank or bay like unto and Hand : sljUate m 11 it hath about 450. dwellers therein . There are very fair ' 
 buildings therein : as concerning their houses , they are made of stone , and there are three Monasteries , of which two of them are of Friars which are within the city , the one called Santo Domingo , and the other called Santo Augustin , and the other which is called Saint Francis , which stands without the city about 30. paces off . And for to go unto the said Frierie , you must go upon a Causey made of stone , and water on both sides . This city hath great trade out of Spaine , and out of The new kingdom of Granada , and out of the Hands there adjoining , from Peru , and from all the coast of this firm land , and of the fishing of the pearls of Rio de la Hacha , and of Margarita : it is a very found country . 
 This City hath a very good Harbour , and sufficient to receive great store of Ships : this said Harbour hath two entrances in , the one of them lies half a league from the City , where all the Ships do enter into the said Harbour : the mouth or entering in of the said Harbour is 1400. yards or paces in breadth , and very deep water . The other entering in which is called La boca chica , or little mouth , lies a league beyond this place to the westwards . It is 900. yards in breadth , and in the entering in thereof there lies a channel in the midst of it , which is 200. yards broad , and 20. or 15. fathom water , some places more , some less . And to enter into the Harbour you must go through this channel , and the land does double in and out . And at the entering in of the said Harbour , after you have passed this Channel , you must bear up to the shoareward near unto the Hand of Cares , and look 
 137 
 how much is overplus more than the two hundred yards of the Channel , all the rest are certain ledges of Rocks , covered with two or three foot water upon the top of them , some places more , and some less . So the ships which must enter in at the mouth , must bring very good Pilots with them , which must be very skilful : yet all this will not serve , but they must carry their Boat before , and found with their Led to know where the best place of the Channel lies for them to go in , so it will be small hindrance to any ship that shall enter , neither yet danger at all of sinking . 
 There are three places about the said City , where the Francis Enemy may give and attempt by Land. The one of them Drake . js where the enemy did enter in and landed , which is a sandy Bay , and on the other side of the Bay is the Sea , and on the other side a great Lake which goes towards the Harbour . The sandy bay or bank , on the one side is 500. yards broad , all sandy ground without any trees . So that the enemy which gives the assault in this place must be constrained to march all alongst this sandy Bay , the enemy lying open these 500. yards , which reach until you do come to the trench : And on the backside other 500. yards , till you do come unto the City . 
 The said sandy bay or bank is 130. yards broad , where the trench is built . And in this place this City hath be taken by the enemy twice . Wherefore here we have driven in a great many of wooden stakes , which go down into the sea 50. yards deep : and this we have done , because this is a very dangerous and filthy coast . And below in the bottom of the Valley there we have built a little Sconce , where we may plant 3. or 4. pieces of ordinance . And likewise we have made a deep ditch , which doth answer to both parts of the sea ; so on this side the City is very strong and sufficient . For this was the place whereof the Citizens were most afraid . 
 The other entering is lower down by the said sandy 138 
 Bay , which is called Cienaga , or The fen deal Roreado . This is another place which is on the said sandy bay , which is 300. yards broad from the one place down to the sea . And on the other side there lies the Cienaga , which is a certain plate of ground that is overflown with water all the year long . So that the enemy which shall come this way to win the City , must come marching over land a good way upon a sandy bank or Bay , where the Sea lies on the one side , and a grove or bosk of wood on the other side , and through a plate of ground which is overflown with water , but not all covered . So in this place we have made a Fort or Sconce with certain Flankers belonging thereunto . And I have caused a deep ditch to be dug of 60. foot in breadth , so that the Sea doth come to that plate or place which is overflown . And in this order we have stopped this passage , so that the City stands in manner like unto and Hand . There is 2600. yards distance from this place to the other trench where the enemy Francis Drake did land last . 
 The entering in of this Harbour is by the bridge and Causey which doth go from the City to S. Francis ; the said Causey is 300. yards in length , and 12. yards in breadth : and the water is on both the sides of the said Causey : so this is the strongest place of all the rest of the three places . Also in this place there is order taken to make a draw bridge , and upon the top of the said bridge to built a platform , and plant ordinance upon it : and on both sides of the bridge there are certain trenches made , where our men may be close kept . 
 At the point of this land called ycacos , which is in the entering in of the harbour towards S. Anna , we have made a Fort of timber foursquare of 300. foot every way , and trenched , where we may plant 15. or 16. pieces of ordinance , and keep 50. men in garrison , and behind the bourds on the backside of the timbers , a Barricade of earth or mud wall being foure foot in thickness , and behind the mudwall , sand : so this Fort will be of 139 
 great importance for safeguard of this Harbour , because all the Ships which do enter into this Harbour do come close to this place where it is strongest , so that sometime one may cast a stone into the ships when they are coming in : and when any ship of war or Pirate will give any attempt to enter into this Harbour , there is The galRes tf order given that the two galleys shall go forth , and put Cartagena . themselves behind the Fort with their prows to the sea , and so shooting at their enemies in the forepart of the ship , and then the Fort answering likewise with their ordinance at the side of the ship , and at their tackling , so the enemy being in the Harbour all unrigged , they must of necessity be constrained to lie hovering within the Harbour , or else they must drive upon the rocks called the Ismo , or else upon those rocks which are covered with the sea at the Hand of Cares . 
 And put case that in this place we can do no good by this means , and that the enemy will venture to come in with their long boats & Pinnaces through this narrow mouth ; then we are to have in a readiness 4. Frigates to aid and help the galleys , & to row with oars , and so to go to the narrow mouth , and there to stay in the channel . And forasmuch as the entering in is so dangerous , according as I have certified your Majesty , there can no ship come into this harbour , but we must needs sink them ; so that these defences shall not only be annoyance to the enemy , but also animate and encourage the inhabitants of this city : for they have been and are in such fear of the enemy , and pirates , that if we had not made these fortifications , strengthened the city in this order , and put some soldiers in garrison , the citizens would have fled , and forsaken this city : for all the persuasions made to them by the governor could not persuade them to the contrary , but they would be gone , if it had not been for this fortification , and yet for all this we have much to do to make them to stay here : so now by reason of these soldiers which shall come hither , the people of the city have taken 
 140 
 heart of grass : so I have told them that your majesty will command that this city and the harbour shall be better fortified and made stronger , and all this which I have caused to be built , is with that money which I have borrowed of the citizens . 
 As touching the safeguard and defence of this harbour , Thepoyntof if your majesty so please , here may we build a very fair and strong castle with foure bulwarks , on the point of the Ycacos which does lie on the side where the city is built , because all the ships which do come to this harbour , must come close aboard this shore , so near , that we may cast a stone into them , and so overtake any ship .. So likewise if the ships will go on the other shore , then they do go in greater danger , because of those shoalds and ledges of rocks , and so are often cast away . And forasmuch as those ships which here do arrive are brought hither by Easterly winds , and sometime with those winds which come out from the sea , and therefore perforce must give a good birth ofF , otherwise they cannot enter into this harbour , therefore of necessity they must come so close to the shore : And on the other side where the Island of Cares stands , there may we build another tower foursquare , and plant some foure or five pieces of ordinance , and this will serve for the night , if occasion be offered that any small ship or bark should come in here , or any pinnace in the night , to do any harm , or to attempt to burn any Fleet which should ride here at and anchor within this harbour : so the fort being on the one side , and the tower on the other side , keeping good watch , there can no ship nor bark come into this harbour , but they will be espied . 
 In the narrow mouth at the entering in the other way towards the Island of Cares , where the channel ! does run near the shore , as I have already certified your majesty , there may another castle be made , and there foure or five pieces of ordinance planted , and some sixe or eight men to keep watch and ward : this being done , 141 
 your majesty shall have this city very well fortified , by reason it is of such importance for the service of your majesty , and the trade of all Spaine and Peru , and all the Indies : for this is the principali fort of all this country . 
 Over against this point of the Ycacos , in the Isle of Cares , hard by the water side , there are great store of stones , free stones , and other stones to make lime , and wood to burn the stones withal for the lime , and great part of the stones do lie about the water : so the wood will cost but the cutting of it down , and the working of it , and with little pains taking it will be brought to good perfection , for we have already made trial thereof , for there was never building that went to decay after it hath be made , nor perished by the sea : so the charge hereof will be but little or nothing . 
 And for to put this in practice to built a fort , it is needful that your majesty should send hither and to many other places , where any fort shall be made , some store of Negroes , and to this place would be sent 150 Negroes brought from Guyney : and if the Negroes of Havana are not to be employed there , nor those which are in Sant Juan de Ullua , it may please your majesty to cause them to be sent for to this place , for most of them be artificers , some masons , bricklayers , smith's and sawyers , and to send some masons from Spaine to teach our men these occupations . And after these fortifications are ended and all furnished , then the Negroes may be sold to great profit , for a Negro that is of any occupation is sold here for 600. and 700. pezos . 
 Number de Dios. 
 NOmbre de Dios is built upon a sandy Bay hard by the sea side , it is a city of some thirtie households or inhabitants : their houses are built of timber , and most of the people which are there be foreigners , they are there to day and gone to morrow : it is full of woods and some places of the land are overflown 142 
 with water continually by reason of much rain which does fallen upon the hills . It is a very bad harbour , neither is there any good water : and it is subject to Northerly winds and Easterly winds , which continually do blow upon this coast : many of the great ships which do come to this place do unladen half their commodities between the two ledges of rocks , for that there is but little water in the harbour : and after that a ship hath unladen half of her goods , then she goes to the second rock , as it does appear by the platform , but the small ships come near unto another rock on the West side . If the wind chance to come to the North and Northwest , and that it overblow , then such great ships as then be in the road must of force more themselves with sixe cables a head , especially in a storm , and yet nevertheless sometime they are driven ashore and so cast away , and all because they dare not vier cable enough , because of so many shelves and rocks which are in both those places : also the ships do roll very much in the harbour , by reason in foul weather the Sea will be mightily grown , which is the cause that their cables do oftentimes break , and their ruthers are unhanged , the cause thereof is by reason the ships do ride but in little water , yet goes there a great sea . 
 The city is built and situated very well if it were a good harbour , it stands upon the Eastside upon a rock where they may build a very good fort , according to the platform for the safeguard of this harbour : but seeing it is but a bad haven and shallow water , therefore I do think that it is not needful for your majesty to be at any charges in fortifying that place , but only a trench to be made of earth or clay , so that these townsmen may defend themselves from danger of 3. or 4. ships . 
 The city of Panama is eighteene leagues from Number de Dios , the ways are exceeding bad thitherwards ; yet notwithstanding all the silver is brought this way to Number de Dios , as well your majesties treasure 
 143 
 Number de Dios in 9. deg . and one tierce . 
 as other merchandise ; so likewise the most part of those commodities which are carried to Peru , and the rest of the merchandise are carried to the river of Chagre which is some 18 leagues from this city and it is brought up by this river within five leagues of Panama unto and Inn or lodge called Venta de Cruzes , and from this place afterwards they are transported to Panama upon Mules . The high way which goes from Number de Dios to Panama may be very well mended , only to remove this way and to stop it quite up , and so to make it again upon the side of a mountain . This city lies in nine degrees and one tierce , and if your majesty will give order that this city should be plucked down and newly built again in Puerto Bello , then you are to make a new way through the mountains of Capira , by reason it may not be frequented and because the high ways are very bad : with little charges they may be broken and so shut up , and the channel of this harbour may be stopped with the timber of those old ships which are laid up here every year , and then afterwards may be cast a great number of stones into the same , and so by this means to dam up the harbour : and here is great want of stones to ballast the ships : wherefore they are feign to go to and Island three leagues from Cartagena called Isla de los Bastimentos , and this is a thing very needful for this Country , as by experience I have seen . 
 Puerto Bello . 
 PUerto Bello lies five leagues from Number de Dios Westward : It is a very good harbour and sufficient to receive great store of ships , and hath very good ankering , and fresh water : for near the shore you shall find some sixe fathom water , and in the midst of the same harbour you shall find twelve fathom , very good and clean ground or sand , without either banks or rocks . There are twelve small rivers or brooks of water which do belong to this harbour , and so do meet all together : 
 144 
 so that the fleet may at all times provide themselves of fresh water so much as shall serve their turns . And like wise there is in this place great store of timber to built ships , and stones to ballast ships . Also the harbour hath no danger at all in coming in , but only when the wind is Westerly , which is seidome seen upon this coast . The winds which do most blow upon this coast are Northerly winds , and they are more dangerous and hurtful then the Easterly winds are . Within this harbour there lies a small creek safe from all winds that can blow . This creek is about five hundred yards long , and so many in breadth , and in the entering in of this creeks mouth it is some 300. yards broad , and foure fathom and a half of water : and entering further in , sixe fathom , all oaze and muddy ground : so that if a ship should chance to strike or come aground , she could take no harm being soft oaze ; also it does ebb and flow according as I have certified your majesty already . 
 And likewise the coming in and going out of this harbour is very good ; and with all kind of weather a ship may set sail from this place except with a Westerly wind : and all this coast is very clean where a ship at all times may come to anchor without the harbours mouth . This harbour is environed round about with woods : and at the end of this harbour there is certain land which is overflown with water : it may be easily dried up and walled round about , so this land will serve very well to feed cattle . For that is the chiefest thing which does belong to any city or town , and of this pasture ground there is great want in Number de Dios , for there is no pasture at all to breed cattle , for all kind of flesh which is spent in this place is brought from Panama : so towards the South there is a very good place , where the city may be new built on a certain plain ground which lies at the foot of certain mountains , which be not very high ; and in this place there run three little rivers of fresh water very sweet and good , and here is good arable ground to till and to 
 x 145 K 
 sow Maiz and other kinds of grain . Also in this circuit there are great stones to make lime , and these stones must needs prove very good as I do think , but we never had any trial thereof . 
 This harbour hath all things necessary to build a. city , where your majesty may have your armies and fleets of ships to ride at and anchor in safety without danger of losing : and it is a very healthful country , and where the city shall be built it is all stony ground : and forasmuch as the rain water which does fallen from the mountains may do hurt unto the city , there at the foot of the mountain we will make a great pond to receive in all the water which does fallen from the mountains , and so from thence to go into the sea , as more at large your majesty may see by my platform . 
 If it would please your majesty , it were good that the city of Number de Dios might be brought and built in this harbour : it would not be very chargeable unto the citizens by reason that all their houses are made of timber , and they may benefit themselves with the same again , and likewise with the tiles of their houses : the greatest charge will be to land timber and to cut down the mountain of wood . 
 If it please your majesty that the said city of Number de Dios should be built in this harbour the first thing which must be finished is to make up this high way , and so to pull down the Church which is in Number de Dios , and the Contractation house , and so new built it in this harbour : and then to command all the fleets of ships from time to time to come and unladen their goods in this said Puerto Bello : And that those merchants and factors of Spaine which are lygers in Panama and Number de Dios , shall come to this harbour and build anew their warehouses for receiving of their goods . So by these means in short time it will be greatly inhabited with people : also the fleet shall not pass so many dangers as they daily do in Number de Dios : neither will there so many people die as there daily doe in Number de 146 
 Dios : and the cause thereof is , that those labouring men which do use to unladen those merchandise , are all the whole day wading in the water up to the armpits to bring the packs of cloth and other commodities aland ; for there is no landing place where there can come any boats to land any goods close to the shore , so this wading and the parching of the Sun is the cause why so many do die of a burning fever . There are but 60. dwelling houses in Number de Dios , and but thirtie dwellers which do continually dwell there , and the rest do go to Panama after the fleet is gone , and then this Town doth remain desolate , every man forsaking it because it is so full of diseases . 
 In the entering in of this harbour for the more security thereof and defence of the town it is needful to built upon the top of the mount which lies to the Northward , a little fort foursquare that will hold foure or five pieces of ordinance , and to appoint sixe men to watch and ward ; and this being done we shall have no occasion to make any more defence , by reason the country is full of rocks and filthy ways , and all full of woods round about the harbour . 
 And so likewise on the other side to build a little tower in manner of a fort , with eight pieces of ordinance and five and twentie soldiers to keep it . And this will be of more importance because it must be built on the town side . And a little beyond this place on the Northside there lies a creek , where there is a very good ankering in eight fathom water : so this fort being built in this place it will defend the harbour and offend the enemy : and will defend the coast along and a point of the land which does run from the East to the West , and reaches to the Hand of Buena Ventura . And put case that the fort which is built on the other side does decay , or be taken by the enemy , with this other fort we may defend the city very well , if the enemy should chance to come into the harbour , and be succoured and helped by the 
 147 
 citizens , and twenty musketeers being planted upon a mount which lies over the fort , will be sufficient to defend us from a good many of our enemies , that should come to assault us , because all the country is full of rocks and stones , and full of mountains . So from this wood there may a way be made to go to the city , and to join with that way which shall go to Panama ; and this may be done with small charges . This harbour does lie in nine degrees and one tierce , and if occasion should serve we may stop up the way which does go to Capira , and the rest of the ways which go from Number de Dios to Venta de Cruzes , according as it is certified me by the Negroes called Simerons ; for they told me that this way would not be very troublesome . Although in the Winter it is reported that here is good store of water in this place , which in the Summer is all dried up , and where these waters are , there we may build a causey , to which purpose there are great quantities of stones and timber very serviceable : so this way may be made with that treasure which your majesty doth receive of the averages and customs of Number de Dios and Panama , which does amount unto twelve or foureteene thousand pezos yearly : and and order might be taken for the same , that the said money may serve for the building and repairing of these ways . 
 Panama . 
 PAnama is the principali city of this Diocese : it lies 18. leagues from Number de Dios on the South sea , and stands in 9. degrees . There are 3. Monasteries in this said city of friars , the one is of Dominicks , the other is of Augustines , and the third is of S. Francis friars : also there is a College of Jesuits , and the royal audience or chancery is kept in this city . 
 This city is situated hard by the sea side on a sandy bay : the one side of this city is environed with the sea , and on the other side it is enclosed with and arm of the sea which runneth up into the land 1000. yards . 
 148 
 This city hath three hundred and fiftie houses , all Panama hath built of timber , and there are sixe hundred dwellers and 35° tones . eight hundred soldiers with the townsmen , and foure hundred Negroes of Guyney , and some of them are freemen : and there is another town which is called Santa Cruz la Real of Negros Simerons , and most of Negroes Sime-them are employed in your majesties service , and they rons ™ rtaU are ioo . in number , and this town is a league from this pan^ar^s city upon a great rivers side , which is a league from the sea right over against the harbour of Pericos . But there is no trust nor confidence in any of these Negroes , and therefore we must take heed and beware of them , for they are our mortali enemies . 
 There are three sundry ways to come to this city , beside the sea , where the enemy may assault us . The one is at the bridge which is built upon the river : and on the one side of this , there lies a creek : so on this side the city is very strong , because it is all soft muddy ground , for in no way they cannot go upon it . And right over against it there lies a river which is in manner like unto a ditch or moat ; and on the other side of the River there lies a great Lake or Pond which is full of water all the Winter , and part of the Summer , so that on this side the city is very strong , for with very small store of soldiers this place might be kept very well . 
 The greatest danger for the surprising of this city is the way that does come from Number de Dios : for all this way is plain ground and no woods : and 2000 yards from this city there lies a river called Lavanderas , where the women do use to wash their linen : and this river does go into the creek , according as I have certified your majesty : and being once passed this river , there is a causey which goes directly unto them . The other way which does go towards the city is lower down towards the sea at a stone bridge lying upon the way which goes to the harbour of Perico . These two ways cannot be kept nor resisted , because it is all plain ground and meadows . 
 149 
 The best way to take Panama . 
 Perico . 
 Upon the East side of this city there are your majesties royal houses built upon a rock joining hard to the Sea side , and they do aswell lean towards the sea as the land . The royal audience or chancery is kept here in these houses , and likewise the prison . And in this place all your majesties treasure is kept . There dwells in these houses your majesties Treasurer , the Lord President , and 3. Judges , and master Attorney . All these do dwell in these houses , and the rest of your majesties officers : which are sixe houses beside those of the Lord President , the which are all dwelling houses , and all adjoining together one by another along upon the rocks . And they are built all of timber and bourds , as the other houses are . So where the prison stands and the great hall , these two places may be very well fortified , because they serve so fitly for the purpose , by reason they are built towards the sea , and that there lie certain small rocks , which at a low water are all discovered and dry , and some of them are And Island in seen at a high water . Right over these houses to the tpanamaUr astwardes there lies and Island about five hundred ’ yards from these houses , and the Island is in form of a half moon ; and in this order it runneth all alongst very near the main land : so over against these houses there lies the harbour where all the ships do use to ride at and anchor , after that they have discharged and unladen their merchandise . For when they have their lading aboard , there can come in none but small Barks , and at a low water the ships are all aground and dry , and so is all the space some thirtie yards from those houses . Right over against them stands the city . 
 When news were brought to this city of those Pirates which were come upon this coast , the Lord President and Judges commanded that there should a sconce be made , and trenched round about , made all of timber for the defence of this city against the enemy , Places good to and to keep your majesties treasure . So your officers land tn . caused Venta de Cruzes to be fortified , and likewise 
 150 
 Chagre , and Quebrada , and fortified the garrison of Ballano : for all these are places where the enemy may land , and by this means spoil all this country . 
 There are three sundry places where this city may without difficulty be taken , and spoiled by the Pirates . The first is on the North seas in a certain place which 1. Place . lies foureteene leagues from Number de Dios , the place is called Aele to the Eastwards , where once before certain men of war have entered into those seas . The other place is Number de Dios , although this is a bad 2 - flueplace and naughty ways , and full of waters and a very as dirty way : for three parts of the year the country people do travel upon those waters , and and other very bad way , which is the going up of certain rocks and mountains which they must climb , called the mountains of Capira , which are of height three quarters of a league , so in this place with very small store of soldiers we can defend our selves from the fury of the enemy , so these dwellers do say that in Summer the ways are very good without either dirt or water . 
 The other entrance is up the river of Chagre , which 3 - Place . rivers mouth lies eighteene leagues from Number de Dios to the Westwards falling into the North sea , and this is the place which the citizens of Panama do most fear , for they may come up this river to Venta de The place of Cruzes , and so from thence march to this city , which is but five leagues offi So up this river there go boats and barks which do carry 320. Quintals weight . These are they which carry the most part of the merchandise which do come from Spaine to be transported to Peru , and from Venta de Cruzes it is carried to Limaret which is three leagues off that place , and the dwellers do report that it is a very good way : and if any men of war will attempt to come into these seas , they may very easily come up this river as far as Venta de Cruzes , and from thence march unto this city , and if the enemy will , they may bring their pinnaces ready made in foure quarters , and so taken in sunder , may 
 151 
 Rebellion feared , in the West Indies . 
 afterwards set them together again : as it is reported that Francis Drake hath used it once before when he came that voyage ; and so he may attempt us both by sea and land . And forasmuch as the most part of these people are merchants , they will not fight , but only keep their own persons in safety , and save their goods ; as it hath be seen heretofore in other places of these Indies . 
 So if it will please your majesty to cause these houses to be strongly fortified , considering it stands in a very good place if any sudden alarms should happen , then the citizens with their goods may get themselves to this place , and so escape the terror of the enemy : and so this will be a good security for all the treasure which does come from Peru. So all the Pirates and rebels , which have robbed in these parts , have gone about what they can to stop this passage , and so by this means to stop the trade of Spaine , and to set soldiers in this place , for to intercept and take your majesties treasure , whereby none might be carried into Spaine . Therefore it behooveth your majesty to fortify these places very strongly . 
 These places being fortified in this manner , your majesty shall have all your gold and silver brought home in safety which comes from Peru. And all those commodities which are laden in Spaine may come safe to this place . And if perchance any rebels should rise in these parts , which would rebel against your majesty , which God forbid , & if they should chance to join with any of these pirates , having this place so well fortified , & Puerto Bello in the North parts , & so to send some garrison your majesty needs not to fear : for here in this harbour are always 10 or 12 barks of 60 or 50 tons apiece , which do belong to this harbour . So if any of these places shall intercepted , then your majesty hath no other place fitter then this to land your majesties soldiers , for then they have but 18. leagues to march by land , & presently they may be 
 152 
 shipped to supply these places which shall stand in most need of them . In all the coast of Peru there is no harbour that hath any shipping but only this place , and the city of Lima , where there are some ships and barks . The harbour being thus open without any defence , a man of war may very easily come to this place , as I have certified your majesty , thorough the streits of Magellane , & arrive at that instant , when those barks , do come from Peru with your majesties gold & silver , for sometime they bring 5 or 6 millions in those barks ; so the enemy may come and take all their treasure , & not lose one man , because here is not one man to resist him , therefore this place being thus fortified , the treasure may be kept in the fort . There is a trench made round about your majesties houses which are built of timber : the President and Judges did cause it to be made , for that here was news brought that there were certain men of war , & pirates coming for these parts . So this trench is thus maintained until such time as your majesties pleasure is to the contrary , & in such wise that your soldiers may fight lying behind the trench ; so there is order given to built a platform upon the plain ground , and so to plant such ordinance in those places , as shall be thought most convenient . 
 If it will please your majesty , here we may make a sconce or fort towards the land side , & so trench it round about and built it with stone , because here is a place and all things ready for the same purpose ; and by this means the ci tie would be securely kept : as for the sea there is no danger at all , by reason that the water does ebb & flow twice a day , and then when it is ebbing water it will be all ozy & muddy ground and rocks , so that in no wise at a low water the enemy can wade over the mud to come to this city , and it reaches from the Island till you come to the bridge called Paita . Two leagues from this city there lies a harbour called Perico down to the Westward : this is 
 153 
 5. or 6. millions of gold W silver . 
 [ HL 556-1 
 The harbour of Perico . 
 sea . 
 a very sure harbour by reason of 3. Islands which do join in manner of a half moon , they lie half a league from the main , the Islands do enclose the harbour round about , the harbour is a very high land , & the Hands are but reasonable high , there is good store of fresh water : also there hath never any ship be cast away in this harbour , for there is 7. fathom water at full sea , and 3 or 4 fathom at lower water , and very good ground for their ankering , and when they will trim their ships , they may hale them ashore . All those ships and barks which come from Peru with gold , silver or any other kind of commodities , do first come to and anchor in this harbour , and if they have a contrary weather they cannot come into the harbour of Panama ; and for so much as the harbour hath no defence for the safeguard of the ships , if a man of war should chance to come into the harbour , all the barks with the treasure may be very easily taken . And likewise these barks & ships which do navigate in the South seas Carry not so much as one piece of ordinance or a rapier to defend them withal . From this place to Venta de Cruzes is not passing 5 leagues ; so that if any pinnace should happen to arrive there , no doubt but they might rob and take all your treasure which is in those barks , by reason that from the shore they cannot be rescued nor helped , because it is and Island and refuge for all ships and barks . If it would please your majesty here might some fort or defence be made in the middlemost Island , and some ordinance planted , and this might be made with little charges , because in the said Island there are all kind of necessaries fit for that purpose , so by this means your majesty may have both the harbour and the city very well kept . 
 And likewise there is another entering into the South sea which is called the river of Francisca , which lies on this side of the Cabe ? a de Cativa , and this river does come into another river which is called Caracol , and is 154 
 five leagues from this city ; and once before these Simerons brought into this place certain Frenchmen . 
 The river of Chagre . 
 THe river of Chagre lies in 9. degrees and one tierce . The mouth of this river is in the North seas 18. leagues from Number de Dios , and 13. leagues Thue five from Puerto Bello : there is carved up this river certain 8* " a , e quantity ot those merchandise which are unladen at ground or Number de Dios which come from Spaine . From the champion mouth of this river to Venta de Cruzes are eighteene eountrey . leagues . From this place where the barks unladen their commodities , they are carried upon mules to Panama , which is but five leagues off from this place . 
 This river hath great store of water in the Winter . And the barks which belong to this river are commonly of 320. Quintals that is of 16. tons in burden : but in the Summer there is but small store of water : so then the barks have much to do to get up this river : and in many places these barks are constrained to unladen their commodities ; and are drawn by men's strength and force a good way up the river , and therefore if it would please your majesty to command that all those goods may be first unladen in Puerto Bello , and there to built a little castle in the mouth of the said river , and at the foot of the castle to built a storehouse to unladen and keep all the said goods , and there to built other barks of less burden : then these would serve for Summer , and the great barks for the Winter . 
 If it would please your majesty , there might a very good high way be made on the one side of the river , and so they might be towed , for it may be made and not with much cost because it is all plain ground , and there is growing upon the said river great store of timber and trees which do lie over - thwart the said River ; so that they are very cumbersome and great annoyance unto the said boats , aswell those 
 155 
 that go up the said River , as also that do come down the said River . 
 And therefore if it might please your majesty to command , that Puerto Bello might be inhabited , and the town made nearer the Rivers side , every thing would be a great deal better cheap , if the commodities were carried up the River : for it is a great danger to carry them up by land , for it is daily seen that the mules do many times fallen and break their necks with their lading upon their backs , as well the treasure as other kind of commodities , because it is such a bad way . And your majesty might be at this charges and spend your revenues of Number de Dios and Panama , which do yearly yield 12 or 14 thousand pezos , & this being once done it would be a great aid and benefit to those , which do trade and traffic , and to those merchants which do send their goods overland , and ease them much of pain and purse , because the-other is a most filthy way , as any is in the world . 
 . 