And excellent ruttier for the Islands of the West Indies , and for Tierra firma , and Nueva Espanna . 
 F a man depart from the bar of S. Lucar in Summer time , he must steer Southwest until he hath sighed of Punta de Naga , which is in the Isle of Tenerif . The marks to know it be these . And high point sloping to the sea , & at the Easter point it hath two down falls 
 like partitions , and they show to be separated from the main of the Island & stand in 28 degrees & a half . And if thou wilt have sighed of the Grand Canaria , and findest thy self with Punta de Naga , thou shalt then steer Southwest and by South , and so thou shalt have sighed of Canaria which stands in 28 degrees . And thou must come to anchor on the Southeast side 
 280 
 of the Island . But I advice thee , if it be in winter time , that thou keep another course , and that as follows . 
 The course that a man must keep departing in winter for the Indies from Sant Lucar . 
 DEparting from Sant Lucar in winter thou shalt go West and by South keeping along the coast , because if thou go far from the coast , thou shalt meet with the wind off the sea until thou be as high shot as Cape Cantin , which is a low flat cape with the sea . Cape Cantin . And thou shalt see a great wood before thou come at A great wood this cape , called Casa deal Cavallero . And from thence before you thou shalt steer thy old course , that is Southwest and by South for the Isles of Alegranza , and Lancerota ; and ' when thou art North and South with Alegranza , thou shalt steer thence Southwest , and so thou shalt see the Canaria , which is a round high land , and stands in twentie eight degrees . 
 What thou must do if a contrary wind take thee fiftie leagues off the shore . 
 WHen thou art fifty leagues shot on thy way into the sea Southwest ofF , and there thou chance to meet with a contrary wind ofF the sea , and if it force thee to put room , then thou shalt steer Northeast and by East , and shalt hall with sighed of Cabos del Plata , which show when thou art a seaboord so far as thou mayest descry them , to be like two points of white sand : and if it be clear thou shalt see within the land certain high hills lying Northwest and by West called las Sierras de Zahara , and being three leagues from land thou shalt have thirtie fathoms water , and sand : And from thence to the bay of Cadiz thou shalt go along Northwest by the coast : and if thou be in thirtie or forty fathoms , thou shalt have oaze ; but if thou be in less then thirtie fathoms , thou shalt have other sounding ; which if it chance , then thou art against S. 
 281 
 The bay of Cadiz . 
 San Pedro. Pedro. And if it be by day thou shalt see the Ermi-San Sebastian . tage of gaunt Sebastian , which seems to be a ship under sail . And thou shalt go into the bay taking 
 Los Puercos . heed of the Puercos , give them a good birth off . And if thou chance to be benighted when thou fallest with the bay , and wouldst go into the bay , thou shalt carry thy led in thy hand , and be sounding : and finding thy self in rocky ground , thou shalt steer North because of shunning the Puercos : and yet give them not TheDiamant . too great a birth because of The Diamant , and so thou mayest go in , sounding when thou thinkest good . And being benighted and then not East and West with the bay , and if thou dost not go into it , then make the largest board thou canst keeping off till day . 
 The Canaries . If thou be at the Canaries and wouldst sail to Nueva 
 Espanna , thou shalt sail foure and twenty hours South because of the calms of Fierro . And from thence thou shalt go Westsouthwest , until thou find thy self in twenty degrees . And then thou must go West and The Isle De - by South , which is the course for the Isle Deseada . And seada in the from Deseada thou shalt go West and by North , be-Westcause of the variation of the compass . And falling with * degrees of Deseada , thou shalt find it to rise low with the sea : 
 latitude . and it stands in 15 degrees . And the eastermost part 
 is the sharpest , and smaller then the West point . 
 And if thou art going for Tierra firma , thou shalt go West and by South until thou come to Dominica , and there on the Northwest side is a river , where thou Marks to mayest water . The marks to know it be a certain 
 know Domi - high land full of hills . And seeing it when thou art mca by . far ogr to the it makes in the midst a 
 partition ; so that a man would think it divided the Island in two parts . And this Island stands in 14 degrees and a half . 
 I advice thee that if thou wouldst go for Nueva Guadalupe . Espanna , and so dost pass between Guadalupe and 
 Monserate . Monserate to the Westward , that being thus open off 
 the entrance betwixt them thou shalt go Westnorthwest , 282 
 and so shalt have sighed of Santa Cruz , which stands Santa Cruz. in seventeene degrees and a half . And the marks to know it be these . It is and Island not very high , and lies East and West , and at the East end it is lower then at the West end . 
 And going forward on thy course thou shalt run Westnorthwest , and so thou shalt go to have sighed of the Isle of San Juan de Puerto rico , which is and Island S. Juan the lying East and West , and stands in eighteene degrees . P^to rico . And the marks be these . That on the West end it is lowest , and the Eastermost is the highest . And if thou fallen with the midst of the Island , then thou shalt go a long it to the West unto Cabo Roxo , which is Cape Roxo . the end of the Isle . And from thence the coast runneth North to Punta Aguada . Cape Roxo hath certain read cliffs . Thou must steer West and by South from Cape Roxo to find Mona , and so thou shalt have sighed of Mona . Mona . And the marks thereof be these , it is a low land lying East and West : and on the East end it is highest , it hath a slope towards the sea , and stands in 18. degrees , rather less then more . And if it be by day , then thou shalt run West and shalt see Saona : Saona . which is and Island lying without Hispaniola , and lies East and West , and is full of trees ; and hath certain sandy bays . And if it be clear weather thou shalt see within the land of Hispaniola certain high hills called las Sierras the Yguey . And being benighted upon Mona , Las Sierras de then thou shalt steer West and by South , because of certain shoalds that lie ofF Saona : but having day light and no sighed of land , thou shalt loof up Northwest and so pass by it , and as thou goest along the coast of Hispaniola , and seest the sea to be cast up into the air , then thou shalt be about 10 leagues ofF the harbour of Santo Domingo , and these mountings up are called 
 The Spouts . are The spouts . 
 But I advice thee , that if thou be benighted when Santo thou fallest with Santo Domingo , then thou must keep Domingo . the hills called Sierras de las minas viejas to the North - 
 283 
 Puerto Hermosa . 
 west . And if thou wouldst go into Santo Domingo , and meetest there with a forcible Northerly wind , then the best way is to run East till it be day . And having daylight thou shalt cast about , and so thou must ply to windward until the Northerly wind be done : and when it is past , make all the sail thou canst to hale with the sighed of Calle de las J Damas : and when thou hast sighed thereof thou shalt lie with thy stem with a sandy Bay , which lies on the other side : and thou must take in thy main sail , and go so till thou bring thy self open with the midst of the river ; and so having opened the river , thou must go with great care in the midst of the same , with all thy sails up , except thy main sail , and thou must have thy boat out , if it be needful to found or to tow thy ship , if she cast too much to the loof , for the currents will cast here to the loof : wherefore be sure to have thy boat out to help thy steerage : and this is the way whereby thou must work . 
 The course from Santo Domingo to go for Nueva Espanna . 
 I Advice thee that if thou wilt go from Santo Domingo for Nueva Espanna , thou shalt go Southwest and by South , and so thou shalt have sighed of Punta de Nizao , which is a low point , and is the end of the hills called Sierras de las minas Viejas , and towards the Northwest of them thou shalt see a low land , and to go into Hocoa thou shalt stir from this point of Nizao Westnorthwest , and thou shalt see the point of Puerto Hermoso , and the Bay that it makes : and thou must be sure to keep near the shore to find a good road , and fear not to go near the land : for all is deep water , and clear ground , and let not fallen thine anchor till thou be passed all the rivers ; and beware of the land , for if thou ride much without , thy anchor will come home , because it is rocky and flat ground . And thou must be ready , that when thine anchor comes home , 284 
 thou have thy moarings ready in thy boat to carry on shore with foure or five men , and if thou think good , thou mayest let them fallen on land with a rope . And when thou art come to ’ anchor thou mayest send on shore to moare , so shalt thou be best moared . 
 The course from Hocoa to Nueva Espanna . 
 GOing from Hocoa to Nueva Espanna thou shalt stir Southwest : and this way thou shalt find the 
 Isles Beata , and Alto velo : Beata hath these marks : Beata , and the It is a low land with the sea , and full of trees : and mar^s of-on the East side and high land or cliff ; and Alto velo Alto velo , and hath these marks . A black round land , and the Easter - ma^s most part thereof is highest , and it hath a downfall . 
 When thou art North and South with * then thou shalt go West , until thou be so far shot as the Frails : and from thence go West and by North , Frails . and keeping this course thou shalt have sighed of Cape Tiburon . And if by keeping this course thou have sighed of a little Island , thou mayest make account it is the Isle of Baque : and it is hard to the land , and The Isle of from thence thou shalt go West , keeping thy self out until thou double a point that makes as it were a great Bay , and then thou must go West and by North , till thou come to Cape Tiburon , that hath a round black Cape de land , and in some part thereof certain white cliffs . Tiburon . 
 I advice thee that when thou art against Cape de Tiburon , thou stir Northwest , and so thou shalt have sighed of Cuba , which lies East and West : and thou Cuba . shalt see certain hills which are called Sierras deal Cobre , and in the highest of them is the harbour of S. Iago de S. Iago de Cuba : and finding thy self so , thou mayest run West unto Cape de Cruz. And before thou seest Cape de 
 Sierras de Tarquino . 
 self . And if thou chance to have the water troubled , as though thy ship did raise up the sand from the 285 
 Cruz thou shalt see the hills called Sierras de Tarquino , and from these hills to Cape de Cruz the land waxes lower and lower , and it is lowest of all at the Cape it 
 Cape de Cruz in 19 , deg . and better . 
 Los Jardines . 
 The Isle de Pinos . 
 Cape de Corrientes . Cape de Sant Anton in 22. degrees . 
 ground , be not afraid : for this place is called The nine fathoms : for thou shalt find no less water upon it , and it is the shallowest water that thou shalt have . 
 Thou must mark that Cape de Cruz makes and end of the coast that comes from the East to the West , and begins the course that goes North and South , and stands in 19. degrees , rather more then less . 
 From Cape de Cruz thou must stir Westnorthwest : and this way thou shalt have sighed of the Isle de Pinos , and if thou have fair weather , then thou must go Northwest , and by West , because of the currents that will set thee out to sea . And keeping this course thou shalt have sighed of and high land . I tell thee it is the mark of the Isles called los Jardines , and is commonly called the land of Zagueio : and then thou shalt go West and by South : and if it be by night , then go Westsouthwest until thou have brought thy self out from The Jardines . And being by day thou shalt keep off the land , and shalt go Westnorthwest , and so thou shalt see the Isle de Pinos . 
 The marks to know the Cape de Santo Antonio . 
 THe headland called Capo de Santo Antonio is a low land , and full of trees , and upon the Cape it self it hath two or three thick woods , and the coast lies Northwest and Southeast . And thou must also take good heed that thou have sighed on the same coast of a white sandy Bay ; and it is on the same coast that lies Northwest and Southeast . And these be the marks from Punta de las Arenas , or The point of the sands , to the Cape of Saint Anthonie , and from the Cape de Corrientes to Punta de las Arenas thou shalt have a great Bay , being so long , that if thou be not very near the shore thou canst not see land , it is so low . And if thou see not the land well , it will show to be a tuft of trees . And the Cape of S. Anthony stands in 22. degrees . 
 286 
 A ruttier that a man must keep from Dominica to Martinino , and so to Tierra firma . 
 I Advice thee that going from Martinino or Dominica , if thou wouldst go for Margarita , that thou stir South and by West , because of the great currents that go here , and set Northwest . And by this course thou shalt find the Testigos , which be 4 or 5 Islands : and The Testigos . if thou wilt not go so much to windward , then thou shalt see Frails , which be three small Islands . And Frails . if thou wilt go into the harbour of Manpater , it is presently in doubling of the point on the East side to the Southward . And being minded to go for puerto de Puerto de Juan Griego , which lies on the Northside , then go Juan G ™ ? . 0-neere the land , and along the coast of the West , and presently thou shalt have sighed of puerto de Juan Griego ; 
 it stands in 11. degrees . 
 I advice thee that going from Matalino , which stands in 13. degrees , if thou wouldst go to Cartagena , thou shalt go West and by South , and by this way thou shalt have sighed of the Isles of Curazao and Aruba , Curasao . which stand in 12. degrees : from these Islands thou Aruba-shalt go West ; and when thou art North and South with Monjes , thou shalt see them to be three little Monjes three white Hands , and they are white because of the multitude an^s‘ of birds that are there : they stand in a triangle . From thence thou shalt go West , if it be by day , and so shalt have sighed of Coquebacoa that stands in 12. Coquebacoa . degrees . And being by night , then go Northwest : and by day thou shalt cast to go for the land again Westsouthwest . Coquebacoa hath a certain point not very high , and within this point thou shalt see in the inland certain hills which be called las Sierras de Avite . 
 Going from this point of Coquebacoa thou shalt run West , and shalt run along the coast , and shalt go to have the sighed of Baya honda and Portete , which is a low honda . land even with the sea . Portete . 
 287 
 Rio de Palominos . 
 Morn hermoso . Rio grande . 
 Isla de Arenas . Samba or hamba . 
 The Cape de la Vela lies with a red show not very high ; and without this Cape about a league there is a little coppled rock . A man may be bold to go betwixt this rock and the main . 
 And going from this Cape to have sighed of Cape deal Aguja thou must stir Southwest , and thou shalt have sighed of the Ancones which lie at the end of the hills called Sierras Nevadas . And then presently thou shalt see the Cape deal Aguja : the marks whereof are these : It is a low Cape , and upon it is a copy not very high , and there begins the high land of the Sierras Nevadas , or snowy mountains . 
 Take this for a warning that if thou go for Cape de la Vela by night by the course abovesaid , and comest into a whitish water , then found and thou shalt find 40. fathoms , and thy found will be certain small sandy white oaze , and some small weeds . And then thou mayest make account that thou art North and South with the river called Rio de Palominos , which comes out of the midst of the Sierras Nevadas . And being benighted thou shalt go Westnorthwest , or West and by North until day : and being day then thou mayest hale in with sighed of the land Southwest , because thou mayest be sure to come right in with it . 
 If thou go from Cape deal Aguja for Cartagena , if it be by day , thou shalt go West and by South , and shalt go to have sighed of Morro Hermoso , that is The fair mountain , which lies to the Westward of Rio grande . And being alone , and with a good ship of sail , and drawing towards night , then thou must come to anchor behind Morro hermoso : and after the first watch thou must set sail , and go out West and by North , because thou must be sure to keep a seaboord from the Island de Arenas , which lies 2 leagues to seaward right against Samba . 
 And if thou go from Cape deal Aguja by night , thou shalt go West and by North : and so thou shalt go without the force of the water of Rio Grande . And 288 
 being by day thou shalt go along the coast , and shalt see Morro hermoso , which , as I have said , lies to the West of Rio Grande , and hath for marks , a face of a black land not very high , and it is round . And if thou depart by day from Morro hermoso , thou must go West , and must take heed , as I said before , of the Isle de Arenas , which lies North and South of Samba . Samba hath for a mark as it were a galley towed . And going this way by day , thou shalt see El buio del Gato , which is and high El Buio < kl land with certain white cliffs to the seaward : and also Gat0‘ more to the West thou shalt see the point called Punta Punta de la de la Canoa , which is a low land even with the water : cmoa ' and there endeth the coast which lies East and West . 
 And the Bay that goes to Cartagena begins here , Cartagena . and lies Northeast and Southwest . 
 And take this for a warning , that if thou be benighted against Samba , thou shalt take in thy sails , & lie off to the offward until midnight without any sail abroad until midnight : and from midnight forward thou shalt lie so into the land without sail : and if in the break of day thou see no land , then go Southwest , and if this way thou have sighed of certain white cliffs , make account it is Buio deal Gato . Take this for a warning , if thy ship be great come not nigh the land in the Bay : I mean thou mayest not with a great ship come nigh the land from the point de la Canoa until thou come to Cartagena , because in many places there are not above 3 or 4 fathoms at the most . In all this Bay there is no high land but the Galley , which is right over the harbour of Cartagena . 
 And if it chance that any man come for this place that The land never was here before , then let him look for a little °f hill like a towed galley lying East and West , and all Carta&na-the land is low , and seems to be full of trees . Having these sights , then make account thou art against Cartagena , and to go in thou hast nothing to be afraid of : but keep thyself hard aboard the point The point of of Ycacos : and then when thou comest to double the Acatos . 
 x 289 TO 
 A shoaled half a league to the sea . 
 The Isle of Cares . 
 Sal Medina . 
 Cabeza de Cativa . 
 Rio de 
 Francisco . 
 The Isles of Cativa . 
 Punta de Samblas . 
 Sierras de 
 Santa Cruz. 
 point del Judeo , give a breadth ofF , because there is a shoaled . 
 I advice thee that if thou be benighted , when thou art at The point de la canoa , and wouldst enter into Cartagena by night , that thou take good heed of a shoaled that lies half a league to the sea , and so thou shalt go in 8 fathoms , and sandy ground . And when thou findest thy self in deep water , as in 30 fathoms and more , then the harbour will be open before thee . And if thou have any fresh Northern winds , then loof up to the seaward , and lie with thy stem Eastsoutheast , and so thou mayest go in East through the midst of the channel : and though it be by night , yet thou mayest go in safely , because it is all clear . And if the night be clear thou shalt have sighed of the Island called Cares , and it is and high land . 
 Coming from Cartagena to go for Number de Dios in the time of the Northern winds , thou must bring thy self to the offward of Sal medina : and thence stir West till thou bring thy self North and South with Cabeza de Cativa ; and then go Southwest and by West , and thou shalt so fallen with Rio de Francisco . It hath for marks a certain land not very high , and within the land certain high hills lying East and West . And on the West of the river of Francisco thou shalt see certain cliffs that bee sixe leagues from Number de Dios , inclining towards the sea . 
 I advice thee that going this course above written ; if thou see 3 or 4 Isles lying low with the sea , and also lying East and West , thou mayest make account that they be the Islands de Cativa , and then run West , and so thou shalt go along the coast . And if thou see by this way a point of low land , make account it is Punta de Samblas : and upon it thou shalt see a row of high rocky hills , and they be the mountains of Santa Cruz. 
 If thou come from Cartagena to go to Number de Dios in the time of the sea winds , when thou art out from Sal Medina , thou shalt go West and by North , that thou 290 
 mayest have sea-room , and take the Brisas or Northern winds when they come : and go till thou be North and South with the harbour of Number de Dios : and from thence go Southwest , and if by this way thou see a row of high hills on a coast that lies Northeast and Southwest , make account they are Sierras de las minas Sierras de las Viejas , which minas Viejas lie North and South with the minas vteJas-harbour of Velo alto . Having kept this course abovesaid , Puerto de and having sighed of the former mark , thou mayest a^0 ' account that thou art on the West side of Number de Number de Dios. Dios - 
 Furthermore when thou hast sighed of and high land , and thou be North and South with it , and in the top thereof thou seest as it were a little table , if it be highest towards the East , then make account that thou art North and South with Number de Dios , I say , with the harbour of Number de Dios , and this hill is called Sierra de Sierra de Capira . And if thou wilt go into the harbour , thou must keep thy prow right against this hill , and coming nearer to the shore , thou shalt see a ledge of rocks , and °f it is without , and thou mayest go in what depth thou rocks-thinkest good , or at which place thou findest most water in . And to the West of the harbour thou shalt see two or isla de hs three Islands called Islas de los Bastimentos . Bastimentos . 
 Take this for a warning , if thou come out of Number Tbe course to de Dios in the time of the Brisas or Northern winds , and wouldst go for Cartagena , thou shalt come out in the DioS to morning , and shalt go Northnorthwest until 3 of the Cartagena . clock at afternoon , and then cast about to the land , until thou be hard aboard the shore , and so thou must go turning until thou hast doubled Cabeza de Cativa : and having doubled it then ply to windward all that thou mayest : and if thou be Eastnortheast off it , then thou shalt have sighed of the Hands of Baru , which are 3 or 4 Islands Islas de Baru . lying low , and are all full of trees : and then presently thou shalt have sighed of the galley that is over Cartagena , and it is like a galley towed . 
 I advice thee , that if thou come for Cartagena in the 
 291 
 time abovesaid , and comest from Cabeza de Cativa , if the wind will not suffer thee to lie but West , then going thus if thou seest a great high Island full of mountains , and on the North side thereof thou see a ledge of rocks two leagues into the sea , thou mayest be Islafuerte . sure it is Isla fuerte : but if thou see not the rocks , give them a good breadth : and if thou wilt come to nc s' anchor , thou mayest ride well on the West side of them , betwixt the main and them in fifteene fathoms ; and the sounding is clay . And if thou wilt go between this and Islas de San the Islands of Saint Barnardo to go into Cartagena , thou Bat nardo . mayest go safely . And if any man ask thee how thou knowest the Islands of Baru and San Barnardo , thou mayest answer truly , that the Isles of San Barnardo are full of high hills , and certain sandy bays to seaward ; and the said Isles have a good depth two or three leagues La Bacilla , to the sea : and this depth is called the Bacilla . And 
 these are all the marks for the Islands of San Barnardo . And touching the Isles of Baru , they be 3 or 4 little Islands and very even with the sea , and full of trees , and there is no good depth about them , but hard aboard them . 
 The shoalds ofSerrana . 
 Seranilla . 
 A ruttier from Cartagena to Havana in Cuba . 
 Coming from Cartagena to go to Havana , thou must go Northnorthwest until thou be in fourteen degrees : and then forwards thou shalt go with great care to anchor every night , and when it is day set sail . And this is to be done in this place because of the shoalds of Serrana : and so thou mayest proceed with a care to anchor when thou comest about Seranilla , or near to it , which is in fifteene degrees and a half . And upon it thou shalt see a low flat land lying Northeast and Southwest : and the sea beats upon it round about , except that on the Southeast part it hath certain shelves of sand , and on the West side it hath a certain little copy , which from sea seems to be a ship under sail : and 292 
 being Northeast and Southwest off it , scant a league from thee shoaled comes out on the West side a certain shoaled , whereupon the sea does always beat . 
 I advice thee that if thou canst not pass on the West side , then thou must go betwixt the said little copy that it is like a sail and the shoaled : for the passage is good . But if thou depart from the Serranilla to the Northwest , and seest a low land with the sea , and certain white sandy bays , and on the West side seest a low land , and on the Eastside a little coast lying East and West , thou mayest make account it is Cape de Corrientes . 
 And if thou go from Cape de Corrientes for Cape de Santo Antonio , thou must go Westnorthwest , and so thou shalt go with the Cape . The marks be a low land full of trees with certain white sandy bays : and upon the Cape it self thou shalt see two thick groves of great trees , and they be upon the Cape it self . 
 To go from the Cape de Sant Antonio for Havana in the time of the North winds , thou shalt go Northwest until thou be clear of all the shoalds of the Cape , and then hale thy bowlines , and go as near the wind as thou canst possibly , until thou bring thy self unto 24. degrees , and there found , and thou shalt find it the Tortugas , and thy sounding will be white sand . 
 Thou must take heed what is said in the Chapter before : for he that writ the same hath seen it , and be witness to this : that coming from Seranilla , and stirring North and by East he had sighed of and Island standing in 16. degrees , and it is on the shoalds of Cape de Camaron . And from thence , if thou have the wind large , go Northeast and by East , because of the variation of the compass , and thou shalt make thy way Eastnortheast , and thou shalt fallen with Isla de Pinos . This I say , because the currents set sometime West : and so it fell out to be true in March , Anno Domini 1582. I tell thee farther , that we came out from this aforesaid Isle stirring North 293 
 Cafe de Corrientes . 
 Cape de San Antonio . 
 The Tortugas . 
 Seranilla . 
 And Island in 16. degrees . Baxos de Cabo de Camaron . 
 The variation of the compass . 
 Isla de Pinos . The currents set here sometime West . 
 The latitude of Cozumel in 19. deg . and one tierce . 
 Las Tortugas . 
 The little Isle called Vermeja . Marks of Villa Rica . 
 and by East , for the wind would not suffer us to lie nearer the East , and one evening at Sun going down we fell with a land , that had the same marks to our judgement with the Cape de Corrientes : and because night was at hand , we wrought to double Cape de Sant Antonio , stirring West : and about midnight we had land all high right a head , & the coast lying Southwest : and then we cast and lay Northeast till day : And being day , we saw the land all a head , and we plied to windward to the East , and kept it a larboard till we had brought it Southwest . And to be short , we went here on land in the same place that we first fell with in the evening before : and it was and Island called Cozumel , lying on the coast of Yucatan . And this Island was the land which we saw first , seeming by the marks to be the Cape de Corrientes . we came to and anchor about the midst of the Island , rather to the Norther then the Souther part : there we found a town of Indians , who gave us all things which we needed for our money : and we carried our Astrolabs on shore and took the height in 19. degrees and one tierce . A man may go between this Island and the coast of Yucatan , and the Cape de Catoche at pleasure Northeast ; and the water will set in thy favour : and thou must go till thou be in 24. degrees , and so thou shalt have the sounding of the Tortugas . The course to be kept from the Cape de Santo Antonio for Nueva Espanna . 
 IF thou go from the Cape de Santo Antonio for Nueva Espanna , and being late , thou shalt stir Westnorthwest till thou be in the height of 24. degrees : and from thence thou shalt stir something to the West , until thou bring thy self North and South with the little Hand called Vermeja : and when thou art so , thou shalt go Southwest , & by this way thou shalt find Villam Rica , which is in 19 degrees & a half , and the signs be these . Thou shalt find a 294 
 ledge of high hills lying Northeast and Southwest . But if thou chance to fallen with a coast that lies North and South , then thou mayest account , that it is about the low ground of Almeria which hath these marks . That It is a land not very high , and it is full of little copies . And if thou have clear weather , thou shalt see within the land certain high hills which are called the hills of Papalo . 
 And I advice thee that being so far shot as the point called Punta delgada , which is the end of all those hills of Villam Rica , thou mayest stir thence South and by West , and thou shalt go along the coast , and shalt see a low land , and with this land thou shalt fallen , going for Saint Paul , and being so far shot as Saint Paul , if thou wilt go into the harbour , thou must stir Southwest : and this is the course that thou must keep being shot into the Bay. And thou shalt go along the coast of the low land in sighed thereof : and keeping this course thou shalt see on the other side a black hill , and it is called Monte de Carneros . Take this for a note , that it lies over the house of Buytron : and as thou dost come nearer to the point of rocks , thou must be sure to keep thy led going , and shalt have foure fathoms and a half or five fathoms , and so thou mayest go through the midst of the channel . And coming against the castle , thou shalt give it some breadth off towards the Arrecife or rock : and having doubled the castle , thou shalt go from thence and shalt bring thy self to and anchor hard by the Herreria , which is a clean Bay , and thou shalt ride against the hospitali . 
 I advice thee that if thou be benighted when thou art near to S. Paul , and meetest with a Northerly wind after midnight , that then thy best way is to bring thy self into thy coarses , and lie by , plying to windward , and to seaward in 20. fathoms which depth thou shalt have near the shore , to the Northward : and being day , then go in with the harbour as thou canst best , observing what is abovesaid . 
 295 
 Las Sierras de Papalo . 
 Saint Paul . 
 Monte de Carneros . 
 Casa de Buytron . 
 The castle of S. Juan de Ullua . 
 The hospitali . 
 And I advice thee that if thou come from Villa Rica , and findest thy self in 20. degrees and a half , and seest not land , and seest that the water does altar , thou shalt found 60. fathoms water : and if in this depth thou hast oaze , make account thou art East The river of anJ West with the river of Almeria . This course is mena . from the Cape of Santo Antonio to Nueva Espanna without or aseaboord the Alacranes or Scorpions . 
 Now follows how to work , if a man come betwixt the Alacranes and the main . 
 IF thou go from the Cape de Santo Antonio and wouldst go for Nueva Espanna within the Alacranes or Alacranes , thou must stir West and by South , and Scorpions . wa^ thou shalt bring thy self in 20. fathoms ; 
 and if thou keeping this course findest less water , then go West and by North , and that way thou shalt bring thy self into 20. fathoms again , until thou have brought thy self North , and South with thee The triangle , triangle . And being North and South with the triangle , Surta or then thou shalt be also North and South with Surta : 
 Zarza . from thence thou shalt go Southwest : and by this The high hills course thou shalt have sighed of the high hills of S. ofS . Martin . Martin , which are certain high hills lying Northwest and Southeast , and they have a partition in the midst , and to the Northwest they be highest : and on the Southeast part within the land , thou shalt see something and high land , called Pan de Minsapa , that is , the loaf of Minsapa , which is a round loaf not very high . 
 The hills of S. Martin stand in 18. degrees less one fift part . 
 I advice thee that when thou fallest with Saint Martin , and wouldst go with Saint John de Ullua , then thou shalt go Westnorthwest : and this is the course that thou must keep , if thou be far ofF at sea , I mean so far ofF as thou mayest well descry the hills of S. Martin . 
 296 
 But if thou be near to the land , then thou must go Northwest and by West , and thou shalt so come along the coast , and thou shalt find the coast to be low land : and coming this course thou shalt have sighed of certain little hills not very high : then thou shalt fallen with the point called Punta de Antoni Serro : and these hills lie over the river of Medelin . And if when thou art East and West , with The Volcan or hill that casts out fire , any man do ask thee , where the harbour of Sant Juan de Ullua is , thou mayest truly answer , West and by South , and it stands in 18. degrees and a half . 
 The course to be kept from Nueva Espanna to the main of Spaine in Europe . 
 Coming from S. Juan de Ullua to go for Spaine , thou shalt stir Northeast until thou be in 24. degrees : and so being thou shalt go East until thou bring thy self in the soundings of the Tortugas , and thy ground will be white sand . I advice thee , that if it be by night , thou go East ; and finding the water to wax shoalder , then go Southwest , with a care to keep thy led going , until thou lose ground , and come into great depth , because thou mayest fallen to the North of the Tortugas . And going from this found for Havana thou must stir Southsoutheast , because of the currents that carry thee to the East . And if by this way thou have sighed of and high land , that seems to be like a loaf , make account it is the loaf of Cabanas . And to the East of this loaf thou shalt see a land that hath a plain . It shows to be low , even with the sea , and as smooth as the sea : and from this land to the East the land is lower and lower . And from thence to Havana thou must go East . And if the wind will not let thee go that course , thou must turn up till thou be upon the harbour of Havana . 
 The marks of the point of Havana be these , that on the East side it hath and high black land , which is sloping 297 
 Rio de Medelin . 
 S. Juan de Ullua in 18. deg . and a half . 
 The Tortugas . 
 The currents to the East . 
 Pan de Cabanas . 
 Havana . 
 The sholds of Mimbres , that is , ofOsiars . 
 The chattel ! reachethtozi . degrees . 
 to the sea , with a little white tower on the top thereof : and as thou goest into the port , thou must keep near the high black land , and when thou art hard to it , strike thy top sails in sign of peace to the castle , lest it shoot at thee . 
 What course the Spaniards keep from Havana to Spaine . 
 IF from Havana thou wouldst set thy course for Spaine , thou must go Northeast , and shalt so have sighed of the Martyrs , which stand in 24. degrees and a half . And the coast lies East and West . The marks be these , it shows like heads of trees , and in some places certain rocks with white sandy bays . And if the wind be large , thou mayest go East and by South until thou see the coast to lie Northeast and Southwest : and if the wind be scant , then go turning up : and take good heed that every evening at Sun going down thou have sighed of the land , and so thou must do being in the channel , until thou bring thy self into the midst of the channel : and thou must lie off from the going down of the sun , until the end of the first watch with thy coarses alone , without any more sail ; and from midnight forward cast about , and lie the other way with the like sail until day : and thus thou must do until thou bring thy self into the channel . And if being in the Channel thou find the wind large , thou shalt stir Northeast , with a care to go clean off the sholds of the Mimbres or the Osiars . And if being in the Channel thou meet with the wind at North , then thou must turn with a little sail 4. glasses one way , and 4. another , as thou thinkest good . And if thou canst not bear sail , then thou mayest go with all thy sails down , except when thou wouldst cast about , thou mayest lose some small sail to wind thy ship . 
 I advice thee , that when thou art come out of the Channel , thou shalt be in 28. degrees . And if it be 298 
 in summer , thou shalt go Northeast until thou be in 39. degrees and J , which is the height of Flores : and thou shalt go to the Northward of Bermuda . And if La Bermuda . thou think good to go in more degrees , to have the seawinds , thou shalt go by the same height , as I have said : and if thou shalt find the wind off the sea , thou hast no need to go in more heights : and from thence thou shalt go East and by South : and thou must go thus because of the variation of the Compass . The variation And thus thou shalt find the isles of Flores and Cuervo , °ft , u which stand in 39. degrees J , and in 40. large . These ' marks be these . * 
 Thou mayest go from betwixt Flores and Cuervo , Flores and and must go East Southeast , and so thou shalt have Cuerv0-sight of the Island of Sails , which is the Island of S. Saint George . George . And being at the land thou shalt go along it , and when thou hast doubled a certain little Headland that lies in the East point , then thou shalt stir East and by North , and East . And thus going , thou shalt have sighed of Terzera , which is in 39. degrees . The Terzera . marks be these . * And behind a certain black land something high , which is called el Brasil , stands the City called Angra . Going from Terzera , thou shalt run East Northeast , until thou bring thy self Northwest , and Southeast with the Cape of Saint Vincent . The Cape of And thou mayest work thus being in summer : for s-Vincent-alwayes thou shalt have the winds at Northwest . And being Northwest and Southeast with this Cape , thou shalt stir Southeast and by East , and thou shalt so fallen with the land 6. or 7. leagues to the windward off thee The winds Cape on the coast , which lies North and South : then thou shalt go along the coast to the South , until thou ,1 . 
 see the Cape . And the Cape stands in 37. degrees : Themarkes of the marks be these . It is a Cape not very high , and is CapeS . black , sloping to the sea . And from thence thou shalt Vincent . 
 double thee Asagresal Southeast : and so running , thou 
 shalt then go East unto the Cape of S. Marry : and Thfcape of 
 from this Cape go East Northeast , and so thou shalt Saint Marry . 
 299 
 The course in winter from the channel of Bahama . 
 The variation of the Compass . Many lost upon Bermuda by negligence . 
 The Isle of S. Marry . 
 Faial . 
 The bar of S. Lucar . 
 Sierras de Monchico . 
 run to have sighed of Arenas Gordas : and then thou shalt see presently a little hill towards the East which is called Cabeza de Pedro Garcia . And if thou be benighted , and coming into 8. or 9. fathoms , then I wish thee to come to anchor , until it be day , and then call for a Pilot , that may by some means carry thee into harbour . 
 I advice thee , if in the Winter time thou be shot out of the narrowest of the Channel of Bahama , and wouldst go for Spaine , that thou must go East Northeast , until thou be in 30. degrees rather less then more ; and then thou mayest go East and by South , because of the variation of the Compass . And stirring hence East Southeast , thou shalt go on the Southside of Bermuda : and must go with great care , because many have be lost here about this Island , because of their negligence . And when thou art sure thou art passed this Island , then go East Northeast , until thou be in the height of seven and thirtie degrees : which is in the height of the Island of Saint Marry . And going thus , and not seeing Land , but seeing the Sea to break , make account it is the rocks called las Hormigas . And if thou think good to go to Faial , thou shalt go till thou be in 38. degrees scant , and then thou shalt go East , and so shalt have sighed of Faial . The marks of it be these . * 
 Coming out from Faial , and leaving all the Islands , then all go East and by South until thou bring thy self in 37. degrees , which is the height of Cape Saint Vincent : and then go East , and thou shalt see the Cape having the marks aforesaid . And from Cape S. Vincent thou must go East Southeast , till thou be Northeast , and Southwest , with the bar of S. Lucar : and then go Northeast for the Bar . 
 Take this for a warning , that if going in 37. degrees thou have not sighed of Cape S. Vincent , and hast sighed of certain high hills , make account they are Sierras de Monchico . 
 300 
 I advice thee , that if thou stand in fear of men of To avoid war about the Cape of S. Vincent , then go in 36 men tf^arre . degrees | . And finding thy self within the Cape , if thou see many signs of green weeds , then cast about to the North Northeast , and by this way finding land , and the same showing white , be sure it is the castle of The castle of Aimonte . Aimmte ' 
 A ruttier for the old Channel from the East point of Cuba by the North side thereof to Havana . 
 GOing from the Cape of S. Nicolas , thou shalt go The cape of North Northwest , but thou must keep to windward off - the point , that thou mayest weather it , & it is called the point of Mayaci : and it is a very low land Punta de and smooth : and above up within the land about a Mayaci . league it hath a long Hill , which is not very high but flat . And from that point to Baracoa is 7. leagues . 
 And being disposed to go into Baracoa , keep the Baracoa . weather-shore all along , until thou open the Harbour . 
 And to know if thou be open of the Harbour , look upon the South side ; and thou shalt see and Hill by it self , which makes as it were a crown upon it . And if thou come along , it makes as it were a Fort with Ports about it : And this is the mark if thou come out of the Sea. And this Hill is North and South of the Harbour , over the Harbour of Baracoa . And if thou wilt go in , thou must take heed of a Shoaled which Asholdonthe lies on the East side , and thou must keep the West East side °f side : and go not much from the Shoaled , because the Baracoa-foote of thee Shoaled that shoots Westward hath 5. fathoms water . And when thou art within the Shoalds , thou must go a little within them , and then let fallen and anchor : and look that thou come not much on the East side , for it is shoaldie . 
 And coming out from Baracoa , being to pass through the old channel , you shall set your course Northwest until you come with the Cayo de Moa , or Cayo de Moa . the shoaled of Moa , until you think you are Northeast 
 301 
 This word Cayo in the Biskayne tongue signifies a flat or a shoaled . 
 Pracellas . 
 The Mosowes . 
 Camoloquea . 
 The Flats of Me ala to be avoided . 
 Cropeda a flat Island . 
 z . Rocks of stone . 
 Punta de Caucus . Matanzas . 
 and Southwest with it , or till you think you are gone 12. leagues : and you shall know that you are upon Cayo de Moa . For before you come at it by 2. leagues or more , you shall understand that it hath a point of low land , and upon the point it hath a Palm tree ; which tree you shall see always , before you see the point : and it is like a sail . From thence to the Pracellas or Flats you shall stir Northwest two parts of your way , that you have to run from Cayo de Moa to the said Pracellas or Flats , and the one half part of the way North Northwest and by West . And this way you shall see the Pracellas or Flats in a clean place of thee shoaled above the water , for all the breach of the sea . The Mosowes be from the Pracell West , and you shall leave them to windward . 
 And if you will go with the Pracellas or Flats , you shall find 4. or 5. fathoms : and you may go sure without danger a Northwest course until you come in 7. fathoms . And if you will go upon thee Shoaled , you shall go upon that depth , until you have run 40. or 45. leagues : And from thence you shall set your course Southwest , till you see the Flattes of the main land . You shall then see to the Westward a rock divided into 3. parts , which is called the Camoloquea . And look that when you come from the Pracellas Southwest , you have certain Flats before you : take heed of them that you fallen not by night with them by foure leagues , for fear of the Mecala : and you shall set your course West Northwest until day : and when it is day , you must bear close aboard the shore , and then you shall see a flat Island with many broken sands , which is called Cropeda , and lies but a little out of the trade way , somewhat to the Northward . Off that you shall see 2. Rocks of stone , which are the point of all the Flats : And two leagues from them on the main land you shall see a point which shows like broken land . This is called the point of Caucus . And from that point to Matanzas 
 302 
 on the Northside of Cuba are 12. leagues , and your course lies West and by North : and then you must borrow upon the land all that you can , because of the currents : for the currents will carry you into the Channel . And being at Matanzas , you must run all along the shore , because of the currents . Remember that when The currents . you see one league before you a Rock , and a Shoaled , that hath upon it but 2. fathoms water ; and your mark if you come out of the sea is and Hill , and the Hill is not very high , it stands East and West , and upon it are some little risings and they are not very high , and upon these risings stand two round hammocks close together , you shall see the Teats of Havana . The Teats of 
 To know along the shore when you are against the ^avana-Harbour of Xaroca , the marks are these . A little to The harbour the Westward one league , you shall see along the shore °fXanca-a Hill that is broken , and that broken Hill is over the Harbour of Xaroca : and then a little more to the Westward a league , there is another broken Hill. And you shall see that North and South from these broken hills is a Flat off . And from that to Havana is 7. leagues : and it is all clean ground , and you may go along the shore till you come to Havana . To know Marks to the harbour of Havana , you shall see before you come ttie - at it one little rock ot stone not very high , and smooth Havana . towards the sea : upon the rock stands a little white tower , wherein they keep watch . And then if you have the wind large , you shall see the harbour open , and then you may bear in with it . 
 Your ship being of great burden , when you are within , then keep on the West side , because on the East side , on the West end of the Rock aforesaid , there lies a ledge to the Westward which hath but three or foure fathoms J upon it . If your ship be of small burden , you may run along the weather shore , until you come right against the Castle ; and then half the Bay over you may come to and anchor . 
 [ How to 
 3°3 
 How to work coming through the old Channel , if you be not minded to go over the Pracellas or shoalds . 
 IF you will come through the old Channel , when you come as high as the Shoalds , coming upon your Caio de Moa . course from the Caio de Moa , as I told you , keep 2. 
 leagues from the Pracel or shoaled : and then set our course West unto the low islands of the Firm land . And upon this course you shall ken the Flats on the Caio Romano , point of Caio Romano : and within it is one Flat higher then the other , and smooth upon , and in the midst it makes as it were broken land ; and when you are in the channel in the day time , you must take heed you come not near the shore by 2. leagues , and by your sounding no nearer then 3. fathoms . And you must take heed still when you night comes to keep 2. or three leagues off for fear of the shoalds . And in the night you must go Northwest as is aforesaid . And also you must take heed that you keep in the middle of the channel , as never as you can towards thee shoaled . And finding much wind & being benighted , from midnight till day stir West Northwest , and when it is towards day , then you may edge towards the Flats as is aforesaid . 
 Alcane de Barasoga . Savano . 
 Basque . 
 The Flats of Mecala . 
 And as you stir hence one day and one night from Caio Romano to the inward of the Channel , you shall see the firm land of Cuba , and other marks ; and among the rest , a round hamocke , which you may easily know . It is called Alcane de Barasoga . And from thence to Savano and to Basque is 6. leagues , and likewise Havana 6. leagues . And from thence to cross under the Fort is 45. leagues . And stir hence upon your course aforesaid . And if you have gone from Barasoga 30. leagues , you shall see none of the Flats of Mecala : And give them a breadth off two or three leagues , and keep your course West Northwest , as 
 3°4 
 aforesaid , until it be day , and presently you may edge round to the Flats . And thus stirring , keep your course until you see the hills of Camaloqua . 
 And look that when you come from Caio de Moa , along the Pracel or shoaled by night close by it , you shall not see what land it is , till it be day : and in the Morning you shall set your course as is aforesaid until you see the shoaled , and in seeing it , you may stir on your course as is above mentioned , until you come to Havana . 
 For to set your course from the point of Mance to Caio Romano , when you are North and South with the point of Mance , you shall stir thence West Northwest , until you think you be Northeast and Southwest with the hill of Hama . And this hill is and high hill and smooth to the seaside . And from this hill to Caio Romano you shall stir Northwest and by West : and upon this course you may be bold to see Caio Romano . And the mark of this Flat is , that it makes and high land and smooth upon the top : and in the midst of it , it shows as it were broken . And when you come to it , you must take heed you come not near it by 2. leagues , because it is fowl . And look that you bring not yourself too near the hill of Hama by night . For you must take heed of Caio Romano to keep ofF it until Morning : in the Morning you may go your course until you see it , and then set your course , as is abovesaid . 
 Take heed of that which is here said , for it hath title reason . 
 Sierras de Camahquea . Caio de Moa . Pracellas . 
 Havana . 
 Punta de Mance . 
 Sierra del 
 Hama . 
 Caio Romano . 
 The marks of the Flat of Caio Romano . 
 x 
 . 