The victorious voyage of Captain Amias Preston now knight , and Captain George Sommers to the West India , begun in March 1595. Wherein the isle of Puerto Santo , the isle of Coach near Margarita , the fort and town of Coro , the stately city of S. Iago de Leon were taken sacked and burned , and the town of Cumana ransomed , & Jamaica entered . Written by Robert Davie one of the company . 
 Aptaine Amias Preston , and captain Sommers , both valiant gentlemen & discreet commanders , lying ready with two tall ships , the Ascension and the Gift , and a small pinnace at Plimmouth , for the space of a month attending the coming of captain Jones their 
 consort , which in all that time , through the bad dealing of those which he put in trust , could not make his ship in readiness , according to his appointment , the 12. of March 1595. set forward on their voyage for the West Indies . We with captain Jones in the Derling , and Captain Prowse in the Angel , followed after them the 19. of the said month . The last of March , captain Preston by giving chase to a sail , was separated from captain Sommers , and his pinnace , so that they utterly lost sighed each of other : whereupon captain Preston in his ship alone , resolved to surprise the isle of Puerto santo , and shortly after came before the same . This island stands in the Northerly latitude of 33. degrees , and lies to the Northward of the isle of Madera , and is inhabited by old soldiers , which the kings of Portugal were wont to reward for their former old services , by placing of them there . This island is rich in corn , wine , & oil : and hath good store of sheep , asses , goats & kine : they have also plenty of fowls , fish , & fruits . 
 213 
 The isle of Puerto Santo taken and the chief town in it burned . 
 Captain Preston coming before this island with one ship only sought with 2. long boats to land his men & to force the same : but the people were on shore in warlike array , with barricados & trenches made , ready to withstand them . Whereupon , considering the great danger , and disadvantage of the place , he caused his people to return aboard again . And the next morning 3 or 4 hours before day , he landed in a place of greater security , with 6o men only , who lay closely in a chapel , to defend themselves from the rain till break of the day , and so marched forward upon the backs of their enemies , which kept their barricados upon the shore . By this time the enemy was 500 strong . But , being so suddenly surprised , after some resistance of our muskets , when they saw our pikes approach , and had tasted somewhat of their force they began to flee into certain thickets , & shrubs , thinking from thence to gall our men : but with very little or no loss at all , our men dislodged them of that place also . Hereupon , they all fled towards the chief town of the island : but once again they thought to make a new stand at a certain house by the way , from whence they were repulsed by captain Roberts . So in the flight part of them were slain , and and ensign , which one captain Harvey and English man had lost not long before , was recovered : and the chief town it self was by our men wholly won and possessed . But before the entrance of our men they had conveyed their wives , their children , and the rest of their goods into and exceeding high hill which stands near the town , and could not be conquered , but with exceeding loss . Although they sent diverse times to redeem their town , which was very fair and large , yet in regard of their cruelty and treachery , which they used towards captain Harvey and his people , captain Preston would show them no favour , but utterly burned their town to ashes , and sent his men to wast the rest of their villages of the island , preferring the honour & just revenge of his country men , before his own private gain , & 
 214 
 AMIAS PRESTON AND GEORGE SOMMERS a.d. 
 .. * 595 - 
 commodity . And so with small pillage and great honour he retired in safety and all his small company with him , from the conquered island unto his ship . But we in our ship met not with him , until the 12. of April following . We therefore in the Derling pursuing our voyage , had sighed of the isles of the Canaries the 6 of April , and 
 the 8 of the same , we watered on the Southeast side water of the grand Canaria . There we met with captain . 
 oh oh i • • oh 1 • / * tO tO - Canaria . 
 bommers , & his pinnace , & 3 ships or Hampton , in one whereof was cap . Willis . The 9 of April we all departed for Tenerif to seek captain Preston : and standing over towards Tenerif , the 9 day at night I came into captain Summers ship . The 10 in the morning we brake our main yard , yet we recovered Tenerif , & the same day towards night we anchored under the southside of the same . There I went aland in our boat , & found 3 or 4 fisher boats , and brought one of them off . The rest bulged themselves . Here we road to mend our yard till the 11 at night : then we set sail to find captain Amias Preston : and standing towards Gomera , the 12 in the morning we had sighed of him . Then we thought to have landed in Gomera : but the wind blew so much , that we could not . So we departed altogether with joy the 13 of April , & set our course for the West Indies . And the 8 of May next ensuing , we arrived at the island of Dominica . In all which time Dominica . nothing happened unto us saving this , that the 18 day of April at midnight , our admiral lost her long boat in towing . We stayed at Dominica till the 14 of May , to refresh our sick men . Here the Indians came unto us in canoas made of and whole tree , in some whereof were 3 men , in some 4 or 6 , & in others 12 or 14 , and brought in them plantans , pinos , and potatos , and trucked with us , for hatchet's , knives , & small bead - 
 stones . Here in refreshing of our men , we found and excellent hight bath hard joining to a cold river side : wherein our hlesome sick men bathed themselves , and were soon recovered on^a in of their sicknesses . This is a goodly island , and some - 
 215 
 thing high land , but all overgrown with woods . The 14 we departed from thence , & the 16 sailing Southwestward , we had sighed of Granada , but landed not there . The isles called The 17 we arrived at the Testigos & anchored there , and Testigos , consorted with the 3 ships of Hampton , wherein captain Willis was . The 18 we landed our men & took view and muster of all , & the same night set sail away . The 19 we had sighed of Margarita , where the Spaniards by their Indians fish for pearl : we stood in very near the road , but saw nothing there . Therefore we went no further in , but stood from it again . The same day towards night , we had sighed of a little island , between Margarita & the main , called Coach . We came near it in the night with our ships within some 3 leagues , & there anchored under the main side , and about midnight we manned our pinnaces & boats , and in the morning about break of day , we landed on the island , wherein are few or none inhabitants , but they commonly come from Margarita in boats on the munday , and remain there fishing for pearls until the Saturday , and then return & carry all that they have taken to Margarita . Certain Here we took some few Spaniards and Negros their t^taken s^aves an^ and some small quantity of pearls . 
 intheyletf e remained on this Hand the 20 and 21 , in which time Cache where we went a fishing with our seine , and took good store they fish fir of mullets and other fish , and among the rest drew pearl . a shore in the seine a fish called by the Spaniards Lagarto , and by the Indians Caiman , which is indeed a Crocodile , for it hath 4 feet and a long tail , and a wide mouth , and long teeth , & will devour men . Some of these Lagartos are in length 16 foot , some 20 foot , and some 30 foot : they have musk in them , and live as well on the land , as in the water . The 21 of May we departed for Cumana , thinking to have got in that night to have landed : but the current striketh so strong out of the bay that we could not recover the town till day light . In the morning we espied 2 sails before the town , but could not fetch them . Here we plied 216 
 too and again in the found all the forenoon , but could not get up so far as the town . These 2 sails came room to us , after they saw that we were at and anchor , & came somewhat near us , and sent their skyphs aboard our admiral . They were 2 flyboats of Middleburgh which traded there , 8c had secretly advertised the country of our coming , to our great hindrance : but we knew it not at our first arrival . Here they of Cumana perceiving that we would land , came to parley with us , and told us , if we would land , we might easily take the town , for they meant not to withstand us , but that they had carried all their goods into the mountains , but , if we would not land to burn and spoil the town , they would give us some reasonable ransom , and any victuals that we wanted . So our general agreed with them , received their ransom , and departed without landing . But at our first arrival in this bay , our generals long boat was sent forth well manned , and took 3 Caravels , but found little or nothing of valve in them : saving in one were some sides of bacon , and some maiz and Guiny-wheat . Here we stayed till the 23 of May , 8c in the evening we set sail , and departed from thence . And the 26 of the same we thought to have landed at a fort that stands by the seacoast in the Caracos , as you go for S. Iago . This is a marvelous high land , as high as the pike of Tenerif . We could not land here over night , by reason of the roughness of the sea , which goes in that place , 8c there is but one little creek against the fort , to come in with your boat . So , we perceiving no fit place to land , by reason of the sea , stood away some league to the Westward , about a little headland , there we anchored all night : and the 27 in the morning we all landed in safety , none resisting us . Then we presently set our selves in array , and marched towards the fort , 8c took it without any resistance . Here we remained all the rest of this day until the 28 , about three of the clock in the afternoon . We found nothing in this fort but a 
 217 
 Two Jlieboats of Middleburgh forewarn the Spaniards of our coming . 
 The town of Cumana ransomed . 
 Three Caravels taken . 
 A fort never the Caracos taken . 
 All our actions betrayed by dangerous spies out of England . 
 little meal , or 2 or 3 tons of wine , which by reason of some disorder among the company overcharging themselves with the wine , our general for the most part caused to be spilled . While we remained here , some of our company ranging the woods , found the governor of the fort where he lay asleep , brought him to our general : who examined him touching the state of the city of S. Iago de Leon . Who declared unto us that they had news of our coming a month before , and that they of the town had made preparation for our coming : and that if we did go the common beaten way , it was never possible for us to pass , for that they had made in the midst of the way between this fort and the said city , and exceeding strong barricado on the top of a very high hill , the passage being not above 25 or 30 foot in breadth , & on each side marvelous steep-upright , and the woods so thick that no man could pass for his life : which indeed at our returning back we found to be true . Upon which speeches our general demanded of him if there were not any other way : who answered , there is another way marvelous bad and very ill to travel , which the Indians do commonly use : but he thought that the Spaniards had stopped the same , by cutting down of great trees and other things , as indeed they had . This Spaniard was a very weak and sickly man not able to travel , so our general sent him aboard his ship , & there kept him . In the taking of our 3 small Caravels at Cumana , we had a Spaniard in one of them that had traveled these ways to the city of S. Iago . He told us he would carry us thither by any of both these ways , if afterwards we would set him at liberty : the which was granted . While we remained at the fort by the waters side , the Spaniards came down unto us by the great 8c beaten way on horseback , who being discovered , our general sent out to meet them captain Roberts with some 40 or 50 musketeirs , who came to skirmish with 
 them , but they would not stay . The same day in the afternoon we marched forth towards S. Iago , & took 218 
 the Indians way called The unknown way . In our march we came to diverse Indians houses , which we never hurt , but passed by and left them untouched : but the Indians were all fled into the woods , and other places , we know not whither . We marched until it was night over such high mountains , as we never saw the like , and such a way as one man could scarce pass alone . Our general being in the forward , at length came whereas a river descended down over the mountains , and there we lodged all that night . Here in going this way , we found the Spanish governors confession to be true : for they had barricadoed the way in diverse places with trees , & other things in such sort , that we were driven to cut our way through the woods by Carpenters , which we carried with us for that purpose . The next day being the 29 of May early in the morning we set forward to recover the tops of the mountains : but ( God knoweth ) they were so extreme high and so steep-upright , that many of our soldiers fainted by the way : and when the officers came unto them , and first entreated them to go , they answered , they could go no further . Then they thought to make them go by compulsion , but all was in vain : they would go a little and then lie down , and bid them kill them , if they would , for they could not , nor would not go any further . Whereby they were inforced to depart , & to leave them there lying on the ground . To be short , at length with much ado we got the top of the mountains about noon : there we made a stand till all the company was come up , and would have stayed longer to have refreshed our men : but the fog and rain fell so fast , that we durst not stay . So we made haste to descend towards the town out of the fog and rain : because that in these high mountains by report of the Spaniards themselves , it doth almost continually rain . Assoon as we were descended down near half the way to the town the rain ceased , and going down a little further , on the top of a hill we saw the town not far distant from us . Here we all cleared our muskets : and 
 219 
 when our colours came in sighed , we discharged a second volee of shot to the great discouragement of the enemy . Thus we marched on a round pace . The enemy was in readiness a little without the town to encounter us on horseback . Being now fully descended from the mountains we came into a fair plain champion field , without either hedge , bush or ditch , saving certain trenches which the water had made , as it descendeth from the mountains . Here we set our selves in a readiness , supposing the enemy would have encountered us : but having pitched our main battle , and marching forward a good round pace , captain Beling , and captain Roberts took each of them some lose shoot , and marched in all haste towards the enemy before the main battle , wherein was our general with captain . Summers and came to skirmish with them : but it was soon ended : for the enemy fled . One Spaniard was slain in this skirmish , and not any one of our companies touched either with piece or arrow , God be The Ci tie of S. thanked . We soon marched into the town , and had 
 ** without any more resistance : but there we found not tfMaye 2$ the wealth that we expected : for they had conveyed all into the mountains , except such goods as they could not easily carry , as wine , and iron , and such things . By three of the clock in the afternoon the 29 of May , we entered the city . Here we remained until the 3 of June without any great disturbance , saving sometime by night they would come on horseback hard unto our Corpse du guard , and finding us vigilant , and ready for them , would depart again . 
 The first of June , there came a Spaniard near unto us alone : the Corpse du guard perceiving him , called our General , who soon came towards him : but before he approached , the Spaniard made signs that he should lay aside his arms : which he refused to do , but promised as he was a soldier , if he would come , he should have free passage . Upon which promise he came to him on horseback , and our General brought him within the 220 
 town , and there communed with him . Who demanded what he meant to do with the town : he answered that he meant to remain there and keep it ; or if he did depart from it he would burn it . The Spaniard then demanded , what the ransom of it should be . Our General required 30000 ducats . Whereunto he replied that it was very much . So having had some other conference together , he showed him that he had be a soldier in Flanders a long time , and now was sent thither by his kings commandment . Among other things our General demanded of him , what the reason was they had not walled the city , being so fair a thing as that was . The Spaniard replied , that he thought it to be stronger walled than any city in the world , meaning , by those huge & high mountains which the enemy must pass over before he can approach it ; which we found very true . Thus with many other fair speeches , he took his leave for that day , and told our general , that he would go speak with the governor : ( but it might be himself , for any thing we know ) howbeit because our General had granted him free coming and going , he suffered him to depart : who before his departure , requested to have a token of our General , that he might show to the Governor how he had spoken with us , or else he doubted , that he would not believe him . Whereupon our General gave him a piece of 12 pence : so he departed and promised the next day by ten of the clock to return unto us with and answer : in which mean time nothing befell . The next day being the 2 of June , at his hour appointed , he returned with his Indian running by his horses side . So he was brought to the general , and there remained till after dinner , and dined in his company in the governors house that was . The dinner ended , with the best entertainment which could be given him , they communed again about the ransom of the city . Our General proposed his old demand of 30000 ducats . The Spaniard first proffered him 2000 , then 3000 , last of all 4000 , and more he would not give . Our General counting it a 
 221 
 Certain villages about Sant lagp fired . 
 The ci tie of S. Iago burned . 
 small sum of money among so many , did utterly refuse it . So the Spaniard departed . But before his departure our general told him , that if he came not to him again before the next day noon , with the ransom which he demanded , he would set all on fire . That whole day passed , and the night also without any thing of moment , except some show of assault , by their approaching towards our Corpse du guard , and retiring back again . The 3 day being come , in the morning some of our company went forth , a league or more from the town , & some two leagues and more unto certain villages thereabouts , & set them on fire : but the enemy never came to resist them , so they returned back again safe into the town , and brought certain Indian prisoners with them , among whom there was one which spoke broken Spanish , which being examined , confessed unto us of his own accord , how the General had sent to the other towns thereabouts for aid , and that he thought they would be there with him that day . When we understood this , we grew into some distrust of the Spaniards treachery , and thought upon the messenger , how he had used long delays with us : whereupon we were commanded presently , every man to make ready to depart , and to fire the city : which forthwith was done . And after we had seen it all on fire , & burned to ashes , we took our leaves and so departed , & marched away that day being the 3 of June , not that way we came , but by the great beaten way . And when we had marched half the way towards the waters side , we came unto that strong barricado which they had made , and there lay all that night . Here we found the Spanish captains word to be true which we took at the fort by the waters side : for this barricado was of such force , that 100 men in it well furnished , would have kept back from passing that way 100000 : first by reason of the huge and high mountains , next the steepenes of them , on both sides , last of all in regard of the fine contriving of it with the large trenches , and other munitions , which I cease to recite . The fourth 
 222 
 AMIAS PRESTON AND GEORGE SOMMERS a.d. 
 I595 ’ 
 day of June in the morning we departed from thence : but before our departure , we overthrew on the one side of the steep hill two bases of iron , which we found there planted by the enemy , and so set forward towards our ships , and by 12 of the clock came to the waters side , and there remained in the fort which we had taken before , until the fift day at night : in which time we jaded some small quantity of hides , and Salsa-perilla , which we found there at our first landing . So the fift day at night we departed from thence , to go to a town called Coro : but before we departed , we set fire in the fort , Indians ' and all the Indians houses that were about it , and burned them . Then we set sail , and standing along the coast , waters side our Spanish guide signified unto us , that there were burned . foure sails of ships about five leagues from thence , in P11 - 58z ] a place called Checherebiche , and Caio , and Maio . So the 6 day in the morning we were thwart of the place , and there our general sent away his long boat with captain Sommers , unto those places , where they found 3 of the ships : but the Spaniards had conveyed their sails ashore into the woods , so that they could not 
 bring them off , but set fire in them and burned them . Three Spanish From hence we stood along the shore , sailing until the burnt-ninth day of June , on which day towards the evening we embarked our selves in our pinnaces and small caravels , to land at Coros : but we had none that knew the place certainly : wherefore we ankored that night some two leagues to the Eastward of it , and in the morning I went on land , and nine more with me , to see if we could discover the town , but we could not , we went above a league up into the country , but could not see any village or town . So returning back , we met our general , with diverse others which came ashore with him , with whom we marched into the country again , but could see nothing , & so returned . At the water side captain Prowse died . There we remained all that day on land , by reason the wind blew so much that we could not get aboard until the evening . After our 
 223 
 coming aboard a boat which we sent into the bay , returned and brought us news , that there road a bark within the bay , and by all likelihood the town should be there . So presently our general went into the bay with the Derling and some of the small caravels . The tenth day in the morning , the rest of our shipping came into the bay , and our men landed the same day , about io or ii of the clock in the night , Sc so marched on towards the town : but in the way they had made barricados , and kept them very strongly . Notwithstanding the courage of our men was such , as that they feared nothing , and forced them to leave their forces , and fly . Having won this barricado they there remained until the next day being the 11 of June , and then early in the morning they marched on towards the town , where by the way , the enemy often times came to skirmish with them , but always fled . In fine they won the town without any great loss of men , God be thanked . Having got the town , they found nothing in it at all ; for they had intelligence from Sant Iago , how we had used them before , which caused them to convey all their goods into the mountains and woods : finding nothing in it , our general caused it to be set on fire , thinking it not good to remain there , but to return again , back to the ships : and the greatest cause was by reason of the departure of captain Sommers : who the day before in a most furious tempest , being in the pinnace , with some 50 men at anchor , had his cables broken and lost all his anchors , and so was feign to put to sea to save himself , otherwise they had be in danger of perishing . Thus our General and his company , returned back again the twelfth day and embarked themselves , and departed away with all speed to seek captain Sommers . The 13 towards night , he came where captain Sommers was , and found him riding , but not by any anchors , but by two bases , which they had made for to stay their bark by : at which meeting the company was very glad . Then they determined to 
 224 
 AMIAS PRESTON AND GEORGE SOMMERS a. d 
 .. J595 - 
 go into a mighty great bay , to a town called Laguna : The bay of but the bay was so deep and should withal , that we returned back again , after we had stood in two days & a night . So we sailed over towards the Isle of Hispaniola the sixteenth of June : and the twentieth day Hispaniola . we saw it . The 21 we ankored under Cape Tiburon . Here we watered , and stayed until the 25 of the same . After our departure out of the bay of Laguna , a great sickness fell among our fleet , and there died about eighty men of the same . This sickness was the flux of the belly , which is a common disease in that country . 
 We remained about this Island until the eight and twentieth of this month . Then we departed from thence , and the second of July arrived at the Island of Jamaica . Jamaica . Before our coming hither , the three ships of Hampton had forsaken us , and left our company . 
 And the Derling wherein was captain Jones , was sent The death of to discover some other secret matter , in which dis - captaineJones . covery the valiant gentleman ended his life . So our whole fleet was now but our generail , with captain Sommers , and a small pinnace . We stayed at this Isle of Jamaica until the sixt of July , in which mean time we landed to see if we could kill any beeves , but we could not , they were so wild : here is great store of them , and great plenty of freshfish . We departed hence the 6 of July , and passed by the Islands , called Caimanes , and the Isle de Pinos , and the 12 of the said month by Cape de Corrientes where we Cape de Cor-watered , and the same night , we set sail towards the rientes . cape of S. Anthony , being the westermost part of the Isle of Cuba . The 13 day in the morning we were under this cape , and the same day we met with the honourable knight , Sir Walter Ralegh , returning from his painful , and happy discovery of Guiana , and his surprise of the Isle of Trinidad . So with glad hearts , we kept him and his fleet of three ships company till the twentieth day at night , what time we lost them . 
 In all which time nothing of moment fell out , save 
 x 225 p 
 that we gave chase to a couple of frigates , but could not fetch them . 
 Afterwards we plied to recover Havana , until the five and twentieth of July : then we set our course for the head of the Martyrs , the 27 we were in sighed of them . The 28 we entered the gulf of Bahama : then we set The Bank of our course homeward towards Newfoundland , but we Newfoundland cOUl ( l not fetch it , but were on the Bank , and took fish there the 20 day of August . The same night we set sail to come home , by reason the wind was contrary to go in with Newfoundland . So the tenth day of September , we arrived in safety ( God be thanked ) in Milford haven in Wales , having performed so long a voyage in the space of sixe months , or somewhat less . 
 . 