A voyage of Master William Parker of Plymouth gentleman , to Margarita , Jamaica , Truxillo , Puerto de Cavallos situate within the bay of Honduras , and taken by sir Anthony Sherley and him , as likewise up Rio dolce : with his return from thence , and his valiant and happy enterprise upon Campeche the chief town of Yucatan , which he took and sacked with sixe and fifty men , and brought out of the harbour a Frigate laden with the kings tribute , and surprised also the town of Sebo . 
 N the year 1596 , Master William Parker of Plimmouth gentleman being furnished with a tall ship and a bark at his own charges , the ship called the Prudence of one hundreth and twenty tons , wherein himself went captain , and the bark called the Adventure of five and 
 twentie tons , whereof was captain one Richard Hen , departed from the foresaid haven of Plimmouth in the month of November , having one hundreth men in his company . 
 The first place where we touched in the West Indies was the Isle of Margarita on the coast of Tierra firma , where we took a Spanish gentleman and others , who for his ransom set at liberty Master James Willis , and five other Englishmen which were prisoners in Cumana , who otherwise were never like to have come from thence . Thus passing from thence , we sailed over to the Isle of Jamaica , where the second of March we met with sir Anthony Sherley , who before our coming had taken the chief town in the Island , and was now almost in a readiness to depart . And here consorting our selves with him , we departed from Jamaica 277 
 Margarita . 
 Sixe English men redeemed . 
 Truxillo the sixt of March , and resolved to set upon the strong 
 assailed . town of Truxillo near the mouth of the bay of the 
 Honduras . And having sailed to Cape de Corrientes upon Cuba , to seek a bark of mine for our better strength ; but not finding her , we went for the cape of Honduras , where we purposed to entrap the watch , and so to have sacked the town of Truxillo . But the watch discovering us , made great fires , and the town presently shot ofF a great piece , and answered with fires . Notwithstanding , the next day being the one and thirtieth of March , we brought our ships under the fort , and landed our men : but it was a vain pur - pose , for the town is invincible by nature , and stands upon the top of a very steep hill joining close to the sea , environed with woods of such exceeding thickness , that there is no passage through the trees : there is also but one very narrow and steep lane to go into the town , at the end whereof is a gate very strongly fortified : so that it is not to be approached unto , unless it be upon the sudden , and with surprise of the watch : wherefore with the loss of some few men we retired from this enterprise . 
 From hence we passed up farther into the gulf the second of April , with intention to invade the town of Puerto de Puerto de Cavallos , where we arrived the seventh of April , and took the same , finding it well fortified , but a n' nothing answering our expectation for wealth . Whereupon Sir Anthony Sherley and I being hitherto frustrate of our hope's , resolved here to enter up to the bottom of Rio dolce , and to pass overland unto thee They pass South sea . Wherefore we set forward , and entered k ™ su°Rio ab°ve thirty leagues up the said Rio dolce , thinking doke^ 10 to have passed overland with two companies of men , and to have carried a pinnace in sixe quarters to be set together with skrewes , and therein to have embarked our selves in the South sea , and there for a time to have tried our fortune ; and to have returned overland to the bay of Honduras . But this our diligence took 278 
 * 597-no effect , because of the huge highness of the mountains , and the length of the way , being more then was given out at the first . Then with much grief we returned out to Truxillo , where I departed from Sir Anthony Sherley . 
 After my departure from this worthy knight , I set my course for Cape de Cotoche which lies on the East part Cabo de of Yucatan from whence I ranged all the North coast Cotoche . of the said promontory of Yucatan , until I came unto Cape Desconoscido , where I put 56 of my men into a Cabo desconos-Periago , or long Indian Canoa ; and leaving my ship Cfdo‘ sixe leagues from the town of Campeche at three of the clock in the morning* I landed hard by the monastery * Cn Easter of San Francisco , and took the said town of Campeche , with the captain and Alcalde , finding therein five Campeche hundreth Spaniards , and in two towns close adjoining taken . to the same eight thousand Indians . The multitude of the Spaniards which fled upon my first assault by ten of the clock in the morning assembling together renewed their strength , and set furiously upon me and my small company . In which assault I lost some sixe of my men , and my self was shot under the left breast with a bullet , which bullet lies still in the chine of my back . Being thus put unto our shifts we devised on the sudden a new stratagem : for having diverse of the townsmen A new prisoners , we tied them arm in arm together , and strata&m . placed them in stead of a barricado to defend us from the fury of the enemies shot . And so with ensign displayed , taking with us our sixe dead men , we retired with more safety to the haven , where we took a frigate which road ready fraught with the kings tribute in silver and other good commodities , * which were * To the valve presently to be transported to S. Juan de Ullua , and 5°°° brought the same and our Periago or Canoa to my ship , * own ‘ which lay in two fathom water sixe leagues from the town , being not able to come any nearer for the sholds upon that coast . Over against the place where our ship an Indian road , stood a town of 300 or 400 Indians called Sebo , town taken . 
 279 
 which we likewise took , where we found Champeche-wood good to die withal , with wax , and honey . This done we left this coast , and turned up to Cape de Cotoche again , and ankored every day at noon , because of the brizes , and in turning up I lost my bark called the Adventure , which was taken by 2 frigates of war , which were manned out from Campeche : wherein Captain Hen and thirteen of my men were taken , and afterwards executed , as since we understand by some Spanish prisoners that were taken in those parts . After we had stayed five weeks on this coast , we shaped our course for Havana , where finding nothing , we disemboqued , and came along by the Isle of Bermuda , and crossed over to The bank near Cape Raze in 22 fathoms : and from thence sailing for England , we fell with Silly about the first of July , and within two days after arrived at Plimmouth , where we found the Right honourable the Earl of Essex setting forth with a great fleet for the Isles of the Azores . 
 . 