The second voyage to Guiana . 
 Unday the 26. of January , in the year of our Lord 1596. we departed from Portland road , in the Darling of London , having in company the Discoverer , a small pinnace , whom we lost at sea , in foul weather , the Thursday next following . Friday , the 13. of February , we fell with 
 the Canarie Islands , where we expected our pinnace , according to our appointment , seven or eight days . Here we took two boats , the one a passenger , we bulged , the other we towed at our ship stern , steering Southsouthwest for the Islands of Cape Verde . Therehence we set sail the 28. of Februarie , keeping a Westsouthwest 
 452 
 course . In this passage we found very smooth seas , fair weather , and steady winds , blowing ordinarily between the East and Northeast points . Near 30. leagues from these Islands , we came into a grown sea , the swollen waters making a strange noise & hurtling together , as if it might be two strong currents encountering each other . The 12. of March we sounded , and had sandy ground in 47. fathom . At midnight in twelve fathom we came to and anchor , the ground sandy oaze . Sunday the 14. towards night , about some sixe leagues from the shore , we descried a low land in the bottom of a bay . From the 9. of March until this time , we kept for the most part a Southsouthwest course . The water in this place is smooth , but muddy , and the colour read or tawny . From the Westermost of the Cape Verde-Islands unto this Bay I do estimate the distance to be near 550. leagues . It seemed to most of our seamen , to be the very bank of a shoaled upon a lee-shore : the rather because without it , in the clean green sea we had but 7. fathom depth : but after by proof finding that there is no sudden alteration in any part of the coast , and that the sea is smoothest near the land , we always at night sought to anchor in three or foure fathom . And doubtless as the hand of God is wondered in all 
 his works : so herein his merciful providence is most A notable admirable , that upon a lee-shore subject unto a perpetuali observation . Easterly gale , neither much wind can endanger shipping , by reason that the foul heavy water is not capable of vehement motion , and the soft light oaze , if they touch , cannot bruise them : nor is there any jeopardy in being wind-bound , or imbayed : for the most forcible winds make the greatest flood-tides , whereby the freshets when they take their ordinary course of ebb , do grow strong 
 and swift , setting directly ofF to sea against the wind . They anchor In we by turning went clear of all Baize : howbeit in this the mouth of case , as also in the rivers , the use of a drove sail seems A , rrowari a good and ready help . The first place wherein we anchored , was in the mouth of Arrowari , a fair and great ute , . * 
 453 
 river . It stands in one degree and fourtie minutes : for we fell so far to the Southwards by your lordship's direction . The bar without hath at the least three fathom , at the shoaldest place , when it is low ebb . The depth within is eight and tenne fathom . The water always brackish . We found not any inhabitants in this place near the sea coast . I omit here to recite the names of the nations that are borderers , their towns , Captains and commodities that their countries do yield , as also the soundings , tides , and how the coast lies etc. thinking it fittest to reduce these disjoined and scattering remembrances to one place . As we passed we always kept the shore within view and stopped the floods , still ankering at night in three or foure fathom . When we came to the North headland of this Bay ( which we nam Cape Cecyl ) we saw two high mountains like two islands , but they join with the main . In this tract lying Northnorthwest near 60. leagues , there fallen into the sea these several great rivers , Arrowari , Iwaripoco , Maipari , Coanawini , Caipurogh . we anchored in two fathom not far from these hills , and filled all our cask with fresh water by the ship side , for in the sea thirtie miles from the mouth of any river it is fresh and good . This second Bay extendeth it self above thirtie leagues to the Westward , and containeth within it these rivers Arcooa , Wiapoco , Wanari , Caparwacka , Cawo , Caian , Wia , Macuria , Cawroor , Curassawini . Here leaving the ship at anchor , I took into the boat John Provost , my Indian Interpreter , John Linsey , and eight or nine others , intending to search some of these rivers , and to seek speech with the Indians . In Wiapoco , at the foot of the Eastermost mountain , where the river falls into the sea , we found twentie or thirtie houses , but not inhabited . we stayed there but one night . Wanari we overpassed , because the entrance is rocky and not deep . In Caperwacka we sailed some fourtie miles , but could see no Indian . At one of their ports under the side of a hill , we took in so much Brasill wood as our 
 454 
 boat could carry . among other trees we cut down one for and example , which I do verily believe to be the same sort of cinnamon , which is found in the straights of Magellan . From Caperwacka we passed to Cawo , and there met with a Canoa , wherein were two Indians . It was long time before we could procure them to come near us , for they doubted lest we were Spanish . When my interpreter had persuaded them the contrary , and that we came from England , they without farther speech or delay , brought us to Wareo their Captain , who entertained us most friendly , and then at large declared unto us , that he was lately chased by the Spaniards from Moruga , one of the neighbour rivers to Raleana , or Orenoque : and that having burned his own houses , and destroyed his fruits and gardens , he had left his country and towns to be possessed by the Arwaccas who are a vagabond nation of Indians , which finding no certain place of abided of their own , do for the most part serve and follow the Spanyards . He showed me that he was of the nation of the laos , who are a mighty people , and of a late time were Lords of all the sea coast so far as Trinidad , which they likewise possessed . Howbeit , that with a general consent , when the Spanyards first began to borrow some of their wives , they all agreed to change their habitation , and do now live united for the most part towards the river of Amazones . But the especial cause of his present remove was , because two or three years past , twentie Spaniards came to his town , and sought to take his best wife from him : but before they carried her away , he at time and place of advantage killed half of them : the rest fled , most of them soar hurt . Now in this case he thought it best to dwell far enough from them . Your Indian pilot Ferdinando , who conducted you by Amana , and now abideth near the 
 1596. 
 The laos a mlghtle nation . 
 Ferdinando the Indian pilot of sir 
 head of Dessekebe , is one of this men subject's : By Walter whom ( as it may seem ) he hath taken good notice Ralegh . of our princess and country . For he descended more [ III . 674. particularly to inquire what forces were come with us , 
 455 
 assuring me of the Spaniards being in Trinidad , and that the Indians our friends betwixt hope and fear , have earnestly expected our return from England these foure or five months . When I had answered him , that at our departure we left no Spaniards alive to annoy them ; that we now came only to discover , and trade with them ; and that if her Majesty should have sent a power of men , where no enemy was to resist , the Indians might perhaps imagine , that we came rather to invade , then to defend them : He replied , that this course very well sorted with the report which they had herd of our Princess justice , rare graces , and virtues : the fame of whose power in being able to vanquish the Spaniards , and singular goodness in undertaking to succour and defend the afflicted Indians , was now so general , that the nations far and near were all agreed to join with us , and by all means possible to assist us in expelling and rooting out the Spaniards from all parts of the land : and that we were deceived , if we thought this country not large enough to receive us , without molestation or intrusion upon the Indians , who wanted not choice of dwellingplaces , if they forsook one to live in another : but stood in need of our presence at all times to aid them , and maintain their liberty , which to them is dearer then land or living . He then farther desired , that he with his people might have our favour against the Arwaccas , who not being content to enjoy their grounds and houses , had taken from them many of their wives and children , the best of whose fortune was , if they lived , to live in perpetuali slavery under the Spaniards . we put him in good hope and comfort thereof . And he to deserve some part of this friendship , commended unto us and elderly man to be our Pilot in bringing us to Raleana . When we were ready to depart , he demanded whither we 
 Brasil-wood , wanted any Urapo , which is the wood , that is usually carried from these parts to Trinidad in Canoas , and is there sold to the French for trade : he offered , if we would bring our ship near his port , to put in her lading thereof , 456 
 But because most of our cask was not iron-bound , and in making stowage-way to remove it , would have be the loss of our Sider and other drink ; I therefore referred the taking of any quantity to fitter opportunity : thinking it sufficient at this time , to have only my boats lading thereof : which afterwards in extremity of foul weather , before we could get aboard our ship , we were enforced in a dark night to heave all overboard : thinking our selves happy , to have recovered thither at seven days end , with safety of life only . All which time we could not where set foot on shore , but rested day and night wet and weatherbeaten in our covertlesse boat , which was sometime ready to sink under us . For we had in this place without comparison more rain , wind , and gusts , then else where at any time . To be brief , my men became weak and sick , and if we had stayed any longer time out , I doubt whither the greatest part of us had ever come aboard again . I afterwards understood by my Indian pilot , that this weather is for most part of the year usual , near the Island Oncaiarie , which lies North from the Unseasonable river Capurwacka some sixe leagues into the sea : and out that they hold opinion how this Hand is kept by some QnCaia°ie evil spirit : for they verily believe , that to sleep in the day time near it ( except it be after much drink ) is present death . The only season wherein little rain does fall there , is ( as I gathered by their speech , they dividing all times by their Moons ) at our Winter Solstice . The mother-wind of this coast is for the most part to the Northward of the East , except when the Sun is on this side of thee . Equinoctial ! , for then it often veares Southerly , but most in the night . This our guide is of the laos , who do all mark themselves , thereby to How the bee known from other nations after this manner . With natim °ftke the tooth of a small beast like a Rat , they raze some their ^^emsHvet to faces , some their bodies , after diverse forms , as if it be known were with the scratch of a pin , the print of which rasure from other can never be done away again during life . When 
 457 
 Port Howard otherwise called Gowateri . 
 he had sometime conversed with our Indians , that went from England with us , he became willing to see our country . His sufficiency , trustiness , and knowledge is such , that if the pretended voyage for Guiana do take place , you shall ( I doubt not ) find him many ways able to steed your Lordship in your designs and purposes . For beside his precise knowledge of all the coast , and of the Indian towns and dwellings , he speaks all their languages , was bred in Guiana , is a sworn brother to Putima , who slew the Spaniards in their return from Manoa , can direct us to many gold mines , and in nothing will undertake more , then he assuredly will perform . 
 To the Westward this Bay hath many good roads under small Islands , whereof the greatest nam Gowateri , is inhabited by the Shebaios : and beside the plenty of foul , fish , fruits , wild porks and deer , which are there to be had , where Caiane falls into the sea , ( for it stands in the mouths of Wia and Caiane ; ) it yields safe and good harbour in foure and five fathom for ships of great burden . On all that coast we found not any like it : we therefore honoured this place by the name of Port Howard . The road under Triangle Islands , which are the Westermost from the rest and stand in five degrees , which have also store of fish , foul , deer and Iwanas , is good , but not comparable with this other , where in all winds and weather , ships , though they be many , may all ride securely . The hills and high lands are limits to this bay on each side : for to the Eastward beyond it appear none at all , and to the Westward of mount Hobbeigh very few . Where the mountains fail , there Brasill wood is no farther to be sought for : but in all parts cotton , pepper , silk and Balsamum trees do grow in abundance . The roots of the herb Wia-passa are here most plentiful : I find them in taste nothing different from good ginger , and in operation very medicinable against the flix and headache . These rivers , as also others nearer Raleana , do all fallen out of the plains of this empire over rocks , as the river 458 
 Caroli doth into Raleana : and in most places within the utmost hedge of woods , the land within is plain , void of trees , and bears short grass like Arromaiaries country . 
 Next adjoining unto these , are the rivers Cunanamma , Uracco , Mawara , Mawarparo , Amonna , Marawini , Oncowi , Wiawiami , Aramatappo , Camaiwini , Shurinama , Shurama , Cupanamma , Inana , Guritini , Winitwara , Berbice , Wapari , Maicaiwini , Mahawaica , Wappari , Lemdrare , Dessekebe , Caopui , Pawrooma , Moruga , Waini , Barima , Amacur , Aratoori , Raleana . From Cape Cecyl to Raleana , the From Cape coast trendeth two hundred leagues next hand West - 200 northwest . In this variety of goodly rivers , Amonna among the rest poureth himself into the sea in a large and deep channel : his swiftness suffers no bar , nor refuseth any shipping of what burden soever they be : within his mouth for good and hopeful respects is port Burley placed . The inhabitants that dwell Eastward , do never pass lower then Berbice to trade . Above Curitini in the woods they gather great quantities of honey . 
 Farther to the Eastward then Dessekebe , no Spaniard ever traveled . In which respect , and that no sea-card that I have seen at any time , does in any sort near a truth , describe this coast : I thought the liberty of imposing English names to certain places of note , of right to belong unto our labours ; the rather because occasion thereby offereth it self gratefully to acknowledge the honour due unto them that have been , and I hope will still continue favourers of this enterprise . 
 The Indians to show the worthiness of Dessekebe ( for Dessekebe it is very large and full of Islands in the mouth ) doe calle^ The call it the brother of Orenoque . It lies Southerly into the land , and from the mouth of it unto the head , they pass in twentie days : then taking their provision they carry it on their shoulders one days journey ; afterwards they return for their Canoas , and bear them likewise to the side of a lake , which the laos call Roponowini , the Charibes , Parime : which is of such 
 459 
 The great lake whereon Manoa or El Dorado stands . 
 In September . 
 This Spaniard understands the Guianian language , and is reputed a very sufficient man . 
 bigness , that they know no difference between it & the main sea . There be infinite numbers of Canoas in this lake , and ( as I suppose ) it is no other then that , whereon Manoa stands : In this river , which we now call Devoritia , the Spaniards do intend to built them a town . In Moruga it was , that they hunted Wareo and his people , about half a year since . Arromaiarie , who won so great credit by overthrowing the Tivitivas of Amana , and making free the passage of that river ( but now again lives in disgrace , by reason that the Charibes of Guanipa have killed most of his followers , and burned his towns ) was present with them , and took away many of the women of that place . Arracurri , another Indian of the nation of the Arwaccas inhabiting in Barima , was likewise present , and conducted the Spaniards to all the Indian dwellings . They were not of Anthonie de Berreo his company , that followed this chase , but were the Spaniards of Margarita , and the Caraccas , with whom * Santiago forsaking his governor Berreo joined himself . For which fact he now lies in fetters at Trinidad , every day expecting sentence of death . The occasion hereof grew as follows . 
 When Berreo , having lost his men , was left with Fasshardo at Cumana all alone , as forlorn , and never likely to compass his intended conquest of Guiana : the governors of the Caraccas and Margarita consulting together , sent with all speed into Spaine , to advertise their king , that Berreo was utterly unable to follow this enterprise , that he had given it over , and did now sojorne in his old days at Fasshardo his house , minding nothing else but his solace , and recreation . They farther declared , of how great importance this matter was : and that and English gentleman of such reckoning , as they nam your lordship to be , having be in Guiana , and understanding so much of the state thereof , and the nations thereunto adjoining , as Topiawarie , being both old and wise , could inform you of , who also in confirmation of friendship , had given you his only son , to whom 460 
 the inheritance of the country did belong after him : there was no other likelihood , but that you , who adventured so far , and in such sort as you did , only to see , and know a certainty , would leave nothing unattempted to possess so rich a country , and without all doubt would return presently . That mean time , you had left this aged Sire alive , to be a block in their way , to whom after his decease , this enterprise by patent did belong , and to be a weak adversary against your self , whom at all times you knew easily how to distress : and that therefore it might be behooveful for his majesty to revoke Berreo his grant , and to use their service , who were ready and willing without any delay to undertake the charge . These news being at large amplified and delivered to the king : Domingo de Vera , Berreo his Campmaster , who was sent into Spaine , five months before your arrival at Trinidad , with a sufficient quantity of gold got out of Guiana , to levy and furnish 500. men , having got knowledge of this practice , so solicited this cause in Berreo his behalf , that present order was given for the victualling and manning of tenne ships to be sent to Berreo : and farther , this gold boar such weight , that the king commanded other 18. of his ships to stop at Trinidad , and not to follow their other directions , before they saw that place secured from enemies . 
 Berreo supposing that these governors in sending with such speed into Spaine , meant him no good ; to approve his care and constancy , and that he never would yield under the burden of his adverse fortune ; giving no time or breath to his adversaries nor himself : returned forthwith to Carapana his port , only with fifteene men , being the scattered remnant of those whom you lately dispossessed of Trinidad . These governors followed him , and assuring themselves of present employment from their king , preoccupating the time of their directions* to be returned from Spaine , entered Guiana with their men , with full determination to murder Berreo , and to dispatch all his company . They indeed 
 461 
 killed two or three , but Berreo fled towards Caroli , where he stayed hoping for succour from his son Antonie de Ximenes , to come down the river from Nuevo Reyno de Granada . The Margaritanes with their accomplices busied themselves , some in searching the country , others in purveying of victuals out of the rivers that do lie Eastward , of which number these were , that entered into Moruga with twentie Canoas . Santiago passed up into Topiawaries country , and there took Francis Sparrow sir George Gifford his man prisoner , who with plenty of gold ransomed his life , and is now abiding in Cumana . This done , they all returned to Trinidad , and began to build their town there , when unhappily to their small comfort the eight and twentie sails arrived , and took Santiago prisoner . The other Actors in this Interlude vanished , and in Canoas recovered Margarita and Cumana again . Eighteen of the said ships leaving all things in good order , departed from Trinidad to follow their others directions : ten doe yet remain fortifying at Conquerabia , and expecting our coming . 
 This particular relation I had from and Indian , servant to Berreo , that could speak Spanish , whom I took in the river . He is of the nation of the laos , and from a child bred up with Berreo . I gave him trade to buy him a Canoa to return into his country , and so left him glad , that he had met with us . 
 Now the Indians of Moruga being chased from their dwellings , do seek by all means possible to accord all the nations in one , so to invade the Arwaccas who were guides to the Spaniards , in showing their towns , and betraying them . For they are fully persuaded , that by driving these Arwaccas , who serve the Spaniards ( for a great part of this nation does also hate , or not know them ) out of their territories , and Trinidad , the Spaniards for want of bred , will be enforced to seek habitation farther ofF , or at the least in time consume and be wasted . 
 462 
 The 6. day of Aprill we came to and anchor within the 2% mouth of the river Raleana , having spent twentie and or three days in discovery upon this coast . The channel Qreno^ of this river hath sixe or seven fathom depth , nine or ten miles off at sea , the bar lies farther out , and at low water hath not full two fathom . It highs not above five foot , except at a spring tIED . we anchored in ten fathom the first night : the next morning twelve Canoas came unto us , furnished and provided of victuals after their manner for the wars . Their Captains names were Anwara , and Aparwa . These Cassiques , when the Spaniards made the last inroad in those parts , were in the inland among the Iwarawakeri their neighbours , by which occasion having lost some of their wives ( for not - Spanish withstanding their profession of Christianitie , some of these Spaniards keep ten or twelve women , thinking themselves well and surely blessed , howsoever they live , if their town and houses be religiously crossed ) they kept together 30. Canoas , hoping at our coming , which they had now long expected to recover this loss upon them and the Arwaccas , who in their absence had done this wrong . They showed me this their purpose , & required to be joined in league of friendship with us against our enemies . When of them I had learned so much of the present estate of the country , as they did know : they demanded whither we had brought no more forces with us , but only one ship ? I answered them as before I did the others , that we now came only to trade , not knowing until this present that any Spaniards were in Guiana ; that upon our return our whole fleet will hasten to set forwards , and that in the mean time , we would now visit our friends , and help them so far as we could in any thing that we should find needful presently to be done . After long discourse ( for their chief man stayed with me all night ) when he had caused me to spit in my right hand , with many other ceremonies which they use in confirming friendship , he went to the shore , and one of his Canoas he sent to bring forwards the 
 463 
 Muchikeri the name of the Province where Macu-rigueray the frst town of 
 Guiana is situate . 
 Parime and 
 Inland sea of salt water . 
 other twentie : one other he caused to go up the river before us , to bring intelligence . Then calling together the chief of his company , they made small fires , and sitting in their Hamacas , or Indian beds , each one sorted himself with his companion , recounting among themselves the worthiest deeds , and death's of their Ancestors , execrating their enemies most despitefully , and magnifying their friends with all titles of praises and honour , that may be devised ; Thus they sit talking , and taking Tobacco some two hours , and until their pipes be all spent ( for by them they measure the time of this their solemn conference ) no man must interrupt , or disturb them in any sort : for this is their religion , and prayers , which they now celebrated , keeping a precise fast one whole day , in honour of the great Princes of the North , their Patroness and defender . Their Canoas being made ready , they accompanied us , and in their way showed us , where the shoaldes of the river do lie . By this Captain I learned , that Muchikeri is the name of the Country where Macureguerai the first town of the Empire of Guiana , that lies towards Raleana , is seated in a fair and exceeding large plain , below the high mountains , that bear Northwesterly from it , that it is but three days journey distant from Carapana his Porte , and that Manoa is but sixe days farther . That they themselves do pass in three days into the Country of the Iwarewakeri by the River Amacur , which though it be not the directest , yet it is the readiest way to Macureguarai , for that which leads to Carapana his dwelling , is in some places difficult , and mountainous . That a nation of clothed people , called Cassanari , do dwell not far from the place , where the River doth first take the name of Orenoque , and that far within , they border upon a Sea of salt water , nam Parime . That a great River , called Macurwini , passes through their Country into Orenoque . That Manoa stands twentie days journey from the mouth Wiapoco : sixeteene days from Barima , 
 464 
 thirteene days from Amacur , and tenne days from Aratoori . That the best way unto it , is not by Macureguerai . That of all others the Charibes that dwell high up in Orenoque , know most the inland , and of those nations , and they speak no other language , then such as John your Interpreter doth well understand . He certified me of the headless men , and that their mouths in their breasts are exceeding wide . The name of their nation in the Charibes language is Chiparemai , and the Guianians call them Ewiapanomos . What I have herd of a sort of people more monstrous , I omit to mention , because it is no matter of difficulty to get one of them , and the report otherwise will appear fabulous . Lastly he told me of and inland River , nam Cawrooma , adjoining to Aratoori , and that the Quepyn mountains , where Carapana dwells , are hardly accessible . That the Amapagotos have images of gold of incredible bigness , and great store of unmanned horses of the Caracas breed : and they dwell five days journey up the River about Caroli . we with our fleet of Canoas were now not far from Carapanas Port , when our intelligencer returned and informed us that tenne Spaniards were lately gone with much trade to Barima , where these Indians dwelled , to buy Cassavi bred ; and that within one day two other Canoas of Spaniards were appointed to come by the River Amana , to Carapana his Port. 
 Upon this occasion they took counsel , and in the end desired to return to their houses , lest the Spaniards finding them from home , and imagining that they did purposely absent themselves , should take away their wives and spoil their dwellings . They farther resolved if it were possible to cut them off : which afterwards they did perform . For when they were dispersed in their houses seeking Cassavi , suddenly at one time , in all places they were assaulted , and not one of them escaped . Carapana , whose hand was in laying this plot , sent us this news , as we returned down the River . 
 x 465 2 G 
 They have eminent heads like dogs , and live all the day time in the sea , they speak the Charibes language . 
 A sudden as salt of the Spaniards by the Indians . 
 The two other Canoas that came from Trinidad by Amana , notwithstanding that we kept a league before the ship with our boats , saw the ship before we had sighed of them , and presently with all speed went to Berreo to advertise him of our coming . He forthwith dispatched two or three messengers to Trinidad . One of his Canoas met with our spy , whom the Indians of Barima had left to go with us : they rifled him of his victuals , gave him knives , and dismissed him .. 
 In eight days sailing still before a wind , we arrived at Topiawaries Porte , in all which time no Indian that we knew came aboard us . For the time of our return promised at your Lordships departure from thence being expired ; they in despair severed them - selves among the other nations . Here the Spaniardes A Ranchma have seated their Rancheria of some twentie or thirtie “ kmtedbj the houses . The high rocky Island , that lies in the Spaniards at midst of the River , against the mouth of Caroli , is a Port of their Fort or refuge , when they misdoubt safety in 
 Toftawary . their Town , or having notice of any practice against them : but now leaving both Town and Island , they joined themselves altogether , and returning to the mouth of River Caroli , placed there a secret ambush , to defend the passage to those mines , from whence your Oar and white stones were taken the last year : we all not without grief to see ourselves thus defeated , and our hungry hope's made void , were witnesses of this their remove . As we road at and anchor within musket shot of their Town , and Indian came unto us with lean cheeks , thin hair , and a squint eye , to inform us that they were very strong , that Berreo his son was with him , that they had but two small Pinnisses at Trinidad , which they daily looked for to come up the River , and lastly to view our ship well , and our provision , but especially to learn whither Gualtero , Topiawarie his son were with us . 
 This informers very countenance gave him to be 466 
 suspected , and therefore partly by threatening , partly by promise of reward we won him to confess the truth . Which he did , assuring us that Berreo had not full fiftie five men with him , whereof twentie came lately from Trinidad , twentie from Nuevo Reyno , and the rest he brought with him about sixe months since , when he fled from Carapana his Porte , and was driven with his small company to keep the aforesaid Island near Caroli . And that though now his number is thus increased yet dareth he not adventure at any time to leave the fast woods , and to go but half a league from his hold into the plains . That some few of the Arwaccas are abiding with him . That he daily looks for his son from Nuevo Reyno , for his Campemaster from Trinidad , and for horses from the Caraccas . That Topiawarie is dead : the Indians of that coast all fled , and dispersed , excepting the son of one Curmatoi , and another woman of account , whom the Spaniardes hold prisoners , for consenting to the death of their nine men , and the holy Fryer in Morekito his time . This Curmatoi is fled Topiawarie towards Guanipa , and is a man of speciali note among the Indians . That Iwiakanarie Gualtero his near kinsman , hath held the Country to his use , by his father's appointment , ever since your being in the River . That there are tenne ships , and many Spaniardes at Trinidad . 
 That the Indians our friends did fear , lest you with your company were all slain , and your ships sunk at Cumana ( for so the Spaniardes noised it among The common them , ) that some of Gualtero his friends with Putijma , were in the mountains not far from the hill Aio . fantar esAnd that Berreo had sent for sixe pieces of ordinance , which he meant to plant , where they might best command the River . 
 When we had stayed here two days , considering that where no hope was left of doing good , to abide there in harms way doing nothing , would be bootless : I resolved to seek Putijma in the mountains : and 467 
 turning down the River with the force of the stream some twentie miles in sixe hours : the next morning with ten shot I went ashore , intending if the Indians should think themselves too weak , with our help to displant the Spaniardes : to set some of them on work , for hatchet's and knives to return us gold grains , and white stones from such places , as they should be directed unto . When we came to the place of their usual abided ; we saw that they lately had be there , but could speak with none of them . It may be that fear ( which is easy of belief ) persuaded them that we were Spaniards . Gilbert my Pilot here offered to bring us either to the mine of white stones near Winicapora , or else to a gold mine , which Putijma had showed him , being but one days journey overland , from the place where we now stayed at and anchor . I saw far off the mountain adjoining to this gold mine , and having measured their paths near the same place this last year , could not judge it to be fifteene miles from us . I do well remember how coming that way with Putijma the year before , he pointed to this same mountain , making signs to have me go with him thither . I understood his signs and marked the place , but mistook his meaning , imagining that he would have showed me the overfall of the River Cur-wara from the mountains . My Indian showed me in what sort without digging they gather the gold in the sand of a small river , nam Macawini , that springs and falls from the rocks where this mine is . And farther told me , that he was with Putijma , at what time Morekito was to be executed by the Spaniardes , and that then the chief of Morekito his friends were in consultation , to show this mine unto them if so they might redeem their Captains life , but upon better advice , supposing them in this case to be implacable , and that this might prove a means to lose not only their king , but their Country also : they have to this day concealed it from them , being of all others the 
 468 
 richest and most plentiful ! . The aged sort to keep this from common knowledge , have devised a fable of a dangerous Dragon that haunteth this place and de - voureth all that come near it . But our Indian , if when we return , we do bring store of strong wine ( which they love beyond measure ) with it will undertake so to charm this Dragon , that he shall do us no harm . 
 I , that for this end came from home , and in this journey had taken much more pains to less purpose , would very gladly from this mountain have taken so good a proof to witness my being in the Country : but withal considering that not one Indian of our known friends came unto us : that DONE Juan the cousin of Gualtero , who lives here a revolt from the Spaniard , was now in election to be chief commander of all the Indian forces in these parts , cannot in policy , for Gualtero his sake , whose inheritance he sought to usurp , be a fast friend unto us : that the Spaniardes abiding in Winicapora ( for there were tenne ) might well before we could do any thing , and return , cause some others of Berreo his men to join with them , in the way to intercept us : and forthinking withal , that there being no means but our selves , to make known our discovery , if we returned not ; in our misfortune the hope of following this voyage would be buried : but beside all this , and the respect of such spials , as the Spaniardes kept to observe our doings , foreknowing that if the enemy should by our lingering , stop our passage , which in one or two places of advantage , few of them might easily doe : it would be a question how with our ship to get out of the River , except first we could remove them : I thought it best ( all other possibilities set apart ) to seek in time to be free from the hazard of the aforesaid evil passages . 
 Whilst we were searching at the shore for the Indians , my Barge took a Canoa , with three men in 
 469 
 This transplanting of Indians is worthy of consideration . 
 her : the one a servant to Berreo , ( as before is mentioned ) the other two merchants of Cassavi . They had a letter sent from the Governor to be conveyed to Trinidad , which I received . There was also a great hatchet , and twentie knives , wherewith this Indian servant should buy a Canoa , and hire Indians to carry her up the River towards Nuevo Reyno . This Canoa forsooth with foure other were to be sent to bring down Berreo his son with all his forces , which now have be , I think , full three years in preparing . If five such boats be sufficient to convoy him , his men and all their provision : it may seem , he comes with no great strength . 
 This servant as he was a man of especial trust , and near Berreo : so appeared he to have some insight in his proceedings . He showed me that the Indians , who with these knives should be hired , were to pass up so high , as where some of the Cassanari do dwell in small villages . That Berreo his purpose was , when they came thither to leave them there , and make them officers over the other Indians : and in their places some of the Cassanari should return , who likewise should be made Justices and Constables over them of Guiana : that from Trinidad he meant to remove most of the old inhabitants , that would be tractable ; and interpose them among the Cassanarians of Guiana , and the Guianians of the Cassanari . That the Arwaccas should wholly possess Trinidad , and the river side of Raleana . That they already were provided of threescore Negroes , to work the mines in these places . And that by this means Berreo hoped to keep these several nations in mutual enmity each against other , all to serve his turn , and never to become strong , or likely to join themselves against him . He farther showed me , that Topiawary , soon after our departure from the river , fled into the mountains , carrying Hugh Godwyn with him , and leaving a Substitute in his Country , as aforesaid : and that the next news 
 470 
 » 596-they herd of him was , that he was dead , and the English boy eaten by a Tiger . That the Spaniardes believe neither the one nor the other . That about the end of June , when the River shall be impassable , the tenne ships shall depart from Trinidad . And that Berreo ever since his coming to Guiana , hath spent his time altogether in purveying of victuals , whereof there is such scarcity , by reason that the Indians forsaking their houses , have not this half year planted any of their grounds , so that the Spaniards are enforced to seek their bred far off , and content themselves to live with little . 
 In sailing up the River , we passed by Toparimacko The Port of his Port , which in one place is very shoalde , the channel Toparimacko . lying close aboard the shore . we returned therefore another way by the main river on the South side : this branch we found large , deep , and without danger . When we were come near Carapana his The port of Port , he sent five or sixe several Canoas , promising Carofana-this day and the next , that he would come and speak with us . Thus we lingered sixe or seven days , but he came not . In the end he sent one of his aged followers , to certify us , that he was sick , old , and weak : that the ways near his dwelling are not easy : and that therefore he desired us to hold him excused for not coming . This old man dilated unto us , that Carapana in hope of our return , hath ever since your Lordships being in that Country , kept the mountains , where the Spaniardes can hardly any way enforce him ; that they have taken from him and his people many of their wives , because they refused to furnish them weekly with a certain proportion of bred and victuals : that DONE Juan otherwise called Eparacano hath the commandment of all his subject's , excepting only a choice guard of men sufficient to keep the place he now dwells in . That it repenteth him of his ambition , ever to have sought by the Spaniardes means , to have enlarged his Countries' and 
 471 
 people . For true it is that from the beginning he was a Lord of no other then ordinary power among them , until he had entered into friendship with Berreo : for then the Indians on all sides left some their habitations , and many their commanders to become his subjects , that they might have the privilege to trade with the Spaniardes for hatchet's and knives , which are jewels of great price among them : that he now saw no other choice , but that the Indians must , if they will do well , without farther dissembling of their necessity , either entertain us their friends , or else give place to the Spaniardes their enemies . For the plenty of gold that is in this country , being now known and discovered , there is no possibility for them to keep it : on the one side they could feel no greater misery , nor fear more extremity , then they were sure to find , if the Spaniardes prevailed , who perforce do take all things from them , using them as their slaves , to run , to row , to be their guides , to carry their burdens , and that which is worst of all , to be content , for safety of their lives , to leave their women , if a Spaniard chance but to set his eye on any of them to fancy her : on the otherside they could hope for , nor desire no better state and usage , then her Majesties gracious government , and Princely virtues do promise , and assure unto them . For , said he , the other year , when we fled into the mountains , and measured your doings by the Spaniards in like case , we made no other account » but that your Commander being able , as he was , would doubtless have persecuted us to the uttermost , as the only maintainers and supporters of your enemies , and would at the least , if he could not reach us , take our Towns , and make us ransom our wives and children : we found it far otherwise , and that none of your well governed company durst offer any of us wrong or violence , no not by stealth , when unknown they might have done it . We then believing it to be 
 472 
 true , that your grand Captain reported of his Princess , took this for a good proof of her royal commandment and wisdom , that had framed her subjects to such obedience , and of your happiness , that enjoyed the benefit thereof : that Carapana weighing the good and Carapana a friendly course of our proceedings , doth humbly crave P ™ * of her Maj estie for himself and his people , that with upon the rest of the Indians , which wholly depend on her craves her Princely regard towards them , he also may enjoy Majesties her favourable protection : that he doth this , not fntectiim-as a man left unto himself and forsaken by the Spaniardes , but as one that knoweth their injustice , hates their cruelties , and takes it for his best choice , utterly to disclaim their friendship . It may be pertinent ( as surely it is a thing worth the noting ) to consider how this president of your moderation and good order , which to us seems a matter but of small and ordinary respect , hath both alienated their hearts altogether from the Spaniard , and stirred up in them true love and admiration thereof . For as government is the only bound of common society : so to men lawless , that each one to another are , Omnes hoc jure molesti , quo forts : To men , I say , that live in daily tumults , fears , doubts , suspicions , barbarous cruelties , never sleeping secure , but always either drunk , or practising one another's death : to such men as these bee , who wanting discipline , justice and good order to confirm them in a quiet and peaceable course of living , knowing not where to find it : the sense and sweetness thereof is as the dew of Hermon : it is as the Harmony of a well tuned Instrument : to be brief , it carrieth in it self not only a due and worthy commendation ; but is available without stroke striking to gain a kingdom . For the Indians in all parts within and near Guiana , do offer their service , and promise to provide victuali , and what else their country yields , desiring only that some force of men may remain with them , to deliver them from oppression 
 473 
 and tyrannic . And now by generail consent ( though hatchet's and knives be the only things of request and useful unto them ) they have agreed by no means to trade with the Spaniard for any thing . 
 Farther this old man showed me , whence most of their gold comes , which is formed in so many fashions : whence their Spleen-stones , & others of all sorts are to be had in plenty : where gold is to be gathered in the sands of their rivers : from what parts the Spaniards , both by trade , & otherwise , have returned much gold . This he uttered with Carapana his consent ( I doubt not ) hoping thereby to induce us to return again . For contrary to their law of secrecy , which in this case they do all generally observe , sharply punishing the breakers thereof , as enemies unto their native Country : I found this man no whit scrupulous , but very free and liberali of speech in all things . 
 And because we might know , that we should not want hands or help , in this or any other our enterprises , if perhaps we should find cause to pass up to the head of this River : he declared that the Spaniardes have no Indians to trust unto but some of the Arwaccas , which since they were not many , could be but of small force : That the Charibes of Guanipa , the Ciawannas among the Tivitivas , the Shebaios , laos , Amaipagotos , Cassipagotos , Purpagotos , Samipagotos , Serowos , Etai-guinams , Cassamari , with the rest of the nations far and near , were all ready , on what side soever the Spaniards shall stir , to fight against them : that the Pariagotos , through whose country they must first pass , are alone sufficient to encounter them , such is the strength of their country , and the valour of the men . The Indians hold opinion , that they are notable sorcerers , and invulnerable . In the mountains where they dwell , white stones are found of such hardness , that by no art or means they can be pierced ; they imagine that these Pariagotos become invulnerable , by 474 
 eating these stones . The fable omitted , happily they may prove good Diamonds . 
 Then he showed how the Iwarewakeri have nou_r_ - 
 ished grass in all places , where passage is , these three years , and that it is at this present so high , as some of the trees ; which they mean to burn , so soon as the Spaniard shall be within danger thereof . Lastly , he showed me that Wariarimagoto the Emperors chief Captain for those parts , hath gathered together many thousandes of the Epuremei , to keep the borders of the Empire ; and that he lay now on the South side of the mountains , some one days journey or little more from the Spaniard . To be short , he certified me , that they all were resolved not to seek upon them ( for indeed they fear their shot ) but to defend their own , and to expect our coming . In the mean time they take opportunities , when they find any of them straggling or divided from their strength , by little and little to lessen their number . 
 Wariaritna-goto one of the Emperor of Guiana his chief Cap-•taines up in arms against the Spaniardes . 
 The place where we were at anchor was but one days journey from Carapana : I therefore made motion to this Captain to stay with two or three of his company aboard the ship , and to cause his men to bring me with my Interpreter to Carapana his dwelling : he answered me that it were not good so to do , lest perhaps some Spy might inform the Spaniardes thereof , whereby danger would grow to Carapana . For they have many times used many means to reconcile him unto them : but he from time to time hath daly with them , neither professing himself their enemy , nor in ought showing them any friendship . Now ( said he ) if the Spaniardes shall by any means come to knowledge , that you have conferred together , they will take this occasion to persecute him with all extremity , as their open enemy , whom they now neglect , or at the least fear not , as being and harmless old man . And for this cause only hath Carapana forborn to come 
 unto you . 
 47S 
 By this I perceived , that to stay longer for him ( though gladly I could have be content to spend one sevennights more to speak with him ) would be purposeless . Wherefore having assured so many of the Indians as at any time came unto us , of our speedy return , promising them plenty of knives , beads , and hatchet's , if they would reserve their Cassavi , and provide store of their pieces of gold for us : I desired this Captain to be a means that our friends of Trinidad might understand of our being in the River and that we meant to relieve them so soon , as conveniently might be . He promised in Carapana his behalf , that this should not be forgotten . One of the Captains of the Cyawannas , who do now dwell in the River Arawawo , near Trinidad , undertook also without fail to ascertain them thereof . I was the more careful herein , because so many , ships being here , I doubted lest they would take order that no Indian should speak with us . For so indeed it fell out . 
 This Captain of the Cyawannas came likewise to join with us , and had provided fifteene Canoas for that purpose . Their dwelling was lately in Macureo , where the Spaniardes one night stealing on them , killed twentie of their men , and burned their houses , because they refused to trade with them for certain images of gold made with many heads which they had got out of Guiana . I sent a present of Iron to Carapana , and then set sail . 
 In turning down the river we spent eight days . In many places where the channel lies we found twentie fathom depth : where it is shouldst , we had two fathom and a half , and that but in one or two places . Of the worthiness of this River , because I cannot say enough , I will speak nothing . we have presumed to call it by the name of Raleana , because your self was the first of our nation that ever entered the same , and I think it nothing inferior to Amazones , which is best known by the name of Orellana , the first discoverer thereof . By turning only , without help of oars to pass so long 476 
 away in so short a time , against the wind , may sufficiently prove , that the channel is very large , good , and The channel likely to second our hope's in all that we can desire . ( > f^-aleana^or Without the mouth of this River , our Pinnace , the Dis - Very°i ™ ge y coverer , whom we lost near the coast of England , good . They came unto us . Shee fell with this land somewhat to meet with the Southward of Cape Cecyl , and had spent three Pinnace . weeks and odd days in ranging alongst the coast , when she met with us . William Down the Master informed me that they entered , and searched these foure rivers . In Wiapoco they sailed so far , until the rocks stopped their passage . In Caiane they went up one days journey . In Cunanama they found many inhabitants . Curitini was the last River they had been in . Whence , having no other means to find Raleana , they were enforced to borrow a Pilot against his will : whom afterwards I would have returned with reward to his contentment ; but he would not . 
 Our English that to steal the first blessing of and untraded place , will perhaps secretly hasten thither , may be beholding to me for this caveat , if they take notice A good caveat . thereof . They may be assured , that this people , as they no way sought our harm , but used our men with all kindness : so are they impatient of such a wrong , as to have any of their people perforce taken from them , and will doubtless seek revenge . The example of the like practice upon the coast of Guinie , in the year 1566 , and again at Dominica , where Aiderman Wats his ship hardly escaped being taken , may serve for our warning in like case to look for no good , before they be satisfied for this injury . 
 When we had taken aboard us such victuals as were in the Pinnace : we set fire in her , ( for her Rudder could serve her to no longer use ) and stopping the floods , plied to windwarde with the ebb near the shore , until we were sixteene leagues to the Eastward of the Rivers mouth , and then standing ofF to Sea , we fell in twentie foure hours sailing with Punta de Galera 477 
 the Northeaster most part of Trinidad . But having Tabaco-island in sighed , we first went thither . This Island is plentiful of all things , and a very good soil . It is not now inhabited , because the Charibes of Dominica are evil neighbours unto it . They of Trinidad have a meaning and purpose to fly thither , when no longer they can keep Trinidad . Their only doubt is , that when they are seated there , the Spaniard will seek to possess it also . The Governor of Margarita went lately in a Pinnace to view this Island . Gilbert my Pilot who sometime lived there , notes it for the best and fruitfullest ground that he knoweth . 
 Thence we returned to Punta de Galera and anchored in tenne fathom under the North side of the Island some five or sixe miles from the said point . The flood-tide striketh alongst the coast to the Eastward very strongly . we discharged a piece of ordinance , and afterwards went to the shore in our boat : but no Indian came unto us . I would have sent John of Trinidad to procure some of them to speak with us : but he was altogether unwilling , alleging that their dwellings were far within the mountains , and that he knew no part of that side of the Island . From this place we set sail for Santa Lucia , but fell with Granata , which we found not inhabited . Saint Vincent we hardly recovered , by turning under the lee of the island . The Tabaco of this place is good : but the Indians being Canibals , promising us store , and delaying us from day to day , sought only opportunity to betray , take , and eat us , as lately they had devoured the whole company of a French ship . This their treachery being by one of their slaves revealed , from thenceforth they did all forbear to come unto us . To fit down on their low stools , when they by offering such ease , will seem to show courtesy , abodeth death to strangers , that shall trust them . At Matalino or Martinino we found not any inhabitants . Lastly , we came to Dominica , where we could get no good Tabaco . But having intelligence 
 478 
 of a Spanish ship , that was taking in of fresh water , at the Northwest side of the Island , we weighed anchor to seek him . He descrying us , stole away by night . The Indians of this place have determined to remove , and joy ne with them of Guanipa , against the Spaniardes , who lately dispeopled one of their Islands , and at our being there one of their Canoas returned from Guanipa , and certified us , that the tenne Spanish ships at Trinidad do ride , some of them at Conquerabia , the rest at the small Hands near the disemboging place . Here-hence we steered North and by East , taking the directest course to shorten our way homeward . 
 Thus have I emptied your purse , spending my time and travel in following your lordship's directions for the full discovery of this coast , and the rivers thereof . Concerning thee not making of a voyage for your private profit , I pretend nothing . Sorry I am , that where I sought no excuse , by the Spaniardes being there I found my defect remediless . And for mine own part , I do protest , that if the consideration of the public good that may ensue , had not overpoised all other hope's and desires : I would rather have adventured by such small and weak means as I had , to do well with danger , then to return only with safety . Now although in a cause not doubtful , my allegation is no way needful : yet because the weightiness thereof , and the expectation of others , seems of due and right to claim something to be said by me , whom your especial trust and favour hath credited and graced with this employment : Pardon it ( I beseech your honour ) if , where my lamp had oil , it borrow light also ; and my speech , which is altogether unsavoury , season it self with some of the leaven of your own discourse touching this discovery . The particular relation of some certain things I have reserved as properly belonging to your self , who only , as knowing most , can make best use thereof . So much in general is here touched , as ( I hope ) may serve to refresh the memory of this worthy enterprise in those 
 479 
 whom it may concern , and testify your care and expense in following the same : that in a second age , when in time truth shall have credit , and men wondering at the riches , and strength of this place ( which nature it self hath marvelously fortified , as her chief treasurehouse ) shall mourn and sighs to hold idle cicles , whilst others reap and gather in this harvest , it be not said , that Sir Walter Ralegh was of all men living in his days , most industrious in seeking , most fortunate in attaining to the fullness of and inestimable public good : if , knowing that for envy and private respects , his labours were lessened , his informations mistrusted , his proffers not regarded , and the due honour of his deserts imparted to others : If ( I say ) seeing , knowing and bearing all this , he with patience had persisted in so good a way in doing his Princess , and country service ; and had but perfected his first discovery by sending a ship or two for that purpose : for then surely all lets and doubts being removed , and so large a kingdom , so exceeding rich , so plentiful of all things , as this by his discourse appeared to be , being offered : no devises and vain surmises could have taken place , no illusions could have prevailed : it had be blindness and deafness in those , that being near her Majesty do spend their days in serving the common weal , not to see , and know in so weighty a matter : it had been malicious obstinacy , impotency of mind , and more then treason to the common wealth , the matter standing only upon acceptance , to seek either to foreslow so fit and occasion , or forsake so general a blessing . This ( if ) is now cut off through a singular and incomparable temper , in overcoming evile with good . 
 This your seconde discovery hath not only found a free and open entrance into Raleana , which the Naturals call Orenoque : but moreover yields choice of fourtie several great rivers ( the lesser I do not reckon ) being for the most part with small vessels navigable for our merchants & others , that do now find little profit in setting 
 forth for reprisal , to exercise trade in . To such as shall be willing to adventure in search of them , I could propose some hope of gold mines , and certain assurance of pieces of made gold , of Spleen-stones , Kidney-stones , and others of better estimate . But because our belief seems to be mated in these greater matters , and a certainty of smaller profits is the readiest inducement to quicken our weak hope's ; I not going so far as mine own eyes might warrant me , do only promise in the aforesaid rivers Brasil-wood , honey , cotton , Balsamum , and drugs to help to defray charges : and further , because without a beginning there can be no continuance of these benefits unto our country to any that shall be the first undertakers hereof , I am gladly content to give such light and knowledge , as by conference with the Indians I have attained unto . 
 My self , and the remain of my few years , I have bequeathed wholly to Raleana , and all my thoughts live only in that actium . The prosecuting whereof is in it self just , profitable , and necessary . Just , because it is intended for the defence of harmless people , who fearing thralldome and oppression , desire to protect themselves and their country under her Majesties tuition : Profitable , as may be gathered not only by many Spanish letters intercepted , but also by the proofs mentioned in the discourse of the first discovery , and since that , by the Indians own voluntary relations : and lastly , by the provision that the Spaniards do make to acquit us thereof . Necessary it is , as being the only help to put a bit in the mouth of the unbridled Spaniard ; the only way to enter into his treasury of Nuevo Reyno , and Peru ; the only means to animate the wronged Indians with our assistance to seek revenge for the extreme murders and cruelties , which they have endured , and to ruinate his • naked cities in all those parts of the Inland ; whose foundations have been laid in the blood of their parents and ancestors . 
 The forces that the Spaniard hath already sent to 
 x 481 2 H 
 Trinidad , to fortify there , and keep the passage of this river , are and evident argument that the king fears and doubteth the sequel of this discovery . For can it be a small matter ? Or hath he so waste employment for his men and shipping , that upon no ground , he would send eight and twentie ships , to keep us only from Tobacco ? For what else that good is can Trinidad yield us ? No doubtless , if the return of Berreo his Campmaster with tenne of these ships be compared with precedent advertisements concerning him : it will appear more then probable , that the Guiana-golde waged these men and shipping : and that they are now more careful to obtain this place , then to keep others , which they have already got , which note , except in matters of extraordinary account , is not incident to their policy and proceedings . Again , it cannot be thought that either it was senseless madness in the governors of Margarita , and the Caracas , to bring their states and lives in question , by seeking , contrary to their kings order , to enter Guiana , and kill Berreo with his followers : or else the abundance of pearl in Margarita , and the gold mines in the Caracas , seeming matters of small account : Guiana only was in their judgement , rich , plentiful , and able of it self to redeem their trespass and offence , how great soever it should be . 
 The sundry attempts and overthrows of the Spaniardes being men of power , and honourable place , in labouring threescore and three years and upwards , to enlarge the kingdom of Spaine with this mighty and great empire , do plainly show , that they long time sought a path , where in one month a high way was found : that the loss of their lives witnesseth their desires , and the worthiness of the thing , where to us the easiness of obtaining discrediteth the greatness of the attempt : and that if now at the last they do prevail , they must hold by tyrannic that which they get by the sword ; where then our return nothing by the Indians is more wished for , nothing expected more earnestly . 
 482 
 Those objections , which have been made by many seeming wise , and the impediments likely to arise , as they have supposed , are best answered by the unreproved witness of those men's actions . Some have termed these discoveries fables , and fantasies , as if there had been no such land or territory : others allowing both of the place , and that such a kingdom or country is discovered , make conclusion , that if it had been so rich as we have supposed , that no doubt the king of Spaine would by this time have possessed it . But if they consider that the Spanish nation hath already conquered the two empires of Mexico and Peru , with so many other kingdoms and provinces : we may very well answer , that his power is not infinite , and that he hath done well for the time . And yet it is manifest , that this very empire hath been by all those several Spaniardes ( the catalogue of whose names is by it self hereunto annexed ) at sundry times undertaken , and never performed . Howbeit , the world hath reason to admire their constancy , and their great labours , and we may well blush at our own idle , despairful , and loitering dispositions , that can find ability in another barren , and starved nation , to possess so much of the world , and can do nothing but frame arguments against our selves , as unfit and powerless to possess one province already discovered , and of which our nation Kath assurance of the peoples love , and that all the Chieftains and principals have vowed their obedience to her Majesty ; the navigation being withal so short , dangerless , and free from infectious sickness . If doubt of perils might moderate the minds of our men once moved with steadfast hope , that gold shall be the reward of their travels : it may easily be perceived , that all those lets and hindrances that can any way be alleged , or wrested so much , as but to touch us , do deeply and nearly concern the Spanish king , and in a manner violently withhold him from that , which he notwithstanding carrieth with success , whilst we 483 
 out of season do affect the bore style , to be nam men stayed and circumspect in our proceedings . It is reported , that Calanus the Indian threw down before Alexander the great , a dry sear piece of leather , & then put his foot on one of the ends of it : the leather being trodden down at that side , rose on all parts else . By this the wise man did show unto him a figure and similitude of his kingdom , which being exceeding large , must of necessity in all other parts , excepting the place of the kings residence , be always full of stirs , tumults , and insurrections . The end afterwards confirmed , that this empire consisting of sundry nations , could not keep it self from dissolution . No potentate living hath , or can have so faithful and incorrupt counsellers , as be the examples and histories of forepassed times and ages . we may therefore be bold to think that the Governors of the Spanish affairs should mind it , that their kings lustful desire , and ambitious thoughts to establish over all Europe one law , one Lord , one religion , are built and erected on a dangerous ungrounded resolution : Considering that many of the neighbour kingdoms being of equal force in men , or greater than he can make , are settled in a long continued estate , are entire within themselves , and hate to hear the voice of a stranger . It is not unlikely that they in this case should lay before their king the fatal destinies of many worthies , that have been constrained for want of sufficient numbers of their natural subject's , after many years spent in the wars , to retire to their own countries' , and have been glad peaceably to hold their own Signiories at home , resigning all that unto others , which they have got abroad by hard adventure , and much effusion of blood . The King of Spaine cannot but discern , that his spacious empires and kingdoms being so many , and so far divided one from another , are like the members of a monstrous body , tied together with cables only . For take away the traffic of unneces - 
 484 
 sarie commodities transported out of Spaine : those huge countries' of the Indies having no common link of affinity , law , language , or religion , and being of themselves able to maintain themselves without foreign commerce , are not so simple , as not to know their own strength , and to find , that they do rather possess Spaniardes , then that they are possessed by them . He cannot be ignorant that Spaine it self is on all sides environed with many puissant enemies , mighty and great princes , who knowing it to be rich without men , confident without reason , proud and adventurous without means sufficient ; may happily confederate to chastise him , as and insolent intruder , and disturber of all quietness ; and going no further then Spaine it self , may even there shake the foundation of his long contrived devises , and in one act redeem the time , control his aspiring humour , and break the bands in sunder that import servitude , and subversion to all the dominions of Christendome . Again , his counsel may well inform him , that to dispeople and disable himself at home , in hope to obtain Guiana , being a country strong of it self , and defended with infinite multitudes of Indian enemies , being rich , and by the inhabitants offered unto the English : his contempt towards us would seem so intolerable and despiteful , as might be sufficient to provoke us , though otherwise we had no such inclination ; if he unprovided of able helps to effect it , should rest himself on a careless presumption , that we cannot , we dare not , we will not stir in a matter that promises us so great benefit , and may so highly offend him . He may be persuaded , that to leave no other succour or safety to his nakedness , but the old stale practice of spreading rumours , and giving out false intelligences of preparations to invade England , thereby to keep us at home ; or else of hiring and suborning some Machavellian under hand by secret conveyance , to stop the course of our proceedings ; or lastly , of 485 
 procuring some wild outlaw to disquiet our tranquillity ; is but a poor , weak , and uncertain stay to uphold his estate by . And yet setting such like drifts aside : what can be imagined likely to hinder us from prevailing in Guiana , rather then him , whose disadvantage is to be encumbered with the self same , and manifold more impediments , then can any way be supposed , with good cause to impeach , or divorce us from so profitable and attempt ? All this notwithstanding , if the Spanish king not being able to dissemble his desire , or bear the loss of this one kingdom ; putting himself out of his strength at home , and exposing his people to the hazard of all casualties abroad , be resolved , whatsoever shall happen , not to relinquish Guiana , but to keep this one iron more in the fire , on no other assurance , but a peremptory disdain of prevention : If he appear so eagerly bent for Guiana , as if it were enacted for a law among themselves , Viis & modis to thrust for it , and not to hear , conceive , or believe any thing , that may dissuade or deter from the conquest thereof : it then appertaineth unto us , not to enforce those objections against our selves , which he with less reason rejecteth as frivolous ; since by how much the more earnest he is in following this purpose , by so much the less cause have we to be diverted from it . To such as shall be willing further to wade in this argument ; for brevities sake , I do propose only this bore assertion : that England and Guiana conjoined , are stronger , and more easily defended , then if England alone should repose her self on her own force , and powerfulness . The reasons that might be inferred to prove this need no rationail discourse : they are all intimated in the only example of Spaine it self ; which without the Indies is but a purse without money , or a painted sheath without a dagger . In sum : it seems unto me , that whereas the difficulty of performing this enterprise hath be produced for a discouragement : it were 486 
 a dull conceit of strange weakness in our selves , to distrust our own power so much , or at least , our own hearts and courages ; as valuing the Spanish nation to be omnipotent ; or yielding that the poor Portugal hath that mastering spirit and conquering industry , above us ; as to be able to seat himself among the many mighty princes of the East Indies , to frontier China , to hold in subjection the Philippinas , Zeilan , Calecut , Goa , Ormus , Mozambique , and the rest ; the navigation being so tedious and full of peril : to suffer our selves to be put back for worthless ciphers , out of place , without account . All which Regions being now also by the late conquest of Portugall , entitled to the Spanish king : to whom the Colonies of those parts do yet generally refuse to swear fealty and allegiance : and the care depending on him , not only in governing them in the East , so far off ; but also of ordering and strengthening of those disunited , scattered , & ill guarded empires and provinces in the West : It might very well be alleged to the said Spanish king , that it were more wisdom for him to assure and fortify some part of those already got , then to begin the conquest of Guiana , so far separate from the rest of his Indies : in which he hath had so many misfortunes , and against whom the natural people are so impetuously bent , and opposed : were it not , that it exceeds all the rest in abundance of gold , and other riches . The case then so standing , is it not mere wretchedness in us , to spend our time , break our sleep , and waste our brains , in contriving a caviling false title to defraud a neighbour of half and acre of land : whereas here whole shires of fruitful rich grounds , lying now waste for want of people , do prostitute themselves unto us , like a fair and beautiful woman , in the pride and flower of desired years : 
 If we do but consider , how unhappily Berreo his affairs , with his assistants have of late years , in our own knowledge succeeded : who can say , if the hand 487 
 of the Almighty be not against them , and that he hath a work in this place , in stead of Papistry , to make the sincere light - of his Gospel to shine on this people ? The effecting whereof shall be a royal crown of everlasting remembrance to all other blessings , that from the beginning the Lord hath plentifully poured on our dread Sovereign , in and eminent and supreme degree of all perfection . If the Castilians , pretending a religious care of planting Christianitie in those parts , have in their doings preached nought else but avarice , rapine , blood , death , and destruction to those naked , & sheeplike creatures of God ; erecting statues and trophies of victory unto themselves , in the slaughters of millions of innocents : doth not the cry of the poor succourless ascend unto the heavens ? Hath God forgotten to be gracious to the workmanship of his own hands ? Or shall not his judgements in a day of visi-HerMajestie . tation by the ministry of his chosen servant , come on these bloodthirsty butchers , like rain into a fleece of wool ? Aliquando manifesta ; aliquando occulta ; semper justa sunt Dei judicia . 
 To leave this digression , It is fit only for a prince to begin , and end this work : the maintenance and ordering thereof requires sovereign power , authority , and commandment . The river of Raleana gives open and free passage , any provision that the Spaniard can make to the contrary notwithstanding , ( for once yearly the lands near the river be all drowned ) to convey men , horse , munition , and victuali for any power of men that shall be sent thither . 
 I do speak it on my souls health , as the best testimony , that I can in any cause yield to aver a truth , that having now the second time been in this country , and with the helps of time and leisure well advised my self upon all circumstances to be thought on ; I can discern no sufficient impediment to the contrary , but that with a competent number of men , her Majesty may to her and her successors enjoy 488 
 this rich and great empire : and having once planted there , may for ever ( by the favour of God ) hold and keep it , Contra ludaeos & Gentes . Subjects , I doubt not , may through her Majesties gracious sufferance , joining their strength together , invade , spoil , and overrun it , returning with gold and great riches . But what good of perpetui tie can follow thereof ? Or who can hope that they will take any other course then such , as tendeth to a private and present benefit ; considering that and Empire once obtained , is of congruity , how , and wheresoever the charge shall grow , to be annexed unto the crown ? The riches of this place are not fit for any private estate : no question , they will rather prove sufficient to cross and countervail the Spaniard his proceedings in all parts of Christendom , where his money makes way to his ambition . 
 If the necessity of following this enterprise does nothing urge us , because in some case better a mischief , then and inconvenience : let the conveniency thereof somewhat move us , in respect both of so many Gentlemen , soldiers , and younger brother's , who , if for want of employment they do not die like cloyed cattle in rank easefulnesse ; are inforced for maintenance sake , sometime to take shameful and unlawful courses : and in respect of so many handycraftsmen having able bodies , that do live in cleanness of teeth and poverty . To sacrifice the children of Belial unto the common weal , is not to defile the land with blood , because the law of God doth not prohibit it , and the execution of justice requires it to be so : but yet if the waterboughes , that suck and feed on the juice , and nourishment that the fruitful branches should live by , are to be cut down from the tree , and not regarded : lucky and prosperous be that right hand , that shall plant and possess a soil , where they may fructify , increase , and grow to good : thrice honourable and blessed be the memory of so charitable a deed , from one generation to another . 
 489 
 To conclude , your lordship hath paid for the discovery and search , both in your own person , and since by me . You have framed it , and moulded it ready for her Majesty , to set on her seal . If either envy or ignorance , or other devise frustrate the rest , the good which shall grow to our enemies , and the loss which will come to her Majesty and this kingdom , will after a few years show it self . we have more people , more ships , and better means , and yet do nothing . The Spanish king hath had so sweet a taste of the riches thereof , as notwithstanding that he is lord of so many empires and kingdoms already , notwithstanding his enterprises of France and Flanders , notwithstanding that he attended this year a home invasion : yet he sent twentie eight sail to Trinidad , 
 . 