To the Reader . 
 Ecause there have been diverse opinions conceived of the gold oar brought from Guiana , and for that and Aiderman of London & and officer of her Majesties Mint , hath given out that the same is of no price , I have thought good by the addition of these lines to give answer aswell to 
 the said malicious slander , as to other objections . It is true that while we abided at the island of Trinidad , I was informed , by and Indian , that not far from the Port , where we anchored , there were found certain mineral stones which 
 they esteemed to be gold , & were thereunto persuaded the rather for that they had seen both English and Frenchmen gather , & imbark some quantities thereof : upon this likelihood I sent 40. men & gave order that each one should bring a stone of that mine to make trial of its goodness : which being performed , I assured them at their refurne that the same was Marcasite , & of no riches or valve : notwithstanding diverse , trusting more to their own sense , then to my opinion , kept of the said Marcasite , and have tried thereof since my return in diverse 
 343 
 places . In Guiana it self I never saw Marcasite , but all the rocks , mountains , all stones in you plains , woods , & by the rivers side are in effect throughshining , and seem marvelous rich , which being tried to be no Marcasite , are the true signs of rich minerals , but are no other then El madre del oro ( as the Spaniards term them ) which is the mother of gold , or as it is said by others the scum of gold : of diverse sorts of these many of my company brought also into England , every one taking the fairest for the best , which is not general . For mine own part I did not countermand any men desire , or opinion , 8c I could have afforded them little if I should have denied them the pleasing of their own fancies therein : but 1 was resolved that gold must be found either in grains separate from the stone ( as it is in most of the rivers in Guiana ) or else in a kind of hard stone , which we call The white spar , of which I saw diverse hills , 8c in sundry places , but had neither time nor men , nor instruments fit for labour . Near unto one of the rivers I found of the said White spar or flint a very great ledge or bank , which I endeavoured to break by all the means I could , because there appeared on the outside some small grains of of gold , but finding no mean to work the same upon the upper part , seeking the sides and circuit of the said rock , I found a clift in the same from whence with daggers , and with the head of and axe , we god out some small quantity thereof , of which kind of white stone ( wherein gold engendered ) we saw diverse hills and rocks in every part of Guiana , wherein we traveled . Of this there have been many trials , and in London it was first assayed by M. Westwood a refiner dwelling in Woodstreet , and it held after the rate of 12000. or 13000. pounds a tun . Another sort was afterwards tried by M. Bulmar 8c M. Dimock Assay-master , 8c it held after the rate of 23000 li . a tun . There was some of it again tried by M. Palmer comptroller of the Mint , and M. Dimock in goldsmiths hall , 8c it held after 26900. li . a tun . There was also at the same time , 8c by the same persons a trial 
 344 
 made of the dust of the said mine which held 8 li . 6. 
 ounces weight of gold in the 100 : there was likewise at the same time a trial of and image of copper made in Guiana , which held a third part of gold , beside diverse trials made in the country , & by others in London . But because there came ill with the good , & belike the said Aiderman was not presented with the best , it hath pleased him therefore to scandali all the rest , and to deface the enterprise as much as in him lies . It hath also be concluded by diverse , that if there had been any such oar in Guiana , and the same discovered , that I would have brought home a greater quantity thereof : first I was not bound to satisfy any man of the quantity , but such only as adventured , if any store had been returned thereof : but it is very true that had all their mountains be of massy gold , it was impossible for us to have made any longer stay to have wrought the same : and whosoever hath seen with what strength of stone the best gold oar is environed , he will not think it easy to be had out in heaps , and especially by us , who had neither men , instruments , nor time ( as it is said before ) to perform the same . There were on this discovery no less then 100. persons , who can all witness , that when we passed any branch of the river to view the land within , and stayed from our boats but 6. hours , we were driven to wade to the eyes , at our return : and if we attempted the same , the day following it was impossible either to ford it , or to swim it , both by reason of the swiftness , and also for that the borders were so pestered with fast woods , as neither boat nor man could find place , either to land or to embark : for in June , July , August and September , it is impossible to navigate any of those rivers : for such is the fury of the current , and there are so many trees and woods overflown , as if any boat but touch upon any tree or stake , it is impossible to save any one person therein : and year we departed the land it ran with such swiftness , as we drave down most commonly against the wind , little less 
 345 
 than ioo . miles a day : Beside our vessels were no other then whirries , one little barge , a small cockboat , and a bad Galiota , which we framed in haste for that purpose at Trinidad , and those little boats had 9. or 10. men a piece , with all their victuals , and arms . It is further true , that we were about 400. miles from our ships , and had be a month from them , which also we left weakly manned in and open road , and had promised our return in 15. days . Others have devised that the same oar was had from Barbary , and that we carried it with us into Guiana : surely the singularity of that device I do not well comprehend : for mine own part , I am not so much in love with these long voyages , as to devise , thereby to cozen my self , to lie hard , to fare worse , to be subjected to perils , to diseases , to ill savours , to be parched & withered , and withal to sustaine'the care & labour of such and enterprise , except the same had more comfort , then the fetching of Marcasite in Guiana , or buying of gold oar in Barbary . But I hope the better sort will judge me by themselves , 8c that the way of deceit is not the way of honour or good opinion : I have herein consumed much time , 8c many crowns , 8c I had no other respect or desire then to serve her Majesty and my country thereby . If the Spanish nation had be of like belief to these detractors , we should little have feared or doubted their attempts , wherewith we now are daily threatened . But if we now consider of the actions both of Charles the 5. who had the maidenhead of Peru , and the abundant treasures of Atabalipa , together with the affairs of the Spanish king now living , what territories he hath purchased , what he hath added to the acts of his predecessors , how many kingdoms he hath endangered , how many armies , garrisons , & navies he hath and does maintain , the great losses which he hath repaired , as in 88. above 100. sail of great ships with their artillery , 8c that no year is less unfortunate but that many vessels , treasures , and people are devoured , and yet not - 
 346 
 withstanding he begins again like a storm to threaten shipwreck to us all : we shall find that these abilities rise not from the trades of sacks , and Sivil oringes , nor from ought else that either Spaine , Portugal , or any of his other provinces produce : it is his Indian gold that indangereth and disturbeth all the nations of Europe , it purchases intelligence , creeps into counsels , and sets bound loyalty at liberty , in the greatest Monarchies of Europe . If the Spanish king can keep us from foreign enterprizes , & from the impeachment of his trades , either by offer of invasion , or by besieging us in Britaine , Ireland , or elsewhere , he hath then brought the work of our peril in great forwardness . Those princes which abound in treasure have great advantages over the rest , if they once constrain them to a defensive war , where they are driven once a year or oftener to cast lots for their own garments , and from such shall all trades , & intercourse be taken away , to the general loss and impoverishment of the kingdom and common weal so reduced : beside when our men are constrained to fight , it hath not the like hope , as when they are pressed & encouraged by the desire of spoil & riches . Farther , it is to be doubted how those that in time of victory seem to affect their neighbour nations , will remain after the first view of misfortunes , or ill success ; to trust also to the doubtfulness of a battle , is but a fearful & uncertain adventure , seeing therein fortune is as likely to prevail , as virtue . It shall not be necessary to allege all that might be said , and therefore I will thus conclude , that whatsoever kingdom shall enforced to defend it self may be compared to a body dangerously diseased , which for a season may be preserved with vulgar medicines , but in a short time , and by little and little , the same must needs fallen to the ground , & be dissolved . I have therefore laboured all my life , both according to my small power , & persuasion , to advance all those attempts , that might either promise return of profit to our selves , or at least be a let and impeachment to the quiet course and plentiful trades 
 347 
 of the Spanish nation , who in my weak judgement by such a war were as easily endangered & brought from his powerfulness , as any prince of Europe , if it be considered from how many kingdoms and nations his revenues are gathered , & those so weak in their own beings , and so far severed from mutual succour . But because such a preparation and resolution is not to be hoped for in haste , & that the time which our enemies embrace , cannot be had again to advantage , I will hope that these provinces , and that Empire now by me discovered shall suffice to inable her Majesty & the whole kingdom , with no less quantities of treasure , then the king of Spaine hath in all the Indies East and West , which he possesses , which if the same be considered and followed , ere the Spaniards enforce the same , and if her Majesty will undertake it , I will be contented to loose her highness favour & : good opinion for ever , and my life withal , if the same be not found rather to exceed , then to equal whatsoever is in this discourse promised or declared . I will now refer the Reader to the following discourse , with the hope that the perilous and chargeable labours and endeavours of such as thereby seek the profit and honour of her Majesty , and the English nation , shall by men of quality and virtue receive such construction , and good acceptance , as themselves would look to be rewarded withal in the like . 
 W. R. 
 . 