And advertisement to the Reader . 
 IN this Breviary , the names only are comprised of such , as being led with the general fame of Guiana , have endeavoured to discover and possess it . The whole histories are long and cannot suddenly be translated or englished at large , as we in these Elegies find them . It may perhaps seem strange and incredible , that so many cavalleros should all fade in this one attempt , since in many parts of the Indies , far smaller numbers in shorter time have performed as great matters , and subdued mighty kingdoms : I have therefore thought it good here to allege those reasons , which by circumstance may be gathered to have been chief impediments to the Spaniard in this intended search and conquest . 
 The first may be the remoteness or distance of their places of Rendezvous , from El Dorado : which appear to be foure , Nuevo reyno , the mouth of Amazones or Orellana , Cubagua or the coast of the Caracas , and Trinidad . 
 1 From Moiobamba , where Orellana hath his headspring , to his mouth , the Spaniards account it 2000. leagues . Raleana riseth near the said mountains in Moiobamba , & tributeth his waters to the sea , not far from the other : Guiana is environed with these 2 fresh - 
 499 
 A.D. 
 1596. 
 water-seas , where their distance is greatest from their risings , and is beside guarded with impassable mountains which enclose and defend it on all parts , excepting Topiawaries country . It is no marvel then , if the vigor , heart , & life of those Spaniards , who sought it from Nuevo Reyno , were allayed & spent , before they came near to it , in those long , desolate & uncomfortable ways . 
 2 From Cubagua to seek it by sea in vessels of any burden , is a work of far greater labour , then to sail directly from Spaine . And to pass over land is a matter of great difficulty , by reason that the Indian nations inhabiting between the coast of The Caracas and Guiana , being wearied and harried with the daily incursions of the Spaniards , have now turned their abused patience into fury , refusing to suffer any forces of men to be led through their countries' . For the Spaniards traveling in those parts , when they found not gold answerable to their expectation , overlaid them with cruelties , tyrannic , and thraldom : forbearing neither men , women , friends , nor foes . Which manner of dealing , though in some part it satisfied their desire of present profit ; yet hath it otherwise done them much harm , in hardening and driving those nations to desperate resolutions . 
 3 From the mouth of Orellana to seek entrance with any number of men , & to boar a hold through the mountains is all one . Neither find we , that any seeking it that way , have at any time boasted of their gains or pleasurable journeys . 
 4 From Trinidad , as the course is shortest , so doth it promise best likelihood of success . Howbeit , impossible it is with any vessel of ordinary burden by that way to recover the river of Raleana . 
 The second , The Spaniards have be so far from helping and furthering one another , or admitting partners or coadjutors in the Guiana-cause , that among so many attempts , from the beginning to the last , I cannot find any one , when they were otherwise likeliest to prevail , 500 
 free from discords , mutinies , and cruel murders among themselves . 
 Thirdly . The Spaniardes in this place have missed that advantage , which elsewhere hath steeded themselves in all their conquests : namely , the dissensions and mutual wars of the Indians . Which of that force it is , may be gathered by the example Arauco in Chili . For the Indians of that one province containing in circuit not above 20. leagues , have maintained wars above these 30. years against all the Spaniards , and in despite of them have kept their own country , oftentimes discomfiting their enemies in many set battles , burning and destroying some of their strongest towns . The chief reason whereof I take to be , because no Indian nation was enemy unto them . And howsoever the Spaniards vaunt of their redoubted exploits in the Indies : yet do their own writings in effect testify , that without the aid of the Indians divided among themselves , Mexico , Peru , and the rest , had never been Spanish . 
 Lastly . I can impute it to no cause so rightly , as immediately to the divine providence : for by him princes reign . And in my belief ( except we will look to be warned by miracle from heaven ) we need no further assurances , then we already have to persuade our selves , that it hath pleased God of his infinite goodness , in his will and purpose to appoint and reserve this empire for us . 
 . 