The third voyage set forth by sir Walter Ralegh to Guiana , with a pinnace called The Watte , in the year 1596. Written by M. Thomas Mash am a gentleman of the company . 
 Pon Thursday the 14. of October 1596. we set sail from Limehouse upon the river of Thames , and through much contrariety of winds and other accidents , we made it the 27. of December , before we could get out of Waimouth . The 25. of Januarie in the morning we 
 came to the North side of the Island of Grand Canaria , where we hoped to have got a boat to serve us upon the coast of Guiana , but the wind was so great , that we could not launch our shalope : so we passed along by the road and the town , and at length saw a boat lying on shore , which being too big for us , we ripped up , and wooded our selves with her . That day we descried a sail , which at length we found to be a flyboat of Dartmouth , of 200. tons , bound to the Island of Mayo for salt . we fell in consort with her , and that night stood for the Southermost part of the Island there to water , where we stayed all the next day , and watered at the Southsouthwest part thereof . That night we weighed and stood away together Southsoutheast , and South and by East , purposing by their persuasion to go for the river Doro. The 28. of Januarie we made the furthermost part of Barbarie ; and this morning we jor The u^outk met with M. Benjamin Wood with his fleet of 3 sails sea . 
 XI I a 
 bound for the straights of Magellan & China , to wit , The Bear , The Whelp , and The Benjamin : who told us that there was no good to be done in the river Doro. Cape Blanco . Whereupon we stood along with them for Cape Blanco , unto which we came upon Sunday night next following . And upon Munday morning the first of Februarie , we saw two ships in a sandy bay : so we stirred in with them , which were Frenchmen bound for the West Indies , and put all into the bay , where we refreshed our selves with fish , in which there was infinite store , and stayed there until Thursday the 5. at which time we stood up with the Cape again , where road the Frenchman and his pinnace , who put forth right afore us , and another Frenchman and his caravel well manned : So all we 5. English came to and anchor by them , where after kind greeting with many shots out of every ship both English and French , all our captains were invited to a feast aboard the French admiral : where after great cheer and kind entertainment , it was concluded on all hands to take the Isle of Fogo , if God would give us leave . 
 The same day we all weighed and stood along for the The Island jsje of ga^ unto which we came the 8. of Februarie , of and anchored altogether at a bay in the West part thereof : in which Island we had good store of goats and fresh fish . There is no man dwelling upon the Island that we could see . we could find no fresh water upon it , but one standing puddle of bad water : it hath foure great mountains upon the 4. corners of it . Here the Frenchmen ( as it seems being overcome with drink , having be aboard our general at a feast ) being on shore , one of the gentlemen of their company was slain , and their chief captain sorely wounded : by reason whereof , and of the setting together of a pinnace which they were about , the French admiral and the caravel stayed behind . So we in the Watte , and the other 6. ships weighed the 10. of Februarie , and stood away for the isle of Maio . This 
 night the other two French ships that came from Sal with us ( as it seems of purpose , because their consorts were not with them ) lost us . The next morning we saw Maio . So we and the flyboat of Dartmouth compassed the Northermost part of the Island , and master Benjamin Wood in the China-fleete , the Southermost , and came all to and anchor together at the Southwest part thereof : where road sixe sails of psalles of Flemmings lading salt ; who had brought their horses and carts , and wheelbarrows , and planks for their M0J0r sa ’ barrows to run upon . Here is abundance of salt in this Island made by Gods hand without men labour . These told us that there were thirtie sails more , which fell to leeward of Fogo , who , as I herd since , beatrice it up with much ado , & came thither also for salt . This trade may be very beneficial to England , considering the dearness of salt . Of goats on this Island there is such store , as is incredible , but to those that have seen them : and it is a wonder how they live one by the other , the ground being stony and barren . It is thought that there are dwelling in it some twentie Mountainiers , which god one of the Flemmings men straggling , and God knoweth what they did with him : for they saw him no more . This Island is somewhat low and round , having no great mountains upon it . 
 Here ended our determination concerning the invading of Fogo . And here we left the flyboat of Dartmouth lading salt , and the China-fleete to refresh themselves with goats , who as I have herd since had at the village ( from whence the Mountainiers were fled into the furthest parts of the Island and rocks ) great store of dried goats which they carried along with them : which were like to be a great help unto them in their long voyage . So upon Saturday the 12 of Februarie at night we set sail and stood for the coast of Wiana , which we were bound for . 
 Upon Sunday the twentieth of Februarie we came into the main current that sets from the Cape of 
 Buena Esperanza along the coast of Brasil , and so towards the West Indies , for the most part setting away Northwest . 
 The Tuesday night following , whereas before our course was Westsouth west , we stood away West and by South : by reason whereof , and of the current that set us to the Northward , we were the next day by noon twentie minutes further to the Northward then the day before . So that then we lay away Southwest , because we were loath to fallen to the Northward of our place intended : which if we should be put to leeward of , there was small hope left to recover it . 
 By Thursday we were within one degree J of the Equinoctial line : therefore this day we hailed away West and by South , and West among . This night we sounded , but had no ground at 90 fathoms . 
 The next day in the morning the colour of the water began to change , and to be more white , so we made another found and had ground at thirtie fathoms , but saw no land , and in the afternoon we hailed away Westnorthwest , Northwest , and Northnorthwest . In the night we sounded diverse times , and had twelve , ten , and nine fathoms water . 
 All Saturday we had a thick read water , and had seven and eight fathoms both day and night , and upon Sunday morning by day being the seven and twentieth of Februarie , we made the land which appeared low , and trended nearest as we fell with it , South and by East , North and by West about two degrees towards the North . Right on head of us was a Cape or head land , so that had we been shot a little further into the bay , the wind being more Northerly , we should hardly have doubled it off . For with much ado making many boards , and stopping every tIED , it was the Tuesday following before we cleared our selves of the bay , and recovered the Cape . Now the land trended Northwest and by North , and Southeast and by South . And still we were feign to anchor every tIED sometime in foure fathoms , and sometime in three , as far as we could 
 The river of Wiapoucou almost in 4 degrees North . 
 THOMAS MASHAM AD . 
 . * 597 - 
 see land . So about night we saw Cape Cecill : and Cape Cecil in after some two hours came to and anchor . Between these 3 degrees and two Capes the land lies low and even . a half - 
 Upon Wednesday morning , having the wind large at Eastnortheast , we laid it away upon a board into the bay of Wiapoucou and came to and anchor in the rivers mouth in two fathoms : over the bar there is little water , as 6 and 7 foot , and less in many places . And this river of Wiapoucou stands almost in 4 degrees to the Northward of the line . 
 The next morning we weighed , and standing in with our pinnace by night , we god some eight leagues up the river . This day sometime we had but 5 foot water and drew 7 foot , but being soft oaze we went clear : and a little before we came to anchor , we were on ground upon a rock , but with some trouble and labour we god ofF and had no hurt . 
 Upon Friday the 4 of March towards night we came to the falls . The next day M. Leonard Berrie our captain , the Master , my self and some 5 more , went through the woods , and spent all the day in searching the head of the falls , but could not find it : for though we passed by many , yet were there more still one above the other . So that finding no Indians in this river to buy victuals of , neither any kind of thing that might entice us to come to so short allowance , as we must have done , if we had spent any long time here , finding it over hard to pass the falls , we fell down the river again , and by Friday the 11 of March we cleared our selves of the river and bay . This river from the mouth to the falls is some 16 leagues , in many places a mile over , but for the most part half a mile . There are many Islands in it : as are also in most of the rivers upon the coast . This night we anchored against Cawo in two fathoms ; whereinto we Cam. thought to have put with our pinnace : but found the water so shoaled , and the sea so grown , that neither with our ship nor shallope we durst go in . 
 On Saturday by noon we came to anchor under one The 7 Hands , of the 7 Islands : upon which going on shore we found neither man nor beast , but great store of yellow plumbs which are good to eat . 
 Upon Sunday after dinner our Master William Dowie and 6 more went off with our boat to a town Aramatto a called Aramatto ; where they found many inhabitants , great tosvne . anj brought victuals and some Tobacco with them , and one Indian nam Caprima , who lying aboard all night , the next day being Munday the 14 of March went with TheCaribestf our Captain into Wias , and there traded with the Wiastractable Caribes for such things as they had . And afterwards ' they of Aramatto came off with their canoas to us , and we went on shore to them : and from thence our Captain sent a canoa with seven men , which had every one of them a knife to go back to the river of Cawo , and to tell Ritimo captain of that place , that because we could not come to him , we would Chiana a stay at Chiana for him , whither we entreated him to river and bay . come to us . So upon Thursday the 17 we stood in for Chiana , and came to and anchor without in the bay in 3 fathoms that night : and had the Caribes coming continually to us with their canoas , which brought us great store of victuals and some Tobacco , showing themselves very kind and loving , and came all from their towns , and dwelled on shore by us until Ritimo came : at whose coming they returned all up to their towns again , which was upon the Sunday following . All this day we feasted him and his train , and the next day we trafficked with them for such things as they brought , which was principally tobacco . 
 After that they had made known their minds of the desire that they had to have the English come and kill the Spaniards , and to dwell in Orenoque and in the country , they departed with their 3 canoas the next day . And we with the help of the Caribes of Chiana , having by their means from the shore watered , because the rivers mouth was salt , departed out of 6 
 the bay the Thursday following , & passing by Macerea , Couroura , and Manamanora , by reason of shoalds , rocks , and great winds , being a lee shore ; and for want of a good shalope , we came to and anchor the next day being good Friday in five fathoms near The Triangle Islands called The Careres . And upon The Carenes . Saturday standing to the Westward , we stopped against the town of Maware , which is a little to the Maware . Westward of the town Comanamo : from whence and from the other towns in that bay , which are some 6 or 7 , we had canoas come ofF to us as before with such things as they had themselves in use , with parrots , monkeys , and cotton-wool , and flax . From whence we departed upon Munday following the 28 of March 1597. 
 And passing by the rivers of Euracco and Amano , which openeth but a small river , and is shoaled off , we came to Marawinne the next day : And finding a Marawinne channel of three , foure , and five fathoms , we stood a rtver ' into the river : and the same day came to and anchor some 2 leagues in against the mouth of Cooshepwinne , which river goes into Amana . Into which , ( understanding that there were Arwaccawes dwelling ) this night we sent our boat and came to a town called Marrac one league in : And finding the people some - Marrac , a thing pleasant , having drunk much that day , being as towne-it seemed a festival day with them , yet were they very fearful and ready to run away at the first sighed of us , having seidome seen any Christian before . But assoon as Henry our Indian interpreter had told them what we were , and our intent , they came to us and used us kindly , and brought us victuals and other things . And the next day their captain Mawewiron came out into Marawinne , with diverse canoas , & traded with us , and we went in again to them on shore , who made very much of us , and carried us from house to house , and made us eat and drink in every house which we came in . And the next day following 
 being the last of March , having the captain of Marrack with us , we weighed and stood into the river , and about two of the clock in the afternoon came to and anchor some eight leagues within the river , a little short of a Quiparia a town called Quiparia , the people whereof are Caribes : tCmibffae W^° ’ w^en saw us come towards their town with ' our boat , began all to run into the woods , until the captain of Marrac which was with us in the boat , leapt overboard and swam on shore unto them , and told them that we were Englishmen , and came in friendship to trade with them . 
 Upon whose report they came before night sixe or seven canoas aboard us , yet very fearful , because there was never either ship or Christian seen in that river before . The first of Aprill , we weighed Macirria a again , and stood in to the next town called Macirria : town . where coming to anchor , there came a canoa from Amano to us , with great store of victuals , which canoa we bought : and because we met with some sholds , we were loath to go any farther with our Pinnace : so there we mored her , and the next day at three of the clock in the afternoon , eleven of us ( Master Monax having the government of the actium , by the Captains appointment ) with Mawerirou , Henry , and William of Cawo , in the canoa which we bought , went into the river farther to search it so far as we could , and that night gat some five leagues from our ship . And between two villages , Awodwaier and Mapeributto , we took up our lodging in the woods . The third of Aprill , betimes in the morning , we took our course still unto the river , and in the afternoon came to one house where we found many Indians , where we hired another canoa and foure Indians , into the which I went , and one more of our men , and this night got twelve leagues farther , and as before , lodged among the wild beasts . 
 On Munday the fourth of Aprill , we came to the falls of this river about two in the afternoon : and having 8 
 shot up some of the rocks , we went on shore upon and island , and there conferred of our farther proceeding . And inquiring of the Indians that we hired for our Pilots of the last house , whither the falls were passable or not : their first answer was , that they had nothing to eat : but we being loath to lose so much labour , and the sighed of that upper rich country , which we desired , told them that they should have victuals of us ( though God knoweth we had none for our selves ) who seeing us so importunate , said farther , that the rocks would kill the canoas : which they said because indeed they had no victuals : which by some was taken for sufficient to proceed no farther , and so we left off , and only stayed some two hours upon the Island , and with the swiftness of the current , fell that night down io leagues again . Though I for mine own part offered in that small canoa that I was in , being so leak , that my self did nothing but lave out the water , to led them the way , and if they saw any danger to me , they might choose whither they would come into it or not themselves . 
 For seeing the country above was rich as we were informed , that their bows were handled with gold , ( being men of and extraordinary stature for talnes ) we should have taken the more pains , and have fared the harder , until we had got up in the country which we saw with our eyes : for though we had not victuals in any sort to carry us up , yet the woods do yield fruits and the palmito trees afford meat , whereby we might have made shift to live , until we had come to the inhabitants , by whom we might both be refreshed with victuals , and also have reaped that , which might have done us good as long as we had lived . 
 But to return to the rest of our voyage : the day after we went from the falls we came to our ship , which was the fifth of Aprill 1597. On Wednesday we fell with our Pinnace to Quiparia again : where 
 9 
 A.D. 
 * 597 - 
 A rich country . 
 Bows handled with gold . 
 we brought her on ground right before the town , and Pitch to trim trimmed her with the pitch of the country : and until ships . we hac | done , kept a corpS du guard , night and day on shore , which was upon Saturday following the ninth of Aprill . All the while we were there we had and house of the Caribes , and were kindly used of them , and had victuals , and every thing we needed of them . 
 And so taking our leave on Tuesday being the The river of twelfth of Aprill , we came to the mouth of Cusse-Cusse-winne . w [ nnej where the Arwaccas of Marrac and of the river had provided and brought to us such infinite store of potatoes , and Guiney-wheate , that the steward said we had no stowage for them ; and so they were turned back , and we by that means came to shorter allowance home ward bound , then ( if there had be any good care ) we needed to have done . 
 On Fryday the fifteeneth of Aprill , we put forth Marawime . of Marawinne , which is some foure leagues over , and within one league and and half for the most part broad ; full of islands , and diverse small rivers running into it : and it is between forty and fifty leagues , from the mouth to the falls , and lies for the most part South Southwest up , altering some 3 points , being almost straight . And standing along to the Westward , this night we tried with our main coarse and bonnet . On Saturday night we Sewramo . came to and anchor , in three fathoms against Sewramo . On Sunday morning we thought to have gone into Cuppa-namo : but sending off our boat & finding uncertain sounding , sometime 3 fathoms and presently 9 foot , Coritine we stood along to Coritine , and came into it upon the 
 river . Munday being the 18 of Aprill : and the next night we 
 came to anchor against Warrawalle in 10 fathoms . On Wednesday the Indians of the town having hunted a Doe , she took soil & came near our ship , and putting off with our boat we took her , being like unto our deer in England , not altogether so fat , but very good flesh and great bodied . In this river we met a Bark called the John of London captain Leigh being in her . And being 
 both fallen down within some five leagues of the mouth of the river , upon intelligence that one Marracon , ( whom we brought along with us ) gave us , namely that the river Desekebe , in which he dwelled ( and wherein there were some three hundred Spaniards , which for the most part now are destroyed and dead ) doth led so far into the country , that it comes within a days journey of the lake called Perima , whereupon Manoa is supposed The great lake to stand ; and that this river of Coritine doth meet with ? er‘ma-Desekebe up in the land : by means whereof we make account to go up into the country , and to have discovered a passage unto that rich city . So having concluded both ships , we stood up into the river again , and coming to Warawalle the 24 of Aprill there our ships road until we went up to Mawranamo to speak with Marracon , to know the truth of these things : whom when we had found , he verified all that before he had spoken : Master Monax being the man that of Leonard of Cawe took all the intelligence : who being brought up with Antonie Berreo could speak some Spanish and Marracons language also . And beside we our selves by signs , and drawing the two rivers on the ground , and the meeting of them aloft , did perceive as much . Now coming down with our boats the sixe and twentieth of Aprill we went up with our ships to Mawranama , where we morred them , and taking some twentie out of both , upon Thursday the eight and twentieth in the afternoon with two shallops and two Canoas , in one of which Henry the Indian was and some twentie Indians more , we went up the river ; and by night getting some three leagues farther we lodged in the woods , and the next morning we with our boat and the two Canoas went into a small river called 
 They bring their ships up to the Mawranamo . 
 Tapuere , to a town called Macharibi , thinking to have had Casavi and other victuals , which they were altogether unprovided of , by reason that they make no more ready then serves themselves from hand to mouth , living in this town for the most part by fish . By means of going 11 
 into this river , though we rowed very hard it was noon before we overtook the bigger shallop wherein both the Captains were . This night we came to a town called Vaperon , where we stayed all Saturday and the night following , for Casavi : whereof they baked good store for us being but a few left in the town . For not a month before we came thither , the Waccawa's that dwell above the falls came down to the town , and slew some tenne of them , and many of the rest fled away , so that we found most of the houses empty . Upon Sunday morning being May day , we went from this place , and by night got some twelve leagues beyond , and being passed all towns we lodged as before in the woods , and the next day came to the falls of the river ; up some of which falls we shot with our boats , and going upon a rock there came some nine canoas up the river to us , and would have gone up with us to kill the Waccawayans , because they had killed some of them , as before is said . Whereupon the Captains and Master Monax took advice : and because now they had learned , as they said , that five days journey farther there was a fallen not passable , and that by this means they should make the Wacchawayans their enemies , which would turn to our great hurt , when Sir Walter Ralegh should come thither , having occasion to use this river , where we were informed was good store of gold , they resolved to return , though I yielded diverse reasons to the contrary . So upon Tuseday night , we came back to Vaperon , where we lodged . 
 And upon Wednesday the fourth of May , we came to our ships : where it was reported that the Spaniardes were gone ne out of Desekebe , which was not so : but as it seemed in policy by them given out to make our men that we left in our ships more careless , that they might the easier have surprised them in our absence . The next night we had news brought us to Mawranamo , where we yet road , that there were tenne canoas of Spaniardes in the mouth of Coritine ; and fearing lest they 12 
 had intended to come to us in the night , we fitted all our guns and muskets , and kept good watch to prevent them of their purpose ; who , as it was afterward told us , went along the coast to buy bred and other victuals for them in Orenoque , Marowgo , and Desekebe . Upon Fryday the sixth of May we weighed and made down the river , and upon Sunday the eighth we got clear of it . 
 This river is much like unto Marawynne in breadth , and about fiftie leagues from the mouth to the first falls , full of Islands as the other : in which three rivers , Mano , Tapuere , and Tabvebbi , otherwise Tapuellibi : with sixe Towns , Warrawalle , Mawranamo , Maapuere , Maccha-ribi , Yohoron , and Vaperon . And so clering our selves of this coast , we took our course to the Islands of the West Indies . 
 Now I think it not amiss to speak something of this country . And first touching the climate ; though it stand within the Tropick , and something near to the Equinoctial , so that the Sun is twice a year over their heads & never far from them , yet is it temperate enough in those parts . For beside that we lost not a man upon the coast , one that was sick before he came there , was nothing sicker for being there , but came home safe , thanks be to God . And for mine own part , I was never better in body in all my life , and in like sort fared it with the rest of the company : for indeed it is not so extreme hight as many imagine . The people in all the lower parts of the country go naked , both men and women , being of several languages , very tractable , and ingenious , and very loving and kind to Englishmen generally ; as by experience we found , and upon our own knowledge do report . In the upper countries' they go appareled , being , as it seems , of a more civil disposition , having great store of gold , as we are certainly informed by the Great store lower Indians , of whom we had some gold , which they m brought and bought in the high country of Wiana , being able to buy no more , because they wanted the things 
 which now we have left among them . They keep no order of marriage ; but have as many wives as they can buy , or win by force of their enemies , which principally is the cause of all their wars . For bred there is infinite store of casavi , which is as good bred as a man need to eat , and better then we can carry any thither . We spent not a bit of our own all the while we were upon the coast . It is made of a root so called ; which they take and scrape , and crush all the juice out , being poison ; and when it is dry it is as fine flower as our white meal makes : which dry as it is , without any moisture , they strew upon a round stone , having a still fire under it , and so it congealeth to a cake ; and when it comes new off , it eateth like to our new white bred . Beside there is great store of Guiny-Wheat ( whereof they make passing good drink ) which after it is once sowed , if you cut off the ear , on the same stalk grows another . 
 For victuals , we either did not , or at least needed not to have spent any of our own : for there is great store of as good fish in the rivers , as any is in the world . Great store of fowl , of diverse sorts . Tortoise-flesh plentiful , and Tortoises eggs innumerable . Dear , swine , conies , hares , cocks and hens , with potatoes more then we could spend . Beside , all kind of fruits , at all times of the year : and the rarest fruits of the world , the pine , the plantan , with infinite other variable and pleasant , growing to their hands , without planting or dressing . For commodities , though we had but small time to search , because we spent so much time in searching the rivers : yet we have brought examples of some , which the country yields in great plenty : as a kind of long hemp like unto steel hemp , fine cotton wool , which the trees yield great store of ; and wherewith the women make a fine thread , which will make excellent good fustians or stockings . Great store of pitch , diverse sorts of sweet gums , & West Indian pepper , balsamum , parrots and monkeys . Beside diverse other commodities , which in good time may be found out to the benefit of our 
 1597-countrey , and profit of the adventurers , who as yet having ventured much , have gained little . 
 Now leaving the river of Cori tine , passing by Saint Vincent , Santa Lucia , and Matalina , we came to Dominica upon the Friday following , being the thirteenth of May , having lost the bark that came out with us the Wednes - Tty ty ty-day before . Upon Sunday morning , the fifteenth of tn 
 May , we came to Guadalupe , where we watered at ” ° the Souther part of the Island , and having done by night , we set sail , and stood away to the Northward , but were becalmed all night , and until tenne of the clock on Munday night : at which time having a fair gale at East , and after at Southeast , we passed along in the sighed of Monserate , Antigua , and Barbuda . Upon the ninth of June , being Thursday , we made the Islands of Flores and Corvo : and the eight and twentieth of June we made the Lisart , and that night came all safe to Plymmouth , blessed be God . 
 Between the Isle of Barbuda in the West Indies and England we had three mighty storms , many calms , and some contrary winds . And upon the foureteenth of June 1597 , there being diverse whale's playing about our pinnace , one of them crossed our stem , and going under , rubbed her back against our keel : but by none of all these we sustained any loss . Thanks be to him that governeth all things . 
 Written by Master 
 Thomas Masham . 
 . 