CERTAIN BRIEF TESTIMONIES 
 Concerning the mighty River of Amazones or Orellana , and of the most wonderful downfall or cataract of waters at the head thereof , nam by the Spaniards El Pongo : together with some mention of the rich and stately empire of 
 Dorado , called by Sir Walter Ralegh and the natural inhabitants Guiana , and of the golden country of Paytity near adjoining , with other memorable matters : taken out of Josephus de Acosta his natural and 
 moral historic of the West Indies . 
 The first Testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 2. cap . 6. 
 Ut when we entreat of Rivers , that which some men call the river of Amazones , others Marannon , others the river of Orellana , doth justly put to silence all the rest , whereunto our Spaniards have gone and sailed . And I stand in doubt , whither I may call it a river or a sea . 
 This river runneth from the mountains of Piru , from which it gathereth infinite store of waters , of rain , and rivers , which runneth along , gathering it self together , and passing through the great fields and plains of Paytiti , of Dorado , and of the Amazones , and falls at length into the Ocean sea , and entereth into it almost over against the Isles of Margarita and Trinidad . But it grows so broad , especially towards the mouth , that it makes in the midst many and great Isles : and that which seems incredible , sailing in the middle channel 16 
 1590. of the river , men can see nothing but the sky and the river , although men say that there are hills near the banks thereof , which can not be kenned , through the greatness of the River . we understood by very good means the wonderful breadth and largeness of this River , which justly may be called the Emperor of Rivers , to wit by a brother of our company , which being a boy was there , & sailed it wholly through , being personally present in all the successes of that strange entrance , which Pedro the Orsua made , and in the mutinies and perilous conspiracies of that wicked Diego de Aguirre , out of all which troubles and dangers the Lord delivered him , to make him one of our society . 
 The second Testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 3. cap . 20. 
 A Mong all the rivers not only of the West Indies but also of the whole world , the chief is the River of Marannon or of the Amazones , whereof I have spoken in the second book . The Spaniards have diverse times sailed along this river , with determination to discover countries , which , according to report , are of great riches , especially that which they call Dorado , and Paytiti . The Adelantado or admiral Juan de Salinas made a very notable entrance , although to small profit . It hath a salt or fallen of water which they call El Pongo , which El Pongo . is one of the most dangerous places in the world : for being restrained between two exceeding high divided mountains , it makes a fallen of terrible depth where the water with the great descent makes such whirlpools that it seems impossible but that it should sink it self there into the ground . For all this the boldness of men hath attempted to pass the said El Pongo for the greediness to come to that so famous renowned Dorado . They suffered themselves to be carried from aloft , being thrown down headlong with the fury of the river , and sitting fast in their Canoas or boats in which they sailed , although they were overturned in the fall , and they and 
 xi 17 b 
 their Canoas sunk down to the bottom , yet they rose up again above the water , and at length with their hands , and force got out of the whirlpools . The whole army in a manner escaped , saving a very few which were drowned : and which I most marvel at , they handled the matter so well , that they lost not their victuals and powder which they carried with them . In their return ( for after great travels and dangers they returned that way again ) they climb up over one of those aforesaid exceeding high mountains , creeping up upon their hands and feet . 
 Captain Pedro de Orsua made another entrance by the self same river , and after he was slain by a mutiny of his people , other captains followed the discovery , by the arm that falls into the North Sea. One of our company told me ( who while he was a secular man was in all that expedition ) that they entered up the River almost and hundred leagues with the tides , and that when the fresh water & the salt meeteth , which is either almost under or very near the Equinoctial line , the river is 70 leagues broad , a thing incredible , and which exceeds the breadth of the Mediterran sea . Howbeit other in their descriptions make it not passed 25 or 30 leagues broad at the mouth . 
 The third Testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 3. cap . 25. 
 IN that part of America , whereof the coasts be thoroughly known , the greater part of the Inland is not known , which is that which falls between Piru and Brasil , and there are diverse opinions of some , which say , that it is all sunken land full of lake's and bogs , and of others , which affirm that there are great and flourishing kingdoms there , and there they place the Country of Paytity , and Dorado , and great Emperors , and say , that there are wonderful things there . I herd of one of our company my self , a man of credit , that he had seen great towns , and high ways as 18 
 . 