TESTIMONIES OF THE AMAZON broad and as much beaten , as the ways between Salamanca and Validolid : and this was when the great entrance or discovery was made by the great river of the Amazones or Marannon by Pedro de Orsua , and afterwards by others that succeeded him : and they supposing that Dorado which they sought , was farther up in the country , did not inhabit there , and afterwards returned without discovering Dorado ( which they never found ) and without that great province which they left . 
 A short description of the river of Marannon or Amazones , and the Countries thereabouts , as also of the sea of Freshwater , taken out of and ancient Discourse of all the Ports , Creeks , and Havens of the West Indies , Written by Martin Fernandez de Enciza , and dedicated to Charles the Emperor , Anno 1518. 
 Arannon lies in seven degrees and and half Northward of the Equinoctial , it is a great river , and hath more then fifteene leagues in breadth eight leagues within the land . It hath many islands , and in this river within the land fortie leagues there is near to the said river 
 a mountain , whereupon grow trees of Incense , the trees be of a good height , & the boughs thereof be like to Plumtrees , and the Incense doth hang at them , as the ice doth at the tiles of a house in the winter season when it doth freeze . In this river were taken foure Indians in a small boat , called in the Indian language a Canoa , that came down by the river , and there were taken from them two stones of Emeralds , the one of them being as great as a men hand . They said that so many days journey going upward by the river , they found a rock of that stone . Likewise there were taken from them two loaves made of flower , which were like to cakes of Soap , and it seemed that 
 19 
 A.D. 
 1518. 
 they were kneaded with the liquour of Balsamum . All this coast from the Cape of S. Austine unto Marannon is a clear coast & deep , but near to the river are certain sholds towards the East part . And by the West part the river is deep , and it hath a good entry . From this river Marannon , unto the river which is called The sea of fresh water , are 25 leagues : this river hath 40 leagues of breadth at the mouth , and carrieth such abundance of water that it entereth more then 20 leagues into the Sea , and mingleth not it self with the salt water : this breadth goes 25 leagues within the land , and after it is divided into parts , the one going towards the Southeast , and the other towards the Southwest . That which goes towards the Southeast is very deep and of much water , and hath a channel half a league of breadth , that a Carrack may go up through it : & the tides be so swift , that the ships have need of good cables . The river of this port is very good , and there have be some that have entered 50 leagues within it , & have seen no mountains . The Indians of this country have their lips made full of small holes in 4 parts , & through those holes be put small rings , and likewise at their ears : & if any man ask of them where they had their gold , they answer , that going up by the river so many days journey , they found certain mountains that had much of it , and from those mountains they brought it when they would have it , but they made no great account of it , for they neither buy nor fell , and among them is nothing but change . In this country they eat bred of roots , and Maiz , and they eat certain roots which they call Aies and Batatas , but the Batatas be better then the other roots , and being raw they have a smell of Chestnuts : they are to be eaten roasted . These Indians do make wine of the fruit of Datetrees , which fruit is yellow in colour , and is as great as a little Doves egg , and being in season is good to be eaten , and of it proceedeth good wine , and is preserved 
 for a long time . These kind of people do make their houses with upper rooms , and they sleep in them , as also all their habitation is in the upper rooms , and that which is below , they leave open : and also they use certain mantels of cotton wool , and these they tie at the ends with ropes , and the one end of the rope they make fast to one part of the house , and the other end to the other part of the house : and in these they lie , which be their beds , and these kind of beds be used in ' all India , and there is not in any part of India any chambers that the people do use to lodge in aloft from the ground , nor they make any high rooms , but only in this part of India : & in all other places they make their houses without any lofts or chambers , and they cover their houses with the leaves of datetrees , and of grass . And from this fresh water sea unto Paria , the coast lies West Northwest , and is so full of sholds that the ships cannot come near to the land . There are from this river to Paria 250 leagues . In this fresh water sea , the tides do ebb & flow as much as they do in Britayne , and it stands in 6 degrees and a half . Paria stands on the other side of the Equinoctial towards the North , in seven degrees : In Paria the sea flows but little , and from Paria towards the West , the sea does not flow . From the entry of the gulf of Paria unto the Cape that lies towards the West , are 35 leagues , and from thence the coast turns towards the Northeast other 35 leagues , & from thence the coast turns towards the West . Before this gulf stands the Island of Trinidad , and towards the West doth appear the gulf of Paria like to half a round circle , after the fashion of a Diameter , and at the end of this circle is the entery in of Paria , & at this entery there is between the land and the Island 8 leagues , and on the other side there is but little space between the Hand and the land , but it is deep , and hath a good entry : this Hand of Trinidad hath in length 25 leagues , and as many in breadth , and 
 21 
 A.D. 
 I5l8 . 
 stands in eight degrees , and is inhabited of many people , and as yet not under subjection . Here the Indians do use to shoot with bows and arrows which are of a fathom in length , made of reeds , which grow in that Country , and at the end of them is artificially joined a piece of wood very strong , unto the which piece of wood at the end of it , they put a bone of a fish , in place of and arrow head : these kind of bones be harder then Diamonds , and every one of them be three or foure fingers long , & they are taken out of a fish that hath three of these bones , one upon the back , another under every wing : but that which grows upon the back is the strongest and the greatest . In this Island the people says that there grows gold : and in this Island and in Paria grow redes so great , that they make staves of them and carry of them into Spaine . Likewise there be Popinjays very great and gentle , and some of them have their foreheads yellow , and this sort do quickly learn to speak , and speak much . There be likewise in the gulf of Paria pearls , although not many , but very good and great . 
 . 