A ruttier or course to be kept for him that will sail from Cabo Verde to the coast of Brasil , and all along the coast of Brasil unto the river of Plate : and namely first from Cabo Verde to Fernambuck . 
 He ship that goes from Cabo Verde to Brasil , must go Southsoutheast : and when she is within 5 or 6 degrees of the Equinoctial she must go Southeast and by South . And if she have the ternados , that is thunderings and lightnings , then thou must go altogether 
 South , or that way and by that board that does profit thee most . And take this for advice , that having the general winds , & if the wind be at South or Southeast , then go Southwest , or westsouthwest . And if the wind You that toitt be South , then go Southwest , and by this way sa3le toBrasil , but little , for it is not a way for thy profit , because thin^ow-the more thou goest this way , the more will be thy 70 leagues of trouble , because thou mayest not come nearer the the coast of coast of Guinea then 60 or 70 leagues unto thee should Gmnea . called Os baixos de Santa Anna . And being this distance from the same , thou shalt cast about the other way towards Brasil , and the wind will be large . 
 Thou shalt understand that the ship that keepeth this course to Fernambuck , and goes in October or after , and chanceth to go to windward of the Isle 73 
 of Fernando de Loronha , when thou comest to 8 * Of Souther - degrees , or 8 and then thou shalt go West and lie latitude . bear with the land . Thou must take this for a warning , that if going West in 8 degrees thou see land , then look to the Northward , and thou shalt see certain white clifFes . Then I advice thee that thou go well to the Southward . And this is to be understood from October forward , for then the time is most subject to Northeast and Eastnortheast winds . And if thou find thy self in the said height above mentioned , and seest clifFes , and seest a Cape to the Southward , and seest not more land to the South , then make account that thou art at Capiguoari : and from thence to Fernambuck thou hast sixe leagues , and hast a good port . 
 Thou shalt take this for a warning , that if in 8 degrees and a half thou see land lying all flat , thou mayest go nearer it , and be bold till thou come in ten ne or twelve radomes : And then thou shalt see a great gross land along the seacoast which is called Capitagua : And being East and West with this land , and , as I have said , in tenne or twelve fathoms water ; and the time being from October to Februarie , then thou needest not to fear any thing : but look to the South and thou shalt see the cape of S. Augustine : and look to the North and thou shalt see a point , and to the Southeast a point called Punta de Olinda , where Aponiquay stands . And the land from the cape to the point called Punta de Olinda lies North and South . 
 I advice thee that if thou be East and West with the cape of Saint Augustine , thou shalt see within the land and high hill , having as it were a saddle upon it like to a camel : And thou shalt see to the Southwards three hills along the sea , and then presently thou shalt see the coast to lie Northeast and Southwest . 
 The height of Thou shalt understand that from this cape of Saint Augustine , to the town of Olinda , thou hast nine of Olinda^ leagues to the North . And this cape stands in eight Fernambuck . degrees and two third parts , and Olinda stands in eight 74 
 degrees and a quarter , and Fernam buck stands in eight degrees . And this course is to be understood to be observed and kept , if thou depart from Lisbon in October or November . 
 Take this advice , that if thou depart in February or March from Lisbone , then thou shalt go to bear In what height with the land in nine degrees , because that from worser March forward reign most commonly Southeast and art Southwest winds . And if by this height and course from Lisbon thou bring thyself nigh to the shore , fear not to in February bring thy ship into 18 or 20 fathoms , for all the °r March . •coast is clean : and there are no more dangers , but such as the sea does break upon . 
 And if after thy fallen with the land thou have occasion to go to the Northward , and so going seest - certain sholdes , doubt not to come for the North , and Him ) i0 kncm thou shalt see the cape of Saint Augustine , which lies as it were sloping to the seaward , and hath as it were ’ ' 
 a Whale's head , and hath upon it a round hill , with many hills round about it . And if thou come along the sea ■ coast much about the depth above mentioned , thou shalt see a little Island called Saint Alexio : And from this A& the Santo Island to the cape of Saint Augustine are foure leagues , Xi° ' - and it stands in eight degrees and three quarters . 
 The course that a man must keep to the bay called A Bahia de Todos os Santos , that is to say , The bay of all Saints , which lies on the foresaid coast of Brasil . 
 F thou go for Bahia de Todos os Santos , thou must keep the course which I have already set down , and shalt observe the time from March 
 forward , as also from October forward . Thou shalt understand that the Bahia de Todos os Santos stands in 13 degrees and J : and if thou go in October or after October , then go to fallen with the land in 12 degrees or 12 and a half . 
 And take this for a warning , that when thou seest a 
 75 
 The height of Bahia de Todos os Santos in 13 degrees and one third part . 
 white land , and long banks of white sand , which show much like linen cloth when it is in whiting , then thou must go along from the North to the South until this white land do end : and thou needest not to fear to go along the coast , for there are no sholds . Before thou be clean passed the white land or white sands , thou shalt have sighed of and Island that stands along the bay , I say on the Northside of the bay , which is called The situation Tapaon : and here the land lies West and by South . of the Isle of When thou art so far shot as Tapaon , thou shalt a*wm " see a certain great tree which is round , and stands near the sea upon the very point of the entrance into Bahia on the Northside . 
 And mark well that if thou look to the Southward , and seest no white grounds such as I wrote of before , but that they be all behind thee to the Northward : When a man then when thou seest none to the Southward , thou ^th^Balia1 mayest be bold to bear in with Bahia . And if when ' thou goest into Bahia to the Northwest , and seest the sea to break , fear nothing : for it is the breach of a certain bank , whereon thou shalt have always 5 or 6 fathoms water : and this be sure of . 
 Thou shalt understand that if thou come for this place from March to the end of April , I would wish thee not to fallen to the Southward of 13 degrees and a half . And falling with the land , and not seeing the white sands , thou shalt strive to go to the Northward . And seeing the land in 13 degrees and a half , thou shalt have sighed of and hill along the sea : And if thou be nigh the land , and cannot make it certain what land it is : thou shalt mark if it be a round high hill The distance along the sea , that it is O morro de San Paulo , or , The Paulo hill Saint P^l : and it lies black and bore on the from Bahia . top . And from thence to Bahia is tenne leagues . 
 And here along this hill on the Northwest side Pio de Tin - there is a great river called Tinsare : and it is a very sare a very gOOd river . And in the entrance of Bahia there are ’ sixe or seven fathoms water in the channel . And I 
 advice thee that being in the height of 13 degrees and a half , thou come not near the land , for it hath a bay very dangerous . 
 And if thou go from Bahia to Fernambuck , then I advice thee that thou take good heed of the coast on the Northeast and Southwest , and thou shalt go East , if the wind will suffer thee to go East : and so go thirtie or forty leagues off to the sea . 
 I advice thee that thou bear not in with the land of Fernambuck , but in the height of 9 or 10 degrees , because that in 11 degrees thou shalt fallen with the bay called A Enseada de Vazabaris . Also if thou come from Portugal and fallest with the land in eleven degrees , bear not in with it , neither come near it , for thou mayest hurt thy self in so doing : but thou shalt shun it , and go to the Southward . For if thou lie to the North thou shalt bring thy self into some trouble . 
 This Bay of All Saints stands in thirteene degrees . And from thence to Fernambuck thou hast a hundreth leagues : and the coast lies Northeast and Southwest . And from thence to Rio das Ilhas , that is , the river of the Islands the coast runneth Northeast and Southwest , I mean taking a quarter of the North and South . The course for Baia das Ilhas , that is , The bay of the Islands , which lie on the said coast of Brasil , & the marks for the finding of them . 
 F thou go for Baia das Ilhas thou must look for it in fifteene degrees lacking a quarter . 
 If thou be minded as I said to go for these Isles , if it be from March forward , thou shalt fallen with the land in 15 degrees and a half , and though it be in 
 15 degrees and f , it is all the better . 
 And if thou have sighed of certain high hills , that seem to reach to the sky , these hills are called As Serras Raiemores . Then having sighed of these hills , 77 
 A dangerous bay in 13 degrees and a half . 
 The height of the bay called A Enseada de Vazabaris . 
 Baia de todos Santos in 13 degrees . 
 Baia das Ilhas lies in 15 degrees lacking a quarter . 
 In what height a man must fallen with this place in time of the Northeast winds . Giemana . Mangues . 
 thou shalt go dung the coast ; and fear nothing , for there are no sholdes along to the North . And when thou seest the Islands , thou mayest make account they be these which thou seekest , for there are no other on all this coast , and thou shalt see a round hill along the sea . Thou shalt understand that on the North side of this hill is the going in of the river . But if it chance that thou find thy self in a time that will not suffer thee to go in , then go along the Islands giving them a breadth off . And thou mayest well come to and anchor hard aboard them , for all is clean ground . And thou shalt find eight or nine fathoms , and from thence thou mayest go into the river hard aboard the shore . And if it chance that thou go from the North to the South all along the great Island , thou must keep thy self from the land : and when thou hast brought it Eastnortheast , then thou mayest anchor two cables length from the shore : for all is clean ground . 
 If thou chance to arrive on this coast in the time of the Northeast winds , thou shalt seek to fallen with the land in foureteene degrees . And if thou see a low land , thou mayest make account it is the land called Ciemana , and then thou shalt see Mangues : And also thou shalt come along this coast to the South : and when thou seest and end of the low land , then thou shalt find and high land along the sea like the other that I have made mention of before , that is , all sandy along the sea coast . 
 And thou must understand , that where the high land begins , there is a little river called Rio das Contas , but enter not into it : it hath for a mark to be known by as it were a white mouth . And from thence to the Islands thou hast nine leagues . And at the end of this high land to the Southward of it thou shalt find a great bay within the land , & then thou shalt look to the Westsouthwest , and shalt see another high land , which lies as it were in the midst of the bay , and thou shalt there see certain white houses 78 
 •which are the Ingenios or houses wherein they make The white sugar of Lucas Giraldo . From thence thou shalt see sugar houses the Isles being so far shot as Rio de Contas . And thou shalt see within the land a round hill which ' is like Monte de laud , and it hath another copy on the South side . 
 The course to sail to Porto Seguro , that is to say , The safe haven , lying on the foresaid coast of Brasil , & the marks to know the same by . 
 in thou go for Porto Seguro and goest in the time of the Southeast winds , which is from March forward , I advice thee that thou fallen not in more degrees then sixteen and a half , because of the sholdes called Os baixos dos Abrolhos , which are very dangerous , and stretch 
 very far into the sea . And also going West from them , that thou keep thy led going and be often sounding . And if thou chance to see the land , and and high hill and long withal , much like to The pike , it is the hill that is called Monte Pasqual . And from thence thou must go to the North , and when thou hast brought it Southwest of thee , then thou mayest bear with the land , but with great care to look about thee . 
 Mark when thou seest the land and comest to see a read cliff , then look to the Southward , and thou shalt see a great smooth coast along the sea , and then on the North side thou shalt descry Porto Seguro . And going along the coast thou shalt see the town of Porto Seguro standing upon the top of and hill ; which hill is a white rock : and on the North side of the said rock there is a very high land . I advice thee that when thou art East and West with the said land , I mean with this rock , that then thou look to the Northward , and 79 
 To avoids Os baixos dos Abrolhos . 
 Monte Pasqual . 
 The place of thou shalt see certain rocks lying two leagues off into r and th® sea > whereon the sea does break , and to the South-Ptrto Seguro , ward of them thou mayest come to and anchor against which stands the town , and hast a good place to ride in thirteen in 16 deg . & fathoms in sighed of the town . 
 one third . And if it be thy chance to arrive in the time of the Northeast winds , and comest in the height of fifteene degrees and two third parts , and seest not certain hills , 16 degrees . then thou must go along the coast being in 16 degrees , and under the first high land that thou shalt descry , thou A dangerous shalt see certain sandy bays along the sea coast : And if rwer in 16 thou have sighed of a river in this height , put not thy self S ' into it , neither bear with the land , for it hath many sholdes . And off them lie certain sunken grounds , Baixos de called Os Baixos de Santo Antonio . And from hence Santo Antonio . to Southward lies Porto Seguro . 
 I advice thee that going along the coast to the Southward , and seeing such sholdes , and the sea to break upon them , as the other which I last spoke of , thou shalt run along them a sea board of them : and when thou art at the end of them , then the town will bear West of thee : and then thou mayest go to thine anchoring place as is abovesaid , giving these sholds a good birth . 
 The course to the haven nam Baia doe Spirito Santo , that is to say , The bay of the holy Ghost , lying on the said coast of Brasil , and the marks thereof . 
 How shalt understand that the ship goes for Spirito Santo , when it doubled the sholdes Os Baixos 
 that hath dos 
 Monzmns are certain set winds with which the tides set . 
 Abrolhos , and hath brought it self in 20 or 19 degrees and a half , then it may hall with the land in 18 or 19 degrees and a half , and in twentie . And the said ship must go in this height , because 
 on this coast there are no Monzoins . 
 If thou chance to come in the height of 19 degrees Market on thee and seest low land to the Northwest off thee , then North s , e thou art on the North side of Spirito Santo , and thou SPmt° ant0‘ mayest make account that it is the land lying over Criquare , and over the river called Rio dolce , that is the river of sweet or fresh water . If thou come along the land thou shalt find certain high hills : but trust not the first that thou seest only . For beside the rest thou shalt see a round high hill which is at the capes end , which is called la Sierra de mestre Alvaro . Take heed that The situation going for this land thou look to the North and thou shalt see a river called Rio dos Reyes Magos : that is , Aharo . The river of the three kings . And coming to the Rio dos Reyes Southward thou shalt see presently the mouth of the bay to open . At the end of this hill on the South side , thou hast a point of a rock , which is called A punta do Tubaron . And on the South side of the bay it hath two or three black high hills , and in the midst of the bay thou shalt go in westward . 
 I advice thee that in going in thou take heed of a should which lies in the mouth of the bay : thou must leave it to the Southward of thee , and then ply to double a certain Island which lies within , and thou must leave it to the Northward of thee : and when it bears on the North or Northeast , thou mayest come to and anchor : for all is clean ground . 
 And if thou chance to come by this course , and fallest in 20 degrees , and seest many hills , and one among the rest very high and craggy : it is called A Sierra de Guari - Sierra de parim , that is , the hill of Guaraparim , and seest another inzo^degrees hill on the North side , which is called A Sierra de Pero a Sierra de Cam : both these lie on the South side of Spirito Santo . Pero Cam. And from these hills thou shalt see a little hill nam Guaipel . And when thou seest these hills , thou shalt see three little Islands together , lying to the Southward : And then from these thou shalt see another rocky , bore , and round Island : and to the land ofF this Island thou shalt see a great bay . If thou wilt thou mayest anchor 
 xi 81 F 
 here safely . And if thou wilt go in , thou shalt bring thy self East and West with the hill , and so thou mayest go in . And thou shalt leave a low land to the North A Ilha de of thee , which is called A Ilha de Repouso , that is , the Repouso . Isle open rest . anj thjs jsje Jietaiong the coast : and thou mayest be bold to ride betwixt it and the main , giving it a breadth off . 
 From these three Islands to Spirito Santo are 12 SpiritoSanta leagues : and running Northwards to come to Spirito stands in 20 gantOj thou shalt see another Island , and shalt go a sea-egrees . board of it , and by & by the mouth of the bay will open towards thee . And this bay stands in 20 degrees . 
 The course from the bay de Spirito Santo to the bay of S. Vincent , and the marks thereof . Also the course from Saint Vincent to the 
 river of Plate . 
 Baia de Salvador 12 leagues North from Cabo frio . 
 Two small Islands . 
 The height of Cape Frio in 23 degrees . Rio de Jenero . 
 Ailing from Spirito Santo for Saint Vincent , thou mayest go along the coast , keeping seven or eight leagues off , and must go to seek Cabo Frio , that is , The cold cape . And as thou comest towards Cabo Frio , thou hast a very great bay called Bahia de Salvador , that is , The 
 bay of our Saviour . And from thence thou hast twelve leagues to Cabo Frio . 
 And before thou comest to Cabo Frio , thou hast two small Islands . Thou mayest go safely either a sea board of them , or else between them . Thou shalt understand that Cabo Frio hath as it were and Island in the midst of 
 the face or show thereof , that does cut off the cape . Thou mayest ride safely on the West side thereof ; for all is clean ground . 
 Understand that Cabo Frio stands in 23 degrees : and from it to Rio de Jenero are twelve leagues . And this river of Jenero hath in the mouth thereof 3 or 4 Islands . And if thou wilt go into this river de Jenero , thou 82 
 mayest well go in between two Islands which stand in the entrance of the river on the South side : near unto this river there is a great hill seeming to be a man with long hair . 
 And take this for advice , that if thou be in the height of this river , thou shalt see certain high hills within the land , which be like unto organs . And when thou seest these organs , then make account thou art right against the river : and coming near the land thou shalt see a certain Island very round , which lies to the Southward , and is high and bore in the top . Thou must know that the mouth of this river stands in 23 degrees and one third part . And from this river to Angra , that is to say , The open haven , thou hast 15 leagues . Go not near the land there , except necessity compel thee . 
 I advice thee , that from this river that I spoke of , I mean from the entrance thereof , thou must go Westsouthwest , and Southwest , and West and by South . And thou shalt see a great Island called Isla de San Sebastiano , and to the Southward thereof another small Island very high , called the Island of Alcatrarzas , that is to say , The Island of Pellicanes : but come not near it , for it hath dangerous shoalds . And from hence thou mayest go West , and so thou shalt fallen right with the mouth of Saint Vincent , and thou shalt see and Island . And if thou mean to go into Saint Vincent thou must leave this Island to the Westward . And understand that Saint Vincent lies in foure and twentie degrees . And when thou art in the mouth of this bay , or art near the mouth of it , then thou shalt see many other Islands , and one among the rest to the seaward . And having these sights , thou hast the best marks that be for these Islands , that I have told thee of : and this Island lies Northwest and Southeast with the mouth of S. Vincent . 
 The situation of and hill like a man with long hair by Jenero . 
 The organs certain high hills . 
 Angra . 
 A llha de San Sebastiano .. 
 The Isle of Alcatrarzas . 
 Saint Vincent in 24 degrees . Many Islands about you mouth ofS . Vincent , y one out to the seaward . 
 83 
 [ The course 
 Porto de Patos . 
 Porto de DONE Roderigo . Laguna . 
 Rio de Martin de Sousa . 
 Cananea . 
 Rio de San Francisco . 
 The course from Saint Vincent to the river of Plate . 
 Rom S. Vincent to Cananea thou hast 40 leagues : and the coast lies Northeast and by East , and Southwest and by West . From Cananea to the river of Saint Francisco are fifteene leagues , and the coast lies Northeast and Southwest . There is a little Island , which hath as 
 it were two bays , and a good road , and is in 26 degrees and a quarter , and towards the main it is high and craggy . 
 From San Francisco to Boca de Overniron are 26 leagues , and the coast lies North & South . Also thou must mark that the river of San Francisco hath a great entrance , and 3 small Islands , and to seaward it hath a good road ; and the main is high and craggy . 
 From this Boca the Overniron to Ilha de Arvoredo thou hast no great marks be observed : but this Boca is a very great bay , and this bay is deep within the Island , and is a good road , and hath many Islands , and stands in 28 degrees . And to the North of this Island under the point there is a good road : and there is no other road hereabout but this , and it is under the Island . 
 From hence thou shalt have sighed of the Isle called Santa Catharina , which is a great Island about eight or nine leagues long , and lies North and South . And hard by even with this Hand is Porto de Patos , which stands in 29 degrees . And from Porto de Patos to Porto de DONE Roderigo are ten or eleven leagues : and the coast lies North and South . And from Porto de DONE Roderigo to Laguna are 5 leagues . And this is a good harbour for all winds , except the Northeast wind . 
 From the Laguna to the river called Rio de Martin de Sousa are 42 leagues . And the coast is something 84 
 high , & lies Northeast & by North , & Southwest & by South : and it hath and Island 2 leagues into the sea , pn 72+ j where ships may ride well . And from the river of Martin de Sousa to Rio de San Pedro are 52 leagues , Rio de S. and the coast lies Northeast and Southwest . Pedro. 
 From this river of San Pedro there lies a point of sand a good league off and more , and it lies on the Southwest side of the port . And from thence to Cabo Caio de Santa de Santa Maria are 42 leagues : and the coast lies Maria . Northeast and Southwest , and all is low land . 
 Also on the Southeast side of Cabo de Santa Maria 
 there lies and Isle two leagues off into the sea , and it hath a good harbour betwixt it and the main . And note that the main is low land . 
 The cape of Santa Maria stands in 35 degrees , and at the point thereof it hath and Island a league into the sea . 
 . 