And extract out of the discourse of one Lopez Vaz a Portugal , touching the fight of M. Fenton with the Spanish ships , with a report of the proceeding of M. John Drake after his departing from him to the river of Plate . 
 Five ships of this fleet cast away on the coast of Spaine . 
 Pon the relation of Pedro Sarmiento concerning the Streits of Magellan , that they might be fortified , and for that the king herd , that there were ships in England preparing for the same streits , he commanded Diego Flores de Valdes a noble man of Spaine , to pass thither 
 with 23 ships , and 3500 men to stop the passage of the Englishmen . 
 There went in this fleet the governor of Chili , with 500 old soldiers that came out of Flanders : but this was the unhappiest fleet of ships that ever went out of Spaine : for before they came from the coast of Spaine a storm took them , and cast away five of the fleet and in them above 800 men , and the 92 
 rest came into Cadiz . But the king sent them word that they should proceed : and so there went out on the voyage 16 of the ships , for two more of their fleet were much spoiled by the storm which they had . 
 In these sixteene ships Pedro Sarmiento was sent to be governor in the straits , and had assigned unto him 500 men to stay there with him , and he carried with him all kind of Artificers to make him forts , and other necessaries , with great store of ordinance and other munition . 
 This fleet because it was late , did winter on the This fleet coast of Brasil , in the river of Jenero : and from thence they went when the winter was passed , and about the jen’er^r °J height of 42 degrees they had a sudden storm , so that Diego Flores beatrice it up and down 22 days , in which time he lost one of the best ships he had , which had in her 300 men and 20 women , that went to inhabit the Streits : and in this ship also was most part of the munition which should have be left in the Streits , so in the end the storm grew to be so great , that the ships were not able to endure it any longer , but were put back unto and Island called Santa Catelina : and there he found a bark wherein were some friars going for the M. Fenton river of Plate : which friars told him of two great tO ! iese English ships , and a pinnace , which had taken them , ers ' but took nothing from them , nor did them any harm , but only asked them for the king of Spaines ships . 
 Hereupon Diego Flores knowing that these English ships would go for the Streits , determined to go thither , although it was in the month of Februarie , and choosing 10 ships of the 15 that were left , he left two ships which were not in case to go to sea at the Island , and into the other three ships which were old , and shaken with the storm he put all the women and sick men in all the fleet , and sent them to the river of Jenero , and he with the other 10 returned again for the Streits . 
 fight betwixt our 2 English ships & three Spanish ships . 
 They victual at Spirit » Santo . 
 RichardFaire-vieather remaineth in the river of Plate . 
 John Drake proceedeth on to the river of Plate . 
 The three ships in which the sick men and women were , went to Brasil , and there they found within the port of S. Vincent the two ships before mentioned . 
 They would have had the English men to have gone out of the harbour , and thereupon they fell to fight , and because that these three ships were weak with the storm , and the men that they had were the worst in all the fleet , the Englishmen easily put them to the worst , and sunk one of them , and might have sunk another , if the Englishmen would : but they minded not the destruction of any man : for that is the greatest virtue that can be in a man , that when he may do hurt , yet he will not do it . So the Englishmen went from this port to Spirit© Santo , where they had victuals for their merchandise , and so they went back for England , without doing of any harm in the Country . 
 The cause why these English ships under the conduct of M. Fenton went not to the streits , I know not : but some say that they were put back by foul weather : other some say that it was for fear of the kings ships . 
 But the pinnace of these two ships went from them , in which was Captain John Drake : the cause why they parted I know not , but the pinnace came into the river of Plate , and within five leagues of Seal Island , not far from the place where the Earl of Cumberlands ships did take in fresh water , she was cast away upon a ledge of rocks : but the men were saved in their boat , which were in number 18 , who went ashore on the Northside , and went a days journey into the land , and met with the Savages which are no men-eaters , but take all the Christians that they can , and make them slaves . 
 But the Englishmen fought with them and the Savages slew five of them , and took 13 alive , which were with the Savages about 15 months . But the Master of the pinnace , whose name was Richard Faireweather being not willing to endure the misery that he was in , and having knowledge that there was a town of Christians on the other side of the river , he in a night called John Drake , 94 
 1583-and another young man which was with them , and took a very little Canoa , which had but two oars , & so passed to the other side of the river , which is about 19 leagues broad , and were three days before they could get over without meat : and coming to land , they hit upon and high way that went towards the Christians : and seeing the footing of horses , they followed it , and at last came to and house where there was corn sowed , and there they met with Indians servants unto the Spaniards , which gave them meat , and clothes to cover them , for they were all naked , and one of the Indians went to the town , and told them of the Englishmen ; so the Captain sent foure horsemen , who brought them to the town behind them . 
 This Captain clothed them , and provided lodging for them , and John Drake dieted at the Captains table , and they were all very well entreated , the Captain purposing to send them for Spaine . But the Viceroy of Peru having John Drake news hereof , sent for them , and so John Drake was sent s^tot , ier to him , but the other two were kept there , because they peru J were married in the country , so that I know no more of their affairs . 
 Upon this coming of the Englishmen , there were prepared 50 horsemen to go over the river to seek the rest of the Englishmen , and also certain Spaniards that were among the savage people , but I am not certain , whither they went forward or not . 
 . 