The voyage of M. John Winter into the South sea by the Straight of Magellan , in consort with M. Francis Drake , begun in the year 1577. By which Straight also he returned safely into England the second of June 1579. contrary to the false reports of the Spaniards which gave out , that the said passage was not repasseable : Written by Edward Cliffe Mariner . 
 They set forward from Plimmouth the 13. of December . 
 N the year of our Lord i^Tl ' the r9* of September there went out of the river of Thamis over the lands end one good and new ship called the Elizabeth , of 80 tons in burden : in company whereof went also a small pinnace being 12 tons in burden called the Benedict . 
 The said ship with her pinnace arrived at Plimmouth : in which haven were three ships more , one called the Pelican in burden 120 tons , being Admiral of the fleet : a bark called the Marigold in burden thirty tons , with a flyboat of 50 tons . These ships had in them 164 men , and were victualed and furnished with all kind of necessary provision to make a voyage into the South sea . we set sail the 15 of November , but were put into Falmouth by contrary winds : and afterwards were constrained to put back again to Plimmouth to repair the great hurt which diverse of our fleet had sustained in that tempest : and at length the 13 of December we set forward from thence upon our voyage . 
 The five and twentie of December we had sighed of Cape Cantin : this Cape lies in the latitude of 32. Cape Cantin . degrees and 30. minutes upon the coast of Barbarie , Asaphi , near to a town called Asaphi . The land all along this coast is high and great mountains . Sailing from the said Cape Southsouthwest about 18 leagues , we found 
 148 
 a little Island called Mogador and English mile distant from the main , we sent our boat to found the depth , and at the return thereof we understood by our men that the haven was without danger , having five fathoms of water fist by the rocks entering in upon the point of the Island : wherefore we entered in with our whole 
 1577-Mogador and Island on the coast of Barbary . 
 fleet the 27 of December . The Moors that were on the main seeing our ships ride there , came from the mountains to behold us : whom our general , M. Francis Drake espying , showed to them a white flag in token of friendship , and sent his boat to shore with one of our men , which not long before had be captive in the country , and partly understood their language , to talk with them . When the boat came to shore , the said man went on land to them : to whom they showed many tokens of friendship , casting up their eyes to heaven , and after looking down upon the ground , as though they had sworn by heaven and earth , promising peace . That done two of them came aboard to our general , and our man stayed on shore for a pledge . 
 These two Moors , after they had made good cheer , and received certain gifts of our general went to shore again , and our man came aboard also . But the crafty slaves having devised to betray us , came the next day along the sea side with certain camels as though they had brought some merchandise to traffic with us : to whom our General sent certain of our men in 
 the boat to learn what they had brought , giving charge that none of them should go on land . But the boat being near the shore one of our men more hasty then wise leapt to shore ; whom the Moors immediately took by force , and setting him on horseback carried him away into the mountains , so that we saw him no more after that time . In the mean time we set up a Pinnace in the island , whereof we brought 4 lose out ^re . lMse of England : which being finished , the last of December out we weighed , and came out of the North part of the England . 
 149 
 island , the same way that we came in : for the South channel is dangerous , having but 8 foot at low water , Mogadorin^i and is full of rocks . This island stands in 31 M degrees 2 of latitude , being one league in circuit , not ‘ inhabited ; and hath infinite number of doves upon it . 
 At Sea we met with a contrary wind , so that we beat oflf and on , till the 4 of Januarie 1578 , at which time a more favourable wind began to blow at Northeast , and then we set our course Southsouthwest , till Cape de Guer On the 7 of Januarie we came as high as Cape de Guer , m 30 degrees , stands in 30 degrees of latitude . Here our new Pinnace took 3 Spanish fisher-boats , called Cantars . From thence we ran Southwest and Southsouthwest , carrying the said Cantars along with us , till the 10 of the said month , at which time we found our selves in 27 degrees 4 min. being 10 leagues WestCape Bojador southwest from Cape Bojador , which lies on the main in Africa . From thence we ran South and by 
 4. min. ‘ West , until the 13 day at noon , at which time we had sighed of Rio del Oro , where our Pinnace took a Portugall caravel . The 15 , the Marigold took a caravel de las about Cape de las Barbas . And thence we ran along CateBlanco coast being low sandy land , till we arrived at Cape in 20 degrees . Blanco . This Cape shows it self like the corner of a 30 min. wall upright from the water , to them which come from the Northwards : where the North pole is elevated 20 degrees 30 min. And the Crociers being the guards of the South pole , be raised 9 degrees 30 min. The said Crociers be 4 stars , representing the form of a cross , and be 30 degrees in latitude from the South pole : and the lowest star of the said Crociers is to be taken , when it is directly under the uppermost ; and being so taken as many degrees as it wants of 30 , so many you are to the Northwards of the Equinoctial : and as many degrees as be more then 30 , so many degrees you are to the Southwards of the Equinoctial . And if you find it to be just 30 then you be directly under the line . 
 150 
 Within the said Cape Blanco we took one ship more , all the men being fled away , save two . We brought this ship with all the rest which we had taken before , into our harbour , 5 leagues within the Cape , where we washed and trimmed our ships , and went to sea again the 22 of Januarie , leaving all the Spaniards there with their ships , saving one Cantar , for which our general gave them the Benedict . In which course we ran continually to the Southwest , until the 26 day , when we found the North pole raised 15 degrees 15 min. having the wind Northeast or Eastnortheast , which is common on that coast . For it doth blow for the most part continually from the shore : and we kept the said course , until we came near the island Bonavista , within 2 leagues off the shore ; so that we haled ofF again Northwest , the space of one hour , and then ran Southwest again , till day light the 27 of Januarie : from which time we ran Southsouthwest , until 3 of the clock in the afternoon , at which time we approached near the island of Mayo , being high and hilly land , The isle of saving that the North part of the island stretcheth out Mat0-it self , a league into the sea very low . we came to anchor under the West part of this island the 28 day of Januarie , and stayed there until the 30 of the same . During which time , our General appointed M. John Winter and M. Thomas Doughtie , to go over to the East part of the island with 70 men , to get some fresh victuals . And as we marched through the island , about the midst thereof , we found one house having a garden belonging to it , in which we found ripe grapes , also Ripe grapes in ripe gourds , and melons , in the most dead time of our J ™ ™ ™ - Winter . we found also a tree which bears the fruit 
 Cocos , which is bigger then a men head , having within The Cocos the utter coat , which is about 3 inches thick , a certain nut as big as two fists , and hath within a white substance , cleaning fast to the shell , which is half and inch thick , very pleasant to taste , and within that a certain hollowness or void place , wherein is contained a pure 
 151 
 Brava . 
 Nonnez de Silva . 
 and pleasant water in taste , and as some think , marvellous comfortable . As we passed through this island the inhabitants fled into the mountains , so that we could have no talk with them . 
 But we understood by the Portugals which came with us , that they were but servants to those of S. Iago , to keep their cattle and goats , which be very plentiful in this island : but we found them so wild , that we could take none saving some young kids : wherefore we returned back again to our ships . The Portugals had salted their Wells near to the sea , so that we could , not water . 
 Then our general commanded every man aboard : afterwards we weighed , and ran over to Sant Iago the same night , being io leagues distant from thence : which seemed to be a fruitful island and well peopled . For we saw 3 towns on the shore : two of which shot at us , as we passed along . Our General made a shot at one of them again . And sailing along the shore , at the South part of the island , we took a Portugal ship laden with wine and other commodities . This island hath 15 degrees in latitude . 
 From hence we ran Southsouth west to the isle of Fogo , so called , because it casts continually flames of fire and smoke out of the top thereof , all the whole island being one high mountain . Two leagues West from the isle of Fogo , is another island called Brava , where the sea is above 120 fathoms deep near to the shore , so that we could not anchor for the depth of the sea , by reason whereof we were constrained to depart without water . Here the general discharged the Portugals , giving unto them our Pinnace which we built at Mogador : with wine , bread , and fish , and so dismissed them the first of Februarie , taking one of their company along with him , called Nonnez de Silva . The 2 of February we set off from Brava , and directed our course Southsoutheast , running so until the 9 of February , being within 4 degrees of the Equinoctial : at ! 52 
 which time , we had the air troubled with thunder and lightning , notwithstanding calm with extreme heat , and diverse times great showers of rain . 
 The 17 day we were right under the line , which is the most fervent place of the burned Zone : where in the midst of February we sustained such heat , with often thunder and lightnings , that we did sweat for the most part continually , as though we had be in a stove , or hothouse . Here we saw flying fish in Flyingfishes . great abundance , some a foot long , some less . Their fynnes wherewith they fly be as long as their bodies . They be greatly pursued by the Dolphin and Bonitoes , whom as soon as the flying fish espy , immediately they mount out of the sea in great numbers , and fly as long as their fynnes continue moist : and when they be dry , they fallen down into the sea again . And here is to be noted , that after we came within 4 degrees of the Equi - Cmtmuall noctial , until we were so much passed it , no day did pass , aineat without great store of rain . sms near ihe 
 From hence we directed our course towards the Equinoctial . Southsouthwest until the 5 of Aprill ; at which time , we had a very sweet smell from the land . The same day at noon we sounded , and found the sea to be 32 fathoms deep , the ground being soft oaze : and shortly after we had but 28 fathoms , being 31 degrees Landin 31 and 30 min. beyond the Equinoctial , toward the South de&rees - 3° pole : and we had sighed of the land about 3 of the clock in the afternoon the same day . This land is Equinoctial . very low near the sea ; and high mountains up within the country . 
 From hence we ran towards the Southsouthwest , until the 14 of Aprill ; when we found a little island , lying near the main land of Cape Sant Marry , by which is the entrance into the river of Plate , being in 35 degrees of Southerly latitude . From this island we ran 7 or 8 leagues along the main , where we came to and anchor under a Cape , which our General called Cape Joy . Here every ship took in fresh water . Then we 
 Cape Sant marry at the mouth of the River of Plate . 
 153 
 departed , and ran about 15 leagues towards the Westsouthwest , where we found a deep bay . In the bottom of this bay is a long rock , not far from the main : which rock so breaks the force of the sea , that ships may ride commodiously under the same for Southerly winds . Hither came all our fleet to anchor , the 19 of Aprill , and road there until the 20 day at night . Here we killed some seals . And . from thence we ran about 20 leagues , where we found the water very much troubled and fresh , and we ran in so far that " we had but 3 fathoms water . Here we took in fresh water , and ran over to the Southward , and fell with the land which lies on the South part of the river of Plate , the 27 day . This land lies Southsouthwest and Northnortheast , and is should 3 or 4 leagues into the sea . Here our flyboat lost our company in the night . 
 From hence we ran towards the Southwest , having much foul weather and contrary winds , until the 12 of May : and then we sounded and had 28 fethomes , with black sand and small stones , and had sighed of the land the same morning about 10 of the clock . This land is 47 degrees in latitude . Our general nam this land , Cape Hope . We came to anchor there , about 3 leagues from the shore the same night . The next morning our General , went to the main in a boat : by means whereof he had be in great danger , if the Marigold had not weighed , and ran in with the shore , and so took up the boat and men : for there arose such foul weather , with a thick mist and a Southeast wind , that they were not able to recover their ships again which road without : which were forced to weigh and run to sea . The Prize weighed the 13 at night , and ran to the Southwards : the other stayed until the 14 in the morning and then ran to sea , not being able to ride . 
 In the mean time while the Marigold road under the shore , our general with certain of his men went 
 154 
 on land , where they saw two naked men , saving that they had a certain skin ne wrapped about their shoulders and rolls upon their heads . To whom our General showed a white cloth , in sign of friendship , who with certain gestures of their bodies and hands , showed the like to him again , speaking likewise and making a noise , which our men could not understand , but they would in no case come near our men . Our general went the next day to the same place again : but he had no sighed of the foresaid men or any other . Howbeit he found certain fowls , as Ostriches , and other Ostriches and sea fowls , which the said men had newly killed , and seafoules-laid them on and heap together , as though they had done that for our men of purpose . There was also a certain bag with little stones of diverse colours , which together with the victuals our General brought aboard , and then weighed , and came to sea the 15 of the said month : where all the rest of the fleet met with him , save the Prize , and the flyboat . The 16 day we ran into a bay to the Southwards of Cape Hope , where we road all that night . The next morning our general weighed , & ran without the cape to the Northwards , & sent the Elizabeth towards the South to look for the Prize : leaving the Marigold and the Canter to search if in the bay they could find any fit harbour for our ships . The same day being the 14 of May , our General met with the flyboat ( which lost us the 27 of April ) and brought her into said bay . The 18 in the morning we had word from the ships , that they had found a safe harbour and we weighed and ran in , the same day being Whitsunday . The Elizabeth weighed & put forth again to sea , the 20 day , to look for the Prize , and not finding her came in the next day . In the mean time our General discharged the flyboat , and ran her upon the main , where we broke her up for firewood . In the mean while there came about descrip-30 of the country people down to the sea side : and fanofuriaine when they were within 100 pases of our men , they set * ’ 
 J55 
 themselves in array very orderly casting their company into the form of a ring , every man having his bow and arrows : who ( when they had pight a staff on the ground , with certain glasses , beads , and other trifles ) returned back . Then the country people came and took them and afterwards approached nearer to our men , showing themselves very pleasant , insomuch that M. Winter danced with them . They were exceedingly delighted with the found of the trumpet , and vialies . They be of a mean stature , well limmed , and of a duskish , tawny , or brown colour . Some of them having their faces spotted with diverse colours , as read , white , and black . Their apparel is a certain skin ( wherein they wrap themselves ) not reaching so low as to cover their privy members , all the rest of their bodies be naked , saving that they wear certain rolls upon their heads , whose ends hang over their shoulders . Every one bears his bow , being and ell in length , and arrows made of reeds , having heads , framed very strangely & cunningly of a flint stone . They be much given to mirth and jollity , and are very sly , and ready to steal any thing that comes within their reach : for one of them snatched our Generals cap from his head ( as he stooped ) being of scarlet with a golden band : yet he would suffer no man to hurt any of them . They eat raw flesh , for we found seals bones , the raw flesh whereof they had gnawen with their teeth like dogs . In this bay we watered , and victualed with seals : for there is such plenty that we slew above 200 in the space of one hour upon a little island . 
 The 3 of June we departed from thence , and being at sea we were put back again to Cape Hope , where we discharged our Canter and let her float in the sea . Afterwards we ran to the 50 degree of the South pole , where we met with the wind Southerly , and so turned back again to the Northward . And as we ran along the shore , we met with our Prize the 19 of June , which we lost the 13 of May . The day following we found 156 
 a harbour , into the which we entered with all our fleet the same day . This port is 49 degrees and and half in latitude , and I suppose it to be the same which Magellan nam Port S. Julian : for we found a gibbet on and The port of hill , whereupon they were executed that did conspire ant Julian . against Magellan , and certain bones also of their dead bodies . The 22 of this month our general going to shore upon the main with 7 or 8 of his men , met with 3 of the Patagons , having bows and arrows , who came near to our men making them signs to depart . Where - Two 0^jur , upon a gentleman being there present , and having a bow p^g^ and arrows , made a shot to the end to show them the force of our bows , with the which shot his string broke : whereupon the Patagons presumed to encounter them , directing their arrows first at our M. Gunner , who had a caliver ready bent to shot at them but it would not take fire : and as he leveled his piece one of them shot him through the breast , and out at the back , wherewith he fell down stark dead . Also the gentleman that shot the arrow was so wounded that he died the 2 day after and with the other was buried in a little island lying in the said port . Our men left the slain man on shore till night , and then fetched him in a boat . In the mean time the Patagons had stripped him of all his clothes , and viewed his body laying his clothes under his head , and so left him untouched , saving that they had stuck the English arrow in his left eye . These men be of no such stature as the Spaniardes report , being but of the height of English men : for I have seen men in England taller then I could see any of them . But peradventure the Spaniard did not think that any English men would have come thither so soon to have disproved them in this & diverse others of their notorious lies : wherefore they presumed more boldly to abuse the world . The last of June M. The execution Thomas Doughty was brought to his answer , was °fM-Thomas accused , and convicted of certain articles , and by M. ° ™ te ' Drake condemned . He was beheaded the 2 of July 
 J57 
 1578 , whose body was buried in the said island , near to them which were slain . We wintered in this port 2 months , during which time we had such weather as is commonly in England in the depth of winter , or rather colder . After we had trimmed up our ships , and made provision of fuel and fresh water , we departed thence with 3 ships the 17 of August about noon . And the 20 of the said month we seized Cape Victory , The entrance by the which Cape is the way into the South sea , called 
 The straights of Magellan , the first discoverer thereof . we found the mouth of the straights to be 52 degrees Southward of Equinoctial . In this straight , we found the sea to have no such current as some do imagine , ( following the course of the primum mobile from East Ordinary to West ) but to eb and flow as ordinarily as upon other inthenrei^ht coasts > rising 5 fathoms upright . The flood riseth out ’ of the East ocean , and stretcheth it self so far into the straights , that it meeteth the flood of the South sea near about the midst of the straights , where it bendeth like and elbow , tending to the Westnorthwest into the South Sea , whereas the East part from the mouth of the straights to this elbow lies Southwest and by West , or Southwest to 53 degrees and j . 30 leagues within the straights there be 3 islands . To the greatest our general gave the name of Elizabeth : to the 2 Bartholomew , because we found it on S. Bartholomews Abundance of day : the 3 he nam S. Georges island . Here we ' go^s bland stayed one day & victualed our selves with a kind of in the straight f°ule which is plentiful in that isle , and whose flesh is of Magellan , not far unlike a fat goose here in England : they have no wings , but short pinions which serve their turn in swimming . Their colour is somewhat black mixed with white spots under their belly , and about their neck . They walk so upright , that a far off a man would take them to be little children . If a man approach any thing near them , they run into holes in the ground ( which be not very deep ) whereof the island is full . So that to take them we had staves with hooks fast to 
 158 
 the ends , wherewith some of our men pulled them out and others being ready with cudgels did knock them on the head , for they bite so cruelly with their crooked bills , that none of us was able to handle them alive . The land on both parts is very high : but especially towards the South sea , monstrous high hills and craggy rocks do exalt themselves , whose tops be all hoary with snow , in the months of August , September , and October . Notwithstanding the lower parts of the hills are replenished and beautified with impenetrable thick woods of strange and unknown trees , flourishing all the year long . Here we made provision of fuel and fresh water , and passed by Cape Deseado into the South sea the 6 of September . And running along towards the Northwest about 70 leagues , the wind turned directly against us , with great extremity of foul weather , as rain , hail , snow , and thick fogs which continued so more then 3 weeks , that we could bear no sail , at which time we were driven 57 degr . to the south pole . The 15 of September the moon was there eclipsed , & began to be darkened presently after the setting of the sun , about 6 of the clock at night , being then Equinoctial vernal in that country . The said eclipse happened the 16 day in the morning before one of the clock in England , which is about sixe hours difference , agreeing to one quarter of the world , from the Meridian of England towards the West . The last of September being a very foul night , and the seas soar grown , we lost the Marigold , the Generals ship and the Elizabeth running to the Eastward to get the shore , whereof we had sighed , the 7 of October , falling into a very dangerous bay full of rocks : and there we lost company of M. Drake the same night . The next day very hardly escaping the danger of the rocks , we put into the straights again , where we anchored in and open bay for the space of 2 days , and made great fierce on the shore , to the end that if M. Drake should come into the 
 A.D. 
 1578. 
 High hills on both sides of the straight . 
 Cape Deseado where they entered into the South sea . 
 They were driven to degrees Southward . 
 They lose M. Drakes company . 
 straights , he might find us . After we went into a iS9 
 They returned out of The straight the 11 of November , having entered into The south sea the 6 of September . 
 Sant Tineent in Brasil in 24 degrees . 
 found , where we stayed for the space of 3 weeks and nam it The port of Health , for the most part of our men being very sick with long watching , wet , cold , and evil diet , did hear ( God be thanked ) wonderfully recover their health in short space . Here we had very great muscles ( some being 20 inches long ) very pleasant meat , and many of them full of seed-pearls . 
 We came out of this harbour the first of November , giving over our voyage by M. Winter's compulsion ( full soar against the mariners minds ) who alleged , he stood in despair , as well to have winds to serve his turn for Peru , as also of M. Drakes safety . So we came back again through the straights to S. Georges Island , where we took of the fowls before nam , and after departed . 
 And thus we passed by Cape Victory out of the straights the 11 of November , directing our course to the Northeast , till the last of this month . What time we arrived at and island which lies at the mouth of the river of Plate . Upon this island there is such and infinite number of seals , as may seem incredible to any man that hath not be there , some of them being 16 foot long , not fearing the presence of men : for the most of our men were upon the island , for the space of 15 days to set up a Pinnace , during which time the seals would come and sleep by them , and rather resist our men , then give place , unless mortali blows forced them to yield . 
 When our Pinnace was built , we went to another island , where we did water , and afterwards departed the first of Januarie 157 9 , and ran towards the North till the 20 of the said month , and then we arrived at and island which lies on the coast of Brasil , near to a town called sant Vincent inhabited by the Portugals . The said town lies 24 degrees Southward , almost under the Tropicke of Capricorne . Here , by reason of fowl weather we lost our Pinnace , and 8 men in her , and never saw them since . Here also our ship was in great 160 
 danger , by the means of a strong current , which had almost cast us upon the shore before we were aware , insomuch that we were constrained to anchor in the open sea , and brake our cable and lost and anchor , and presently let fall another anchor ; in weighing whereof our men were soar spoiled . For the capstan ran about so violently with the rising of the ship in the sea , that it threw the men from the bars , and brake out the brains of one man : one other had his leg broken , and diverse others were soar hurt . At last we goat up our anchor and set sail , and ran into a place called Tanay , where we road under and island and took in wood and water . 
 And while we stayed here , there came 3 Portugals aboard us in . a canoa , to know what we would have , or of what country we were . To whom our Captain made answer : that we were Englishmen , and had brought commodities for their country , if they would traffic with us : whereat they greatly marveiled . For they said that they never herd of any English ship to have be in that country before ; and so they went to land again , having one of our men with them to speak with the Governor of the town , and we kept one of them for a pledge . Shortly after there came another canoa aboard us with one Portugal and all the rest naked men of the country : of whom we had two small Oxen , one young Hog , with certain hens : also Pome-cytrons , limons , oranges , and other fruits of the country . For the which our Captain gave to them , linen cloth , combes , knives , and other trifles . In the mean time the Governor of the town sent word that we should have nothing , unless we would bring our ship into the haven . Whereunto our Captain would in no case consent : for all their practice was to have got us within their danger , nevertheless we came somewhat near the town with our ship , as though we would have gone in ; but we never meant it . 
 Here we took in our man ; and set the Portugal xi 161 L 
 A.D. 
 I579 - 
 A dangerous current . 
 Tanay a ptace in Brasil . 
 The isle of SantSebastian about the Tropicke of Capricorne . 
 Cape Sant Augustine . 
 The isle of Fernando de Loronha . 
 The sea of Weeds , near the Tropicke of Cancer . 
 Their arrival at Ilfoord-combe in Devonshire . 
 pledge on land . After that we went to and Hand called the isle of Sant Sebastian ; where we took fish . Here the Portugals had betrayed us , if a Brasillian one of their slaves had not be . For he stole from them , & showed unto us by signs , that the Portugals were coming with their canoas to take us , as it fell out in deed : for the next morning they showed themselves with 12 or 16 canoas , some of them having 40 men in them . The same night two of our men ran away with our boat to the Portugals . And thus we came away from thence towards our own country the 17 of March : and had sighed of the Cape of sant Augustine , lying in 8 degrees to the Southward of the line . After that we had sighed of and island lying within 3 degrees of the Equinoctial , called the isle of Fernando de Loronha . We crossed the Equinoctial the 13 of April , and had sighed of the North star the 19 of the said month . 
 The 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 of May , we sailed through the sea of Weeds , about the space of 100 leagues , being under the Tropicke of Cancer . From whence we kept our course towards the Northeast , until we had the pole raised 47 degrees . The 22 of May we ran Eastnortheast . 
 The 29 we sounded and had 70 fathoms with white oaze ; having the North pole raised 51 degrees . The 30 of May we had sighed of S. Ives on the North side of Cornwall , and the 2 of June 1579 we arrived at Ilfoord-combe in Devonshire . 
 And thus after our manifold troubles and great dangers in having passed The straights of Magellan into the South Sea with our general M. Francis Drake , and having be driven with him down to the Southerly latitude of 57 degrees , and afterwards passing back by the same straights again , it pleased God to bring us safe into our own native country to enjoy the presence of our deer friends and kinsfolks , to whom be praise , honour , and glory , for ever and ever . Amen . 
 Edward Cliff , Mariner . 
 . 