Instructions given by the right honourable the [ HIM . 75+1 Lords of the Counsel , to M. Edward Fenton Esquire , for the order to be observed in the voyage recommended to him for the East Indies and Cathay . Aprill 9. 1582. 
 Irst you shall enter as Captain general , into the charge and government of these ships , viz. the Bear Gallion , the Edward Bonaventure , the Bark Francis , and the small Frigate or Pinnace . 
 2 Item you shall appoint for the furnishing of the vessels in the whole , to the 
 number of 200 able persons , accounting in that number the Gentlemen and their men , the Ministers , Chirurgeons , Factors , etc. which said number is no way to be exceeded , whereof as many as may be , to be seamen ; and shall distribute them into every vessel , as by advice here before your going shall be thought meet : Provided that you shall not receive under your charge and government , any disordered or mutinous person , but that upon knowledge had , you shall remove him before your departure hence , or by the way as soon as you can conveniently avoid him , and receive better in his place . 
 3 Item , for the more and better circumspect execution , and determination in any weighty causes incident in this voyage , we will that you shall take unto you for assistants , Captain Hawkins , captain Ward , M. Nicholas Parker , M. Maddox , M. Walker , M. Evans , Randolph Shaw , Matthew Taiboys , with whom you shall consult and confer in all causes , matters , and actions of importance , not provided for in these instructions touching this service now in hand . And in all such matters , so handled , argued , and debated , we think that convenient always to be executed , which you shall think meetest with the assent also of any 4 of them , the matter having be debated , and so assented unto , in the presence of your 163 
 said assistants . And in case that such conference and debating the opinions of the aforesaid Assistants be found in effect any way to differ , then it is thought meet , that all such matters so argued upon , shall rest to be put in execution in such sort as you shall think most meetest , having the assent of any 4 of them , as aforesaid . And if any of these Assistants shall die , then the number of the one half of the Survivors to join with the General captain for consent in all things aforesaid . 
 4 Of all which your assemblies and consultations , for the matters aforesaid , we think it very convenient , that a particular and true note should be kept , for which cause we appoint master Maddox minister , and if he should decease , then the general with half the Assistants Survivors , to name one to keep a book of all such matters as shall be brought in consultation , and of all such reasons as shall be propounded by any person , either on the one side , or on the other : what was resolved on , and by whose consent , who dissented there from , and for what causes . In which book he shall in the beginning of the note of every such assembly , set down particularly the day , and the place , if it may be , the names of the persons then present , and upon what occasion the said consultation was appointed or held , and shall have to every act , the hands of the General , and of all , or so many of the said Assistants as will subscribe : which book the said master Maddox , or the other upon his decease appointed in his place shall keep secret , and in good order to be exhibited unto us , at your return home . 
 5 Item , if there happen any person or persons employed in this service , of what calling or condition , he or they shall be , should conspire , or attempt privately or publicly , any treason , mutiny , or other discord , either touching the taking away of your own life , or any other of authority under you , whereby her Majesties service in this voyage might be overthrown or impugned : we will therefore , that upon just proof made of any such 
 164 
 INSTRUCTIONS TO EDWARD FENTON a.d. 
 1582. 
 treason , mutiny , or any other discord attempted as aforesaid , the same shall punished by you , or your Lieutenant , according to the quality and enormity of the fact . Provided always , and it shall not be lawful neither for you , nor for your Lieutenant to proceed to the punishment of any person by loss of life or limb , unless the party shall be judged to have deserved it by the rest of your Assistants , as is before expressed , or at the least by foure of them . And that which shall concern life to be by the verdict of twelve men of the company employed in this voyage , to be impaneled for that purpose , with the observation of the form of our country laws in that behalf , as near as you may . Provided , if it shall not appear , that the forbearing of the execution by death , shall minister cause to increase the fact of the offender , then it were better to convince the party of his fact , by the oaths of 12 indifferent persons , and to commit him to hard imprisonment , until the return . And aswell of the facts committed by any , as also of the proof thereof , and of the opinions of you , and your Assistants , and the manner of the punishment , the Register shall make a particular and true note , in the book of your consultation , as is before appointed . 
 6 Item , you shall not remove Captain William Haw - kins your lieutenant , master Captain Lycia Ward your viceadmiral , or captain of the Edward Bonaventure , nor captain Carlile from his charge by land , whom we will M. Carlile not to refuse any such service as shall be appointed to him uPm occasion by the general and the council , nor any captain of other mass not in * ts vessels from their charges , but upon just cause duly proved , and by consent of your Assistants , or of foure of them at the least . 
 7 Item , for the succession of the general , governor of this whole voyage , if it should please God to take him away , it is thought meet that there should be the names of such Gentlemen secretly set down to succeed in his place one after the other , which are severally written in parchment , included in bals of wax , sealed with her 
 165 
 Majesties signet , put into two coffers locked with three several locks , whereof one key is to be in the custody of Captain Lycia Ward , the other of William Hawkins , the third of master Maddox the Minister , and the same two coffers to be put into two several ships , videlicet , the one coffer in the Gallion , in the custody of the general , the other in the Edward Bonaventure in the custody of the Viceadmiral : the same two coffers upon any such casualty of the Generals death by consent of the Assistants which shall overlive , to be opened , and the party therein nam to succeed in the place , who shall thereupon take upon him the charge in the said voyage according to these instructions , in such sort as if they had be specially directed unto him , and the rest of the company so to take and repute him in every respect , as they will answer to the contrary . But if it shall so fallen out , ( as we hope it will ) that there shall be no such need , but that the general do continue still , then shall you at your return deliver back the said coffers and bals of wax sealed in such sort as they be , without opening them , unless it be in the case aforesaid . 
 8 You shall make a just and true inventory in every ship and vessel appointed for this voyage of all the tackle , munition , and furniture belonging to them at their setting forth hence , and of all the provisions whatsoever , and one copy thereof under your hand , and under the hands of your Viceadmiral and lieutenant , to be delivered The gwernour to the Earl of Leicester , and the other to the governor of this come - of company for them before your departure hence , 
 ' ' and the like to be done at your return home of all 
 things then remaining in the said ships and vessels , with a true certificate how and by what means any parcel of the same shall have be spent or lost . 
 9 Item , you shall use all diligence possible to depart They are in - from Southampton with your said ships and vessels before joynedto^by ^g iast of present mOneth of Aprill , and so go on Buena Esper - 7our course by Cape de buena Esperanza , not passing by anza . the straight of Magellan either going or returning , except 
 upon great occasion incident , that shall be thought otherwise good to you , by the advice and consent of your said Assistants , or foure of them at the least . 
 io Item , you shall not pass to the Northeastward of the 40 degree of latitude at the most , but shall take your right course to the Isles of the Malucos for the better discovery of thee Northwest passage , if without hindrance of your trade , & within the same degree you can get any knowledge touching that passage , whereof you shall do well to be inquisitive , as occasion in this sort may serve . 
 11 Item , you shall have speciali regard after your departure from the coast of England , so to order your course , as that your ships and vessels loose not one another , but keep company together both outward and homeward . And lest if they happen to sever the one from the other by tempest or otherwise , it shall not be amiss , that you appoint to the Captains and Master's certain places , wherein you will stay certain days . And every ship passing aforehand , and not knowing what is become of the other ships , to leave upon every Promontory or Cape a token to stand in sighed , with a writing lapped in lead to declare the day of their passage . And if any wilfulness or negligence in this behalf shall appear in any person or persons that shall have charge of any of the ships or vessels aforesaid , or if they or any of them shall do otherwise then to them appertaineth , you shall punish such offenders sharply to the example of others . 
 12 Item , we do straightly enjoin you , and consequently all the rest employed in this voyage in any wise , and as you and they will answer the contrary at your coming home by the laws of this realm , that neither going , tarrying abroad , nor returning , you do spoil or take any thing from any of the Queens Majesties friends or allies , or any Christians , without paying justly for the same , nor that you use any manner of violence or force against any such , except in your own 
 167 
 Strange people to be brought home . 
 defence , if you shall be set upon or otherwise be forced for your own safeguard to do it .. 
 13 Item , we will that you deal altogether in this voyage like good and honest merchant's , trafficking and exchanging ware for ware , with all courtesy to the nations you shall deal with , as well Ethnics as others , and for that cause you shall instruct all those that shall go with you , that whensoever you or any of you shall happen to come in any place to conference with the people of those parts , that in all your doings and theirs , you and they so behave your selves towards the said people , as may rather procure their friendship and good liking towards you by courtesy , then to move them to offence or misliking , and especially you shall have great care of the performance of your word and promise to them . 
 14 Item we will , that by the advice of your Assistants , in places where you and they shall think most fit , you settle if you can a beginning of a further trade to be had hereafter : and from such places do bring over with you some few men and women if you may , and do also leave some one or two , or more , as to you and your Assistants shall seem convenient of our nation with them for pledges , and to learn the tongue and secrets of the countries' , having diligent care that in delivering and taking of hostages , you deliver not personages of more valve then you receive , but rather deliver mean persons under colour of men of valve , as the Infidels do for the most part use . Provided that you stay not longer to make continuance of further trade , then shall be expedient for good exchange of the wares presently carried with you . 
 15 Item you shall have care , and give general warning , that no person of what calling soever he be , shall take up , or keep to himself or his private use , any stone , pearl , gold , silver , or other matter of commodity to be had or found in places where you shall come , but he the said person , so seized of such stone , pearl , gold , silver , 
 168 
 or other matter of commodity , shall with all speed , or so soon as he can , detect the same , and make delivery thereof to your self , or you Viceadmiral , or Lieutenant , and the Factor appointed for this voyage , upon pain of forfeiture of all the recompense he is to have for his service in this voyage by share or otherwise : and further to receive such punishment , as to you & your Assistants , or the more part of them shall seem good , and otherwise to be punished here at his return , if according to the quality of his offence it shall thought needful . 
 16 Item , if the Captains , Merchants or any other , shall have any apparel , jewels , chains , armour , or any other thing whatsoever , which may be desired in countries' where they shall traffic , that it shall not be lawful for them or any of them to traffic , or fell any thing thereof for their private account : but the same shall be prized by the most part of those that shall be in commission in the places where the same may be so required , rated at such valve , as it may be reasonably worth in England , and then sold to the profit of the whole voyage , and to go as in adventure for those to whom it doth appertain . 
 17 Item you your self shall in the Gallion keep one book , and the Factors appointed for the same ship another , wherein shall be a just account kept , aswell of the merchandise carried hence , as of those you shall bring home . And aswell at your setting forth , as from time to time , as exchange shall made , you shall set your hand to their book , and they theirs to yours , and the like order shall you see that the Captain and the Factors in the Edward Bonaventure shall use in their ship , and the other Captains and Factors in each other vessel . 
 18 Item you shall give straight order to restrain , that none shall make any charts or descriptions of the said voyage , but such as shall be deputed by you the general , which said charts and descriptions , we think meet that 
 169 
 A.D. 
 15824 
 you the general shall take into your hands at your return to this our coast of England , leaving with them no copy , and to present them unto us at your return : the like to be done if they find any charts or maps in those countries' . 
 19 Item you shall at your return so direct your course , that all the ships under your government may come home together , and arrive here in the river of Thames , if it may conveniently be . And wheresoever in this Realm you , or any of the ships shall arrive , you shall give speciali and straight order , that no person of what condition soever he be , shall unladen , or bring on land , or forth of the vessels in which he came , any part or parcel of merchandise , or matter of commodity brought in any of the said vessels , until we being certified of your or their arrival , shall give further order and direction therein , under the penalties and forfeitures expressed in the fifteenth article , against such as shall retain any thing to their private use , as in the said article is further expressed . 
 20 Item , to the intent that all such persons as shall go with you in this voyage , may better understand what they ought to do , and what to avoid , we think it requisite , that aswell out of these , as otherwise with the advice of your Assistants and Master's of the ships , you shall cause some convenient order to be set down in writing for their better government both at sea and land , if they shall happen to go on land any where : and the same to be openly read and made known unto them , to the intent they may understand how to behave themselves , and upon any fault committed , not to have any excuse to pretend ignorance , and so to avoid such punishment as it is requisite to have ministered for the keeping of them in good order . 
 21 And to the end God may bless this voyage with happy and prosperous success , you shall have and especial care to see that reverence and respect be had to the Ministers appointed to accompany you in this 
 170 
 1582. voyage , as appertaineth to their place and calling , and to see such good order as by them shall be set down for reformation of life and manners , duly obeyed and performed , by causing the transgressors and contemners of the same to be severely punished , and the Ministers to remove sometime from one vessel to another . 
 22 Provided always , that the whole direction and government of the people , life and limb excepted , as in the fift article , and the course of this voyage , shall be wholly at your disposition , except in the course by the Straight of Magellan , either outward or homeward , and in your passage by the Northward of 40 degrees in latitude , wherein you shall follow directions set down in the nine and ten articles , as also in the displacing of the Captain of the Edward Bonaventure , and other captains , wherein you shall follow the order appointed in the sixt article : Provided that we mean not by this article to derogate any thing from the authority of your assistants established in the third article , or in any other article of these instructions . 
 23 Item , in all occasions and enterprises that may fallen out to be upon the land , we will that Captain Carlile Carlile shall have the general and chief charge thereof . occasion 
 24 And finally we require you and every of you to have a due regard to the observation and accomplishment of these our instructions , and of all such other things , as may any kind of way tend to the furtherance and benefit of this service committed to your charge . 
 . 