A discourse of the West Indies and South sea written by Lopez Vaz a Portugal , born in the city of Elvas , continued unto the year 1587. Wherein among diverse rare things not hitherto delivered by any other writer , certain voyages of our Englishmen are truly reported : which was intercepted with the author thereof at the river of Plate , by Captain Withrington and Captain Christopher Lister , in the fleet set forth by the right Honourable the Earl of Cumberland for the South sea in the year 1586. 
 Rancis Drake and Englishman being on the sea , and having knowledge of the small strength of the town of Number de Dios , came into the harbour on a night with foure pinnaces , and landed and hundreth and fifty men : and leaving one half of his men with a trumpet 
 in a fort which was there , he with the rest entered the town without doing any harm till he came at the market place : and there his company discharging their calivers , and sounding their trumpets ( which made a great noise in the town ) were answered by their rellowes in the fort , who discharged and sounded in 227 
 This voyage vias made in the year 1572. 
 like manner . This attempt put the townsmen in such extreme fear , that leaving their houses , they fled into the mountains , and there bethought themselves what the matter should be in the town , remaining as men amazed at so sudden and alarm . But the Spaniards being men for the most part of good discretion joined foureteene or fifteene of them together with their pieces , to see who was in the town : and getting to a corner of the marketplace they discovered the Englishmen , and perceiving that they were but a few , discharged their pieces at them ; and their fortune was such , that they slew the trumpeter , and shot the captain ( whose name was 
 Francis Drake ) into the leg : who feeling himself hurt retired towards the Fort , where he had left the rest of his men : but they in the Fort sounded their trumpet , and being not answered again , and hearing the calivers discharged in the town , thought that their fellows in the town had be slain , and thereupon fled to their Pinnaces . Now Francis Drake ( whom his men carried because of his hurt ) when he came to the fort where he left his men and saw them fled , he and the rest of his company were in so great fear , that leaving their furniture behind them , and putting off their hose , they swam & waded all to their Pinnaces , and departed forth of the harbour , so that if the Spaniards had followed them , they might have slain them all . Thus Captain Drake did no more harm at Number de Dios , neither was there in this skirmish any more then one Spaniarde slain , and of the Englishmen only their Trumpeter , whom they left behind with his trumpet in his hand . 
 From hence the coast lies all along till you come to Cartagena . Between Number de Dios and Cartagena is a great found or gulf , where the first Spaniardes that ever dwelled upon the firm land built and inhabited the town of Dariene : howbeit they abided not long there , because of the unholesomenesse of the place . 
 But Captain Drake being discontent with the repulse 228 
 that the men of Number de Dios gave him , went with his Pinnaces into the said bay or found of Dariene , where having conference with certain Negroes which were ran away from their master's of Panama and Number de Dios , he was informed that at the very same time many mules were coming from Panama to Number de Dios laden with gold and silver . Upon this news Francis Drake taking with him and hundred shot , and the said Negroes , stayed in the way till the treasure came by , accompanied and guarded only by those that drove the mules , who mistrusted nothing at all . When captain Drake met with them , he took away their gold : but the silver he left behind , because he could not carry it over the mountains . And two days after this he went to the house of crosses called by the Spaniards Venta de Cruzes , Venta de where all the merchant's leave their goods , where he slew cruzes-sixe or seven of the merchants , but found neither gold nor silver , but great store of merchandise : and so he fired the said house , with all the goods , which were judged to be worth above two hundred thousand ducats . Thus not finding gold in this house to satisfy his mind , he burned the merchants goods , and forthwith recovered his Pinnaces : where fortune so favoured his proceedings , that he had not be aboard half and hour , but there came to the sea side above three hundred soldiers , which were sent of purpose to take him : but God suffered him to escape their hands , to be a farther plague unto the Spaniards . 
 Also another Englishman nam John Oxenham hear - JohnOxenham ing what spoil Captain Drake had done upon that coast , anno made a voyage thither to enterprise the like . His ship was of burden about and hundred and twentie tons , and he was accompanied with seventie persons : he had conference also with the foresaid Negroes , but being advertized that the treasure was conducted by soldiers , he determined with himself to do that which never any man before durst undertake to do . For being most resolute of his purpose , and not looking nor forecasting what danger might ensue of this bold enterprise , he landed his 
 229 
 men in the same place where Captain Drake was , and hailing his ship to shore , cut down boughs of trees , and covered his ship with them , and hid up his great ordinance in the ground . Thus leaving not one man in his ship , he took two small pieces of ordinance , and his calivers , and good store of victuals , with all other necessaries for his intended voyage . And he went with the Negroes above A fwer run - twelve leagues up into the main land , unto a river that Seuti ” ea runneth into the South sea : and by this river in a wood he ’ cut down timber , and built a Pinnace , which was 45 foot 
 long by the keel ; which Pinnace being finished , he went down the river and passed into the South sea , carrying sixe Negroes with him for his guides , and he arrived at the Hand of Pearls being 25 leagues distant from Panama . This Hand lies in the South sea as they sail from Peru to Panama , and here he stayed ten days , before he could take any shipping , but at length there came a small bark from a place called Quito in Peru : this bark he took , and found in her 60000 pezos of gold , with much wine and bred : and not being content with this , he stayed a long while , before he would send away his prize or any of his men . Shortly after he took another bark that came from Lima , wherein he found 100000 pezos of silver in bars , which being all aboard his Pinnace , he shaped his course towards the river from whence he came : but before his departure he landed on the foresaid Hand to find pearls , and went to a small town of the Hand inhabited by Negroes for the same purpose : where finding but small store , he returned to his Pinnace , and coming near unto the river he sent away his two prizes , and with his Pinnace entered up the river . The Negroes of the Hand of pearls , so soon as the Englishmen were departed , posted in their Canoas to Panama , to signify unto the 
 Governor what they had done . Whereupon the Governor within two days after sent out foure barks and and hundred soldiers , and Negroes to row , the captain of which soldiers was called Juan de Ortega : who went first to the Hand of pearls , & there had knowledge which way 230 
 the Englishmen did take , and in pursuing them he met with the two prizes taken by the Englishmen , which told him that they were gone up the river . But when he was come to the entrance of the river , he knew not which way to take , because the river ran into the sea by three mouths , and not all at one . Therefore being determined with himself to pass up the greatest of the three , he saw coming down with the stream many feathers of hens out of one of the lesser mouths : which mouth he entered , and sailing foure days up the same , he descried the Englishmens pinnace lying upon the sand , and coming to board her , they found in her no more but sixe Englishmen , of which they killed one , and the other 5 fled , & having thoroughly ransacked the said pinnace , they could find nought in her , but victuals . The Spaniards seeing this , determined to seek out the Englishmen by land , and leaving about twentie men to keep their barks they marched with eightie shot up into the country , and half a league from the river they found a little house made with boughs , where the Englishmen had left all their treasure ; which the Spaniards took and carried back to their barks , meaning not to follow the Englishmen any further ; but the English captain with all his men , and above 200 Negroes followed the Spaniards unto the rivers side , and set upon them with great fury : howbeit the Spaniards lying behind the bushes did easily put the English to flight , and they took seven of them alive , and slew eleven and five Negroes : so the Spaniards returned with the loss of two men and five or sixe hurt . Then they asked those Englishmen which they had taken prisoners , why they departed not with their treasure , having fifteene days liberty ? They answered , that their captain had commanded them to carry all that gold and silver unto the place where their ship was , and they were agreed to carry it , although they made three or foure journeys , for he promised to give them part of the treasure beside their wages , but the mariners would needs have it by and by : whereat the captain being angry because they put so 
 231 
 A.D. 
 1572-87 . 
 small trust in his word , would not suffer his sailors to carry it , but said he would get Negroes to serve his turn , and so these were the Negroes aforesaid , whom he had brought to carry away the gold and silver : but by the way he met with the five Englishmen which fled from the pinnace , who told him of the Spaniards ; and then he made friends with all his men , and god the Negroes to take his part : but having the overthrow , and his best men being slain and taken prisoners , he thought to have returned to his ship , and so to have gone for England . The Spanish captain having herd this discourse of the English prisoners , buried the dead bodies , embarking all things , and with the Englishmen and their pinnace returned back unto Panama . Thus was the Englishmens voyage overthrown . 
 Now so soon as the foure barks and the pinnace were arrived at Panama , the Governor of that place sent a messenger overland to Number de Dios , to advertise the townsmen , where the Englishmens ship lay : whereupon they of Number de Dios manned out foure ships and went into the bay of Dariene where the Englishmen had left their ship , which they took away with them to Number de Dios , with all her ordinance ; so that the poor Englishmen were left in the mountains very naked and destitute of all comfort : for the Spaniards had taken out of the foresaid house of boughs all their tools & other necessaries , so that they could by no means have any succour : whereas otherwise they might have built another pinnace , and provided better for themselves to have returned for their own country . 
 These news coming to the ears of the Viceroy of Peru , he thought it not convenient to suffer those fiftie Englishmen which were yet alive , to continue in the mountains among the said Negroes . Wherefore he sent a servant of his called Diego de Frees with 150 shot to seek them , who at length found them making of Canoas to take some one small bark or other that sailed to and again in the North sea , whereby they might the 232 
 better shift for themselves : but before they had finished their pretended work , the Spanish soldiers set upon them , and took fifteene of them that were sick : but the rest fled , whom the Spaniards pursued among the mountains , and in the end the Negroes betrayed them , and they were all taken and carried to Panama . Where the Justice asked the English captain , whither he had the Queens license , or the license of any other Prince or Lord ? And he answered that he had none , but that he came of his own proper motion . Which being known to the Justice , the Captain and his company were condemned and were all put to death at Panama , saving the Captain himself , the Master , and the Pilot , and five boys , which were carried to Lima , where the Captain and the two other men were executed , but the boys are yet living . 
 The king of Spaine having intelligence of these matters , Warn made sent 300 men of war against those Negroes who had a£a ™ sttlie assisted the Englishmen , which Negroes before were slaves unto the Spaniards , and ( as is aforesaid ) fled from their master's into those mountains , and so joined themselves to the Englishmen , thinking by that means to be revenged of the Spaniards cruelty . 
 At the first coming of these three hundred soldiers they took many of the Negroes , and did great justice on them according to the quality of their offences . But after a season the Negroes grew wise and wary , and prevented the Spaniards so , that none of them could be taken . Whereof the king being advertised by his Captains , as also how the country was full of mountains and rivers , and very unhealthfiill , insomuch that his soldiers died , he wrote unto his said Captains to make and agreement with those Negroes , to the end the country might be in quiet . And so they came to agreement with the Captains of the Negroes , and all was appeased . Afterwards the Negroes inhabiting two places which the Spaniardes allotted unto them , the kings pardon was proclaimed unto all those which before the day of the proclamation thereof had run from their Master's , 
 233 
 Seven French ships taken by the galleys . Sir Francis Drakes voyage to S. Iago , Sant Domingo , Cartagena , and S. Augustine . 
 Cartagena . 
 upon condition that from that day forward , whatsoever other fugitive Negroes should resort unto them , they should return them home either dead or alive , if not , that they should pay for them . Upon these conditions , and to make all quiet in the mountains , all things were concluded and agreed upon . So that now the Negroes dwell in great towns , where they have Spaniardes for their teachers , and a Spaniard for their Judge , and with this they hold themselves very well contented , and are obedient unto their rulers . 
 The Spaniards since they conquered those parts have seen many Frenchmen on that coast , but never any Englishmen in that place , save those two only which I have before mentioned . And although the Frenchmen have come strong , yet durst they never put foot on shore as the English did . But the king of Spaine hearing that Englishmen as well as Frenchmen began to haunt that coast , caused two galleys to be made and well appointed , to keep the coast . The first year that they were made they took sixe or seven French ships . So soon as this was known there used few English or French men of war to come on the coast , until this year 1586. when as the aforesaid Francis Drake came with a strong fleet of about foure and twentie ships , and did such harm as is well known unto all Christendome . But ( God sparing the king of Spaine life ) he will sufficiently provide to keep his subjects from the invasions of other Nations . 
 Now to go forward with our begun discourse , the next town upon this coast beyond Number de Dios is Cartagena : it stands in a more healthful place , and is a greater town then the other , bordering upon a better country , which aboundeth with plenty of victuals , and having a very good port for the harbour of ships : and it is called Cartagena , because it resembles very much the city of Cartagena in Spaine . It containeth above foure hundred households . It is very rich by reason of the ships staying there , when they go or come from 
 234 
 Spaine . And if the ships chance to winter before they go home into Spaine , then they lie at Cartagena . Also it is greatly enriched by the merchandise , which is there discharged to be carried to the new kingdom of Granada , from which kingdom much gold is brought unto Cartagena . This new kingdom of Granada is two hundred reyn0 leagues within the land : neither can they travel from Granada . Cartagena to this kingdom by land , because of the mountains and standing waters , which lie in the way , so that they are feign to carry their goods up a river called The great river of Magdalen . They can go with grande their barks but two hundred leagues up this river ; for magaa-although it be large and very deep , yet there runneth ' so swift a current , that the barks are constrained to discharge their goods at a place in the river called Branco Branco de de Malambo , into small canoas which row close by the Salambo . shores side . In this river are great abundance of Crocodiles , so huge and terrible to behold , that such as never saw them before are very fearful at the first sighed of them , for if a man chance to put his hand or foot into the water , they will straightway catch at them . In some places this river is very unhealthful and full of noisome worms ; but the first place thereupon which the Spaniards do inhabit called Mompox is exceeding healthful . The Mompox . country adjoining upon this river they call The new kingdom of Granada , because the captain called Cesada which first conquered the same , and inhabited there , was born at Granada in Spaine : for it is the use of the Spanish captains , when they have conquered any Province of the Indies , to call it after the name of the place where they themselves were born . This new kingdom of Granada is very fruitful , and brings forth much corn & other victuals , and hath many gold-mines , and great quantity of emeralds , whereof they send so many into Spaine , that now they are become little worth : but before these countries' were found , they were in great estimation . Here are also dwelling many of the Indian people so meek and gende of nature , that they are 
 235 
 called flies . This land is very plain and wholesome , and the inhabitants are given to peace . 
 From this kingdom they travel to another country Popayan . called La governacion de Popayan ; it is rich of gold , and withal very fruitful , but fuller of mountains then the new kingdom of Granada , and hath fewer Indians dwelling in it , but those that are there are full of courage and very valiant , which caused the Spaniardes to make great war before they could overcome them . In this province there are 13 towns of Spaniards , and in The new kingdom of Granada there are nine towns of Spaniards . 
 From this country of Popayan they travel along till they come to the first inhabitants of Peru dwelling in Quito . a town which joineth upon the South sea called Quito . This town I will leave any further to speak of till I come particularly to entreat of Peru. Only I have spoken of the two foresaid Provinces , to the intent you A passage might know , that there is a passage by land from Car-over land from tagena to perUj which is about five hundred leagues Peru^ ™ t0 through : so that beside the two hundred leagues which they go up the river , the other three hundred leagues is a country well inhabited and without danger to travel in , insomuch that oftentimes posts are sent too and from . But because it is so long a journey , merchants use not to travel that way , but when they are enforced so to do . If any foreign Nation should become Lords of the South sea , the king of Spaine might have his treasure conveyed unto this town of Cartagena from Peru , and so into Spaine . For in times passed there being a rebellion in Peru made by the Spaniardes against their king , he sent his power to suppress them through these Provinces . This I write only for that I know some Englishmen have thought , that in taking the South sea , or Panama or Number de Dios from the king of Spaine , his treasure of Peru could not be conveyed unto him , and that the king could not succour Peru , if it wanted help . Howbeit I do here most certainly assure you , that there be many ways to Peru. 
 236 
 But now I will return to my former discourse . Upon the seacoast of Tierra firma Eastward from Cartagena stands a little town called Santa Martha , between which town and Cartagena the mighty river of Magdalen before nam falls into the sea with such a strong current , that by reason thereof it is known 20 leagues from the shore . Santa Martha is a very poor town , because it hath often be robbed by the Frenchmen , and hath no trade but with a few Indians that dwell thereabouts . Here begins that wonderful long ridge of high mountains covered with snow , which stretching through many countries' , runneth along the kingdoms of Peru and Chili , and continueth to the very straights of Magellan . These mountains are seen with snow upon their tops above thirtie leagues into the sea . At the foot of these wild mountains there is a valley called Tagrona , which is the richest place that is known thereabouts : but because the country adjoining is so mountainous , and the inhabitants so many and of so good a courage , shooting poisoned arrows which are present death to such as are wounded with the same ; therefore it lies as yet unconquered , notwithstanding it hath cost many Spanish captains their lives . 
 Passing along the coast of Tierra firma to the East of Santa Martha , where is and other small town of above and hundred houses called Rio de Hacha . This town is somewhat rich by reason of the pearls which they get there . Also they have a trade with the Indians for some small quantity of gold . From hence they go along the coast to Cabo de la Vela , which because it is of the same property with Rio de Hacha before mentioned , I omit to speak of it . Upon this coast there is a lake or gulf which openeth into the sea , at the mouth whereof they gather great store of pearls . Beyond this place there is another poor town , which hath sixe or seven times been spoiled by the Frenchmen . From hence there lies and high way to the new kingdom of Granada , but it is above seven hundred leagues in length , 
 A.D. 
 1572-87 . 
 SantaMartha . 
 A mighty ridge of mountains . 
 The rich •valley of Tagrona . 
 Rio de Hacha . 
 Cabo de la Vela . 
 Great store of pearls . 
 237 
 A.D. 1572-87 . this way is traveled very seidome , because the Indians will usually set upon the travellers . More up into the land the country lies plain , and there is some gold , and a few towns inhabited with Spaniardes , whereof I have had but small notice , and therefore I let them 
 The lie of Margarita . pass . The next place of any account is the Hand of Margarita , where there are but few Spaniardes inhabitant . This Island of Margarita is very small , and lies foure leagues from the main land : it hath heretofore be very rich of gold and pearls , and so would have continued till this present day , had it not been spoiled by men of war , because it stands so far from the main land , notwithstanding they yet gather good store of 
 Excellent horses and mules . pearls . Upon this Island are bred better horses and mules then in any other part of the Indies , therefore they carry them from hence to Peru , albeit they have great store of horses in Peru , but not so good . And because we have begun to speak of the Hand of Margarita , you are to understand , that to the North 
 More then 70. Hands . of the foresaid coast of Tierra firma lie above seventie Hands being all very little , except Cuba , Hispaniola , and Boriquen , or Sant Juan de Puerto rico , which He 
 of Boriquen , although it be not very great , yet is it inhabited by the Spaniards . The other smaller Hands have be inhabited by the Indians , and have had good store of gold , pearls , and emraldes ; but the Spaniards have destroyed most of those Indians from off the earth , and in many of those Hands there is nothing of any valve , wherefore I have small cause to entreat any 
 Hispaniola . further of them . But Hispaniola is and Hand of great bigness , and hath be very full of people , and abounded with mines of gold and with pearls , but now all is 
 The Indians killed themselves , rather then they would serve the tyrannous Spaniards . wasted away . It was at the Spaniards first coming thither , as full of inhabitants as any place of that bigness in the whole world , yet now there are none left : for they were men of so hard a heart , that they murdered themselves rather then they would serve the Spaniards : for being men under so small civil governe-238 
 1572-87 . meant as they were , never was there any people known of so resolute and desperate minds : for oftentimes a great number of them being together over night , they should be found all dead before the morning : such extreme hate did this brutish people bear against the Spaniards , that they chosen rather to die the death , then to endure their insolences . It happened on a time , that a Spaniard calling certain Indians to work in the mines ( which labour of all others did most grieve them ) they , rather then they would go , offered to lay violent hands on themselves : which the Spaniard perceiving said unto them : seeing you will hang your selves rather then go A pretty jest . and work , I likewise will hang my self and will bear you company , because I will make you work in and other world : but the Indians hearing this , replied , we will willingly work with you here , to the intent you may not go with us into another world : so unwilling were they of the Spaniards company . So that of all the inhabitants of this Hand there were none that escaped death , save only these few , which came to pass by the means of this one Spaniarde , otherwise they would have hanged themselves also . Some of these people are yet living , but very few . This Hand of Hispaniola is for the most part called The He of Sant Domingo , because the chief city thereof is so called , which was the first city in all the West Indies that was inhabited . There are in this city above eight hundred fire-houses of good building inhabited by Gentlemen of great wealth . This Hand is unhealthful , for it rains here the most part of the year . The riches that now this Hand affords are sugar ( for Sugar , hides , 
 here are many Ingenios or sugar-houses ) and great coppermines . 
 store of hides by reason of the abundance of cattle ; 
 there are copper mines also , which is the cause that 
 they have such store of copper-money , for their gold mines be all ' exhausted , and the gold which they have comes from other places . This Hand being ( as is beforesaide ) destitute of the first inhabitants , and the 
 239 
 Spaniardes lacking men to work in their Ingenios , and to look unto their cattle , they were forced to bring Negroes Negroes thither out of Guinea , where they have so ' increased increased , that the Hand is now as full of them , as ncreas .. tO was of natural inhabitants ; so that the Spaniardes 
 carry Negroes from this Hand to the main land and there fell them . The chiefest victuali that they have J root called in this Hand , is a kind of root called Juca , which being Juca ' eaten as it comes new out of the ground is present death : but first they boil it and after press it , and the liquour that is strained therefrom is deadly poison : howbeit this root being pressed so dry , that there remains no moisture in it , they mingle and temper the same with water and so make cakes thereof , which are very savoury & good to eat , & this is all the bred which they have in those Hands . There go from hence yearly into Spaine 7 or 8 ships at the least full freighted with sugar & hides . 
 The We of Near unto Hispaniola lies another greater Hand Cuba - called Cuba , it is like unto Hispaniola , although there is not so much sugar . The principali town of this Island is called Havana , which hath and excellent harbour belonging thereunto . The townsmen are very rich by reason of the fleets that come from Nueva Espanna , and Tierra firma which touch there ; for the safeguarde of which fleets and of the town it self there is a castle built near the said harbour kept with Spanish soldiers ; neither is there any castle or soldiers in all the Hands but only here . There is also another Hand S. Juan de inhabited with Spaniards called Boriquen or Sant Juan Puerto neo . je puerto rico . p is but little , yet every way as plentiful ! as the other two are ; and therefore I omit to speak thereof . 
 But now to prosecute my discourse of the port-towns upon the main land : Eastward and Southward from Margarita there are no towns inhabited by Spaniardes or Ternambuck . Portugals , till you come to Fernambuck upon the coast of Brasil ; notwithstanding that between the said Hand 240 
 The material originally positioned here is too large for reproduction in this reissue . A PDF can be downloaded from the web address given on page iv DownloadeflKrfomhttps^www . cambndge.orgA^^ Nofa flatWn 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 09 : 32 , subject to the 
 1572-87 . and Fernambuck runneth the mighty river of Marannon , The great whereof ( both because of the greatness and the riches ww °f contained therein ) I must needs make some relation , in Marmnon-regarde I have promised to speak of every place that is of any valve in all the Indies . This river is one of the greatest in the world , and was first found when as the Spaniardes sought out the other coast : but none can pass up this river because of the greatness of the current which comes down , as also there are many shelves of sand lying in the mouth thereof : whereby it was long before the riches in and about this river were known , until such time as the kingdom of Peru was conquered : at which time a Captain called Gonsalo Pizarro passing through the country of Peru came at length into a land which they nam La Canela , because there grows great store of Sinamome , but not altogether so good as that which comes from the East Indies . The said Captain proceeding farther into the country came at length to a mighty river , where he saw the country people rowing in their Canoas , and bringing gold to buy and fell with the Spaniards . Captain Pizarro seeing this , was desirous to find out the end of this river , but he could not travel by land because of the high mountains : wherefore he made a small Bark or Pinnace to go and discover from whence the said Indians brought their gold , and sent in the said Pinnace a Captain under him called Orellana , who with fiftie men went down the river , but could not return to their general Pizarro , because of the great current _ _ 
 which was very strong against them , forcing them to fiftie men . pass along the river , and to enter into the Sea , and so they sailed on forward to the foresaid He of Margarita : but as they passed down this river they found it well inhabited with Indians , which were possessed of great store of gold . These men with their Pinnace were passing down this river eight months , for the river lies very crooked , which makes a long way by water , neither durst the Spaniardes ever land , because they saw 
 XI 241 Q 
 The great river of Marannon or Orellana . 
 Orellana sent down the river of Mar - 
 the country so full of people , but they took many Canoas , wherein they had great store of victuals and some gold . 
 Now this Orellana coming unto Margarita with these good news and riches , determined not to return unto his Captain Pizarro which sent him , but took his way from thence to the king of Spaine , and presented him with the gold that he brought out of the river : whereupon the king sent him with a fleet of ships and sixe hundred men to inhabit the said river : but because of the great current and sholdes that are therein , he left the most part of his men and ships , and with those that remained he went unto certain Islands hard by the river , and built him Pinnaces ; but the country being very unhealthful , himself and many of his men died , and the residue went every man which way pleased him best . The fame of this river was straightway spread through Spaine and Portugal , insomuch that a Gentleman of Portugall called Lewis de Melo asked license of DONE Juan the third , then king of Portugall to go and conquer the said river : for from the mouth of this river to the mouth of the river of Plate , is that part of America which the kings of Portugall ( according to the partition made between them and the kings of Spaine ) do hold : so that the king of Portugall having this river in his part gave it to the said Lewis de Melo to conquer : who taking tenne ships and eight hundred men ( among which many were gentlemen ) and coming to the mouth of this river , lost all the said ships saving two , in one of the which two was Lewis the Melo himself : also the most part of the men that were in the ships cast away were saved and god to the shore , and so went by land to the Hand of Margarita ; from whence they were dispersed throughout all the Indies . 
 Thus these two fleets of ships being so unfortunately cast away , never durst any Captain afterwards attempt by sea to conquer the said river . Howbeit from the kingdom of Nueva Granada before mentioned there have 
 242 
 gone two or three Captains by land to discover it , for a rumour went over all the country of the great riches contained in this river ; whereupon the Spaniards nam it El Dorado , that is to say , The golden river . It is El Dorado . thought that God will not have this river to be known , for that one Captain by land had most of his people slain by those of the country , and others for want of victuals returned . So that none of all these came to any plain discovery , till a few years passed a Captain of the country of Navarre called Pedro de Orzua , who Pedn de went from Peru almost the same way that Gonsalo Orzua-Pizarro had before discovered , and was accompanied with about some seven hundred Spaniards , it being a great marvel how he could get so many , among whom were many Gentlemen and old soldiers of Peru , who caused diverse mutinies and insurrections , as hereafter I will more at large declare , which mutinous soldiers were the cause of their captains death . Howbeit with all these men captain Pedro de Orzua came unto the head of the said river : but you must understand , that this river is nourished not only with the waters and freshets that come from the mountains of Peru , but also by all the rivers between the Equinoctial and sixteene degrees of Southerly latitude , which fallen thereinto and cause it to be so great . Now at the head of this river the said Captain Pedro de Orzua made fifteene Pinnaces with many Canoas , wherein he carried above two thousand Indians to help him , with many horses and other provision , as meaning to inhabit there : for it was not possible for him to carry all his provision by land , because the mountains be very great , there being also between them many small rivers which fallen into this great river above twentie leagues out of the land . So this captain having all his things in good order went down the river wjth his whole company , and at length came from among the mountains to a plain country where the Indians dwelled ; and there he held a council , determining in the same place to built a town and to fortify 
 243 
 Lopez de jdgira . his dangerous conspiracy . 
 Pedro de Orzua murdered . 
 it very strongly , to the end he might leave all his stuff there , and such men as were not soldiers . And so they began to built the said town , and wrought upon it all the winter : where because it rains much , and withal is very hight , sickness and want of victuals began to prevail among them , whereupon the soldiers fell a murmuring among themselves . For coming out of Peru , which is one of the fruitfullest & richest countries of the world , they were more inclined to have their fill of bred and meat then to apply their bodies to labour : which was the cause that albeit the country in which they now were , was exceeding fruitful , and that they saw with their eyes most evident appearances of gold , & also that up into the country it seemed to be much better ; yet for all this they murmured & would needs return for Peru from whence they came . In the company of these men there was a soldier of Biskay called Lopez de Agira , a very little man of body & lame of one of his legs , but very valiant and of good experience in the wars . This man having be one of the principali mutineers in Peru , could not here give over his old wont , but asked his fellow-soldiers , what they went to seek for in those wild deserts whither they were brought : For ( said he ) if you seek riches , there are enough in Peru , and there is bred , wine , flesh , and fair women also ; so that it were better to conquer that , and to take it out of the hands of the Spaniardes , and that it were no hard enterprise , because all the soldiers and poor men of Peru would turn unto them , and that that were a better course , then to go and conquer the savage people in those mountains : so that once having the government of Peru , the king of Spaine should be enforced to agree with them : if not ( said he ) we shall not lack them that will succour us , to have the riches of Peru. By these persuasions he brought many soldiers to be of his mind , and conspired also with a young gentleman of Sivill called DONE Fernando de Gusman ( who was in love with a young woman which the captain Pedro de Orzua had , and therefore did the 
 244 
 DONE Ferdinando de Gusman proclaimed kins 
 LOPEZ VAZ 
 sooner agree unto the wicked intent of Agira ) to murder the captain . Who on a night being asleep in his bed , the said conspirators and their faction entered into his bedchamber , and there stabbed him with their daggers ; which being done , they slew also all the Captains that were his friends , and therewithal ! made a great outcry , saying , God save the king , God save the king : whereupon all the camp was in and uproar . Then Lopez de Agira made unto the soldiers a long oration , and god them all to consent unto him , some by force , and some because they durst not say to the contrary , and others of their good will , and so in the end they all agreed unto his determined purpose . Then made they Fernando de Gusman their head , 8c Agira was made a captain . This done , because the people should the better hold their opinion , he did as great a villainy as ever any Spaniard committed : for he made and altar , whereon he and all the soldiers renounced their service unto the king of Spaine , 8c so as people without a king , chosen the said DONE Fernando to be their king , and did homage unto him . These matters being thus finished they consulted among themselves which should be the best way for them to go of Peru. “ to Peru ? For they could not go up the river , by which they came down , in regard of the strong current , and going back overland they should be very weak for want of horsemen : wherefore they determined to go down the river . Then said Lopez de Agira , that they would carry nothing with them but the pinnaces & soldiers which should fight , and that it were best to leave behind them all the Indians which they brought from Peru , with the women and the sick men . Whereunto the general DONE Ferdinando would not agree , because he knew that when they were gone the people of the country would kill them all . Lopez de Agira hearing this , and longing to be chief governor himself , took unto him 30 of his own countrymen of his Fernando & disposition , and on the sudden slew DONE Fernando , Gusman whom not many days before he had sworn to obey : 8c slain . 
 245 
 now by his subtle practises , being withal eloquent in his talk , he caused the soldiers to appoint himself their governor , & made them believe that all the cruelties committed were for their saveguard : neither did the tyrannic of this wretched man here end . He was born in Biskay a country near unto France , wherefore I believe him rather to have been a Frenchman then a Spaniard , for that in the heart of a Spaniard could not be A new mass - so much cruelty as this man showed . Now being ready sacre ’ to go his way , he determined not to carry with him any gendemen or persons of quality , and therefore he slew all such persons ; and then departing only with the common soldiers , he left behind him all the Spanish women and sick men , with all other creatures . If I should rehearse all the cruel murders of this wicked man one by one , I should be over tedious unto you . Only in few words I say , that this man proceeded down the river , having with him only foure hundred men : but before he passed the river , and was come to Margarita , he had no more left but two hundred and thirty men , for the rest he had put to death , and left on shore among the people of the country : all which tyranny he used , because he ever stood in fear of his life : for had he seen at any time but two soldiers talking together , he would straight suspect that they were conspiring of his death , and therefore he used the practises abovesaid . And he never went any way , but that he had in his company thirtie Biscaines of his own will and mind ready to execute his cruel purposes . 
 Great store of As these soldiers with their Captain came down gild in the the r [ verj they saw many Canoas with gold in them nver of Mar - passjn „ too and j from and people on both sides of the river , and in their passage many times they landed , and god good store of gold and victuals . Now also did they Amazmes find that to be true which Orellana had reported , namely at there were Amazones , that is to say , women that husband^in fight in the wars with bows and arrows : but these 
 the wars . women fight to aid their husbands , and not by them - 
 246 
 selves alone without the company of men , as Orellana reported . There were of these women upon diverse parts of this river , who seeing the Spaniardes fighting with their husbands came in to succour them , and showed themselves more valiant then their husbands ; for which cause it was nam , The river of Amazones . 
 The Spaniardes intent was only to pass down the river , neither sought they at all to discover the Inland , and yet they took good store of gold , putting it into one of their Pinnaces , where Lopez de Agira himself was embarked , which Pinnace at the mouth of the river was cast away , but he himself escaped , because he had not as yet fulfilled his bloody mind . And when he was come to the Island of Margarita , the Governor thereof supposing he had been one of the kings loyal captains , received him with pinnaces , and brought good store of victuals unto him . But he putting the said Governor immediately to death , landed on the Hand , and took it and two ships that were there , and constrained likewise and hundred and fiftie men , which he 
 Good store of gold . 
 Lopez de Agira arriveth at Margarita 1568. 
 there found , to go with him , beside others that went voluntarily , carrying from thence good store of victuales , and many horses also . And then he returned to the main land , saying , that with his small forces he would subdue the whole Indias : imagining belike that all the old soldiers and poor people , at the first sighed of him , would turn to his side and take his part . Howbeit he was foully deceived : for before he had marched two days journey up into the land , the Governor of Nueva Granada came against him with a power of men : but Lopez de Agira hoping that other soldiers would have joined themselves unto him , whereby his strength might have been the more , was quite frustrate of his expectation : for even his own men left him , and took part with the kings Captain . Now seeing himself thus left destitute of his soldiers , and void of all help , he committed a more unnatural bloody act then ever Nero the tyrant did , for he murdered his own 
 247 
 Great riches hidden within the river of Marannon . 
 The coast of Brasill , why it was so called , and by whom it was at the first discovered . 
 daughter being but sixeteene years of age , which he had brought with him out of Peru : the cause why he killed her was , that she might not become a concubine to villains , nor be called the daughter of a traitor : and these words he used unto her , so soon as he had given her her death's wound : but before he could finish this cruel act , the soldiers came upon him , and cut him in pieces , also his daughter died of her wound in that place . 
 Thus have you herd the miserable end of this bloody caitiff : in regard of whose treacherous and mischievous dealing the king would never since suffer this river to be thoroughly discovered ; so that the riches and treasure of the said river remain unknown even until this present day . 
 Now leaving to discourse any longer of this river of Marannon , all the coast between the said river and the river of Plate , is called The coast of Brasill , taking that name from a kind of wood in the same country , called Brasill-wood , whereof there is great store in those parts . This coast of Brasill was first discovered by Pedro Alvarez Cabral , in the second voyage which the king of Portugall caused to be made to the East Indies : and the foresaid Pedro Alvarez took possession of this land for the king of Portugall : whereupon the king DONE Emanuel hearing news thereof sent presently ships to discover the whole country , and found it to be part of America otherwise called The West Indies : for which cause there grew some controversy between him and the king of Spaine : but being kinsmen and great friends one to another , they agreed in the end , that the king of Portugall should hold all the country that he had discovered , the which was ( as I have said ) from the river of Marannon to the river of Plate ; albeit the Spaniards affirm , that it stretcheth no further then the Hand of Santa Catelina ; whereupon there have risen many controversies between the Portugales and Spaniardes , which have cost many men their lives . 
 248 
 There came into the said river of Plate in the year 
 1587 two English ships and a Pinnace of the right Honourable the Earl of Cumberland , which were bound for the straights of Magellan , and ankored ten leagues within the said river before a little Hand lying hard by another called Seal-Hand . On which Hand the Captain of one of the ships called Christopher Lister , and his whole company landing , found the king of Portugales arms graved on a rock by the sea side ; which are thought to have been there engraven by one Martin Alonso de Souza , who was sent by the king DONE Emanuel to discover this coast . Therefore I think 
 the Portugales have reason for that which they allege concerning the extension of the said coast of Brasil . Wherefore the king of Portugal ! gave this land to diverse of his gentlemen to inhabit . Most of the natural inhabitants of this country are very rude , and go Stark naked both men and women , and are maneaters ; for which cause they make wars one against another to get men to eat ; they are stout and good bowmen . The first place inhabited on this coast beyond the river of Maran non is called Fernambuck so nam by the Indians , but in Portugal ! it is called Villa de Olinda . Before you come to this place there is a port called Parajua , unto which port not many years passed the Frenchmen hearing of the troubles which were then in Portugall resorted , and built there a fort ; whereunto certain French ships made yearly voyages to lade Brasill-wood . But they of Fernambuck , with the help of the Spaniardes , went and burned five French ships within the port , and took the fort it self , and the Frenchmen that were there fled part into the mountains , and part of them were slain ; so that since that time the Spaniardes have inhabited there till this present . Now to return to Fernambuck inhabited by a Portugall Captain called Duarte Coelio , it is the greatest town in all that coast , and hath above three thousand houses in it , with seventie Ingenios for sugar , and great store 
 Fernambuck . 
 A fort built by the Frenchmen at Parajua . 
 Parajua now inhabited by Spaniards . Fernambuck containeth 3000 houses . 
 249 
 of Brasill-wood and abundance of cotton , yet are they in great want of victuals : for all their victuals come either from Portugall or from some places upon the coast of Brasill . The harbour of this town is a barred harbour , and fit only for small barks : this place belongeth as yet unto the son of Duarte Coelio . Cape S. Au - Beyond this town lies the Cape of Sant Augustin , , and next thereunto is the river of Sant Francisco , which Francisco . 1S a great nver . Between this river and naya it is all a wilderness inhabited with cruel salvages , for whomsoever they take they kill and eat him . The Bayhaatowne town of Bayha belongeth to the king , and therefore ofvcoohmues . gOVernour of all the coast keepeth his residence in the same , as also the bishop . It containeth xooo houses , & 40 Ingenios for sugar , and hath much cotton , but no Brasill-wood at all . The sea runneth up into the country here 14 or 15 leagues , where they get some years good store of Amber-griese . Here is great plenty of victuals , and although the country be hight , yet is it healthful , & the air wholesome . The next town upon As Ilhas . the coast called As Ilhas , or The Isles , is but a small town , containing not above 150 houses , and but three Ingenios for sugar . Most of the inhabitants are labouring men , which use to carry victuals in their small barks unto Fernambuck : their Lord is called Lucas Giraldo . 
 Puerto Seguro . The next place unto this is called Puerto Seguro : it consisteth of 4 small towns , which contain not in all above 300 houses . The inhabitants of this town also live by carrying of victuals along the coast ; and the town it self belongeth to the Duke de Avero . Hard The sholdes by this port begin the sholdes which they call Abrolhos ; called Abrol - anj these sholdes lie above 25 leagues into the sea . 
 ’ The next habitation of Christians beyond these sholdes 
 Espirito Santo , is Espirito Santo which consisteth of two towns , both of them containing about 300 houses : and they belong to a gentleman called Vasques Fernandes de Coutinho . RiodeJenero . From hence you pass along the coast to the river of Jenero , which hath about three hundred houses . In 25° 
 this place the Frenchmen first inhabited , whose Captain was called Monsieur de Villegagnon . The said Captain made here a fort , and planted good ordinance thereon , and jaded every year great store of Brasill-wood from hence , and had great friendship with the salvage people , who did him good service , by reason whereof the Frenchmen reaped much benefit out of this country . But the king of Portugall sent out a power against the Frenchmen , who first took the French ships by sea , and then landed and besieged the fort , and at length took it , and the Captain thereof : unto whom , because he was a gentle person , and never hurt the Portugales , they gave thirtie thousand ducats for his ordinance , and for all other things that were in the fort , and so sent him for France . Since which time the Portugales have inhabited this river . There are at this present only two Ingenios , but great store of Brasill-wood , with plenty of victuals . 
 From this river of Jenero they pass along the coast Foure towns to Sant Vincente , which hath 4 towns , the greatest whereof is called Santos , and consisteth of foure hundred ymcente , J ’ houses , there are also three Ingenios . A few years These English passed there came two English ships into this harbour men were M. which were going for the Straights of Magellan . Who being in this port , there came thither three of the king ’ 
 of Spaines ships , and fought with the Englishmen , but the Englishmen sunk one of their ships , and therefore the t111 - 788 - ] king commanded a fort to be made , to the end that - Afirtbuilt no English ships that were bound for the straights of Magellan should victuali there , the which fort stands on against the the mouth of the harbour . This country belongeth to a English . Gentleman called Martin Alonso de Souza : this is the last inhabited place upon all the coast of Brasill . This coast of Brasill is very full of mountains , and hath much rain falling upon it , for which cause they cannot go from town to town by land : all the habitations of this . 
 country are by the sea side . From Sant Vincente the §anta Qate _ coast is all mountainous , till you come to the He of Santa Una . 
 251 
 Catelina , and from this Hand till you come even to the straights of Magellan , the coast is very plain and without woods . 
 Having proceeded thus far , it will not be amiss to Rio de laPlata , speak somewhat of the river of Plate , which is one of the greatest rivers in all the world : for at the mouth it is above five and twentie leagues from land to land : and the Spaniards have gone up in it above sixe hundred leagues , and could not attain to the head thereof . The first Spaniard that entered this river , and inhabited the same was called Solis , who passed up 100 leagues into it , and called it by . the name of Rio de la Plata , that is to say , The river of silver , because of the fine and clear water that is in it , for I have not herd of any silver that ever was found there . The said Solis returned into Spaine , without any further search into this river : howbeit another Sebastian Ca - Captain called Sebastian Cabota went up this river 150 b°ia ' leagues , and built a fort , which fort stands until this present : where leaving his ships , he went higher up the river in small Pinnaces , and all along as he went he found many Indians : but finding neither gold nor silver , nor ought else of any great valve , he returned to his ships , and sailed for Spaine . Not many years after a certain Gentleman called DONE Pedro de Mendoza furnished forth a great fleet of ships , wherein were shipped a thousand men , fortie mares , and twentie horses , with all other creatures to inhabit this river : and coming thither he went up into the country to see what riches he could there find , leaving all his stuff , cattle , and provision Buenos at a place called Buenos Ayeres , so nam in regard of the Ayeres . freshness of the air , and the healthfiilnesse of his men , during their abided there : this place was eightie leagues within the river , and here he landed first : at this place the river is above seven leagues broad , and very low land on both sides without trees . This river is very often subject to great and sudden storms , so that with a storm this DONE Pedro lost eight of his ships , and in the rest he returned for Spaine , saying to his men , that he would go 252 
 seek victuals , and so left the greater part of them behind . In his way homeward he died , and the poor men which he left behind him , for the most part of them died for hunger also , because in that place there were very few Indians , and therefore but small store of victuals , only they lived by hunting of Dear , and by fishing . Of all the men that DONE Pedro left behind him there were but two hundred remaining alive , who in the ship boats went higher up the river , leaving in the place called Buenos Ayeres their mares and horses : but it is a wonder The wonderful to see , that of thirty mares and seven horses which the Spaniards left there , the increase in fortie years was so Jmares-great , that the country is 20 leagues up full of horses ; whereby a man may conjecture the goodness of the pasture , and the fruitfulness of the soil . The Spaniards that went up this river passed three hundred leagues , and found the country full of Indians : who had great plenty of victuals , among whom the Spaniards dwelled as their friends , and the Indians bestowed their daughters in marriage upon them , and so they dwelled altogether in one town , which the Spaniards ' called La Ascension , and it La Ascension stands on the North side of the river . The foresaid Spaniardes were twentie years in this place , before any pi^er news of their inhabiting upon this river was brought into Spaine : but waxing old , and fearing that when they were dead , their sons which they had begotten in this country being very many , should live without the knowledge of any other Christians : they determined among themselves to built a ship , and to send news into Spaine with letters unto the king of all things that had passed among them , upon that river . These news being brought to the king , he sent three ships , with a Bishop and certain Priests , and Friars , and more men and women to inhabit , with all kind of cattle , when this succour was come , they inhabited in two places more on the North side of the river , and traveled three hundred leagues beyond the Ascension ; but finding neither gold nor silver , they returned back again unto the Ascension . The people are so 
 253 
 multiplied in this city , that now it is one of the greatest in all the Indias , and containeth above two thousand houses . The country adjoining is exceeding fruitful , abounding with all kinds of victuals , & with sugar and cotton . From this city of Ascension 150 leagues towards the mouth of the river stands another town which Santa Fe. they call Santa Fe , on the South side of the said river , from which town there lies and open high way leading into the land of Peru , so that when I come to entreat of Peru I will speak of this way , and declare who first found it . Also five years past they have inhabited anew the town of Buenos Airs on the South side of the river , to the end they might have trade from the coast of Brasill , but their fortune was such , that the very first time they went to Brasill , and would have returned again Two English to the river of Plate , they were taken by two ships of ^^Fenton^ England that were going for the straights of Magellan . was general The coast along from this river to the straights of 1582. Magellan hath not be perfectly discovered , either by sea or land , saving only certain ports which they have found , sailing to the straights . Wherefore passing them over , I will here entreat of the said straights , and declare who was the first finder of them , as likewise what was the cause why they were sought for . The Portugales therefore having first found and conquered the East Indies , and discovered the coast of China , with the Hands of the Malucos , ( all which places abound with gold , precious stones , silks , and other rich commodities ) and bringing home the foresaid riches in their ships into Portugall : there grew by this means great envy between the Portugales and their neighbours the Spaniardes ; insomuch that the Council of Spaine said unto the Emperor Charles the fift being then their king , that the Portugales would be Lords of all the riches of the world . Upon which words began a controversy between the Emperor and the king of Portugall : but they being great friends before , and also kinsmen , agreed immediately to part the whole world between them , in such wise as I for 
 254 
 my part could never understand the certainty thereof . The world being thus divided , a Portugal-gentleman called Fernando Magellanes born in a place of Portugall called Fernando Punta de la barte , being of a good house , & very well MaSellanes-seene in cosmography , and and excellent Pilot , as also being offended with DONE Emanuel his Sovereign , departed out of Portugall into Spaine , and affirmed to the Council of Spaine , that the Isles of the Malucos were in that part of the world which was allotted to the king of Spaine , and that he would find a shorter way thither then the Portugales took , and laid before them such infallible reasons , that the Council giving credit unto his words , sent him to sea with five ships and 400 men all very well appointed . With these five ships setting sail from S. Lucar , he came to the coast of Brasill , where at that time two places were inhabited by Portugales , and so sailing on along that coast he passed by the river of Plate , which river was discovered a little before by Solis . And notwithstanding many storms , and great mutinies among his company , he came at length unto 48 degrees , to the Southwards of the river of Plate : where he found and har - 
 bour , which he nam Puerto de Sant Julian , and PorteS . Julian . wintered there : and there also he hanged 5 men , and put on shore a Priest , because they would have made the company to stand against their captain , and so to have returned back again . But in the end having pacified 
 his men , he put to sea , and within 5 days after he found Tke discovery the straights , which by him were so much desired : but^f^r^r‘S before he entered the said straights there befell such a J ' mutiny in one of his ships , that the same ship returned back again . And so himself with the other foure ships entering the straights , one of thee said foure with all the men therein was cast away at the very entrance : which loss notwithstanding he proceeded on with the other three ships , and passing many troubles and dangers in this long discovery , ceased not to prosecute his intended voyage . This discovery was at the first thought very profitable unto the Spaniards , but of late 
 255 
 it hath proved very hurtful unto them by means of certain coasters which have sailed the self same course . The Southerly These straights stand in 52 degrees and a half of st^htfof1 Southerly latitude . Also here is to be noted , that it Magellan . is colder to the Southward of the line then to the Northward : in such wise , that in forty degrees to the Southward the cold is more sharp , then in fiftie degrees to the North : experience does always show the same : for it is as cold even in the straights of Magellan , as it is in sixty degrees of Northerly latitude . Howbeit the cold is not the cause why navigators frequent not the same , but the Westerly and Southerly winds , which blow most furiously on that coast , and that oftentimes out of the very mouth of the straights , and so continue for the most part of the year . Also there runneth sometime such a strong current , that if the wind and it go all one way , the cables cannot hold , neither can the ship withstand the force thereof . For which cause , and also for that there is no harbour , till you be passed 30 leagues into the said straights , most part of the ships that have gone thither have endured many troubles before they could come to the straights , and being come to the mouth thereof they have be hindered by the current and wind , and so have been put back again . And to the end you may understand the truth , I will declare unto you all the ships that have passed through the said straights , since Magellan first found them , unto this present year of 1586 , when I have once ended my discourse of Magellan his own voyage . Now you are by the way to understand , that the North side of the entrance of these straights is plain land without any wood or trees : Patagpnes . here are likewise some Indians though not many , yet are they very mighty men of body of ten or eleven foot high , and good bowmen , but no man-eaters , neither have they any victuals , but such as they get by hunting and fishing ; they cover their bodies with the skins of beasts that they kill , to defend them from the cold : neither was there ever to this day any silver or gold 
 256 
 found among them or in their country . These Streights The length of ( they say ) extend in length from East to West about the straights of and hundred and twentie leagues . At the middle of these mighty ridg straights on the North side are many mountains covered of mountains . with snow , which mountains stretch from thence along the frontiers of Chili , Peru , and Nuevo reino de Granada , even unto the shore of the North sea at Santa Martha , as I have before signified . It is a wonder to behold the exceeding heighth of these mountains , and the way which they continue covered with snow , for even under the Equinoctial line they have as much snow upon their tops as in 52 degrees . Also it is worthy the remembrance , that all this country toward the South sea is very fruitful , and the people very discreet and gentle : but all the coast towards Brasill upon the North sea is poor , whereas never yet was found any commodity of account , and the people themselves are very cruel and salvage ; for the will of God is , that good and civil men should inhabit fruitful countries . And for the better understanding hereof you must note , that all the land lying between the said ridge of mountains and the South sea is called by the names of Chili , Peru , and Nuevo Chili , Peru , reino de Granada , which are the best and richest countries' an Nuevo in all the world : and most part of the land from the rQ%^a said mountains to the North sea is called Brasill , being ' a mountainous country , * where as yet was never found * But of late either gold or silver . From the said mountains in there are found the middle of the straights the land riseth high , till you d'werse rich come to the end or the straights where you enter into the South sea , in which place next the South sea the straights are very dangerous , by reason of the sholdes & rocks that lie on the North side . Thus Magellan after he had entered the South sea , within 60 days came to the Isles of the Malucos , without touching at any land until he came thither : and so seeking there to The death of lade his ships at and Hand inhabited by Moores , he was Magellan . by them treacherously slain . Now the Spaniards being too few for the managing of all three ships , because 
 xi 257 R 
 many of them were dead , partly with sickness , and partly with the hardness of the voyage , determined to abandon one of their said ships , and so manned the other two : which two being laden with spices and other riches knew not what course they were best to take : howbeit at length it was determined , that one of these two ships should go for Nueva Espan na , and the other for the cape of Buena Esperanza , and so for Spaine . The ship that went for Spaine was called The Victory , the Pilot Sebastian deal whereof was a Biscain nam Juan Sebastian deal Canon , man thatever to w^om king gay great rewards , and appointed sailed about globe for his arms , whereon was written : 
 the world . Primus omnium circunde disti me ; that is , thou art the first man that ever sailed about me . 
 And albeit this voyage was so long and troublesome as is before mentioned , yet many others have attempted the same . And the next that sought to pass the said Two ships of straights of Magellan were two ships of Genoa , which Genoa . coming as far as the mouth of the straights were by a mighty storm driven back again , and one of them , whose master was called Pancaldo , put into the river of Plate , and was cast away about Buenos Aeres , where to this day part of the said ship is to be seen , and some of the men are yet living in the river among the Spaniards : and the other ship returned to Genoa again . 
 A third voyage Also there was a bishop of Placencia in Spaine , who to you straights . covetjng riches , set forth a fleet of foure sails , to pass the straights , and so to go for the Malucos : and getting license of the Emperor he sent his said 4 ships towards the straights which had very fair winds till they came thither : but being entered 20 leagues within the straights , a storm of Westerly winds took them , & drove 3 of them on shore , 8c the fourth back into the sea , which ( the storm being passed ) returned into the straights to seek for his consorts , 8c found many men going on the shores side , but the ships were beaten all to pieces . So they on land called unto the ship ; but 258 
 the captain thereof , considering that his ship was but little , & that he had but small store of victuals , would not go to them on shore , but proceeded on his voyage , & passed the straights . And because he was alone he would not sail to the Malucos , but went for the coast of Peru to the city of Lima , where the ship remains unto this day . The men of the other three ships , which were left in the straights being to the number of two hundred and fiftie ( whose Captain being kinsman to the bishop of Placencia was called * Queros ) were never herd of until this present day , it being fortie years since they were left there . A year after this , certain merchants of the Groin in Galicia set forth other three ships , which ships also came to the straights mouth , where one of them was cast away with all the men , and the other two returned for Spaine . 
 Also I have had intelligence of certain Portugall ships , which being come to the mouth of the Straights lost two of their Pinnaces which they sent to discover the land , and then returned back . And after these , two French ships were sent from the river of Jenero by Monsieur de Villegagnon , but being come to the latitude of 45. degrees , they were driven back by a storm of contrary winds . After all this the governor of Chili called DONE Garcia de Mendoza son to the Marks of Cannette determining to discover the said Straights from the South sea , sent from Chili two ships under the conduct of a captain called Latherelio : but the danger to seek these Straights by the South sea is more then by the North sea , because all the storms of the North sea come from the land , but in the South sea all the winds and storms come off the sea , and force the ships to run upon the leeshore , insomuch that the said two ships were cast away in fiftie degrees . 
 The seeking of these Straights of Magellan is so dangerous , and the voyage so troublesome , that it seems a matter almost impossible to be performed , insomuch that for the space of thirty years no man made account 259 
 * Gonsalvo de Oviedo , part 2. lib . 20. calls this Captain Camargo . 
 A fourth voyage to the straights . 
 A fiftandsixt voyage to the straights of Magellan . Two French ships sent for the str eights of Magellan . 
 A.D. 1572-87-Sir Francis Drakes voyage aboutyeworld . 
 The cause why M. Douty was beheaded . 
 Sir Francis Drake driven into degrees of Southerly latitude . 
 La Mocha in 38 deg . 30 min. over against the province of Arauco . 
 thereof ; until of late one Francis Drake and Englishman ( of whom I have before spoken ) seeing he could do no good on the main land of the West Indies to benefit himself , because of the galleys of Cartagena that kept the coast , determined to seek the Straights of Magellan , and to pass into the South sea . And so having provided two ships and three pinnaces in England , he proceeded on his voyage , and coming to the Islands of Cape Verde took a Portugal ship laden with wine , the Pilot whereof being a Portugal called Nuno dam Sylva , he carried along with him , who was a great help and furtherance unto him in his voyage . And this which I shall here say , I had in writing of the Portugall pilot himself . 
 From the Islands of Cape Verde the said Francis Drake sailed unto Port Sant Julian , where he wintered : and there also he put to death a gentleman of his company , because he would have returned home . This port I take to be accursed , for that Magellan likewise put some to death there for the like offence . 
 This Francis Drake putting out of the said port , entered the Straights , and within twelve days got into the South sea . And two days after there arose such a storm of Westerly winds ( which are usual in those parts ) that he lost his pinnace , and his Viceadmiral master John Winter was driven back again into the Straights , who passing many dangers returned home into England . But Francis Drake himself ran with this storm into seven and fifty degrees of Southerly latitude , where he found and Island with a good harbour , and fresh water , and stayed at the same Island two months to repair his ships : and then , the weather being fair , he proceeded on his voyage , and came to the coast of Chili to and Island called La Mocha ; where he went on shore , and talked with the Indians : but when he would have returned unto his boat they shot their arrows at him , and killed two of his men , and he himself was wounded in the face . 
 260 
 Going from thence he passed by the town of Con - town of cepcion not knowing the place , and so to Valparizo which is the port of Sant Iago , where he found a ship laden afanzo-with a kind of victuals and wine , and had in her beside threescore thousand pezos of gold , every pezo being worth eight shillings sterling : and taking this ship with him he went from thence to another port called Coquimbo : The port ef where seeing many cattle on the land , he sent presently some of his men with calivers to kill of the said cattle : mi „ , but being espied of the Spaniards that dwelled in the town , they sent twelve horsemen to see what they were that killed their cattle , for they knew them not : and coming near unto them , the Englishmen fled to their boats , but the horsemen overtook one of them who had a halberd in his hand , whom the Spaniards thought to have taken : but he with his halberd killing one of their horses was himself run through with a lance , and so the Spaniards carried him dead with them into the town . The next day the news came to Sant Iago , that they were Englishmen , and how they had taken the ship out of the harbour of Valparizo : whereupon they of Sant Iago sent a Post by land to give warning unto them of Peru. Howbeit by reason that the country between this place and Peru is not inhabited for the space of two hundreth leagues , and many huge and cold mountains covered with snow lie in the way , the Post was so long in performance of this journey , that captain Drake was upon the coast of Peru a month before the said Post came thither : neither could they send any news by sea , because they were destitute of shipping . 
 Captain Drake departing from Coquimbo sailed to another port not inhabited , where he set up a pinnace . And going from thence , the next place where he touched was a port upon the coast of Peru called los Pescadores : LosPescadores . and there he landed , and in one of the fishermen's houses found of a Spaniards three thousand pezos of silver in little bars . Arica in 18 
 From hence he went to another port called Arica , which deg . 
 261 
 being the next town to Chili that the Spaniards have in all Peru , containeth and hundreth houses : and this is the port where they discharge their merchandise that pass from 
 Lima to Potossi , and to all other cities within the land , and likewise at this place they were wont to embark all the silver which they carried for Panama . At this port of Arica he found a ship that had in her thirteene thousand pezos of silver , which having taken out , he burned the said ship , and after thought to have landed , but seeing both horsemen and footmen on shore he would not , but proceeded on his voyage . Since captain Drake was at this port they carry their silver by land to Lima , and lade no more treasure here , but only discharge the merchant's goods that come from Spaine hither . Also they have built a fort at this place for the better safety of the inhabitants , and have planted it with ten pieces of Ordinance , and every summer there lie in garrison and hundred soldiers beside the townsmen . * From hence Chuli . he sailed to another port called Chuli : in which port was a ship that had three hundred thousand pezos of silver in bars : but they had sent horsemen from Arica to give advertizement of Drakes being on the coast , which news came but two hours to the town before his arrival at the said port : whereupon the Master of the ship having no leisure to carry his silver on shore , was forced to throw it into the sea in sixe fathom water , where his ship road , and so to run on shore in the ships boat . And captain Drake coming aboard the ship was told by and Indian , that the Master had thrown the silver overboard . Wherefore seeing that news began to run of him from town to town he stayed not here , but ran along the coast : and because he would have no lets , he cast off the ship which he had taken at Sant Iago , with never a man in her , which ship was never herd of after . And so without staying any where he shaped his course El Callao de for Lima , and coming to the harbour of Lima called £ » « < ? . pi Callao , being two leagues distant from Lima it self , ( for Lima stands up into the land ) he arrived there one 262 
 day , before the news of him was brought to Lima , and found the men in the ships without suspicion . And as he entered into the port , there came in also a ship from Panama laden with merchandise , and he sent his pinnace to take her : but the men forsaking the ship betook them to their boat , and went on shore : and as the Englishmen followed the boat , a Spaniard that was therein shot a piece , and slew one of captain Drakes men in the pinnace . Wherefore he followed the boat no farther , but went with his pinnace into the harbour among fourteene sail of ships that lay there , in all which ships there was not a man that had so much as a sword or a piece to molest him , wherefore he did with less fear go from ship to ship , asking them if there were any ships gone for Panama ; for he knew well , that the ships which go for Panama carry both silver & gold , neither sought he for any thing else , for there were marchan dize enough for him in those ships , if he had be desirous to have had the same . So they told him that three days passed there was a ship gone for Panama which carried all the merchant's silver thither . Whereupon he presently set sail towards Panama ; for when he came into this port it was about midnight , so that the Spaniards could not see what ships he had . At last the news came to Lima unto the Viceroy of Peru , that there were enemies in the harbour , but they knew not what they were . Wherefore the Viceroy & all the people were in great fear , lest some Spaniards had made a mutiny , and put themselves in arms : and so the next morning himself accompanied with 2000 horsemen & footmen came from the city down to the waters side , and finding some of the Englishmens arrows that were shot at the boat , out of which their man was slave , they knew them to be Englishmen : and then they were all in quiet , seeing it was but one ship , for as yet the ship lay becalmed 3 days before the town . Whereupon they forthwith provided 2 ships with 200 men in them , to board captain Drake or else to burn his ship ; and after the ships went 2 small pinnaces , because that if any of the 263 
 ships should be sunk , they might save the men . But it was a day & a half before these things could be made ready , & in the end going forth they found the English ship still becalmed , & the calm was such , that the Spaniards could not come at them . The same night , the wind blowing a fresh gale , the Spaniards returned into the harbour , and captain Drake set forward to Panama . The cause of the Spaniards return was , for that they had no Ordinance , nor victuals to tarry any longer out . Then the Viceroy caused sixe pieces of Ordinance to be made , neither could he make any more , in regard of the shortness of time : so with these Three ships pieces of Ordinance , and three ships , and two hundred sent after anj ££t men jn tjjgm he sent after captain Drake ; who captatne r . 
 Drake . after he had wind stayed no where , nor took any ships at all , notwithstanding he met with many coming from Panama laden with merchandise , but still he inquired after the ship that was gone to Panama before him : of A rich prize which ship he had sighed about the cape of Sant Francisco , EandsDrake Master whereof was a Biskaine , called Juan de Anton : at Cape S. wh° seeing this ship of the Englishmens , thought that 
 Francisco the Viceroy of Peru had sent him some message , and 
 situate one therefore struck all his sails : but so soon as he might ‘ north of that discern the ship somewhat better , he would then feign Equinoctial . have gone his waY > f°r he knew that it was none of that coast , and then he began to hoist his sails , but could by 
 no means get from Captain Drake because he was within the reach of his great Ordinance , for the Spaniards not having so much as a rapier to defend themselves , Read Nuno were soon constrained to yield . There were in this da Sylva con - ship above eight hundred and fifty thousand pezos ‘ treEureE of sdver , and forty thousand pezos of gold , all which silver and gold was customed ; but what store of treasure they had beside uncustomed I know not , for many times they carry almost as much more as they pay custom for ; otherwise the king would take it from them , if they should be known to have any great sum ; wherefore every ship carrieth his bill of custom , that the king may 264 
 see it . All this treasure that captain Drake took was merchant's and other men's goods , saving one hundred and eighty thousand pezos of the kings . He had also out of this ship good store of victuals with other necessaries , which were to be carried for Panama and was five days taking out of such things as he needed . This done , he sailed from hence to the coast of Nueva Espanna without going to Panama . Surely this was a great plague of God justly inflicted upon us for our sins : for the taking of these ships is and especial cause of all the dangerous wars that are likely to ensue between Spaine and England . 
 Now the ships that were sent by the Viceroy of Peru from Lima after Francis Drake , arrived at Cape Sant Francisco twenty days after he had taken the foresaid ship , and had intelligence by a ship coming from Panama , which they met at the said cape , that Francis Drake had taken the ship with silver , and was not gone for Panama . Whereupon the captain of the three ships thinking that captain Drake had be gone for the Straights of Magellan , directed his course that way to seek him . 
 Captain Drake carried from the coast of Peru eight hundreth sixty sixe thousand pezos of silver , which is as much as eight hundred sixty sixe quintals , at 100 pound weight the quintal , every quintal being worth one thousand and two hundreth ducats of Spaine ; all which sum amounteth to a million and thirtie nine thousand and two hundreth ducats . Beside this silver he carried away a hundred thousand pezos of gold , that is ten quintals , each quintal being valued at a thousand five hundreth Spanish ducats , which last sum amounteth to and hundreth and fifty thousand ducats : over and beside the treasure in the said ship which was uncustomed ( the valve whereof I cannot learn ) consisting of pearls , precious stones , reals of plate , and other things of great worth . 
 With all this purchase he sailed towards Nueva Espanna ; and at and Island lying before that coast 265 
 Pedro Sarmiento sent from Lima to the Streits of Magellan . 
 58 degrees of Southerly latitude discovered . 
 Many Islands discovered to the South of the Straights . 
 called The Island of Canon he discharged all things out of his ship and graved her , and remained there ten days . From thence he went along the coast of Nueva Espanna , where he took certain ships laden with spices , silks , and velvets , but no gold nor silver , for there was none to be had on this coast . And here at Guatulco he set on shore his Portugal-pilot , which he took at one of the Islands of Cape Verde . But what course he kept from this coast till he came into England I know not of certainty , and therefore I will not meddle therewithal ! . 
 The foresaid three ships which were sent in pursuit of captain Drake , returned back again to Lima without doing of ought . All which notwithstanding , the Viceroy of Peru determined to send two ships to the Straights of Magellan , either to meet with captain Drake there , or else to see if they could fortify the said Straights against such ships as might afterwards attempt to pass through the same . And albeit this was thought a most dangerous voyage , and impossible to be performed , by reason of the sholds on that side of the Straights , yet sent he forth the two said ships . The Admiral being a ship of and hundreth tons , and the other of eighty tons , & having one hundreth and twenty men in them both , sailed from Lima under the conduct of Pedro Sarmiento , who was then accounted the best navigator in all Peru. These ships after their departure touching on the coast to take in victuals , were nine months before they came to the latitude of the Straights , and there were they encountered with a cruel storm : but Pedro Sarmiento being a man of good courage , bore in with the land in this storm , & in a night he was put into the streits , not knowing how nor which way ; and the other ship running farther into the sea , sailed to 58 degrees of Southerly latitude . The storm being passed , this other ship found many Islands near unto the main land , and so returned with fair weather all along the shore , neither could they find any other way to enter the Straights , but only that 266 
 which Magellan discovered : notwithstanding that others affirm the contrary , saying that the Straights be full of Islands to the Southwards : but they may be deceived , for if there be any other Straight , it is beyond 58 degrees , and hath never be seen of any man : for this ship was farthest to the Southwards of all that ever I herd of : for Francis Drake being driven by tempest no farther then 57 degrees could not know so much as this other ; which ship from hence returned back to Lima. But Pedro Sarmiento entered the Straights , where his men fallen - 
 ing into a mutiny would have returned to Lima ; where - upon hanging one of them he proceeded on his voyage 
 for Spaine . Where being arrived , he told the king that e^ro Sarmi-there were two narrow places in the Straights where he ent^ter^d-might built a fort , and that there was a very good s^ine to for-countrey abounding with great store of riches and other tifie the necessaries , and very well inhabited with Indians . Upon Straights of whose words , and for that there were more ships making Magellan . ready in England to pass the said Straights , the king sent Diego Flores de Valdez with 23 ships and 3500 men , and a new governor to Chili with five hundred old soldiers newly come out of Flanders . These ships had the hardest hap of any that ever went out of Spaine since the Indias were first discovered : for that before they could get clear of the coast of Spaine , a storm took them , and cast away five of them , and above eight hundred men , and the residue of the fleet put into Cadiz . Notwithstanding which hard success , the king sent them word that they should proceed : and so they did with sixteene sails only , for two other of their ships were so shaken with the storm , that they could not go forth . In these sixteene sail of ships Pedro Sarmiento was sent to be governor in the Straights : he carried with him all kind of artificers , to built forts , and other necessaries , with great store of Ordinance and munition . 
 This fleet because it set late forth , wintered on the coast of Brasil in the river of Jenero . Winter being passed , they set sail from hence , and about the height 267 
 Two English ships under the conduct ofM . Fenton andM . Luke Ward . 
 of 42 degrees they had such a storm , that Diego Flores was feign to beat it up and down about 22 days ; in which storm was sunk one of his best ships , and in her three hundred men and twenty women that went to inhabit the straights , and most part of the munition that should have be left in the straights were all cast away . In the end the storm grew so intolerable , that the ships not being able to endure it any longer were constrained to put back again unto and Island called Santa Catelina : and there he found a bark wherein were certain friars going for the river of Plate , which friars told him of two great English ships and a pinnace that had taken them , but took nothing from them , nor did them any harm , but only asked them for the king of Spaines ships . Now Diego Flores supposing that these English ships would go to the straights , was himself determined to go to the straights also , though it was in the month of February ; and choosing tenne ships of the fifteene that were left , he sent three of the residue that were old and shaken with the storm ( wherein he put all the women and sick men that were in the fleet ) back again to the river of Jenero ; leaving the other two ships , which were not able to brook the sea , at the foresaid Island ; and so himself with the said ten ships returned again for the straights . 
 Now the three ships wherein the sick men and the women were embarked , came to the port of Sant Vincent : where finding the two foresaid English ships , and urging them to avoid the harbour , the English entered combat with them : and by reason that these three ships were weakened with former tempests , and were manned with the refuse of all the Spanish fleet , the Englishmen easily put them to the worst , and sunk one of them , and might also have sunk another , if they had be so minded ; but they desired not the destruction of any man : and doubtless it is the greatest valour that any man can show , that when he may do hurt , he will not . Hereupon the Englishmen departed from this port unto 268 
 Espirito Santo , where they had victuals for their mer - Espirito Santo . chandize : and so they returned home to England without doing any harm in the country . The cause why these English captains went not to the straights I know not : some say , that they were put back by foul weather , others suppose that it was for fear of the kings ships : but the pinnace that belonged to these ships wherein John Drake went as captain , departed from them : the cause why he did so , is unknown : but this pinnace John Drake . entered the river of Plate , and within five leagues of Seal-island , not far from the place where the Earl of Cumberlands ships took in fresh water , it was cast away upon a ledge of rocks ; but the men were all saved in the boat . Who being eighteene in number went on shore upon the Northside of the Island , and passing tenne days journey up into the land , they met with certain Salvage people , which are no man-eaters , but take all the Christians that they can get , and make them their slaves : howbeit the Englishmen fought with them , and being too few in number , five of them were slain , and the other thirteene taken prisoners , who remained with the Salvages about fifteene months . 
 But the Master of the pinnace called Richard Fair-weather , being loath any longer to induce that misery wherein he was , and having knowledge of a town of Christians on the other side of the river , called on a night John Drake , and another young man which was with them , and took a Canoa being very little , and having but two oars , and passed therewith on the other side of the river , which is full nine leagues broad ; and being three days before they could get over , they were much pined for lack of meat . But coming to land , they hit upon and high way that went towards the Christians : and spying the footing of horses , they followed it , and at last came to and house , near unto the which corn was sowed . And there they met with Indians that were servants to the Spaniards , who gave them food , and clothes to cover them withal , for they 
 269 
 The governor of Chili passes thither by the river of Plate : 
 were all naked . And one of the said Indians went to the town , and carried news of the Englishmen : whereupon the captain of the town sent out foure horsemen , which brought them to the town behind them , and the said captain clothed them , and provided lodging for them , and John Drake sat at the captains own table , and he entreated them all very well , thinking to send them for Spaine . But the Viceroy of Peru hearing this news sent for them , and they sent him John Drake ; but the other two they kept , because they were married in the country . Thus much concerning their affairs . Upon these news also there were prepared fifty horsemen to go over the river , both to seek the rest of the Englishmen , and certain Spaniardes which were among those Salvage people ; but I am not assured whither they went forward or no . 
 Now let us return to Diego Flores : who passing from the Island of Santa Catelina towards the straights of Magellan in the middle of February , and coming to the height of the river of Plate , sent the governor of Chili with three ships up the river to Buenos Airs , that he might from thence pass overland to Chili . Of these three ships two were lost , but the men and provisions were saved ; and the third returned for Spaine . Then Diego Flores with the other seven ships proceeded on to the latitude of 52. degrees , whereas the mouth of the Straights begins : but because it was the end of March , which there is the latter end of summer , the country was so full of snow , and withal there arose such a sudden storm , that he could not set Sarmiento and his men on shore , but was constrained the second time to return unto the river of Jenero upon the coast of Brasil ; where he herd news of the English ships by the two Spanish ships that escaped from them . Upon which news he left his lieutenant Diego de Ribera , and Pedro Sarmiento , that they might the next year return for the straights . And so Diego Flores himself with foure 
 » 70 
 ships which were yet remaining unto him , and other foure which the king sent to succour him , set forth to Foure ships seek the Englishmen ; but having run along all the m& . e se^t0 coast of Brasil he could not find them , because they °res ' were gone directly for England . Whereupon shaping his course unto a port called Parajua , and finding there French five French ships , he burned three and took two , and s&s ken at the tort also which the £ renchmen had built , and put Spaniardes therein , but the Frenchmen fled into the mountains to the Salvages . This done he returned for Spaine . 
 In the mean season his Lieutenant Diego de Ribera , and Pedro Sarmiento had the next year so good Fedr0 arm^-fortune , that they arrived safely in the straights with all their ships , and set on shore foure hundreth men : but Magellan because the ships boat could not land , being once with 400 men laden , they ran that ship , which had all the victuals 3° women . and munition in her , on shore in a bay , and as the water did ebb they took all things out of her . This being done , Diego de Ribera left Sarmiento with foure hundreth men , thirtie women , and a ship , with victuals for eight months : and with the other three ships he returned , having remained in the Straights but eight days . Now Pedro Sarmiento built a town Hombre de at the mouth of the Straights on the North side , placing Iesus therein and hundreth and fiftie men : and from thence he went by land , and sent the ship further into the straights , and fiftie leagues within the Straights , at the narrowest place of all , where there is a very good port , he built another town , which he nam The town Ciudad deal of king Philip ; and would also have made a fort , and planted Ordinance for the defence of the Straights : ’ 
 but the snow and Winter was so intolerable , that he could not bring it to perfection . Whereupon taking about 25 mariners with him into the foresaid ship , he said he would go see how his other people did , and so he sailed to the Straights mouth , unto the town which was first built ; where having continued a day 
 271 
 or two , he said that a storm put him from the Straights by force and brake his cables ; but his men affirmed the contrary , that himself cut his cables ( God knoweth the truth ) and so he passed to the river of Jenero ; and not finding there any succour come from the king , he sailed to Fernambuck , craving aid of the captain to furnish him with victuals . And so the captain presently freighted his ship with victuals and clothes for his people left in the Straights , and so sailed thitherward . But between Cape S. Augustin and Baya the wind came off the sea with such violence , that it forced the ship to run on shore ; where Sarmiento had three of his men drowned , and he with the rest hardly escaped : and so this ship was lost with all the provision in her . 
 From thence he passed by land to Baya where the governor of Brasil bought him a bark that lay in the harbour , lading the same with victuals and clothes for Sarmientos colony . With this provision and diverse other necessaries for his people he took his voyage for the Straights , and coming to the height of foure and forty degrees , he met on the sudden with such a furious storm , that he was forced to throw his fraught overboard , and also to return to the river of Jenero . Where staying a whole year for succour from the king , there came not so much as a letter from him . For the king was soar displeased at Pedro Sarmiento , because he made him believe that the narrowest place of the Straights was but a mile over : and that it might be fortified so that a boat could not pass : whereas Diego de Ribera , and others certified the king , that it was above a league broad , and that if a ship came with wind and current , all the Ordinance in the world could not hurt it . Wherefore the king thought that Pedro Sarmiento had deceived him , in making him to loose so many men , and so much charges to no effect . And the governor of Baya seeing that the king wrote not unto him , would give him no more succour : so that Sarmiento was constrained to make a voyage for Spaine 
 272 
 in the same ship , wherein he last sailed towards the Straights : and it is said that he was taken in the Sar-way by Englishmen , and carried into England . This Sarmiento hath carried the name to be the best Navigator wait ? Ra-in all Spaine , and that he hath sailed the furthest of leghs barks all others . After all this the captain of the river of is86-Jenero sent a small ship with victuals for the Straights , which was put back also in fortie degrees . And this is all the discovery of the Straights of Magellan , made as well by Spaniards as other nations unto this present year 1586. It is foure years since these poor and blaster Can-miserable Spaniards were left in the Straights , from which time there hath no succour gone unto them , so oftkem , 6 God he knoweth whither they be dead or alive . 
 Thus according to my promise I have declared unto you to the uttermost of my knowledge , all things concerning the Indias , as far as the very Straights of Magellan ; thinking to have proceeded along the coast , as at the first ; but that the doings of captain Drake and other captains which attempted to pass the said Straights have caused me to be the longer in this my pretended work . Howbeit now let us proceed on forward from the Straights to the coast of Chili : the distance between which two places no man hath traveled by land , in regard of the huge mountains covered with snow that lie in the way : yea I may well say , that it hath not often be traveled by sea ; for that all the ships which have passed that way have at the least gone thirty leagues off the shore , to avoid the sholds and many little Islands that lie near the main land ; and therefore the inland of that coast remains as yet unknown . 
 The first town after you have passed the Straights stands on the coast of Chili , and is called Castro , Castro upon being situate upon the worst place of all the coast , for there is but small store of gold with scarcity of victuals , * ’ and a sharp cold air . The harbour belonging to this town is compassed about with so many sholdes , 
 xi 273 s 
 that it will serve but to receive small barks only . Baldivia . The next town to this is Baldivia . 
 A description But before I pass any farther I will here describe ' ‘ chili’^^ unto you situati°n and quality of Chili . This ' country stretcheth in length from North to South above two hundreth leagues , containing in breadth but five and twenty leagues at the most . 
 From the great ridge of mountains lying to the East of Chili run very many rivers into the sea , which rivers are the cause of diverse valleys the fruitfullest in all the world , where bred , wine , and other victuals Rivers rich of mightily abound : and the said rivers also are very rich of gold . But to declare in few words the excellency of this province , I say that it might well be called and earthly paradise , save that it lacketh one only commodity , and that is peace . It was first discovered on this manner : the Spaniards having conquered the kingdom of Peru , ( as I will hereafter show unto you ) found in the said kingdom great store of gold ; and asking the Indians from whence it came , they answered , from Chili . Upon which news DONE Diego de Almagro being one of the principali captains that conquered Peru made a voyage with three hundreth horsemen towards Chili , being constrained in his way to go over part of the snowy mountains , which way his Indian guides conducted him , to the end that himself and all his company might die for cold . Howbeit the Spaniards , though they lost some of their horses , Copiapo the came to the first town of Chili called Copiapo being next town of situate upon the first plain at the entrance of the said Peru province . But having news that the Indians were risen against the Spaniards of Peru and had enclosed them , he returned back without going any farther . 
 Now this captain DONE Diego de Almagro being slain in the wars of Peru , another called DONE Pedro de Baldivia marching into Chili with foure hundreth horses , easily conquered that half of the country which was subject to the kings of Peru. For knowing that Peru , being the chief country of their Emperor , was over-274 
 I572-87-come by the Spaniards , they also immediately yielded their land unto them . But the other half as it was Bl esta^Q the richest and the fruitfullest part , so God had peopled Arauco-it with the most valiant and furious people in all America . 
 The province which they inhabit called El Estado de PJ1 - 797 - ] Arauco is but a small province about 20 leagues in ° length , and is governed by ten principali men of the country , out of which tenne they choose the valiantest man for the general in the wars . The kings of Peru in times past could never conquer this part of Chili , nor yet any other kings of the Indians . The weapons used by these people of Arauco are long pikes , halberds , bows and arrows : they also make them jacks of seal-skins , and headpieces : in times passed the heads of their halberds and pikes were of brass , but now they have got store of iron . They pitch their battles in manner like the Christians : for putting their pikemen in ranks , they place bowmen among them , and marshal their troops with discretion and great valour . Now the Spaniards coming unto this province sent word unto them by other Indians , saying that they were the children of God , and came to teach them the word of God , and that therefore they ought to yield themselves unto them : if not , they would shoot fire among them and burn them . These people not fearing the great words of the Spaniards , but desiring to see that which they had herd reported , met them in the field , and fought a most cruel battle : but by reason of the Spaniards great ordinance and calivers , they were in the end put to flight . Now these Indians thinking verily that the Spaniards were the children of God , because of their great ordinance which made such a noise , and breathed out such flames of fire , yielded themselves unto them . So the Spaniards having divided this province made the Indians to serve their turns for getting of gold out of the mines , which they enjoyed in such abundance , that he which had least had 20000 pezos , but Captain Baldivia himself had 300000 pezos 
 275 
 Villa neuva de la Serena , La Concepcion , Sant lag ) , La Imperial , Baldivia , La Villam rica , the first sixe towns that wereinhdbited in Chili . 
 A stratagem of the Indians of Chili against the Spaniards . 
 The death of Baldivia . 
 by the year . The fame of these riches in the end was spread as far as Spaine ; from whence soon after resorted many Spaniards to the land of Chili , whom Captain Baldivia caused to inhabit sixe towns : to wit , Villam nueva de la Serena called in the Indian tongue Coquimbo ; the second Sant Iago which the Indians call Mapocha ; the third La Concepcion called by the Indians Penco ; the fourth La Imperial ; the fift Baldivia ; and the sixt La Villam Rica . Also he built a fort in the middle of all the land , wherein he put ordinance and soldiers ; howbeit all this their good success continued not long : for the Indians in short time perceiving that the Spaniards were but mortali men as well as they , determined to rebel against them : wherefore the first thing that they did , they carried grass into the said fort for the Spaniards horses , and wood also for them to burn , among which grass the Indians conveyed bows and arrows with great clubs . This done , fiftie of the Indians entered the fort , betook themselves to their bows , arrows , and clubs , and stood in the gate of the said fort : from whence making a sign unto other of their nation for help , they won the fort , and slew all the Spaniards . The news of this overthrow coming to the town of Concepcion where Captain Baldivia was , he presently set forth with two hundred horsemen to seek the Indians , taking no more men with him , because he was in haste . And in a plain he met the Indians , who coming of purpose also to seek him , and compassing him about , slew most part of his company , the rest escaping by the swiftness of their horses : but Baldivia having his horse slain under him was taken alive . Whom the Indians wished to be of a good courage , and to fear nothing ; for the cause ( said they ) why we have taken you , is to give you gold enough . And having made a great banquet for him , the last service of all was a cup full of melted gold , which the Indians forced him to drink , saying , Now glut thy self with gold , and so they killed him . This Baldivia was a most valiant man , who had been and 276 
 old soldier in the wars of Italy , and at the sacking of Rome . 
 Upon this discomfiture the Spaniards choose for their Captain one Pedro de Villa grande : who assembling Pedro de all the Spaniards in Chili , and taking with him tenne S " ande-peeces of ordinance , marched against those Indians ; but with so bad success , that he lost not only the field and many of his men , but also those ten pieces of ordinance which he brought . The Indians having thus got the victory , went straightway against the town of Concepcion , from whence the Spaniards fled for fear , and left the town desolate . And in this manner were the 
 Spaniards chased by the Indians out of the country of Arauco . But news hereof being brought to the Marks of Cannete viceroy of Peru , he sent his sdnne DONE D°n Garda de Garcia de Mendoza against those Indians , with a great power of horsemen , and footmen , and store of Artillery . The nobleman having subdued Chili again , & slain in diverse battles above 40000 Indians , and brought them the second time under the Spaniards subjection , newly erected the said fort that stood in the midst of the land , 
 inhabited the town of Concepcion again , and built other towns for the Spaniards : and so leaving the land in peace , he returned for Peru. But year he was clean departed out of the land the Indians rebelled again , but could not do so much mischief as they did before , because the Spaniards took better heed unto them . From that time until this present there hath be no peace at all : for notwithstanding many Captains and soldiers have done their uttermost , yet can they not bring that people wholly in subjection . And although the Spaniards have in this province eleven towns and two bishoprics , yet have they little enough to maintain themselves , by reason of the wars ; for they spend all the gold that the land yields in the maintenance of their soldiers : which would not be so , if they had peace , for then they might work in all their mines . 
 Eleventowns , andtwobishop-ricks in Chili . 
 277 
 description Thus having spoken somewhat of the situation of ^ofChil^ ™ Chili , and of the troublesome conquest thereof , I will Baldivia . return to my former discourse where I left . Baldivia therefore being of 150 houses hath twice be burned and spoiled by the Indians ; so that now it is waxed poor , but before the Indians sacked it , it was very rich : and it stands up a river foure leagues from the Tie province sea . Passing from hence you come to the plain country insethe'* Arauco being situate over against the Island La Mocha , island La on wbich Island the Indians that inhabit belong to the Mocha situate main land . 
 in 38 deg . and Having passed this plain of Arauco , the next town 
 a hayi . of the Spaniards that you come unto is La Concepcion which hath been the greatest and the richest town in all Chui : but by reason that the Indians have burned the same foure times , it is now grown very poor , and hath small store of people : it containeth about some two hundred houses . And because it adjoineth upon the plain of Arauco , where these valiant Indians be , therefore this town is environed about with a strong wall , and hath a fort built hard by it : and here are 500 soldiers continually in garrison . Between this place Valparizo anJ Valparizo , the Indians call the coast by the name WortofS^Ia 0 Mapocha . Sant Iago it self standing 25 leagues up into the country , is the principali town of all Chili , deg . 40 min. and the seat of the governor : it consisteth of about 800 houses . The port of Valparizo whither the goods come from Lima by shipping , hath about twentie houses standing by it . The next town near the sea side Coquimbo beyond this is Coquimbo , which stands two leagues standethtm^ . Up jnto janj ; anj containeth about 200 houses . Next C%'iapo . mtn ' unt0 Coquimbo stands a port-town called Copiapo inhabited altogether by Indians which serve the Spaniards : and here a gentleman which is governor of the town hath and Ingenio for sugar : at this place endeth the whole province of Chili . Here also the mountains joining hard upon the sea are the cause why all the land between Copiapo and Peru , containing 160 leagues , lies desolate . 
 278 
 The first town on the coast of Peru called Atacama is A description inhabited by Indians which are slaves unto the Spaniards . °fPeru-But before I pass any farther I will here also declare unto you the first discovery of Peru with other matters thereto belonging , and then will I return to the seacoast again : and to the end you may understand me the better , I will begin with Panama . After that the Spaniards had inhabited the North side of this main land , passing over the mountains they discovered the South sea : where because they found Indian people with gold and pearls , they built a town eighteene leagues to the West of Number de Dios hard upon the seaside , and called it Panama . From hence they discovered along the coast of Nueva Espanna : and for that Nueva Espanna was at the same time inhabited by Spaniards , there began a trade from thence to Panama : but from Panama by sea to the coast of Peru they could not trade in a long time , because of the Southerly winds blowing on this coast almost all the year long , which are a hindrance to ships sailing that way : and by land the passage was impossible , in regard of mountains and rivers : yea it was fifteene years before they passed the Island of Pearls , which is but twentie leagues from Panama . There were at this time in Panama two men , the one called Francisco Pizarro born in the city of Truxillo in Spaine , a valiant man , but withal poor : the other called Diego de Almagro was very rich . These men god a company unto them , and provided two Caravels to discover the coast of Peru : and . having obtained licence of the governor of that place , Francisco Pizarro set forth with the two foresaid caravels and 100 men , and Diego de Almagro stayed in Panama to send him victuals and other necessaries . Now Francisco Pizarro sailing along the coast met with much contrary winds and rain , which put him to great trouble ; and he began also after a while to lack victuals , for he was sailing of that in eight months which they now pass in fifteene days , and not knowing the right course he ran into every river and bay that he saw along the coast : which 
 279 
 was the chief cause that he stayed so long on his voyage : also thirtie of his company died by reason of the unhealthfulness of the coast . At last he came to and Isla deal Gallo . Island called by him Isla deal Gallo , being situate from the main land sixe leagues . From hence he sent one of his ships to Panama for a new supply of victuals & of men : which ship being departed , 40 of his men that remained behind made a mutiny , and passed up into the country , meaning to return by land to Panama , but in the way they all perished , for they were never herd of until this day . So that Francisco Pizarro was left upon the said Island only with thirteene men : who although he had his ship there in which he might have returned , yet would he rather die then go back ; and his 13 men also were of his opinion , notwithstanding that they had no other victuals , but such as they had from the main land in the night season . Thus he continued nine months , before any succour was brought him from Panama : but in the end his ship returned with 40 men only and victuals : whereupon he prosecuted his voyage till he came to the first plain country of Peru called Tumbez , where he found a fort made by the king of Peru against the Indians of the mountains . Wherefore Pizarro and his men were very glad in that they had found a people of so good understanding and discretion , being rich also in gold and silver and well appareled . At this port of Tumbez he took 30000 pezos of gold in truck of merchandise : and having too few men to proceed any further he carried two Indians with him to learn the language and returned back for Panama . Upon this discovery Francisco Pizarro thought it expedient to travel into Spaine to crave of the king the conquest of this land . Whither being come , the king granted his request . And with the money which he carried over with him he hired a great number of men with a fleet of ships , and brought also along with him foure of his brothers very valiant and hardy men . And being come to Panama he straightway went on his voyage 
 280 
 for Peru , being accompanied with his partner Diego de Almagro . They sailed first to the Island called Isla deal Gallo ; where Francisco Pizarroand his brothers went on land , and left Diego de Almagro in the ships . And the whole number which afterwards landed on the main land were 60 horsemen and 120 footmen , with two great fieldpieces . 
 But before we proceed any farther , we think it not Tir river of amiss to describe unto you the situation of Peru , and the natural disposition of the inhabitants : This country was called Peru by the Spaniards , of a river so nam by the Indians , where they first came to the sighed of gold . From which river standing under the line , till you come to Copiapo the first town on the coast of Chili , stretcheth the land of Peru , for the space of eight hundred leagues : upon sixe hundred whereof from Atacama to Tumbez did never drop of rain fallen , since the flood of Noah : and yet it is the fruitfullest land for all kinds of victuals and other necessaries for the sustentation of men life that is to be found in all the world beside . The reason why it The cause why rains not in this land is because it being a plain coun - ^Mth not trey and very narrow and low , situate between the ' Equinoctial and the tropic of Capricorne , there runneth on the West frontier not above twentie leagues from the sea called Mar deal Sur Eastward thereof , a mighty ridge of high mountains covered with snow , the height of which mountains so draws the moisture of the clouds unto it self , that no rain falls upon the valleys of Peru. From these mountains issue great store of rivers into the South sea , with the waters whereof drawn by certain sluices and channels they moisten their vineyards and cornfields , and by this means the land is so exceeding fruitful . Between these mountains and the mountains of Chili that stretch unto the Streits of Magellan , lies a plain of 60 leagues over , being so cold that it yields no Wheat , but good store of other victuals . This country of Peru is full of people well appareled and of civil behaviour . It hath many mines 
 281 
 Gold , silver , of gold and more of silver , as also great store of copper , aft-peur^nd and tinne-mines , with abundance of salt peter , and of brimstone . brimstone to make gunpowder . There are likewise cattle The sheep of of all sorts , among which there is a beast in shape some-Peru called what resembling a camel , but no bigger then a steer of a Llamas . year old ; they serve to carry burdens , their flesh being good to eat , and their wool apt for many purposes . This beast is accounted the most profitable of all others for the use of man : howbeit the Spaniards since their first coming have replenished this country with horses , kine , sheep , and goats , and likewise with plenty of wheat . So that in few words this land hath abundance of riches and victuals , and is the healthfullest place in the world . There were in times passed kings of this land which were mighty Monarchs , whose dominions stretched 1200. leagues , and their laws were very civil , save that they were worshippers of the Sun . At what time the Spaniards first entered this land there were two brothers of Atabalipa and the blood royal which strove who should have the king-^rethren^com d°me > the one called Guascar , and the other Atabalipa . petitoursfor ' Now Guascar had possession of all the mountains and the empire of the lands within them : and Atabalipa was lord of all the Pen . sea coast , and of the valleys situate between the said mountains and the sea . The Indians seeing the Spaniards at the first arrive upon their shore called them Vera coach , which in their language signifies , The foam of the sea . Also Atabalipa the Indian prince sent unto them to know what they did in his land , and what they sought for : the Spaniards made answer that they were the messengers of a great lord , and that they came to speak with the prince himself : who sent them word that they should come with a very good will ; and so Atabalipa stayed for them at a city called Caxamalca , being thirtie leagues distant from the sea side . Whither being come , they found the Indian prince sitting in a chariot of gold , carried upon men's shoulders , and accompanied with above 60000 Indians all ready armed for the wars . Then the Spaniards told them that they were sent from and 282 
 Emperor ( unto whom the Pope had given all that land ) to convert them unto the Christian faith . Whereunto Atabalipa answered , that he would gladly be friends with the Emperor , because he was so great a Monarch , but in no case with the Pope , because he gave to another that which was none of his own . 
 A.D. 
 1572-87 . 
 Now while they were thus in talk , the Spaniards discharging their two field pieces , and their calivers , set upon the Indians , crying Sant Iago . The Indians hearing the noise of the ordinance and small shot , and seeing the fire , thought that flames of fire had be come down from heaven upon them : whereupon they fled , and left their prince as a booty for the Spaniards . Whom they at the first entreated very gently , wishing him not to fear , for that their coming was only to seek for gold and silver . During the time of Atabalipas imprisonment , his Captains had slain his brother Guascar , and had subdued 
 all the mountains and plain countries' . Upon which news Atabalipa told the Spaniards , that if they would release him , he would give them all that they should demand . This communication having continued a whole day , at length a soldier nam Soto said unto Atabalipa : what wilt thou give us to set thee free ? The prince answered , I will give whatsoever you will demand . Whereunto the soldier replied , thou shalt give us this house full of gold and silver thus high , lifting up his sword , and making a stroke upon the wall . And Atabalipa said , that if they would grant him respite to send into his kingdom , he would fulfil their demand . Whereat the Spaniards much marvelling , gave him three months time , but he had filled the house in two months and and half , a matter scarce credible , yet most true : for I know above twentie men that were there at that time , who all aflirme , that it was above tenne millions of gold and silver . Howbeit for all this they let not the prince go , but thought that in killing of him they should become lords of the whole land , and so the Spaniards on a night strangled him . But 283 
 God the righteous judge seeing this villainous act , suffered none of those Spaniards to die by the course of nature , but brought them to evil and shameful ends . 
 Upon the news of these great riches there came store of people out of Spaine , and inhabited many places in this country . The king in recompense of the good services of the two foresaid partners , appointed Diego de Almagro governor of half the land , and Francisco Pizarro of the other half , whom also he made a Marks . But these two consorts in parting of a land belonging unto other men , fell at variance and sharp war between themselves : and at length Pizarro having slain Almagro god all the land into his own hands . Howbeit this prosperity of Pizarro continued not long : for a bastard-sonne of Diego de Almagro , to be revenged of his father's death , slew Pizarro , for which act he lost his head . In this controversy between these two partners were slain also two brother's of Pizarro , and the third was carried prisoner into Spaine and there died in prison ; but the fourth called Gonsalvo Pizarro rebelled with the whole country and became a cruel tyrant , vanquishing many of the Emperors Captains in battle , and possessing the country in peace for two years : howbeit being in the end overcome he lost his head like a traitor . And thus died they all and evil death that were causes of the death of that innocent king Atabalipa . And yet there are mutinies raised oftentimes by the Spaniards , but the Indians never rebelled , after they had once peace granted unto them . The Indian people of this land are parted among the Spaniards , some being slaves unto the gentlemen that conquered their land , other some to others , and the residue to the king : and these Indians pay eke man for his tribute seven pezos of fine gold , which is about tenne ducats and a half . There are in this ricks^and’one country above fortie cities and towns inhabited by archbishopric Spaniards : also they have here erected nine bishopin Peru. ricks and one archbishopric . 
 284 
 Now after this country was fully conquered and brought in good order , certain Spaniards being desirous to discover the land on the other side of the snowy mountains , found a very wholesome country and there inhabited . The said province situate behind the mountains is called The province of Tucuman , wherein The province are five towns inhabited by the Spaniards , the last of °fTucuman-them called Cordova , from which town unto Santa Fee Cordova . situate upon the river of Plate it is seventie leagues . This town of Santa Fee was built in that place , to seek a way to Peru by the river of Plate . And from hence down the said river to Buenos Airs are 120 leagues , and from Buenos Airs unto Sealisland you have 40 leagues . 
 Now having put down all that I know concerning the country of Peru , and of the way from the river of Plate unto Tucuman , I will return unto Atacama the Atacama . Southermost town upon the coast of Peru , where I left . From this town of Atacama till you come to Arica , all the coast is inhabited by Indians subject unto the Spaniards . But since Captain Drake was here they have built towers by the sea side , whereon , seeing any sail that they do mistrust , they presently'make smokes , and so from tower to tower they warn all the country . Having before spoken of Arica all that I can , I will now proceed to the next port called Camana being a Camana . town of Spaniards and containing about two hundred houses . Here they make store of wine , and have abundance of figs and reisins . The next town called Acari Acari . containeth about three hundred houses , and here is made the best and greatest store of wine in all Peru. From hence passing along the coast you come to El Calao El Calao . the port of Lima consisting of about two hundred houses : and here was a strong fort built since Captain Drake was upon the coast . The city of Lima standing Lima. two leagues within the land , and containing two thousand houses , is very rich , and of more trade then all the cities of Peru beside : and this city is the seat of the viceroy , the archbishop , and the inquisition . 
 285 
 Paita . 
 Guaiaquil . 
 Tumbez . 
 Salsaperilla . Ships built at Guaiaquil . 
 Puerto Viejo a place where Emralds abound . 
 La Buenaventura . 
 La governacion de Popaian . 
 Negroes fled from their master's . 
 Panama . 
 Next unto this stands a small town of the Spaniards by the sea side called Santa : and next unto Santa is another small town of Christians called Cannete . From hence they sail unto a rich city called Truxillo , being one of the principali towns of Peru , and containing about five hundred houses . Then follows Paita which hath to the number of two hundred houses . Leaving this town they pass to Guaiaquil which stands fortie leagues up into a great bay or river , at the entrance of which river stands Tumbez a town of the Indians . All this coast along from Atacama to Tumbez it never rains , as I have before said : so that all the houses in their towns are not tiled , but covered with bourds to keep off the heat of the Sun , for they fear no rain at all . Guaiaquil is the first place where it rains , and here they gather Salsaperilla ; Here is also great store of timber , and at this place they built many ships . Hence they sail along the coast to a small and poor town called Puerto Viejo , which in times passed hath be rich with emralds : but now since these stones in regard of their plenty are grown nothing worth , this town likewise is waxed very poor . Below this village stands another called La Buena Ventura : but whosoever go thither must needs meet with evil fortune , the place it self is so waterish and unwholesome . Here abide not above 20 men , who serve only to transport goods unto a city standing fiftie leagues within the main , in a province called La governacion de Popaian . From Buena ventura and Popaian till you come to Panama there is no other town , by reason of the high mountains , the manifold rivers , and the unholesomenesse of the country . In this place do inhabit the Negroes that run from their master's , and upon these mountains was Oxnam the English Captain and his men taken , as is before mentioned . Beyond these mountains stands the city of Panama , being a rich place , by reason that all the treasure which comes from Peru 
 286 
 is brought thither , and it consisteth of about foure hundred houses . The coast running along between this city and Nueva Espanna is called Costa rica . Costa rica . 
 Next unto Costa rica , which is a mountainous and The province desolate place , lies the coast of Nicaragua , being inhabited by the Spaniards , and having many good ports belonging to it , and is frequented with trade of merchandise ; but having no knowledge of the situation thereof , nor of the towns therein contained , I surcease to speak any more of it . 
 A certain viceroy of Nueva Espanna called DONE Luis de Velasco caused certain ships to be built for the discovery of the Malucos and of the coast of China : which ships in sailing thitherward found certain The discovery Islands 80 leagues distant from the main land , which PMip-the Spaniards , according to the name of their king , called * mass ' The Philippinas : and having conquered one of these Islands called Manilla , inhabited with a barbarous kind The Isle of of people , they built a fort and a town thereupon , Manilla . from whence they have trade with the people of China . 
 Unto these Islands they have foure great ships that usually trade , two of them continually going , and two coming : so that such spices and silks as the Portugals bring home out of the East Indies , the very same do the Spaniards bring from these Islands and from China , for Mexico the chief city of Nueva Espanna . The principali port-towns of the coast of Nueva Espanna are Guatulco , and Acapulco . 
 All the viceroys and governors that the king of Spaine sends for Peru and Nueva Espanna have a custom , for the obtaining of his favour , to seek and discover new countries' . But the greatest and most notable discovery that hath be from those parts now of late , was that of the Isles of Salomon , which were The discovery found in manner following . The Licenciate Castro being governor of Peru sent forth a fleet of ships to ’ discover certain Islands in the South sea upon the coast of Peru , appointing as general of the same fleet 
 287 
 a kinsman of his called Alvares de Mendanio , and Pedro Sarmiento as lieutenant , and in the Viceadmiral went Pedro the Ortega . This fleet departing forth of the haven of Lima , and sailing 800 leagues Westward ofF the coast of Peru , found certain Islands in eleven degrees to the South of the Equinoctial inhabited with a kind of people of a yellowish complexion , and all naked , whose weapons are bows and arrows , and darts . The beasts that they saw here were hogs and little dogs , and they found some hens . Here also they Ckmes^ing / ir , found a muster of cloves , ginger , and cinnamon , although andsinamon . the cinnamon Were not of the best ; and here appeared unto them likewise some show of gold . The first Island that the Spaniards discovered , they nam Santa Izabella ; and here they built a small pinnace , with the which and with their ships boat they found out between nine and fifteene degrees of Southerly latitude eleven great Islands being one with another of 80 leagues in compass . The greatest Island that they discovered The Isle of was according unto the first finder called Guadalcanal , Guadalcanal . on t^e coast whereof they sailed 150 leagues , before they could know whither it were and Island or part of the main land : and yet they know not perfectly what to make of it , but think that it may be part of that continent which stretcheth to the Straights of Magellan ; for they coasted it to eighteene degrees and could not find the end thereof . The gold that they found was upon this Island or main land of Guadalcanal , whereas they landed and took a town , finding small grains of gold hanged up in the houses thereof . But because the Spaniards understood not the language of the country , and also for that the Indians were very stout men , and fought continually against them , they could never learn from whence that gold came , nor yet what store was in the land . 
 These Indians use to go to sea in great Canoas that will carry 100 men a piece , wherein they have many conflicts one against another : howbeit unto the Christians 288 
 they could do no great hurt ; for that with a small pinnace and two falcons a few may overcome 100 of them . At this place foureteene men mistrusting nothing , rowed to land , to take in fresh water , whom on the sudden certain Indians in foure Canoas set upon , took the ships boat , and slew all the men therein : wherefore a man cannot go on shore too strong , nor yet be too wary in a strange land . Hereupon the Spaniards went on shore in their pinnace , and burned the town , A town burned . and in this town they found the small grains of gold before mentioned . They were discovering of these Islands from one to another about foureteene months , at the end of which time ( because that upon the coast where they were , the wind continuing still in one place , might be and occasion of longer tarrying ) they consulted which way to return . Southward they durst not go for fear of great tempests which are that way usual : wherefore sailing to the North of the line , they fell with the coast of Nueva Espanna ; on which coast they met with such terrible storms , that they were forced to cut their main masts over-bourd , and to lie nine months beating it up and down in the sea , before they could get into any harbour of the Christians . In which time by reason of evil government , and for lack of victuals and fresh water , most of the men in their Admiral died ; for five whole days together they had neither water nor meat : but in the other ships they behaved themselves so well , that the greater part of them came safe unto the land . He that passes the Straights of Magellan , or saileth from the coast of Chili directly for the Malucos must needs run in sighed of some of these Islands before spoken of . At which Islands lying so furnish _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ hens , excellent almonds , potatos , sugar-canes , with diverse other sorts fit for the sustenance of man in great abundance . Also among these Islands you shall have some quantity of gold , which the Indians will give you in truck for 
 xi 289 TO 
 Abundance of good victuals upon the Isles of Salomon . 
 conveniently in the way to the Malucos you may your self with plenty of victuals , as hogs , 
 A.D. 1572-87 . A new rich trade for gold , cloves , ganger , and cinnamon . 
 Why these Isles were called The Isles of Salomon . 
 other commodities . For the Spaniards in their discovery of these Islands not seeking nor being desirous of gold , brought home notwithstanding 40000 pezos with them , beside great store of cloves and ginger , and some cinnamon also which is not so good as in other places . The discoverer of these Islands nam them the Isles of Salomon , to the end that the Spaniards supposing them to be those Isles from whence Salomon fetched gold to adorn the temple at Jerusalem , might be the more desirous to go and inhabit the same . Now the same time when they thought to have sent colonies unto these Islands , Captain Drake entered the South sea : whereupon commandment was given , that they should not be inhabited , to the end that such Englishmen , and of other nations as passed the Straights of Magellan to go to the Malucos might have no succour there , but such as they god of the Indian people . 
 . 