A petition made by certain of the company of the Delight of Bristol unto the Master of the said ship Robert Burnet , one of the consorts of M. Chidley , being in the Straights of Magellan the 12. of February 1589. 
 E have thought good to show unto you ( being our Master ) our whole minds and griefs in writing : that whereas our Captain Matthew Hawlse , and Walter Street do begin to take into the Captains cabin this 12. of Febr. both bred and butter , ( such as was put in 
 for the provision of the ship and company ) only to feed themselves , and a few others , which are of their mess : meaning thereby rather to starve us , then to keep us strong and in health : And likewise upon the same , he hath taken into his cabin certain furniture , as swords , calivers , and musquets : We therefore not well knowing their intents herein , except by certain words cast out unwares , we may conjecture , ,that your death , which God forbid , by them hath be determined : do all most humbly desire you being our Master , and having charge of the ship , and us , this present voyage committed unto you , to consider : First , that by Gods visitation we have lost 16. men , and that so much the rather because they were not allotted such necessary provision , as was in the ship to be had . Also to consider the great loss of 15. of our men with our , boat at Penguin-yland within the Straights of Magellan : and of 7. good and serviceable men beside near Port famine : and of three anchors , and our Carpenter . Over and beside all these calamities to consider how you have ( without all reason and conscience ) be overthwarted , disgraced , and outcountenanced by your mate Street , and Matthew Hawlse : Also what danger you now are subject unto , your death having be so often 
 XI 
 385 
 2 B 
 conspired , and what danger we should be in , if it were ( which God forbid ) effected . Furthermore , to weigh with your self the great want of many necessaries in our ship : namely that we have but 6. sailors , ( beside your self and your mate Street , whom we dare not trust , ) Also that we have but one anchor , likewise the lack of our boat and a Carpenter , of ropes , of pitch , [ III . 84.1 . ] treynailes , bolts , and planks , and the want of a skilful 
 Chirurgeon . And whereas a view being taken of our provision there was found but five months victuals of bred , meal , greets , and peas , and also but three months victuals of beef , penguins and pork , three hogsheads of wine , ten gallons of aquavitae ( whereof the sick men could not get any to relieve them , ) foure hogsheads of syder and 18. flitches of bacon , etc. the company hath but three flitches . Also the said Captain Hawlse and Street have taken and seized upon 17. pots of butter , with certain cheese , and and hogshead of bred at a time , and have be thereof possessed to their own private uses : And have not only immoderately spent the companies provision in butter , cheese , aquavitae , etc. but have also consumed those sweet meats , which were laid up in the ship only for the relief of sick persons ( themselves being healthy and found , and withholding the said meats from others in their sickness ) and even at this time also ( by reason of the small store of our provision , we being inforced to come to a shorter allowance ) they thee said Captain Hawlse and your mate Street , do find themselves aggrieved at the very same allowance , wherewith other men are well contented . And although ( beside our ordinary allowance , and more then all the rest of the company ) they only have their breakfasts permitted unto them , yet they complain that the company goes about to famish them , whereas indeed they do what lies in them to famish the company by feeding themselves fat , which do not labour at all . These things being well weighed , you ought likewise to consider the 
 386 
 long time that we have lain here in these Straights of Magellan , having be at , and seven or eight times , tenne leagues beyond Cape Froward , we have had but a small gale of wind with us : neither could we come to and anchor , the water being so deep : and ( you know ) the place is so dangerous , that we were once embayed , and could scarce get out again : And likewise , What fogs and mists are here already ? Much more here will be , the winter and dark nights being at hand , & we having not so much as a boat to seek out any road to ride in , saving a small weak boat made of men's chests , in which it is not convenient to go on shore in a foreign country , where we must go with force : and having but one anchor left us , there is but little hope of life in us , as you may sufficiently judge , if we should loose either the said anchor or our boat , and therefore we dare not put the same in danger for fear of losing them . Also we having lain here these sixe weeks and upward , the wind hath continued in the Northwest directly against our course , so that we can no way hope to get through the Straights into the South sea this year , and if we could , yet our provision is not sufficient , having spent so much thereof , in this our lingering abode . Nay we have scarcely victuals enough to carry us home into England , if they be not used sparingly , and with very good government . Therefore we do again most humbly desire you to consider and have regard unto the premises , as you tender your own safety and the safety of us which remain alive , that we may ( by Gods help ) return back into England , rather then die here among wild and savage people : for if we make any longer abided in this place , it will be ( without all doubt ) to the utter decay and loss , both of our selves , and of the ship : and in returning back , it may please God , that we may find our fifteene men , and our boat at Penguin-yland ( although this be contrary to the minds of Matthew Hawlse , and your mate Street ) and having 
 387 
 found them , we do not despair in Gods mercy , but that in our return homeward , he will send us purchase sufficient , if we would join our selves together in prayer , and love one another . And thus doing ( as we shall bound ) even so we will also heartily pray for the continuance of your good estate , and welfare , and for the length of your days , to the pleasure of Almighty God . 
 Lastly , we do most humbly beseech you to consider , that ( after the loss of so many men and all the casualties aforesaid , as we were taking in of water by Port Famine , our boatswain , the hooper , and William Magoths being on shore ) Matthew Hawlse did hallow to have them in all the haste come on-bord : saying therewithal ! these words : He that will come in this voyage , must not make any reckoning to leave two or three men on shore behind him , whereas we had so lately lost all the foresaid men , having then but sixe sailors left us on-bord . Also the said Matthew Hawlse did carry a pistol for the space of two days secretly under his gown , intending therewithal ! to have murdered Andrew Stoning , and William Combe , as by confession of Hawlse his man , William Martin , it is manifest : for the said William Martine reported unto two of his friends , viz. Richard Hungate , and Emanuel Dornel , that he kneeled upon his knees one whole hour before Matthew Hawlse in his own cabin , desiring him , for Gods cause , not to kill either of them , especially because the said Stoning and Martin came both out of one town . Also the said Hawlse , at our second time of watering in the place aforesaid , came into the Gunners room to speak with you ( your self with the master Gunner Thomas brown , and his mate William Frier being then present ) demanding of you , if he should send certain men to Port famine being two leagues from the ship by land . Thomas Browne answered him presently , that he should send none , for fear least the wind might arise , and by that means we should lose 
 388 
 so many of our men more : to whom Matthew Hawlse replied that it was not material , for that he had made choice of a company for the very same purpose , whose names were Emmanuel Dornel , Richard Hungate , Paul Carry , John Davis , Gabriel Valerosa , a Portugall , and Peter a Britaine , and the Spaniard which we had taken in at the same place , at our first time of watering . And thus we end , desiring God to send us well into our native country . In witness whereof we have 
 subscribed our names . 
 Thomas brown , Gunner , 
 John Morrice , etc. 
 . 