Certain rare and special notes most properly belonging to the voyage of M. Thomas Can dish next before described ; concerning the heights , soundings , lyings of lands , distances of places , the variation of the Compass , the just length of time spent in sailing between diverse places , and their abided in them , as also the places of their harbour and anckering , and the depths of the same , with the observation of the winds on several coasts : Written 
 by M. Thomas Fuller of Ipswich , who was Master in the desire 
 of M. Thomas Candish in his foresaid prosperous voyage about the world . 
 A note of the heights of certain places on the coast of Barbarie . 
 Nprimis Cape Cantin stands in the latitude of 
 Item the island of Mogador stands in 
 Item Cape d’oro stands in 
 Item the islands of the Canaries about 
 Item Cape Bojador stands in Item Cape Verde stands in Item the Cape of Sierra Liona in Item and island called Ilha Verde in 348 
 32. degr . 4. min. 
 31. degr . 30. min. 
 30. degr . 20. min. 
 28. degr . 
 27. degr . 30. min. 
 14. degr . 30. min. 
 8. degr . 
 7. degr . 30. min. 
 A note of the heights of certain places from the coast of Brasill to the South sea . 
 INprimis Cape Frio stands in the latitude of 
 Item the island of S. Sebastian in 
 Item Port desire stands in 
 Item Seals bay stands in 
 Item Port S. Julian stands in 
 Item The white river stands in 
 Item Cape Joy stands in 
 Item Port famine within the Straights of Magellan stands in 
 Item Cape froward within the Straights of Magellan stands in 
 Item . Cape desire in the entering into the South sea stands in 
 23. degr . 30. min. 
 24. degr . 
 47. degr . 50. min. 
 48. degr . 20. min. 
 50. degr . 
 50. degr . 30. min. 
 52. degr . 40. min. 
 53. degr . 50. min. 
 54. degr . 15. min. 
 53. degr . 10. min. 
 A note of the heights of certain places on the coast of Chili and Peru in the South sea . 
 INprimis the island of Mocha stands in the latitude of 
 Item the island of S. Marry in 
 Item the bay of * Valpares in 
 Item the bay of Quintero in 
 Item Coquimbo in 
 Item Morro moreno in 
 Item Arica stands in 
 Item the bay of Pisca stands in 
 Item the bay of Lima stands in 
 Item Santos stands in 
 Item the bay of Cherrepe in 
 Item the bay of Paita , in 
 Item the island of Puna , in 
 Item Cape Sant Francisco to the North of the Equinoctial , in 
 349 
 38. degr . 30. min. 
 37. degr . 15. min. 
 33. degr . 40. min. * ra^arizo . 
 33. degr . 20. min. 
 29. degr . 30. min. 
 23. degr . 20. min. 
 18. degr . 30. min. 
 13. degr . 30. min. 
 11. degr . 50. min. 
 9 degr . 20. min. 
 6. degr . 30. min. 
 5. degr . 4. min. 
 2. degr . 50. min. 
 I . degr 
 A note of the height of certain places to the Northwards of the Equinoctial line , on the coast of New Spaine . 
 * Or , Guatuko . 
 * Las tres Marias . 
 Or Panama . 
 INprimis Panama stands in the latitude of 
 Item the island called Isla de Canoas , in 
 Item Cape Blanco , in 
 Item Rio Lexo , in 
 Item * Aguatulco , in 
 Item Acapulco , in 
 Item Sant Iago , in 
 Item Cape de los Corrientes , in 
 Item the bay of Xalisco , in 
 Item the islands of the * Mary's , in Item the island of Saint Andrew , in Item the islands of Ciametlan , in Item , that the Cape of Santa Clara on the point of California is in 
 9. degrees . 
 9. degr . 10. min. 
 10. degr . 10. min. 
 12. degr . 40. min. 
 15. degr . 50. min. 
 17. degr . 20. min. 
 18. degr . 50. min. 
 20. degr . 30. min. 
 21. degr . 30. min. 
 21. degr . 20. min. 
 22. degr . 
 23. degr . 40. min. 
 23. degrees . 
 A note of the heights of certain places beginning from the islands of the Ladrones and passing by the Philippinas , the Malucos , Java minor , Java major , the Cape of Bona Speranza , and the isle of Santa Helena . 
 INprim . one of the islands of the Ladrones called Guana stands in 
 Item Cape De Spirito Santo on the isle of Luzon stands in 
 Item the island of Capul in 
 Item that the island of Seboyon stands in 
 Item that the Easterly end of the island of * Pannay is in 
 Item that the opening between the South head of Pannay and the South head of Isla de los Negroes is in 35° 
 13. degr . 50. min. 
 13. degr . 
 12. degr . 30. min. 
 12. degr . 
 11. degr . 
 10. degr . 10. min. 
 Item that the Southhead of Isla de los Negroes is in 
 Item that the Northhead of the island Mindanao is in 
 Item the Southhead of Mindanao called Cape Cannel is in 
 Item the Cape of Batochina is in * Item that 12. small islands stand in Item the latitude of two other islands is in 
 Item the Westerly head of Java minor is towards the South in 
 Item the Easterly head of Java major is towards the South in 
 Item Malaca stands to the Northward in 
 Item Cape Falso on the promontory of Africa , stands in 
 Item the Cape of Bona Speranza stands in 
 Item the island of Santa Helena stands in 
 Item the Cape of S. Augustine stands Southward in 
 NOTES a.d. 
 1588. 
 9. degr . 10. min. 
 7. degr . 50. min. 
 6. degr . 40. min. 
 10. min. 
 3. degr . To the South - 
 wards of the j „ • Line . 
 4. degr . 10. min. 
 8. degr . 30. min. 
 8. degr . 20. min. 
 2. degr . 
 34. degr . 20. min. 
 34. degr . 40. min. 
 15. degr . 40. min. 
 8. degr . 40. min. 
 Soundings on the coast of Barbarie from Rio del Oro unto Cape Blanco . 
 Nprimis about 3. leagues off Rio del Oro you shall have very fair shoulding , fine white sand 18. fathoms , and so alongst unto Cape Blanco two or three leagues off the shore you shall have 18. and 20. fathoms . And when you come within one league of the Cape you shall have 
 twelve or thirteene fathoms , brown sand , very fair shoulding . And if you will hall in with Cape Blanco , beware you come not within seven or eight fathoms of the Cape : for there lies a sand off the Cape . 
 351 
 Also about 7. or eight leagues off the Cape lies a long should next hand Southwest and by South off the Cape . 
 Soundings on the coast of Guiny . 
 I Tern , Going unto Sierra Leona , having the cape Eastnortheast off you , 7. leagues off , you shall have 22 fathom brown sand . And hailing in you shall find very fair shoalding . You may be bold to borrow on the Southermost shore : but take heed of a rock that lies in the fair way a good birth off the shore , but there is no fear of it : for it lies above the water , and is distant two miles off the South shore . 
 Item , You may be bold to borrow hard by the rock ; for on the North side going in there lies one long sand which runneth Southeast and Northwest , and lies distant from the South shore 2 leagues . And you shall anchor in 14 or 15 fathoms hard by the shore . 
 Also going unto the island called Illha Verde , the which island lies 10 leagues to the Southward of Sierra Leona , the course is Southsouthwest , and Northnortheast : and you shall have between them 9 or 10 fathom . And if you will anchor at the said island , you shall have 5 or 6 fathom hard by the shore . 
 Also you must have especial care of a great current that sets alongst the coast of Guiny to the Eastward . 
 Item , And if you be bound unto the Southwards , you must go Westsouth west off , for fear of thee shoaled that is called Madera Bomba , the which shoaled is to the Southwards of the island . 
 Soundings on the coast of Brasil . 
 I Tern , Unto the Northwards of Cape Frio , the cape bearing southwest off you , about 17 or 18 leagues off , you shall have 45 fathoms streamy ground : and running Southwest , you shall find 32 fathoms black sand : and then running Westsouthwest into a deep bay , which lies tenne leagues to the Northwards of the 352 
 cape , you shall have 22 fathoms oaze : that depth you shall have all alongst , except you be far into the bay ; and then you shall have 16 fathoms all oazy . 
 Item , To the Northwards of Cape Frio , about 6 or 7 leagues , you shall have many small islands . 
 Item , To the Northwards of the cape 6. leagues , you shall have two small islands one mile distant the one from the other , and they are distant from the main five leagues . And between those lands and the cape you shall have very many islands hard aboard the main . 
 Item , The cape bearing West of you two leagues ofF , you shall have 55 fathoms oaze . Also you shall know when you are shot about the cape unto the Southwards , by deeping of the water . 
 Also if you will go for S. Sebastian from the cape , you must go West and South , and Westsouthwest among . And the distance from the cape unto S. Sebastian is 50 leagues . And being shot into the bay any thing never the shore , you shall have 24 fathoms all oazy . 
 And hailing in for S. Sebastian , you shall know it by two little islands which be round : and those lands lie from the Hand of S. Sebastian next hand East and by South ; and are distant the one from the other about foure leagues . 
 Also off the Southermost end of S. Sebastian , there lies one island about 6 leagues ofF ; which island is called the Alcatrarza , and there lie foure little lands about it . Also you may know it by the trending of the land unto the Southwards . 
 Item , If you will go in at the Northermost end of S. Sebastian , you must take heed of a sand that lies on the Northeast part of the island : but you may be bold to borrow on the island : for the sand lies ofF the main side . Also you may anchor on the Northermost part of the island in tenne fathoms ; and the main is distant from you where you shall ride two leagues ofF . 
 xi 353 z 
 Item , If you will come in at the Southermost end of the island of S. Sebastian , your course from the Alcatrarza is Southwest & Northeast , and their distance is 6 leagues the one from the other . 
 Item , Unto the Southwards of the river of Plate , being in the latitude of 45 degrees and 60 leagues off the main , you shall have shoalding in 60 fathoms or 65 fathoms oazy sand : and then hailing in for the shore Westsouthwest 16 leagues , you shall have 50 fathoms oaze , and you shall have fair shoalding all along . 
 Item , In the latitude of 47J you shall see about one mile in length , not passing one league off the shore , a ledge of broken ground , but no danger . Also you shall have very fair shoalding all along the coast ; and the land lying South and North until you come unto port Desire , which stands in 48 degrees . 
 Item , If you will go into port Desire , on the North side there lies one ledge of rocks about a league distant from the shore . Also on the North side at the mouth of the harbour , there lie a couple of rocks , which are at half flood under water : but be bold to borrow on the Southermost shore ; for there is no danger ; and you shall have no less then 6 fathoms water at a low water , the harbour lying East and West . Also you may know the harbour by one little island that lies Southeast off the mouth of the harbour , and it is distant 4 leagues . Furthermore , you may know the harbour by and high rock that stands on the South side ; and this rock is very much like a watch tower . Also if you be any thing in , you may anchor in 5 fathoms at a low water . 
 Item , It flows there South and North , and higheth at spring tides 3 fathoms and and half water ; and in the offing the flood sets to the Northward . 
 Item , In the latitude of 48 degrees 50 minutes you shall have 44 fathoms black sand about 5 leagues off : and about 3 leagues off you shall have 25 fathoms , and great shingle stones . 
 354 
 Item , In the latitude of 49 degrees you shall have sounding in 38 fathoms oazy sand . 
 Item , In the latitude of 51 degrees 10 minutes you shall have soundings 4 leagues from the shore in 44 fathoms small black stones . 
 Soundings within the entrance of the Straights . ITem , About two leagues from the Northermost shore you shall have 38 fathoms black sand , and all along you shall have deep water , not less then 18 or 20 fathoms in the fair way . 
 Soundings on the coast of Chili in the South sea . 
 ITem , In the latitude of 36 degrees you shall have soundings in 12 fathoms , 2 miles from the land , brown sand . 
 Item , In the latitude of 35 degrees , you shall have soundings one league ofF from the land in 10 fathoms white sand . 
 Soundings on the coast of New Spaine in the South sea . 
 ITem , In the latitude of 14 degrees to the North of the line , you shall have soundings 4 leagues from the land in 30 fathoms , brown sand . 
 Item , From the latitude of 14 degrees unto the latitude of 15 degrees , you shall have fair shoalding 3 leagues from the land . 
 Soundings on the coast of Africa unto the Eastward of the cape of Buena Esperanza 40 leagues . 
 ITem , To the Eastwards of the cape of Buena Esperanza 40 leagues , in the latitude of 34 degrees and 10 minutes , 8 leagues from the land , you shall have 65 fathom , and brown sand . 
 [ A note 
 355 
 A note of the lying of the land unto the Southward of Port Desire . 
 N primis , Seals bay stands unto the Southwards of Port Desire 12 leagues Southsouthwest . Furthermore , unto the Southwards of Seales bay 3 leagues , you shall have very low land . Also more unto the Southwards of Seales bay 7 leagues , in the height of 48 degrees 
 40 minutes , you shall see a rock 5 leagues ofF the shore , the land lying Southwest and by South . 
 Item , In the latitude of 49 degrees you shall see a small flat Island , about a league and and half ofF the shore , the land lying Southwest and by South . Furthermore , from the latitude of 49 degrees J unto the latitude of 50 degrees , the land lies South and by West , and is high land . 
 Item , From the latitude of 50 degrees unto the latitude of 50 degrees 40 minutes , the land lies Southwest and by South . Furthermore , from the latitude of 50 degrees 40 minutes unto the latitude of 52 degrees 17 minutes , the land lies South and by West , North and by East . 
 Item , In the said latitude of 52 degrees 17 minutes , there goes in and harbour , which is to be known by a long beache that lies on the South side of the harbour . Moreover , the said harbour stands 12 leagues unto the Northwards of Cape Joy . Furthermore , from the latitude of 52 degrees 17 minutes unto the latitude of 52 degrees 40 minutes ( in which heighth stands Cape Joy ) the land lies Southsoutheast , and N orthnorthwest . 
 Item , Coming from the Northwards , you shall see before you come to Cape Joy , a very long beach , about the length of 8 leagues , being 5 leagues short of the cape unto the Northwards . Also unto the Southwards of the cape , you shall see another beach about a league 356 
 long , adjoining hard under the cape ; about which beach is the entrance of the Straights of Magellan , the which Straights are in breadth sixe leagues over , from the cape unto the South shore , lying South and by East . 
 Item , From Cape Joy , being the entrance of the straight of Magellan , unto the first narrow passage of the said straight ; the course is West and by North , and East and by South , and are distant 18 leagues ; the land being in breadth from the one side to the other one league . 
 Item , From the first narrow unto the second narrow passage , the course is West & by South , and East and by North ; and the distance is 12 leagues : and in breadth the one side is from the other about two leagues over . 
 Item , from the second narrow unto the islands that be called Elizabeth , Bartholomew , and Penguin lands , the distance is 5 leagues , and the course is Southwest and Northeast : the islands being distant a league and and half the one from the other . 
 Item , From the said lands unto Port Famine is 16 leagues : the course is Southsouthwest , and Northnortheast . Moreover , from Port Famine unto Cape Froward , the course is South and by West , and North and by East : and they are distant 8 leagues asunder . 
 Item , From Cape Froward unto S. Jeromes river , is 16 leagues : the course is Northwest and Southeast . Also from S. Jeromes river unto the uttermost land on the South side , the which is called Cabo Deseado , the course is Northwest & somewhat to the Northward , and are distant 30 leagues . So the whole length of the straight of Magellan is 105 leagues . 
 The entrance of the straight . 
 The end of the straight . 
 A note of the lying of the lands in the South sea . 
 IN primis , There stand in the latitude of 52 degrees and 50 minutes , three or foure lands , about 8 leagues from Cabo Deseado : the course is Northnorthwest , and 
 357 
 In which height stands Quintero . 
 27 deg . 40 mi . 
 In which height stands Copiapo . 
 Southsoutheast . And those lands stand in the mouth of the straight of Magellan , at the going into the South sea .. 
 Item , From the latitude of 52 degrees 50 minutes , unto the latitude of 51 degrees , the land lies Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest . 
 Item , From the latitude of 50 degrees untq the latitude of 38 degrees and 30 minutes , the land lies Northeast and by North , Southwest and by South . 
 Item , From the latitude of 38 degrees 30 minutes unto the latitude of 37 degrees 14 minutes , the land lies North and South . 
 Item , From the island of S. Marry , being in the latitude of 37 degrees 14 min. unto the height of 36 degrees 14 minutes , in which height stands The Bay of Conception , the course is Northeast and Southwest , and the distance 12 leagues . 
 Item , From the latitude of 36 degrees 40 minutes unto the latitude of 35 degrees 20 minutes , the land lies Northeast and by North , Southwest and by South . 
 Item , From the latitude of 35 degrees 20 minutes unto the latitude of 33 degrees 30 minutes , the land lies Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest . 
 Item , In the latitude of 34 degrees you shall see about five miles ofF from the shore a bank of sand , on the which you shall have but shoaled water . 
 Item , From the latitude of 33 degrees 20 minutes unto the latitude of 29 degrees 20 minutes , the land lies Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest . 
 Item , From the latitude of 29 degrees 20 minutes unto the latitude of 27 degrees 40 minutes , the land lies Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest . 
 Item , In the latitude of 29 degrees 20 minutes , there lie two lands distant 4 leagues asunder , and about one league from the main . 
 Item , From the latitude of 27 degrees 40 minutes unto the latitude of 23 degrees 30 minutes , the land lies North and by East , South and by West . 
 358 
 11 deg . 50 mt . In which height stand the lands oj Lobos . 
 5. degrees . 
 In which height stands Paita . 
 THOMAS FULLER’S NOTES a.d. 
 1588. 
 From the latitude of 25 degrees unto the of 23 degrees and 30 minutes , the land is very 23^ . 30 « « . 
 In which 
 From the latitude of 23 degrees unto the of 22 degrees , the land lies Northnortheast , 
 and Southsouthwest . 
 Item , From the latitude of 22 degrees unto the latitude of 18 degrees and 30 minutes , the land lies North and by 18 deg . 0,0 mi . East , South and by West . afab 
 Item , From the latitude of 18 degrees 30 minutes , unto et 
 the latitude of 18 degrees , the land lies Northwest and by West , Southeast and by East . 
 Item , From the latitude of 18 degrees unto the latitude of 13 degrees 30 minutes , the land lies Northwest and 13 deg . 30 mi . Southeast : in which heighth there lie two or three lands , whtc^ which lands lie ofF a place where are two towns called Paraca , and Pisca . “ 
 Item , From the latitude of 13 degrees 30 minutes , unto the latitude of 11 degrees 50 minutes , the land lies Northnorthwest , and Southsoutheast . 
 Item , From the latitude of 11 degrees 50 minutes , unto the latitude of 6 degrees , the land lies North and by West , South and by East . Also you shall see two lands , which be called The Lands of Lobos , that stand in the latitude of 6 degrees . 
 Item , From the latitude of 6 degrees , unto the latitude of 5 degrees , the land lies Northwest and by West , Southeast and by East . 
 Item , From the latitude of 5 degrees unto the latitude of 4 degrees , the land lies Northwest and Southeast : in which height of 4 degrees stands Cape Blanco . 
 Item , From the latitude of 4 degrees unto the latitude of 2 degrees 50 minutes ( in which latitude of 2 degrees 50 minutes stands the island of Puna ) the course is Northeast and Southwest . 
 [ A note 
 359 
 2 deg . 50 min. 
 In which height stands the island of Puna . 
 Leagues 12. 
 Leagues 80. 
 Leagues 7. 
 Leagues 55. 
 Leagues 70. 
 Leagues 90. 
 Leagues 120. 
 Leagues 71. 
 A note of the distance between certain places on the coasts of Chili and Peru. 
 HN primis , From the island of Mocha unto the island of S. Marry , the course is North and South , and the distance is 25 leagues . 
 Item , From the island of S. Marry unto the bay of Conception , the course is Northeast and Southwest , and the distance is 12 leagues . 
 Item , From the bay of Conception unto the port of Valpariso , the course is Northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance is 80 leagues . 
 Item , From the port of Valpariso unto the bay of Quintero , the course is Northeast and by North , and Southwest and South , and the distance is 7 leagues . In which bay of Quintero there lies one small island . 
 Item , From the bay of Quintero unto the bay of Coquimbo , the course is Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest , and the distance is 72 leagues : in which height stand two lands . 
 Item , From the bay of Coquimbo unto the bay of Copiapo , the course is Northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance is 55 leagues : in which height stands one island . 
 Item , From the bay of Copiapo unto the bay of Morro moreno , the course is Northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance is 70 leagues . 
 Item , From the bay of Morro moreno , unto the bay of Arica , the course is North & by East , South & by West , and the distance is 90 leagues : in which bay of Arica stands one small island . 
 Item , From the bay of Arica unto the bay of Parraca , the course is Northwest and Southeast , and the distance is 120 leagues : in which bay of Parraca stand three or foure lands . 
 Item , From the bay of Parraca unto the bay of 360 
 1588. Lima , the course is Northwest and by North , Southeast and by South , and the distance is 35 leagues : in Leagues 35. the bay of Lima is one island . 
 Item , From the bay of Lima unto the bay of Cherrepe , the course is North & by West , South and by East , and the distance is 90 leagues . Leagues 90. 
 Item , From the bay of Cherrepe unto the bay of 
 Paita it is 45 leagues , the course is 20 leags West - Leagues 45. northwest unto two lands that be called The lands of Lobos , and from thence unto the bay of Paita it is 25 leagues , the course is North and by East . 
 Item , From Paita unto Cape Blanco , the course is North and by West , South and by East , and the distance is 25 leagues . Leagues 25. 
 Item , From Cape Blanco unto the island of Puna , the course is Eastnortheast and Westsouth west , and the distance is 25 leagues : and you shall see one island that Leagues 25. is called Santa Clara , which stands 10 leagues to the Leagues in all Southward of Puna . « « 751. 
 A note of certain places unto the Northwards of the Line . 
 IN primis , From Cape Blanco unto Cape S. Laurence , the course is North & by East , South and by West , and the distance 60 leagues . Leagues 60. 
 Item , From Cape S. Lorenzo unto Cape S. Francisco , the course is North & by East , South and by West , and the distance is 40 leagues . Leagues 40. 
 Item , From Cape S. Francisco unto the cape that is called Cape Blanco , which cape is on the coast of New Spaine , the course is Northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance is 160 leagues : and you Leagues 160. shall have a great current that sets out of the bay of Panama ; and the said current sets South out . 
 Item , From Cape Blanco unto the Port de Veles , the course is Northeast and Southwest , and the distance 8 leagues . Leagues 8. 
 361 
 Item , From the Port de Veles unto the port of S. John , the course is Northwest and Southeast , and the Leagues 17. distance is 17 leagues . 
 Item , From the port of S. John unto Rio Lexo , the course is Northwest , and Southeast , and the distance is Leagues 40. 40 leagues . 
 Item , From Rio Lexo unto the gulf of Fonsecco , the course is Westnorthwest , and Eastsoutheast , and Leagues 14. they are distant 14 leagues . 
 Item , In the mouth of Rio Lexo there lies one island , and you must go in on the Northwest part of that island ; on the which island you may be bold for to borrow on : and you must go from that island Southeast up . 
 Item , That in the gulf of Fonsecco you shall have lying ten lands , whereof three be peopled with Indians , whereon you may have water , wood , and salt . 
 Item , On the West side of the gulf of Fonsecco there is one town of Indians , which is called Mapal , in which town there is great store of beeves . 
 Item , From the river Lexo unto the bay of Sonsonate , the course is East and West , and the distance is Leagues 60. 60 leagues . 
 Item , From the bay of Sonsonate unto the port of Aguatulco , the course is Northwest and by West , SouthLeagues 160. east and by East , and the distance 160 leagues . 
 Item , From the bay of Coppeleto unto the port of Leagues z . Aguatulco it is 2 leagues , the course is West and by North , East and by South . 
 Item , From the port of Aguatulco unto the port of Angels , the course is East and West , and they are Leagues 12. distant 12 leagues . 
 Item , From the port of Aguatulco unto the port of Acapulco , the course is West & by North , East and Leagues 78. by South , and the distance is 78 leagues . 
 Item , From the port of Acapulco unto the port of S. Iago , the course is West and by North , East and Leagues 80. by South , and the distance is 80 leagues . 
 Item , From the port of S. Iago unto the port of 
 362 
 1588. Natividad , the course is East and West , and the distance is 7 leagues . Leagues 7. 
 Item , From the port of Natividad unto the port of the islands of Chiametla , the course is East and West , and the distance is 10 leagues . Leagues 10. 
 Item , From the lands of Chiametla unto Cape de los Corrientes , the course is Northwest and by West , Southeast and by East , and the distance is 30 leagues . Leagues 30. 
 Item , From the Cape de los Corrientes unto the bay of Xalisco , the course is Northnortheast , and Southsouthwest , and the distance is 18 leagues . Leagues 18. 
 Item , From the bay of Xalisco unto the port of Chiametlan , the course is Northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance is 30 leagues . Leagues 30. 
 Item , From the Cape de los Corrientes unto the lands called Las tres Marias , the course is Northwest and Southeast , and the distance is 20 leagues . Leagues 20. 
 Item , From the Cape de los Corrientes unto the cape of Santa Clara on the point of California , the course is Westnorthwest , and Eastsoutheast , and the distance is 108 leagues . Leagues 108. 
 A note from the coast of America unto the Westwards . 
 ITem , From the cape of Santa Clara unto the lands of The Ladrones , the course is West and by South , East and by North , and the distance between them is 1850 iMpm leagues . l85° - 
 Item , That the Southermost island of the Ladrones stands in the latitude of 12 degrees and 10 minutes , and from thence unto the Northermost island , the course is Northnortheast & Southsouthwest , and the distance between them is 200 leagues : and the said Northermost island stands in 21 degrees 10 minutes . 
 Item , From one of the lands of the Ladrones , which stands in the latitude of 13 degrees and 50 minutes , which island is called * Guaihaime , unto the Cape de Spirito Or Guana . 
 363 
 santo , which cape is upon one of the lands of the Philip — pinas , the course is West and to the Southwards , and the 
 Leagues 320. distance is 320 leagues . 
 Item , From the cape of Spirito santo unto the mouth of the entrance of the Straights of the Philippinas , the course is West and by North , East and by South , and Leagues 15. the distance is 15 leagues . 
 Item , From the mouth of the Straights unto the island Leagues 6. Capul , the course is Southwest and by West 6 leagues . 
 Item , From the island of Capul unto the North head of the island called Masbat , the course is Northwest and Leagues 15. Southeast , and the distance between them is 15 leagues . 
 Item , From the North head of the island called Masbat L unto the island called Sebojon , the course is Westsouth - 
 Leagues 1 » all west and Eastnortheast , and the distance between them 2414. is 15 leagues . 
 A note of our course kept from the island Sebojon unto the Southwards . 
 ITem , From the island of Sebojon unto the East end of the island called Pannay , the course is Southeast and by South , Northwest and by West , and the distance is Leagues 22. 22 leagues . 
 Item , That off the Easter end of the island of Pannay there lie certain small lands , unto the number of 12 or more , and you shall have shoaled water among them . 
 Item , From the Easter end of Pannay unto a bay that is called The bay of Lago grande , on the same island , the course is Westsouthwest , and Eastnortheast , Leagues 18. and the distance is 18 leagues . 
 Item , From the bay of Lago grande unto the island Leagues 6. that is called Ysla de los Negros , is the distance of 6 leagues Southeast and Northwest . 
 Item , From the bay of Lago grande unto three small lands that stand in the latitude of 10 degrees , the course is South and by West 12 leagues . Furthermore , from those three lands unto the Westermost end of Ysla de Leagues 10. los Negroes , the course is Southwest and Northeast 10 364 
 1588. leagues , where we were clear of the lands of the Philippinas . 
 Item , From the South end of Ysla de los Negroes unto the North head of the island called Mindanao , the course is South and North , and the distance is 30 Leagues 30. leagues . 
 Item , From the North end of Mindanao unto the South head of the said island , which is called Cape Cannal , the course is South and by West , North and by East , and the distance is 26 leagues . Leagues 26. 
 Item , From the cape of Cannal between the South 
 and the Westsouthwest about 10 or 12 leagues ofF you Leagues 12. shall have great store of small lands , about the number of 24 or more . 
 Item , From the cape of Cannal unto the cape of Batochina , the course is Southsouthwest , and Northnortheast , and the distance is 100 leagues , and between them sets Leagues 100. a great current unto the Eastward . 
 Item , From the cape of Batochina unto the West head of Java minor , the course is Southwest and by South , Northeast and by North , and the distance between them is 220 leagues . Leagues 220. 
 Item , From the West end of Java minor unto the 
 East end of Java major , the course is West and by North , and East & by South , and the distance between them is 18 leagues : in the which course there lies one Leagues 18. * island between them , which island is in length 14 * This is the leagues . ofBaly . 
 Item , From the East end of Java major unto the cape of Buena Esperanza , the course is West and by South , and Westsouth west , and the distance between £easues them is 1800 leagues . j8oo . 
 Item , That Cape Falso stands 30 leagues to the Leagues 30. Eastward of Cape de Buena Esperanza , & ofF the said Cape Falso you shall have shoalding 20 leagues ofF in 80 or 90 fathoms , & the course is from Cape Falso unto the cape of Buena Esperanza Westnorthwest and Leagues in all Eastsoutheast . are 2292 - 
 365 
 Leagues 1200. 
 A note of the distance and course from the cape of Buena Esperanza unto the Northwards . 
 ITem , From the cape of Buena Esperanza unto the island of Santa Helena , the course is Northwest , and Northwest and by West , and the distance between them is 600 leagues . 
 Item , From the island of Santa Helena unto the island of Flores , the course between them is Northnorthwest , and Northwest and by North , and the distance between them is 1200 leagues . 
 Item , From the island of Flores unto the lands end of England , the course is between the Eastnortheast , and the Northeast and by East , and the distance between them is foure hundred and fifty leagues . 
 A note of the variation of our Compass . 
 N primis , The variation of our compass on the coast of New Spaine in the South sea in the latitude of 12 degrees , was one point to the Eastwards . 
 Item , the variation of our compass between the cape of California and the lands of the Philippinas , was one point 
 and and half unto the Eastward , that was , that the North did stand North and by East , and half a point unto the East . 
 Item , The variation of our compass between the lands of Maluco and the cape of Buena Esperanza , was two points and and half at the most to the Westward , that was , that the Northnortheast was our North . 
 366 
 A note of our time spent in sailing between certain places out of England , 1586. 
 N primis , We were sailing between England and the coast of Guinea from the 21 day of July unto the 26 day of August unto the haven called Sierra leona , where we watered and stayed until the 6 day of September . 
 Item , we departed from the coast of 
 Of our abided tenne days where we watered . 
 Guinea for the coast of Brasil the 10 day of September , and we had sighed of the coast of Brasil the 26 day of October , being sixe leagues to the Northwards of Cape Frio : and from thence we were sailing unto the island of S. Sebastian until the 31 and last day of October , 
 where we watered and set up our pinnace : and we Of our abided anchored on the Northwest part of the island in tenne foure fathoms , and stayed there until the 23 day of November , 
 Item , The 23 day of November we departed from the watered . island of Sant Sebastian , keeping our course South and by West unto the port that is called Port Desire , where we arrived the 17 day of December ; in which port we graved our ship : and we stayed there until °four the 28 day of December , where we anchored in 5 fathoms . 
 Item , The eight and twentieth day of December we -a^our departed from the Port of Desire towards the Straight of ships . Magellan , where we arrived the third day of January : and we remained in the Straights until the foure and twentieth day of February ; where we watered in many places on the South side , having the wind all that while between the Westsouth west and the Northwest . 
 Item , We departed out of the Straights the 24 day of February towards the island of Mocha , which island we had sighed of the 14 day of March . 
 Item , The 14 day of March at night we anchored in the bay of Marroccos ; where we road in 9 fathoms water . 
 Item , The 15 day of March we anchored in the island 
 of Saint Marry , on the North part of the island in f01* ™ 367 
 Of our abided two y fifAe days , where we watered . 
 Of our abided 
 eight fathoms water , black sand , where we stayed foure days . 
 Item , The 19 day of March we departed from the island of Saint Marry , and the same day we anchored in the bay of Conception , where we stayed until the next day : and there we road in ten fathoms water , shingle stones . 
 Item , The 20 day of March we departed from the bay of Conception , and the thirtieth day of March we Of our abided arrived in the bay of Quintero , where we watered : 6 days , where anj there the first day of April we had twelve of our we wa re . men s ] a ; nej being on land for water : and we stayed there sixe days : and we anchored in 7 fathoms water , white sand . 
 Of our abided Item , We departed from the bay of Quintero the 5 day 
 three days . Qf April , and we arrived at the bay of Arica the 24 day of April , and we anchored in 7 fathoms water . 
 Of our abided Item , The 27 day of April we departed from the bay of 
 two days . Arica , and the third day of May we arrived in the bay of Pisca , and we anchored in 4 fathoms water in oaze . 
 Of our abided Item , The 5 day of May we departed from the bay of 
 sixe days . Pisca ) and the 12 day we anchored in the bay of Cherrepe , where we anchored in 7 fathoms water , in white sand . 
 Of our abided Item , The 18 day of May we departed from the bay of one day . Cherrepe , and the 20 day of May we arrived in the bay of Payta , where we anchored in 6 fathoms water . 
 Item , The 20 day of May we departed from the bay of Paita , and the 26 day of May we anchored at the island of Puna , and we anchored in 5 fathoms . 
 Of our abided Item , From the island of Puna we departed the fourth 
 watered* ^Une Unt° °^ce main , where we 
 ' watered , and we anchored in 10 fathoms water , brown sand . 
 Of our abided Item , The 12 day of June we departed from the place 
 % days , where where we watered , being bound for the coast of New we watered , gpaine , and the 29 day of July we arrived in the port of Aguatulco , where we watered , and anchored in 6 fathoms water . 
 368 
 Item , The 3 day of August we departed from the port of Aguatulco , and the 26 day of August we arrived at the port of S. Iago , where we watered , and stayed Of our abided there until the second day of September , and anchored in 7 wbere o radoms . 
 Item , The 2 of September we departed from the port of S. Iago , and the 3 day of September we put into a port one league unto the Westwards of Natividad , where Of our abided we anchored in 8 fathoms water . one day . 
 Item , The 4 day of September we departed from the ° / °ur “ bode port of Natividad , and the 7 day of September we put three into the bay of Xalisco , where we anchored in 9 fathoms water , and the 10 day of September we departed from the bay of Xalisco , and the 12 day of September we anchored at the island of S. Andrew , where we anchored in 17 fathoms water . 
 Item , The 17 day of September we departed from Of our abided the island of S. Andrew , and the 24 day of September we put into the bay of Chiametlan , where we anchored in 8 fathoms water , and the 26 of September we departed from the bay of Chiametlan , and the 28 day we anchored Of our abided under the islands of Chiametlan in 4 fathoms . z day es , where 
 Item , The 9 day of October we departed from the islands of Chiametlan , and crossing over the mouth of twelve days , Mar vermejo , the 14 day of October we had sighed of thee where we Cape of California . watered . 
 Item , The 15 day of October we lay off the Cape of S. Lucas , and the 4 day of November we took the great and rich ship called Santa Anna , coming from the Philippinas : and the 5 day of November we put into the Of our abided port of S. Lucas , where we put all the people on shore , and burned the Santa Anna : and we anchored in 12 fathoms watered . water . 
 Item , The 19 day of November we departed from the port of S. Lucas , and the 3 day of January we had sighed of one of the islands of the Ladrones , which island is called The island of * Iwana , standing in the latitude * Guana . of 13 degrees and 50 minutes . 
 xi 369 2 A 
 Item , The 3 day of January we departed from the island of Iwana , and the 14 day of Januarie we had sighed of the cape of Spirito santo , and the same day we put Of our abided into the Straights of the Philippinas ; and the 15 day mne ayes . of january we anchored under the island of Capul , on the which island we watered and wooded . , 
 Item , The 24 of January we departed from the island of Capul , and the 28 day of January we arrived in the bay of Lago grande , which bay is in the island of Pannay , Spaniards where there were Spaniards building of a new ship . Elding of a Item , The 29 of January we departed from the bay of 
 nevi ship tn the TO ’ , , 7 , r . , , 
 Philippinas , Lago grande , and the same day at night we were clear from the islands of the Philippinas , shaping our course towards the lands of Maluco . 
 Days 30. Item , From the 29 day of January unto the first day of March , we were navigating between the West end of the island of Pannay and the West end of the island of Java minor . 
 Of our abided Item , The first day of March we passed the Straights 
 wZr ” at West head of the island of Java minor , and the 5 
 watered . day of March we anchored in a bay at the Wester end of 
 Java major , where we watered , and had great store of victuals from the town of Polambo . 
 Java major . Item , The 16 day of March we departed from the Total of and Java major , and the 11 day of May we had sighed Buena Espe - and 4° leagues unto the Eastwards of the cape of ranxa . Buena Esperanza , the land being low land . 
 A note from the cape of Buena Esperanza unto the Northwards . 
 Of our abided TTem , The 21 day of May we departed from the cape herem1^ ®uena Esperanza , and the 8 day of June we watered anchored on the Northwest part of the island of Santa Helena , where we watered , and made our abided 12 days . 
 Item , The 20 day of June at night we departed Days 14. from the island of Santa Helena , and the 4 day of July we passed under the Equinoctial line . 
 370 
 Item , The 20 day of June at night we departed from 
 the island of Santa Helena , and the 25 day of August 
 in the morning we had sighed of the islands of Flores and 2*4# space of 
 Corvo in the latitude of 40 degrees . ournavigation 
 Item , The 9 day of September 1588 we arrived , after iia^ewas 
 a long and terrible tempest , in the Narrow seas , in the 
 threescore y 
 haven of Plimmouth in safety , by the gracious and most five days . merciful protection of the Almighty , to whom therefore be rendered immortali praise and thanksgiving now and for ever . Amen . 
 A note of our ankering in those places where we arrived after our departure from England 1586. 
 Hr = = = = = = | N primis , we anchored in the harbour of Sierra leona in 10 fathoms water : and Fathoms 10. a Northwest wind in that road is the worst that can blow . 
 Item , You may anchor under the island that is called Ilha Verde in 6 fathoms Fathoms 6. 
 — — J water : and the wind being at the Westnorthwest is the worst wind that can blow . 
 Item , You may anchor under the island of S. Sebastian on the Northwest part in 10 fathoms : and a Westsouth - Fathoms 10. west wind is the worst wind . 
 Item , You may anchor in Port Desire in 5 fathoms water , and a West and by South wind is the worst . Fa < i°ms 5 - 
 Item , You may anchor under Cape Joy without the mouth of the Straights of Magellan in 7 fathoms water . Fathoms 7. 
 Item , You may anchor within the Straights of Magellan , until you come unto the first narrowing in 25 or 30 Fathoms 25. fathoms water , in the mid way of the Straights . 
 Item , You may anchor in the second narrow of the 
 Straights in 16 fathoms water . Fathoms 16. 
 Item , You may anchor under Penguin island on which side you please in 6 or 7 fathoms water . Fathoms 7. 
 Item , You may anchor in Port Famine in 5 or 6 fathoms Fathoms 6. water , and a Southsoutheast wind is the worst . 
 Item , You may anchor in Muscle cove , which cove is on 371 
 the South side , and is 7 leagues to the Southwards of Fathoms 12. Cape Froward , and you shall ride in 12 fathoms . 
 Item , You may anchor in Elizabeth bay , which bay is on Fathoms 8. the North side of the Straights in 8 fathoms water . 
 Item , From Elizabeth bay unto Cabo deseado , you may anchor on both sides of the Straights in many places . 
 A note of our ankering after we were entered into the South sea . 
 IN primis , You may anchor in the bay of Mocha in 7 or 8 fathoms water , and there a Northeast wind is the worst . 
 Item , You may anchor on the North side of S. Marry Fathoms 9. island in nine fathoms water : and there a Northnorthwest wind is the worst wind . 
 Item , You may anchor in the bay of Conception under Fathoms 9. one small island in 9 fathoms water , and a Northnorthwest wind is the worst wind in that bay . 
 Fathoms 7. Item , You may anchor in the bay of Quintero in 7 fathoms water , and a Northnorthwest wind is the worst wind . 
 Fathoms 6. Item , You may anchor in the bay of Arica in 6 fathoms , and in that bay a Westnorthwest wind is the worst wind . 
 Item , You may anchor in the bay of Pisca and Paraca Fathoms 5. in five fathoms : and in that bay a Northnorthwest wind is the worst . 
 Fathoms 8. Item , You may anchor in the bay of Cherepe in 8 fathoms , and there from the Northwest unto the South . east it is open . 
 Fathoms 7. Item , You may anchor in the bay of Paita in 7 fathoms water : and there a Northnortheast wind is the worst wind . 
 Item , You may anchor on the Northeast part of the Fathoms 4. island of Puna in 4 fathoms : and a Northeast wind is the worst . 
 Item , You may anchor at Rio dolce , where we watered , Fathoms 10. unto the Eastwards of the island of Puna in 10 fathoms . 
 372 
 A note of what depths we anchored in on the coast of New Spaine . 
 ITem , You may anchor in the port of Aguatulco in 
 sixe fathoms water : and a Southsouthwest wind is Fathoms 6. the worst . 
 Item , You may anchor in the port of S. Iago in 6 Fathoms 6. fathoms water : and a Westsouthwest wind is the worst . 
 Item , You may anchor in the port of Natividad in 8 Fathoms 8. fathoms water : and a Southeast wind is the worst . 
 Item , You may anchor on the bay of Xalisco in 9 Fathoms 9. fathoms water : and a Westsouthwest wind is the worst . 
 Item , You may anchor on the Northwest part of the island of S. Andrew in 17 fathoms water . Fathoms 17. 
 Item , You may anchor under the island of Chiametlan 
 in 4 fathoms water : and a Southeast wind is the worst . Fathoms 4. 
 Item , You may anchor in the port of S. Lucas on the Cape of California in 12 fathoms water : and a Fathoms 12. Southeast wind is the worst . 
 A note of what depths we anchored in , among the lands of the Philippinas . 
 ITem , You may anchor on the Southwest part of the 
 island of Capul in 6 fathoms water : and a West - Fathoms 6. southwest wind is the worst . 
 Item , You may anchor all along the South part of the island of Panna in shoaled water , in the depth of 
 IO or 12 fathoms . Fathoms 10. 
 Item , You may anchor in the bay of Lago grande in seven fathoms water , which bay is on the South side of the island of Panna . 
 Item , You may anchor at the East end of Java major in 16 fathoms water , and and Eastsoutheast wind is the Fathoms 16. worst . 
 Item , You may anchor on the North part of the island of Santa Helena in 12 fathoms water . Fathoms 12. 
 373 
 * To you South side of the Equinoctial . 
 A note of our finding of the winds for the most part of our voyage 1586. 
 N primis , From the 21 day of July unto the 19 day of August we found the wind at Northnortheast , being in the latitude of 7 degrees . 
 Item , From the 19 day of August unto the 28 day of September , we found the wind for the most part be 
 tween the West and the Southwest , being in * 24 degrees . 
 Item , From the 28 day of September unto the 30 day of October , we found the winds between the Northeast and the Eastnortheast . 
 Item , From the 23 of November , from the island of S. Sebastian , unto the 30 day of November , we found the wind between the Southeast and the Southsoutheast , being in 36 degrees . 
 Item , From the 30 day of November unto the 6 day of December , we found the winds to be between the West and the Southwest . 
 Item , From the 6 day of December unto the first day of January , we found the winds for the most part between the North and the Northeast , being then in the latitude of 52 degrees . 
 Item , From the first day of January unto the 23 day of February , we found the winds to be between the Northwest and the Westsouthwest , we being all that time in the Straights of Magellan . 
 Item , From the 23 day of February unto the first day of March , we found the winds to be between the South and the Southeast , being then in the South sea in the latitude of 48 degrees . 
 Item , From the first day of March unto the 7 day of March , we found the wind to be at the North and the Northnortheast in the latitude of 43 degrees . 
 Item , From the 7 day of March unto the 14 day of 
 374 
 March , we found the winds to be between the South and the Southwest , in the latitude of 37 degrees . 
 Item , From the 14 day of March unto the 28 day 1587. of May , we found the winds to be between the South and the Southwest , in the latitude of 3 degrees to the South of the Line . 
 A note of the varying of our winds to the North of the Equinoctial line on the coast of New Spaine - 
 ITem , From the 28 day of May unto the 5 day of July , we found the winds for the most part to be between the Southsoutheast , and the Southsouthwest , being in the latitude of 10 degrees to the Northward of the Line on the coast of New Spaine . 
 Item , From the 5 day of July unto the 14 day of October , we found the winds for the most part to be at the Eastnortheast in the latitude of 23 degrees Northward , and almost under the tropic of Cancer . 
 A note of the winds which we found between the coast of New Spaine and Islands of the Philippinas on the coast of Asia . 
 IN the year of our Lord 1587 we departed from the cape of Santa Clara on the coast of California the 19 day of November , and we found the winds to be between the East and the Eastnortheast , until the 29 day of January ; departing then from the lands of the Philippinas , being in the latitude of 9 degrees . 
 Item , From the 29 day of January unto the 19 day of March , we found the winds for the most part between the Northnortheast and the Northwest , being then among the Lands of Maluco , in the latitude of 9 degrees . 
 Item , From the 19 day of March unto the 20 day of May , we found the winds for the most part between the South and the Eastsoutheast , being then 
 375 
 between the Lands of Maluco , and the cape of Buena Esperanza , in the latitude of 34 degrees to the South of the Line . 
 Item , From the 20 day of May unto the 11 day of July , we found the winds for the most part between the South and the Southeast , being then between the cape of Buena Esperanza , and 15 degrees unto the Southward of the line . 
 Item , From the 11 day of July unto the 18 day of August , we found the winds for the most part between the Northeast and Eastnortheast , being then between the latitude of 15 degrees to the Southward of the line , and 38 degrees unto the Northwards of the line . 
 . 