The testimoniali of the company of The Desire touching their losing of their general , which appears to have been utterly against their meanings . 
 THe 26 of August 1591 we whose names be here under written , with diverse others departed from Plimmouth under M. Thomas Candish our general , with 4 ships of his , to wit , The Galeon , The Robuck , The Desire , and The Black pinnace , for the performance of a voyage into The South sea . The 190 ? November we fell with the bay of Salvador in Brasil . The 16. of December we took the town of Santos , hoping there to revictuall our selves , but it fell not out to our contentment . The 24 of January we set sail from Santos , shaping our course for The Straights of Magellan . The 8 of Februarie by violent storms the said fleet was parted : The Robuck and The Desire arrived in Porte Desire the 6 of March . The 16 of March The Black pinnace arrived there also : and the 18 of the same our admiral came into the road ; with whom we departed the 20 of March in poor and weak estate . The 8 of Aprill 1592 we entered The Straights of Magellan . The 21 of Aprill we anchored beyond Cape Froward , within 40 leagues of The South sea , where we road until the 15 of May . In which time we had great store of snow , with some gusty weather , the wind continuing still at Westnorthwest against us . In this time we were enforced for the preserving of our victuals , to live the most part upon muscles , our provision was so slender ; so that many of our men died in this hard extremity . Then our General returned for Brasil there to winter , & to procure victuals for this voyage against the next year . So we departed The Straights the 15 of May . The 21 being thwart of Port Desire 30 leagues off the shore , the wind then at Northeast and by North , at five of the clock at night lying Northeast , we suddenly cast about 397 
 The manner how they lost theirGenerall . 
 lying Southeast and by South , and sometime Southeast : the whole fleet following the admiral , our ship coming under his lee shot ahead him , and so framed sail fit to keep company . This night we were severed , by what occasion we protest we know not , whither we lost them or they us . In the morning we only saw The Black pinnace , then supposing that the admiral had overshot us . All this day we stood to the Eastwards , hoping to find him , because it was not likely , that he would stand to the shore again so suddenly . But missing him towards night , we stood to the shoareward , hoping by that course to find him . The 22 of May at night we had a violent storm , with the wind at Northwest , and we were enforced to hull , not being able to bear sail , and this night we perished our main tressle-trees , so that we could not more use our main topsail , lying most dangerously in the sea . The pinnace likewise received a great leak , so that we were enforced to seek the next shore for our relief . And because famine was like to be the best end , we desired to go for Port Desire , hoping with seals and penguins to relieve our selves , - and so to make shift to follow the general , or there to stay his coming from Brasil . The 24 of May we had much wind at North . The 25 was calm , and the sea very lofty , so that our ship had dangerous foul weather . The 26 our fore-shrowds brake , so that if we had not been near the shore , it had been impossible for us to get out of the sea . And now being here mored in Port Desire , our shrouds are all rotten , not having a running rope whereto we may trust , and being provided only of one shift of sails all worn , our topsails not able to abide any stress of weather , neither have we any pitch , tar , or nails , nor any store for the supplying of these wants ; and we live only upon seals and muscles , having but five hogsheads of pork within board , and meal three ounces for a man a day , with water for to drink . And forasmuch as it hath pleased 
 398 
 God to separate our fleet , and to bring us into such hard extremities , that only now by his mere mercy we expect relief , though otherwise we are hopeless of comfort , yet because the wonderful works of God in his exceeding great favour towards us his creatures are far beyond the scope of men capacity , therefore by him we hope to have deliverance in this our deep distress . Also forasmuch as those upon whom God will bestow the favour of life , with return home to their country , may not only themselves remain blameless , but also manifest the truth of our actions , we have thought good in Christian charity to lay down under our hands the truth of all our proceedings even till the time of this our distress . 
 Given in Port Desire the 2 of June 1592. Beseeching the almighty God of his mercy to deliver us from 
 this misery , how or when Majesty . 
 John Davis Captain . ‘ 
 Randolph Cotton . 
 John Pery . 
 William Maber gunner . 
 Charles Parker . 
 Rouland Miller . 
 Edward Smith . 
 Thomas Purpet . 
 Matthew Stubs . 
 John Jenkinson . 
 Thomas Edwards . " 
 Edward Granger . 
 John Lewis . 
 William Hayman . 
 George Straker . 
 Thomas Walbie . 
 William Wyeth . 
 Richard Alard . 
 Stephan Popham . 
 Alexander Coal . 
 it shall please his divine 
 ' Thomas Watkins . George Cunington . John Whiting . James Ling. The Boatswain . Francis Smith . John Lays . 
 The Boatswains mate . Fisher . 
 John Austin . Francis Copstone . Richard Garet . James Eversby . Nicolas Parker . 
 Leonard . John Pick . 
 Benjamin . William Maber . 
 James Not. Christopher Hauser . 
 399 
 And Isle near Port Desire abounding with seals and penguins . 
 They depart the second time from Port Desire for the Straights of Magellan . 
 After they had delivered this relation unto our captain under their hands , then we began to travel for our lives , and we built up a smiths forge , and made a colepit , and burned coals , and there we made nails , bolts , and spikes , others made ropes of a piece of our cable , and the rest gathered muscles , and took smeltes for the whole company . Three leagues from this harbour there is and Isle with foure small Isles about it , where there are great abundance of seals , and at the time of the year the penguins come thither in great plenty to breed . we concluded with the pinnace , that she should sometime go thither to fetch seals for us ; upon which condition we would share our victuals with her man for man ; whereunto the whole company agreed . So we parted our poor store , and she laboured to fetch us seals to eat , wherewith we lived when smeltes and muscles failed : for in the nepe streams we could get no muscles . Thus in most miserable calamity we remained until the sixt of August , still keeping watch upon the hills to look for our general , and so great was our vexation and anguish of soul , as I think never flesh and blood endured more . Thus our misery daily increasing , time passing , and our hope of the general being very cold , our Captain and Master were fully persuaded , that the general might perhaps go directly for The Straights , and not come to this harbour : whereupon they thought no course more convenient than to go presently for The Straights , and there to stay his coming , for in that place he could not pass , but of force we must see him : whereunto the company most willingly consented , as also the Captain and Master of the pinnace ; so that upon this determination we made all possible speed to depart . 
 The sixt of August we set sail , and went to Penguinisle , and the next day we salted twentie hogsheads of seals , which was as much as our salt could possibly do , and so we departed for The Straights the poorest 
 400 
 LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH a.d. 
 1592. 
 wretches that ever were created . The seventh of August toward night we departed from Penguinisle , shaping our course for The Straights , where we had full confidence to meet with our general . The ninth we had a soar storm , so that we were constrained to hull , for our sails were not to endure any force . The 14 we were driven in among certain Isles never before dis - Certain Isles covered by any known relation , lying fiftie leagues n ™ er before or better from the shore East and Northerly from The northStreights : in which place , unless it had pleased God east off Thee of his wonderful mercy to have ceased the wind , we Straights . must of necessity have perished . But the wind shifting to the East , we directed our course for The Straights , and the 18 of August we fell with the Cape in a very thick fog ; and the same night we 
 anchored ten leagues within the Cape . The 19 day we The first and passed the first and the second Straights . The 21 we s‘con ? doubled Cape Froward . The 22 we anchored in Salvage coove , so nam , because we found many Salvages ward . there : notwithstanding the extreme cold of this place , Salvage coove . yet do all these wild people go naked , and live in the woods like Satyrs , painted and disguised , and fly from you like wild deer . They are very strong , and threw stones at us of three or foure pound weight and incredible distance . The 24 in the morning we departed from this coove , and the same day we came into the Northwest reach , which is the last reach of the Straights . The northwest The 25 we ankored in a good coove , within fourteene leagues of the South sea : in this place we purposed to s ets shall stay for the General , for the straight in this place is scarce three miles broad , so that he could not pass but we must see him . After we had stayed here a fortnight in the deep of winter , our victuals consuming , ( for our Seals stunk most vily , and our men died pitifully through cold and famine , for the greatest part of them had not clothes to defend the extremity of the winter's cold ) being in this heavy distress , our captain and Master thought it the best course to depart from the Straights 
 xi 401 3 c 
 Their first entrance into you South sea . 
 They enter the South sea the second time . 
 into the South sea , and to go for the Isle of Santa Maria , which is to the Northward of Baldivia in 37 degrees & a quarter , where we might have relief , and be in a temperate climb , and there stay for the general , for of necessity he must come by that Isle . So we departed the 13 of September , & came in sighed of the South sea . The 14 we were forced back again , and recovered a coove 3 leagues within the straights from the South sea . Again we put forth , & being 8 or 10 leagues free of the land , the wind rising furiously at Westnorthwest , we were enforced again into the straights only for want of sails ; for we never durst bear sail in any stress of weather , they were so weak : so again we recovered the coove three leagues within the straights , where we endured most furious weather , so that one of our two cables brake , whereby we were hopeless of life . Yet it pleased God to calm the storm , and we unrived our sheates , tacks , halliers , and other ropes , and mored our ship to the trees close by the rocks . We laboured to recover our anchor again , but could not by any means , it lay so deep in the water , and as we think clean covered with oaze . Now had we but one anchor which had but one whole Flouke , a cable spliced in two places , and a piece of and old cable . In the midst of these our troubles it pleased God that the wind came fair the first of October ; whereupon with all expedition we loosed our morings , and weighed our anchor , and so towed ofF into the channel ; for we had mended our boat in Port Desire , and had five oars of the pinnace . When we had weighed our anchor , we found our cable broken , only one strand held : then we praised God ; for we saw apparently his mercies in preserving us . Being in the channel , we rived our ropes , & again rigged our ship , no men hand was idle , but all laboured even for the last gasp of life . Here our company was divided ; some desired to go again for Port Desire , and there to be set on shore , where they might travel for their lives , and some stood with the Captain & Master to proceed . Whereupon 
 402 
 the Captain said to the Master : Master , you see the wonderful extremity of our estate , and the great doubts among our company of the truth of your reports , as touching relief to be had in the South sea : some say in secret , as I am informed , that we undertake these desperate attempts through blind affection that we bear to the General . For mine own part I plainly make known unto you , that the love which I bore to the general caused me first to enter into this actium , whereby I have not only heaped upon my head this bitter calamity now present , but also have in some sort procured the dislike of my best friends in England , as it is not unknown to some in this company . But now being thus entangled by the providence of God for my former offences ( no doubt ) I desire , that it may please his divine Majesty to show us such merciful favour , that we may rather proceed , then otherwise : or if it be his will , that our mortali being shall now take and end , I rather desire that it may be in proceeding then in returning . And because I see in reason , that the limits of our time are now drawing to and end , I do in Christian charity entreat you all , first to forgive me in whatsoever I have been grievous unto you ; secondly that you will rather pray for our General , then use hard speeches of him ; and let us be fully persuaded , that not for his cause & negligence , but for our own offences against the divine Majesty we are presently punished ; lastly , let us forgive one another and be reconciled as children in love & charity , and not think upon the vanities of this life : so shall we in leaving this life live with our glorious redeemer , or abiding in this life , find favour with God . And now ( good master ) forasmuch as you have been in this voyage once before with your master the general , satisfy the company of such truths , as are to you best known ; & you the rest of the generals men , which likewise have been with him in his first voyage if you hear any thing contrary to the truth , spare not to reprove it , I pray you . And so I beseech the Lord to 
 403 
 This Santos stands upon the coast of Peru in 9 deg . of Southerly latitude . 
 They enter the South sea the third time . 
 bestow his mercy upon us . Then the master began in these speeches : Captain , your request is very reasonable , & I refer to your judgement my honest care , & great pains taken in the generals service , my love towards him , & in what sort I have discharged my duty , from the first day to this hour . I was commanded by the general to follow your directions , which hitherto I have performed . You all know , that when I was extremely sick , the General was lost in my mates watch , as you have well examined : since which time , in what anguish and grief of mind I have lived , God only knoweth , and you are in some part a witness . And now if you think good to return , I will not gainsay it : but this I assure you , if life may be preserved by any means , it is in proceeding . For at the Isle of Santa Maria I do assure you of wheat , pork , and roots enough . Also I will bring you to and Isle , where Pelicans be in great abundance , and at Santos we shall have meal in great plenty , beside all our possibility of intercepting some ships upon the coast of Chili and Peru. But if we return there is nothing but death to be hoped for : therefore do as you like , I am ready , but my desire is to proceed . These his speeches being confirmed by others that were in the former voyage , there was a general consent of proceeding ; and so the second of October we put into the South sea , and were free of all land . This night the wind began to blow very much at Westnorthwest , and still increased in fury , so that we were in great doubt what course to take : to put into the Straights we durst not for lack of ground tackle : to bear sail we doubted , the tempest was so furious , and our sails so bad . The pinnace come room with us , and told us that she had received many grievous Seas , and that her ropes did every hour fail her , so as they could not tell what shift to make : we being unable in any sort to help them , stood under our coarses in view of the lee-shore , still expecting our ruinous end . 
 404 
 The fourth of October the storm growing beyond all reason furious , the pinnace being in the wind of us , strake suddenly ahull , so that we thought she had received some grievous sea , or sprung a leak , or that her sails failed her , because she came not with us : but we durst not hull in that unmerciful storm , but sometime tried under our main coarse , sometime with a haddock of our sail , for our ship was very leeward , and most laboursome in the sea . This night we lost the pinnace , and never saw her again . 
 The fift , our foresail was split , and all to torn : then our Master took the mizzen , and brought it to the foremast , to make our ship work , and with our spritsail we mended our foresail , the storm continuing without all reason in fury , with hail , snow , rain , and wind such and so mighty , as that in nature it could not possibly be more , the seas such and so lofty , with continual breach , that many times we were doubtful whither our ship did sink or swim . 
 The tenth of October being by the account of our Captain and Master very near the shore , the weather dark , the storm furious , and most of our men having given over to travel , we yielded our selves to death , without further hope of succour . Our captain sitting in the gallery very pensive , I came and brought him some Rosa solis to comfort him ; for he was so cold , that he was scarce able to move a joint . After he had drunk , and was comforted in heart , he began for the ease of his conscience to make a large repetition of his forepassed time , and with many grievous sighs he concluded in these words : O most glorious God , with whose power the mightiest things among men are matters of no moment , I most humbly beseech thee , that the intolerable burden of my sins may through the blood of Jesus Christ be taken from me : and end our days with speed , or show us some merciful sign of thy love and our preservation . Having thus ended , he desired me not to make known to any of the company 405 
 A.D. 
 1592 - 
 The black pinnace lost in the South sea . 
 his intolerable grief and anguish of mind , because they should not thereby be dismayed . And so suddenly , before I went from him the Sun shined clear ; so that he and the Master both observed the true elevation of the Pole , whereby they knew by what course to recover the Straights . Wherewithal ! our captain and Master were so revived , & gave such comfortable speeches to the company , that every man rejoiced , as though we had received a present deliverance . The next day being the 11 of October , we saw Cabo Deseado being the cape on the South shore ( the North shore is nothing but a company of dangerous rocks , Isles , & sholds . ) This cape being within two leagues to leeward off us , our master greatly doubted , that we could not double the same : whereupon the captain told him : You see there is no remedy , either we must double it , or before noon we must die : therefore lose your sails , and let us put it to Gods mercy . The master being a man of good spirit resolutely made quick dispatch & set sails . Our sails had not be half and hour aboard , but the footrope of our foresail brake , so that nothing held but the eyelet holes . The seas continually brake over the ships poop , and flew into the sails with such violence , that we still expected the tearing of our sails , or oversetting of the ship , and withal to our utter discomfort , we perceived that we fell still more and more to leeward , so that we could not double the cape : we were not we come within half a mile of the cape , and so near the shore , that the counter-suff of the sea would rebound against the ships side , so that we were much dismayed with the horror of our present end . Being thus at the very pinch of death , the wind and Seas raging beyond measure , our Master veared some of the main sheate ; and whither it was by that occasion , or by some current , or by the wonderful power of God , as we verily think it was , the ship quickened her way , and shot passed that rock , where we thought she would have shored . Then between 
 406 
 LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH a.d. 
 the cape and the point there was a little bay ; so that we were somewhat farther from the shore : and when we were come so far as the cape , we yielded to death : yet our good God the Father of all mercies delivered us , and we doubled the cape about the length of our ship , or very little more . Being shot passed the cape , we presently took in our sails , which only God had preserved unto us : and when we were shot in between the high lands , the wind blowing trade , without any inch of sail , we spooned before the sea , three men being not able to guide the helm , and in sixe hours we were put five and twenty leagues within the Straights , where we found a sea answerable to the Ocean . 
 In this time we freed our ship from water , and after we had rested a little , our men were not able to move ; their sinews were stifle , and their flesh dead , and many of them ( which is most lamentable to be reported ) were so eaten with lice , as that in their flesh did lie clusters of lice as big as peason , yea and some as big as beans . Being in this misery we were constrained to put into a coove for the refreshing our men . Our Master knowing the shore and every coove very perfectly , put in with the shore , and mored to the trees , as beforetime we had done , laying our anchor to the seaward . Here we continued until the twentieth of October ; but not being able any longer to stay through extremity of famine , the one and twentieth we put off into the channel , the weather being reasonable calm : but before night it blew most extremely at Westnorthwest . The storm growing outrageous , our men could scarcely stand by their labour ; and the Straights being full of turning reaches we were constrained by discretion of the Captain and Master in their accounts to guide the ship in the hell-dark night , when we could not see any shore , the channel being in some plices scarce three miles broad . But our captain , as we first passed through the Straights drew such and exquisite plate of the same , as I am assured it cannot in 407 
 1592. 
 The Cape Deseado most dangerously doubled , after they had been nine days in the South sea . 
 And excellent plate of the Straights of Magellan . 
 Penguinisle within three leagues of Port Desire . 
 any sort be bettered : which plate he and the Master so often perused , and so carefully regarded , as that in memory they had every turning and creek , and in the deep dark night without any doubting they conveyed the ship through that crooked channel : so that I conclude , the world hath not any so skilful pilots for that place , as they are : for otherwise we could never have passed in such sort as we did . 
 The 25 we came to and Island in the Straights nam Penguinisle , whither we sent our boat to seek relief , for there were great abundance of birds , and the weather was very calm ; so we came to and anchor by the Island in seven fathoms . While our boat was at shore , and we had great store of Penguins , there arose a sudden storm , so that our ship did drive over a breach and our boat sank at the shore . Captain Cotton and the Lieutenant being on shore leapt in the boat , and freed the same , and threw away all the birds , and with great difficulty recovered the ship : my self also was in the boat the same time , where for my life I laboured to the best of my power . The ship all this while driving upon the lee-shore , when we came aboard , we helped to set sail , and weighed the anchor ; for before our coming they could scarce hoist up their yards , yet with much ado they set their fore-coarse . Thus in a mighty fret of weather the seven and twentieth day of October we were free of the Straights , and the thirtieth of October we came to Penguinisle being three leagues from Port Desire , the place which we purposed to seek for our relief . 
 When we were come to this Isle we sent our boat on shore , which returned laden with birds and eggs ; and our men said that the Penguins were so thick upon the Isle , that ships might be laden with them ; for they could not go without treading upon the birds , whereat we greatly rejoiced . Then the captain appointed Charles Parker and Edward Smith , with twenty others to go on shore , and to stay upon the Isle , for the killing and drying of those Penguins , and promised 408 
 LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH a.d. 
 i59x 
 after the ship was in harbour to send the rest , not only for expedition , but also to save the small store of victuals in the ship . But Parker , Smith , and the rest of their faction suspected , that this was a devise of the Captain to leave his men on shore , that by these means there might be victuals for the rest to recover their country : and when they remembered , that this was the place where they would have slain their Captain and Master , surely ( thought they ) for revenge hereof will they leave us on shore . Which when our Captain understood , he used these speeches unto them : I understand that you are doubtful of your security through the perverseness of your own guilty consciences : it is and extreme grief unto me , that you should judge me bloodthirsty , in whom you have seen nothing but kind conversation : if you have found otherwise , speak boldly , and accuse me of the wrongs that I have done ; if not , why do you then measure me by your own uncharitable consciences ? All the company knoweth indeed , that in this place you practised to the utmost of your powers , to murder me and the master causeless , as God knoweth , which evil in this place we did remit you : & now I may conceive without doing you wrong , that you again purpose some evil in bringing these matters to repetition : but God has so shortened your confederacy , as that I nothing doubt you : it is for your Master's sake that I have forborn you in your unchristian practises : and here I protest before God , that for his sake alone I will yet endure this injury , and you shall in no sort be prejudiced or in any thing be by ime commanded : but when we come into England ( if God so favour us ) your master shall know your honesties : in the mean space be void of these suspicions , for , God I call to witness , revenge is no part of my thought . They gave him thanks , desiring to go into the harbour with the ship , which he granted . So there were ten left upon the Isle , and the last of October 
 we entered the harbour . Our Master at our last being the third time . 409 
 here having taken careful ! notice of every creek in the river , in a very convenient place , upon sandy oaze , ran the ship on ground , laying our anchor to seaward , and with our running ropes mored her to stakes upon the shore , which he had fastened for that purpose ; where the ship remained till our departure . 
 The third of November our boat with water , wood , and as many as she could carry , went for the Isle of Penguins : but being deep , she durst not proceed , but returned again the same night . Then Parker , Smith , Townesend , Purpet , with five others , desired that they might go by land , and that the boat might fetch them Penguin Isle when they were against the Isle , it being scarce a mile scarce a mile from the shore . The captain bade them do what they ne^ thought best , advising them to take weapons with them : for ( said he ) although we have not at any time seen people in this place , yet in the country there may be Savages . They answered , that here were great store of Dear , and Ostriches ; but if there were Salvages , they would devour them : notwithstanding the captain caused them to carry weapons , calivers , swords , and targets : so the sixt of November they departed by land , and the Hine men lost , boat by sea ; but from that day to this day we never herd of our men . The 11 while most of our men were at the Isle , only the Captain and Master with sixe A great mul - others being left in the ship , there came a great multi-w^swith ' tude Salvages to the ship , throwing dust in the air , Wizards , or leaping and running like brutus beasts , having vizards on faces like unto their faces like dogs faces , or else their faces are dogs dogs faces . faces indeed . We greatly feared lest they would set our ship on fire , for they would suddenly make fire , whereat we much marveled : they came to windward of our ship , and set the bushes on fire , so that we were in a very stinking smoke : but as soon as they came within our shot , we shot at them , & striking one of them in the thigh they all presently fled , so that we never herd nor saw more of them . Hereby we judged that these Canibals had slain our 9 men . When we considered what 
 410 
 LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH a.d. 
 J592 - 
 they were that thus were slain , and found that they were the principali men that would have murdered our Captain and Master , with the rest of their friends , we saw the just judgement of God , and made supplication to his divine Majesty to be merciful unto us . While we were in this harbour , our Captain and Master went with the boat to discover how far this river did run , that if need should enforce us to leave our ship , we might know how far we might go by water . So they found , that farther than 20 miles they could not The river of go with the boat . At their return they sent the boat P°rtDestr^ to the Isle or Penguins ; whereby we understood that passabie the Penguins dried to our hearts content , and that the boat . multitude of them was infinite . This Penguin hath the shape of a bird , but hath no wings , only two stumps in the place of wings , by which he swimmeth under water with as great swiftness as any fish . They live upon smelts , whereof there is great abundance upon this coast : in eating they be neither fish nor flesh : they lay great eggs , and the bird is of a reasonable bigness , very near twice so big as a duck . All the time that we were in this place , we fared passing well with eggs , Penguins , young Seals , young Guiles , beside other birds , such as I know not : of all which we had great abundance . In this place we found and herb called Scurvygrasse , which we fried The great with eggs , using train oil in stead of butter . This herb did so purge you blood , that it took away all kind gcurvygrasse of swellings , of which many died , & restored us to perfect health of body , so that we were in as good case as when we came first out of England . We stayed in this They stayed y harbour until the 22 of December , in which time we had weeks in Port dried 20000 Penguins ; & the Captain , the Master , Desire-and my self had made some salt , by laying salt water pretty de - 
 upon the rocks in holes , which in 6 days would be t0 ma^e kerned . Thus God did feed us even as it were with ’ Manna from heaven . 
 The 22 of December we departed with our ship for the Isle , where with great difficulty , by the skilful industry 411 
 The Isle of Placencia in Brasill . 
 of our Master we god 14000 of our birds , and had almost lost our captain in labouring to bring the birds aboard : & had not our Master be very expert in the set of those wicked tides , which run after many fashions , we had also lost our ship in the same place : but God of his goodness hath in all our extremities be our protector . So the 22 at night we departed with 14000 dried Penguins , not being able to fetch the rest , and shaped our course for Brasil . Now our captain rated our victuals , and brought us to such allowance , as that our victuals might last sixe months ; for our hope was , that within sixe months we might recover our country , though our sails were very bad . So the allowance was two ounces & a half of meal for a man a day , and to have so twice a week , so that 5 ounces did serve for a week . Three days a week we had oil , three spoonfuls for a man a day ; and 2 days in a week peason , a pint between 4 men a day , and every day 5 Penguins for 4 men , and 6 quarts of water for 4 men a day . This was our allowance ; wherewith ( we praise God ) we lived , though weakly , and very feeble . ' The 30 of January ' we arrived at the He of Placencia in Brasill , the first place that outward bound we were at : and having made the should , our ship lying ofF at sea , the Captain with 24 of the company went with the boat on shore , being a whole night before they could recover it . The last of January at sunrising they suddenly landed , hoping to take the Portugales in their houses , & by that means to recover some Casavi-meale , or other victuals for our relief : but when they came to the houses , they were all razed , and burned to the ground , so that we thought no man had remained on the Hand . Then the captain went to the gardens , & brought from thence fruits & roots for the company , and came aboard the ship , and brought her into a fine creek which he had found out , where we might more her by the trees , and where there was water , and hoops to trim our cask . Our case being 
 412 
 LAST VOYAGE OF THOMAS CANDISH a.d. 
 1593-very desperate , we presently laboured for dispatch away ; some cut hoops , which the coopers made , others laboured upon the sails and ship , every man traveling for his life , & still a guard was kept on shore to defend those that laboured , every man having his weapon like wise by him . The 3 of February our men with 23 shot went again to the gardens , being 3 miles from us upon the North shore , and fetched Cazavi-roots out of the ground , to relieve our company instead of bred ; for we spent not of our meal while we stayed here . The 5 of February being munday , our captain and master hasted the company to their labour ; so some went with the Coopers to gather hoops , and the rest laboured aboard . This night many of our men in the ship dreamed of murder & Ominous and slaughter : In the morning they reported their dreams , fir^aming one saying to another ; this night I dreamed , that thou ‘ wertenberg slain ; another answered , and I dreamed , that thou wertenberg slain : and this was general through the ship . The captain hearing this , who like wise had dreamed very strangely himself , gave very straight charge , that those which went on shore should take weapons with them , and saw them himself delivered into the boat , & sent some of purpose to guard the labourers . All the forenoon they laboured in quietness , & when it was ten of the clock , the heat being extreme , they came to a rock near the woods side ( for all this country is nothing but thick woods ) and there they boiled Cazavi-roots , & dined : after dinner some slept , some washed themselves in the sea , all being stripped to their shirts , & no man keeping watch , no match lighted , not a piece charged . Suddenly as they were thus sleeping & sporting , having got themselves into a corner out of sighed of the ship , there came a multitude of Indians & Portugales upon them , and slew them sleeping : only two escaped , one very soar hurt , the other not touched , by whom we understood of this miserable massacre : with all speed we manned our 
 4X3 
 Thirteene men lost at the lie of Placencia by their own extreme negligence . 
 boat , & landed to succour our men ; but we found them slain , & laid naked on a rank one by another , with their faces upward , and a cross set by them : and withal we saw two very great pinnaces come from the river of Jenero very full of men ; whom we mistrusted came from thence to take us : because there came from Jenero soldiers to Santos , when the general had taken the town and was strong in it . Of 76 persons which departed in our ship out of England , we were now left but 27 , having lost 13 in this place , with their chief furniture , as muskets , calivers , powder , & shot . Our cask was all in decay , so that we could not take in more water than was in our ship , for want of cask , and that which we had was marvellous ill conditioned : and being there mored by trees for want of cables and anchors , we still expected the cutting of our morings , to be beaten from our decks with our own furniture , & to be assailed by them of Jenero : what distress we were now driven into , I am not able to express . To depart with 8 tons of water in such bad cask was to starve at sea , & in staying our case was ruinous . These were hard choises ; but being thus perplexed , we made choice rather to fallen into the hands of the Lord , then into the hands of men : for his exceeding mercies we had tasted , & of the others cruelty we were not ignorant , So concluding to depart , the 6 of February we were off in the channel , with our ordinance & small shot in a readiness , for any assault that should come , & having a small gale of wind , we recovered the sea in most deep distress . Then bemoaning our estate one to another , and recounting over all our extremities , nothing grieved us more , then the loss of our men twice , first by the slaughter of the Canibals at Port Desire , and at this He of Placencia by the Indians and Portugals . And considering what they were that were lost , we found that all those that conspired the murdering of our captain & master were now slave by salvages , the 
 414 
 gunner only excepted . Being thus at sea , when we came to cape Frio , the wind was contrary ; so that 3 weeks we were grievously vexed with cross winds , & our water consuming , our hope of life was very small . Some desired to go to Baya , & to submit themselves to the Portugales , rather then to die for thirst : but the captain with fair persuasions altered their purpose of yielding to the Portugales . In this distress it pleased God to send us rain in such plenty , as that we were well watered , & in good comfort to return . But after we came near unto the sun , our dried Penguins began to corrupt , and there bred in them a most loathsome & ugly worm of and inch long . This worm did so mightily increase , and devour our victuals , that there was in reason no hope how we should avoid famine , but be devoured of these wicked creatures : there was nothing that they did not devour , only iron excepted : our clothes , boots , shoes , hats , shirts , stockings : and for the ship they did so eat the timbers , as that we greatly feared they would undo us , by gnawing through the ships side . Great was the care and diligence of our captain , master , and company to consume these vermin , but the more we laboured to kill them , the more they increased ; so that at the last we could not sleep for them , but they would eat our flesh , and bite like Mosquitos . In this woeful case , after we had passed the Equinoctial towards the North , our men began to fallen sick of such a monstrous disease , as I think the like was never herd of : for in their ankles it began to swell ; from thence in two days it would be in their breasts , so that they could not draw their breath , and then fell into their cods ; and their cods and yards did swell most grievously , and most dreadfully to behold , so that they could neither stand , lie , nor go . Whereupon our men grew mad with grief . Our captain with extreme anguish of his soul , was in such woeful case , that he desired only a speedy end , and though he were scarce able to speak 
 415 
 A.D. 
 1593 - 
 Cabo Frio 30 leagues east off the lie of Placencia . 
 A moststrange and noisome kind of worm bred of unsalted Penguins . 
 for sorrow , yet he persuaded them to patience , and to give God thanks , & like dutiful children to accept of his chastisement . For all this diverse grew raging mad , & some died in most loathsome & furious pain . It were incredible to write our misery as it was : there was no man in perfect health , but the captain & one boy . The master being a man of good spirit with extreme labour boar out his grief , so that it grew not upon him . To be short , all our men died except 16 , of which there were but 5 able to move . The captain was in good health , the master indifferent , captain Cotton and my self swollen and short winded , yet better then the rest that were sick , and one boy in health : upon us 5 only the labour of the ship did stand . The captain and master , as occasion served , would take in , and heave out the topsails , the master only attended on the spritsail , and all of us at the capsten without sheats and tacks . In fine our misery and weakness 
 was so great , that we could not take in , nor heave out a sail : so our topsail & spritsails were torn all 
 in pieces by the weather . The master and captain taking their turns at the helm , were mightily distressed and monstrously grieved with the most woeful lamenta - 
 They arrive atBear-haven in Ireland the 11 of June « 593 - 
 cion of our sick men . Thus as lost wanderers upon the sea , the 11 of June 1593 , it pleased God that we 
 arrived at Bearhaven in Ireland , and there ran the ship on shore : where the Irish men helped us to take in our sails , and to more our ship for Hooting : which slender pains of theirs cost the captain some ten pounds before he could have the ship in safety . Thus without victuals , sails , men , or any furniture God only guided us into Ireland , where the captain left the master and three or foure of the company to keep the ship ; and within 5 days after he and certain others 
 had passage in and English fisherboat to Padstow in Cornewall . In this manner our small remnant by Gods only mercy were preserved , and restored to our country , to whom be all honour and glory world without end . 
 . 