another testimony of the voyage of Sebastian Cabot to the west and northwest , take out of the sixth chapter of the three decade of Peter martyr of Angleria . Crutatus est oras glaciales Sebastianus quidam Cabotus genere Venetus , say a parentibus in . britanniam insulam tendentibus ( uti moris est venetorum , qui commercii causa terrarum omnium sunt hospite ) transportatus pene infans . duo be sibi navigia , propria pecunia in Brit - annia ipsa instruxit , and prim tendens cum hominibus tercentum ad septentrionem donec etiam julio mense vastas repererit glaciales mole pelago natantes , and lucem fere perpetuam , tellure tamen libera , gelu liquefacto : quare coactus fuit , uti ait , vela vertere and occidentem sequi : tetenditque tantum ad meridiem littore seize in - * 5° curvante , ut herculei freti latitudinis fere gradus aequarit : ad occidentemque profectus tantum est ut cubam insulam a laeva , longitudine graduum pene parem , habuerit . be ea littora percurren , quae baccalaos appelavit , eosdem se reperisse aquarum , sed lenes delapsus ad occidentem ait , quos Castellani , meridionales suas regiones adnavigantes , inveniunt . ergo non modd verisimilius , sed necessario concludendum est , vastos inter utramque ignotam hactenus tellurem jacere hiatus , qui viam praebeant aquis ab orient cadentibus in occidentem . quas arbitror impulsu coelorum circulariter agi in gyrum circa terrae globum , non autem demogorgo anhelante vomi , absorberique ut nonnulli senserunt , quod influxu , and refluxu forsan assentire daretur . baccalaos , Cabotus ipse terras illa appellavit , eo quod in earum pelago tantam reperierit magnorum quorundam piscium , tynnos aemulantium , sic vocatorum ab indigenis , multitudinem , ut etiam illi interdum navigia detardarent . earum regionum homines pellibus tantum coopertos reperiebat , rationis haudquaquam expertes . Ursorum inesse regionibus copiam ingentem refert , qui and ipsi piscibus vescantur . inter densa namque piscium illorum agmina seize immergunt ursi , and singulos singuli complexos , unguibusque inter squamma immissis in terram raptant and comedunt . propterea minime noxios hominibus visos esse ait . Orichalcum in plerisque locis se vidisse apud incolas praedicat . Familiarem habeo domi cobotum ipsum , and contubernalem intejdum . vocatus namque ex britannia a rege nostro catholico , post henrici majoris britanniae regis mortem , concurialis noster est , expectatque indies , ut navigia sibi parentur , quibus arcanum hoc naturae laten jam tandem detegatur . the same in english . these north sea have be search by one Sebastian Cabot , a venetian bear , who be yet but in manner a infant , his parent carry with they into England , have occasion to resort thither for trade of mar - the people of island say the sea and ice set also west . Jonas arngrimus . the english voyage chandise , as be the manner of the venetian to leave no part of the world unsearched to obtain riches . he therefore furnish two ship in England at his own charge , and first with 300 man direct his course so far towards the north pole , that even in the month of July he find monstrous heap of ice swim on the sea , and in manner continual day light , yet see he the land in that tract free from ice , which have be melt by the heat of the sun . thus see such heap of ice before he , he be enforce to turn his sail and follow the west , so coast still by the shore , that he be thereby bring so far into the south , by reason of the land bend so much southwards , that it be there almost equal in latitude , with the sea Fretum Herculeum , have the northpole elevate in manner in the same degree . he sail likewise in this tract so far towards the west , that he have the island of Cuba on his left hand , in manner in the same degree of longitude . as he travel by the coast of this great land , ( which he name baccalaos ) he say that he find the like course of the water towards the west , but the same to run more soft and gentle then the swift water which the Spaniard find in their navigation southward . wherefore it be not only more like to be true , but aught also of necessity to be conclude that between both the land hitherto unknown , there shall be certain great open place whereby the water shall thus continual pass from the east unto the west : which water i suppose to be drive about the globe of the earth by the un-cessant move and impulsion of the heaven , and not to be swallow up and cast up again by the breathe of Daemogorgon , as some have imagine , because they see the sea by increase and decrease to ebb and flow . Sebastian Cabot himself name those land baccalaos , because that in the sea thereabouts he find so great multitude of certain big fish much like unto Tunies , ( which the inhabitant call baccalaos ) that they sometime stay his ship . he find also the people of those * 5* region cover with beast skin , yet not without the use of reason . he also say there be great plenty of bear in those region which use to eat fish : for ing themselves into you water , where they perceive a multitude of these fish to lie , they fasten their claw in their scale , and so draw they to land and eat they , so ( as he say ) the bear be thus satisfy with fish , be not noisome to man . he declare further , that in many place of these region he see great plenty of copper among the inhabitant . Cabot be my very friend , who i use familiar , and delight to have he sometime keep i company in my own house . for be call out of England by the commandment of the catholique king of Castille , after the death of king Henry the seven of that name king of England , he be make one of our council and assistant , as touch the affair of the new Indies , look for ship daily to be furnish for he to discover this hide secret of nature . 