 which thing be well consider , and familiar captain know to our generali captain Frobisher , aswell for f^uhers that he be thorough furnish of the knowledge of the 5 sphere and all other skill appertain to the art of navigation , as also for the confirmation he have of the same by many year experience both by sea and land , and be persuade of a new and near passage to Cataya then by Capo de buona speranda , which the Portugal yearly use : he begin first with himself to devise , and then with his friend to confer , and lay a plain plat unto they that that voyage be not only possible by the northwest , but also he can prove easy to be perform . and further , he determine and resolve with himself to go make full proof thereof , and to accomplish or bring true certificate of the truth , or else never [ in . 58. ] to return again , know this to be the only thing of the world that be leave yet undo , whereby a notable mind may be make famous and fortunate . but although his will be great to perform this notable voyage , whereof he have conceive in his mind a great hope by sundry sure reason and secret intelligence , which here for sundry cause i leave untouched , yet he want altogether mean and ability to set forward , and perform the same . long time he confer with his private friend of these secret , and make also many offer for the perform of the same in effect unto sundry merchant of our country above 15 year before he attempt the same , as by good witness shall well appear ( albeit some evil willer which challenge to themselves the fruit of other man labour have great injure he in the report of the same , say that they have be the first author of that action , and that they have learn he the way , which themselves as yet have never go ) but perceive that hardly he be hearken unto of the merchant , which never regard virtue without sure , certain , and present gain , he repair to the court ( from whence , as from the fountain of our common wealth , all good cause have their chief increase and maintenance ) and there lay open to many great estate and learned man the plot and sum of his device . and among many honourable mind which favour his honest and commendable enterprise , he be special bind and behold to the right honourable Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick , who favourable mind and good disposition have always be ready to countenance and advance all honest action with the author and executer of the same : and so by mean of my lord his honourable countenance he receive some comfort of his cause , and by little and little , with no small expense and pain bring his cause to some perfection , and have draw together so many adventurer and such sum of money as may well defray a reasonable charge to furnish himself to sea withal . he prepare two small bark of twenty and five and 278 1578. twenty ton a piece , wherein he intend to accomplish his pretend voyage . wherefore , be furnish with the foresay two bark , and one small pinnace of ten tun burden , have therein victual and other necessary for twelve month provision , he depart upon the say voyage from black-wall the 15 or June anno domini 1576. one of the bark wherein he go be name the Gabriel , and the other the Michael ; and sail northwest from England upon the 11 of July he have sight of a high and ragged land , which he judge to be Frisland ( whereof some author have make mention ) but dare not approach the same by reason of the great store of ice that lie alongst the coast , and the great mist that trouble they not a little . not far from thence he lose company of his small pinnace , which by mean of the great storm he suppose to be swallow up of the sea , wherein he lose only four man . also the other bark name the Michael mistrust 7^ Michael the matter , convey themselves privy away from he , return and return home , with great report that he be cast me-away . the worthy captain notwithstanding these discomfort , although his mast be spring , and his top mast blow overboard with extreme foul weather , continue his course towards the northwest , know that the sea at length must needs have a end , and that some land shall have a beginning that way ; and determine therefore at the least to bring true proof what land and sea the same may be so far to the northwestwards , beyond any man that have heretofore discover . and the twenty of July he have sight of a high land , which he call queen Elizabeth foreland , after her majesty name . And sail more northerly alongst that coast , he descry another foreland with a great gut , bay , or passage , divide as it be two main land or continent asunder . there he meet with store of exceed great ice all this coast along , and covet still to continue his 279 " frobishers first entrance within you strait . frobishers straight . [ in . 59 - ] the english voyage course to the northward , be always by contrary wind detain overthwart these straight , and can not get beyond . within few day after he perceive the ice to be well consume and go , either there ingulf in by some swift current or indraft , carry more to the southward of the same straight , or else convey some other way : wherefore he determine to make proof of this place , to see how far that gut have continuance , and whether he may carry himself through the same into some open sea on the back side , whereof he conceive no small hope , and so enter the same the one and twenty of July , and pass above fifty league therein , as he report , have upon either hand a great main or continent . and that land upon his right hand as he sail westward he judge to be the continent of Asia , and there to be divide from the firm of America , which lie upon the left hand over against the same . this place he name after his name , frobisher strait , like as Magellanus at the southwest end of the world , have discover the passage to the south sea ( where America be divide from the continent of that land , which lie under the south pole ) and call the same straight , magellane strait . after he have pass 60 league into this foresay strait , he go ashore , and find sign where fire have be make . deer . he see mighty dear that seem to be mankind , which run at he , and hardly he escape with his life in a narrow way , where he be fain to use defence and policy to save his life . in this place he see and perceive sundry token of the people resort thither . And be ashore upon the top of a hill , he perceive a number of small thing fleet in the sea afar off , which he suppose to be porpose or seal , or some kind of strange fish ; but come near , he discover they to be man in small the first sight boat make of leather . and before he can descend of you Savages . down from the hill , certain of those people have almost 280 cut off his boat from he , have steal secret behind the rock for that purpose , where he speedy haste to his boat , and bend himself to his halberd , and narrow escape the danger , and save his boat . afterwards he have sundry conference with they , and they come aboard his ship , and bring he salmon salmon . and raw flesh and fish , and greedy devour the same before our man face . and to show their agility , they try many mastery upon the rope of the ship after our mariner fashion , and appear to be very strong of their arm , and nimble of their body . they exchange coat of seal , and bear skin , and such like , with our man ; and receive bell , look glass , and other toy , in recompense thereof again . after great courtesy , and many meeting , our mariner , contrary to their captain direction , begin more easy to trust they ; and five of our man go ashore be by five engrsh-them intercept with their boat , and be never since hear of to this day again : so that the captain be t^en destitute of boat , bark , and all company , have scarce sufficient number to conduct back his bark again . he can now neither convey himself ashore to rescue his man ( if he have be able ) for want of a boat ; and again the subtle traitor be so wary , as they will after that never come within our man danger . the captain notwithstanding desirous to bring some token from thence of his be there , be great discontent that he have not before apprehend some of they : and therefore to deceive the deceiver he wrought a pretty policy ; for know well how they great delight in our toy , and special in bell , he ring a pretty lowbell , make sign that he will give he the same that will come and fetch it . and because they will not come within his danger for fear , he fling one bell unto they , which of purpose he throw short , that it may fall into the sea and be lose . and to make take of the they more greedy of the matter he ring a loud bell , firstsava&-so that in the end one of they come near the ship 281 the take possession of Meta incognita . how the ore be find by chance . the english voyage side to receive the bel ; which when he think to take at the captain hand , he be thereby take himself : for the captain be ready provide let the bell fall , and catch the man fast , and pluck he with main force boat and all into his bark out of the sea . whereupon when he find himself in captivity , for very choler and disdain he bite his tongue in twain within his mouth : notwithstanding , he die not thereof , but live until he come in England , and then he die of cold which he have take at sea . now with this new prey ( which be a sufficient witness of the captain far and tedious travel towards the unknown part of the world , as do well appear by this strange infideli , who like be never see , read , nor hear of before , and who language be neither know nor understand of any ) the say captain Frobisher return homeward , and arrive in England in Harwich the 2 of October follow , and thence come to London 1576 , where he be high commend of all man for his great and notable attempt , but special famous for the great hope he bring of the passage to Cataya . and it be especial to be remember that at their first arrival in those part there lay so great store of ice all the coast along so thick together , that hardly his boat can pass unto the shore . at length , after diverse attempt he command his company , if by any possible mean they can get ashore , to bring he whatsoever thing they can first find , whether it be live or dead , stock or stone , in token of christian possession , which thereby he take in behalf of the queen most excellent majesty , think that thereby he may justify then have and enjoy of the same thing that grow in these unknown part . some of his company bring flower , some green grass ; and one bring a piece of black stone much like to a sea coal in colour , which by the weight seem to be some kind of metal or minerali . this 282 be a thing of no account in the judgement of the captain at the first sight ; and yet for novelty it be keep in respect of the place from whence it come . after his arrival in London , be demand of sundry his friend what thing he have bring they home out of that country , he have nothing leave to present they withal but a piece of this black stone . [ Iii . 60. ] and it fortune a gentlewoman one of the adventurer wife to have a piece thereof , which by chance she throw and burn in the fire , so long , that at the length be take forth , and quench in a little vinegar , it glister with a bright marquesset of gold . whereupon the matter be call in some question , it be bring to certain goldfiner in London to make assay thereof , who give out that it hold gold , and that very rich for the quantity . afterwards , the same goldfiner pro - many adven-mised great matter thereof if there be any store to turers-be find , and offer themselves to adventure for the search of those part from whence the same be bring . some that have great hope of the matter seek secret to have a lease at her majesty hand of those place , whereby to enjoy the mass of so great a public profit unto their own private gain . in conclusion , the hope of more of the same gold over to be find kindle a great opinion in the heart of many to advance the voyage again . whereupon preparation be make for a new voyage against the year follow , and the captain more special direct by commission for the search moor of this gold ore i » than for the search any further discovery of the v°ya& compassage . And be well accompany with diverse resolute and when me^ and forward gentleman , her majesty then lie at the fir the bring-right honourable the lord of Warwick house in Essex , mg of ore . he come to take his leave , and kiss her highness hand , with gracious countenance and comfortable word depart towards his charge . 