a true discourse of the three voyage of discovery , for the find of a passage to Cathaya , by the northwest , under the conduct of Martin Frobisher generali : before which , as a necessary preface be prefix a twofold e discourse , containing certain reason to prove all part of the world habitable . pen by master George best , a gentleman employ in the same voyage . what commodity and instruction may be reap by diligent read this discourse . i tturst , by example may be gather , how a dis-j ? coverer of new country be to proceed in his first attempt of any discovery . 2 item , how he shall be provide of ship , victual , munition , and choice of man . 3 how to proceed and deal with strange people , be they never so barbarous , cruel and fierce , either by lenity or otherwise . 4 how trade of merchandise may be make without money . 5 how a pilot may deal , bq environ with mountains of ice in the freeze sea 25° 6 How length of day , change of season , summer and winter do differ in ' sundry region . 7 how dangerous it be to attempt new discovery , either for the length of the voyage , or the ignorance of the language , the want of interpreter , new and unaccustomed element and air , strange and unsavoury meat , danger of thief and robber , fierceness of wild beast and fish , hugeness of wood , dangerousness of sea , dread of tempest , fear of hide rock , steepness of mountain , darkness of sudden fall fog , continual pain take without any rest , and infinite other . 8 how pleasant and profitable it be to attempt new discovery , either for the sundry sight and shape of strange beast and fish , the wonderful work of nature , the different manner and fashion of diverse nation , the sundry sort of government , the sight of strange tree , fruit , fowl , and beast , the infinite treasure of pearl , gold and silver , the news of new find land , the sundry position of the sphere , and many other . 9 how valiant captain use to deal upon extremity , and otherwise . 10 how trusty soldier dutiful use to serve . 11 also here may be see a good example to be observe of any private person , in take note , and make observation of all such thing as be requisite for a discoverer of new country . 12 last , the reader here may see a good pattern of [ in . 4.8 . i a well govern service , sundry instruction of matter of cosmography , Geographic , and navigation , as in read more at large may be see . [ experience 251 experience and reason of the sphere , to prove all part of the world habitable , and thereby to confute the position of the five zone . experience to prove thattor-rida zona be habitable . irst , it may be gather by experience of our Englishman in anno 1553. for captain Windam make a voyage with merchandise to Guinea , and enter so far within the torrida zona , that he be within three or four degree of the equinoctial , and his company abide there certain month , return , with gain . also the Englishman make another voyage very prosperous and gainful , An. 1554. to the coast of Guinea , within 3. degree of the equinoctial . and yet it be report of a truth , that all the tract from cape de las Palmas trending by C. de tres puntas alongst by Benin , unto the he of saint Thomas ( which be perpendicular under the equinoctial ) all that whole bay be more subject to many bloom and smother heat , with infectious and contagious air , than any other place in all torrida zona : and the cause thereof be some accident in the land . for it be most certain , that mountain , sea , wood and lake etc may cause through their sundry kind of situation , sundry strange and extraordinary effect , which the reason of the climb otherwise will not give . i mention these voyage of our Englishman , not so much to prove that torrida zona may be , and be inhabit , as to show their readiness in attempt long and dangerous navigation . we also among we in England have black moor , . / ethiopian , out of all part of torrida zona , which after a small continuance , can well endure the cold of our country , and why shall not we as well abide the heat of their country ? but what shall i name any more experience , see that all the coast of Guinea and Benin be inhabit of Portugal , span - 252 yard , french , and some Englishman , who there have build castle and town . only this i will say to the merchant of London , that trade yearly to Marochus , it be very certain , that the great part of the burn zone be far more temperate and cool in June , than the country of Marochus , as shall appear by these reason and experience follow . for let we first consider the breadth and bigness of this burn zone ( which as every man know , be 47. degree ) each Tropic , which be the bounder thereof , be 23. degree and a half distant from the equinoctial . imagine again two other parallel , on each side the equinoctial one , either of they distant from the equinoctial about 20. degree , which parallel may be describe either of they twice a year by the sun , be in the first degree of gemini the 11. of may , and in Leo the 13. of July , have north latitude . and again , the sun be in the first degree of sagittarius , the 12. of November , and in Aquarius the 9 of January , have south latitude , i be to prove by experience and reason , that all that distance include between these two parallel last name ( contain 40. degree in latitude , go round about the earth , accord to longitude ) be not only habitable , but the same most fruitful and delectable , and that if any extremity of heat be , the same not to be within the space of twenty degree of the equinoctial on either side , but only under and about the two tropicke , and so proportional the near you do approach to either Tropic , the more you be subject to extremity of heat ( if any such be ) and so Marochus be situate but six or seven degree from the Tropic of Cancer , shall be more subject to heat , than any place under or near the equinoctial line . and first by the experience of sundry man , yea thousand , traveller and merchant , to the east and west Indies in many place both direct under , and hard by the equinoctial , they with one consent affirm , that it abound in the midst of torrida zona with all 253 A.D. 1578. Marochus more hot than about the equinoctial . 1578. manner of grain , herb , grass , fruit , wood and cattle , that we have here , and thousand other sort , far more wholesome , delectable and precious , than any we have in these northern climate , as very well shall appear to he that will read the history and navi - marvellous fruitful soil under the equinoctial . gation of such as have travel Arabia , India intra and extra gangem , the island Moluccas , America , etc which all lie about the middle of the burn zone , where it be true report , that the great herb , as be radish , lettuce , colewort , borage , and such like , do wax ripe , great , more savoury and delectable in taste than we , within sixteen day after the seed be sow . wheat be sow the first of February , be [ hl 49 ] find ripe the first of May , and general , where it be less fruitful , the wheat will be ripe the four month after the seed be sow , and in some place will bring forth a ear as big as the wrist of a man’s arm contain 1000 grain ; bean , peace , etc be there ripe twice a year . also grass be cut down , will grow up in six day above one foot high . if our cattle be transport thither , within a small time their young one become of big stature , and more fat than great tree . ever they will have be in these country . there be find in every wood in great number , such timber tree as twelve man hold hand together be not able to fathom . and to be short , all they that have be there with one consent affirm , that there be the goodly green meadow and plain , the fair mountain commodity and pleasure under the equinoctial . cover with all sort of tree and fruit , the fair valley , the goodly pleasant fresh river , store with infinite kind of fish , the thick wood , green and bear fruit all the whole year , that be in all the world . and as for gold , silver , and all other kind of metal , all kind of spice and delectable fruit , both for delicacy and health , be there in such abundance , as hitherto they have be think to have be breed no where else but there . and in conclusion , it be now think that no where else but under the equinoctial , 254 or not far from thence , be the earthly paradise , and the only place of perfection in this world . and that these thing may seem the less strange , because it have be account of the old philosopher , that there can nothing prosper for the extreme heat of the sun continual go over their head in the zodiac , i think good here to allege such naturali cause as to i seem very substantiali and sure reason . first you be to understand that the sun do work his moor or less heat in these low part by two mean , the one be by the kind of angle that the sun beam do make with the earth , as in all torrida zona iter make perpendicular right angle in some place or other at noon , and towards the two pole very oblique and uneven angle . and the other mean be the long or short continuance of the sun above the horizon . so that wheresoever these two cause do most concur , there be most excess of heat : and when the one be want , the rigor of the heat be less . for though the sun beam do beat perpendicular upon any region subject unto it , if it have no continuance or abode above the horizon , to work his operation in , there can no hot effect proceed . for nothing can be do in a moment . and this second cause mora solis supra horizontem , the time of the sun abide above the horizon , the old philosopher never remember , but regard only the manner of Angles that the sun beam make with the horizon , which if they be equal and right , the heat be the great , as in torrida zona : if they be unequal and oblique , the heat be the less , as towards both pole , which reason be very good and substantiali : for the perpendicular beam reflect and reverberate in themselves , so that the heat be double , every beam strike twice , and by unite be multiply , and continue strong in form of a column . but in our latitude of 50. and 60. degree , the sun beam descend oblique and slant wise , and so strike but once and depart , and therefore our 255 heat be cause by two mean that be by his manner of angle and by his continuance . note this reason . heat be the less for any effect that the angle of the sun beam make . yet because we have a long continuance of the sun presence above our horizon than they have under the equinoctial ; by this continuance the heat be increase , for it shine to we 16. or 18. hour sometime , when it continue with they but twelve hour always . and again , our night be very short wherein cold vapour use to abound , be but six or eight hour long , whereas they be always twelve hour long , by which two advantage of long day and short night , though we want the equality of angle , it come to-passe that in summer our heat here be as great as they be there , as have be prove by experience , and be nothing dissonant from good reason . therefore whosoever will right weigh the force of cold and heat in any region , must not only consider the angle that the sun beam make , but also the continuance of the same above the horizon . as first to they under the equinoctial the sun be twice a year at noon in their zenith perpendicular over their head , and therefore during the two hour of those two day the heat be very urgent , and so perhaps it will be in four or five day more an hour every day , until the sun in his proper motion have cross the equinoctial ; so that this extreme heat cause by the perpendicular angle of the sun beam , endure but two hour of two day in a year . but if any man say the sun may scalde a good while before and after it come to the meridian , so far forth as reason lead , i be content to allow it , and therefore i will measure and proportion the sun heat , by compare the Angles there , with the Angles make here in England , because this temperature be best know unto we . as for example , the two . day of march , when under the equinoctial it be half hour past eight of the clock in the morning , the sun will be in the east about 38. degree above the horizon , because there it rise always at six 256 of the clock , and move every hour 15. degree , and so high very near will it be with we at London the say eleven day of march at noon . and therefore look what force the sun have with we at noon , the eleven of march , the same force it seem to have under the equinoctial at half a hour past eight in the morning , or rather less force under the equinoctial . for with we the sun have be already six hour above the horizon , and so have purify and cleanse all the vapour , and thereby his force increase at noon ; but under the equinoctial , the sun have be up but two hour and a half , have sufficient to do , to purge and consume the cold and moist vapour of the long night past , and as yet have wrought no effect of heat . and therefore i may bold pronounce , that there be much less heat at half a hour past eight under the equinoctial , then be with we at noon : i fortiori . but in march we be not only content to have the sun shine , but we great desire the same . likewise the 11 of June , the sun in our meridian be 62 degree high at London : and under the equinoctial it be so high after 10 of the clock , and see then it be beneficial with we ; a fortiori it be beneficial to they after 10 of the clock . and thus have we measure the force of the sun great heat , the hot day in the year , under the equinoctial , that be in march and September , from six till after ten of the clock in the morning , and from two until sun set . and this be conclude , by respect only the first . cause of heat , which be the consideration of the angle of the sun beam , by a certain similitude , that whereas the sun shine never above twelve hour , more than eight of they will be cool and pleasant even to we , much more to they that be acquaint always with such warm place . so there remain less than four hour of any excessive heat , and that only in the two summer day of the year , that be the eleven day of march , and the foure-vii 257 r teenth of September : for under the equinoctial they have two summer , the one in march , and the other in September , which be our spring and autumn : and likewise two winter , in June and December , which be our summer and winter , as may well appear to he that have only taste the principle of the sphere . but if the sun be in either Tropic , or approach near thereunto , then may we more easy measure the force of his meridian altitude , that it strike upon the equinoctial . as for example , the twelve of June the sun will be in the first degree of Cancer . then look what force the heat of the sun have under the equinoctial , the same force and great it have in all that parallel , where the pole be elevate between fourty and seven , Paris in . and fourty and eight degree . and therefore Paris in France ss as prance the twelve day of June sustain more heat of the Equinoc - the sun , than saint Thomas hand lie near the tiall in June , same meridian do likewise at noon , or the hand Taprobana , Moluccae , or the firm land of Peru in America , which all lie underneath the equinoctial . for upon the twelve day of June aforesaid , the sun beam at noon do make a isoscheles triangle , who vertex be the centre of the sun , the basis a line extend from saint Thomas hand under the equinoctial , unto Paris in France near the same meridian : therefore the two angle of the base must needs be equal per 5. primi , ergo the force of the heat equal , if there be no other cause then the reason of the angle , as the old philosopher have appoint . but in June be because at Paris the sun rise two hour before it m^then0* r^set^ to under the equinoctial , and set like-und the wise two hour after they , by mean of the obliquity equinoctial , of the horizon , in which time of the sun presence four hour in one place more than the other , it work some effect more in one place then in the other , and be of equal height at noon , it must then needs follow to be more hot in the parallel of Paris , than it be under the equinoctial . 258 also this be a other reason , that when the sun set to they under the equinoctial , it go very deep and low under their horizon , almost even to their antipode , whereby their twilight be very short , twilight and their night be make very extreme dark and long , a ’ sl®rter . ’ and so the moisture and coldness of the long night dark under wonderful increase , so that at length the sun the equinoc-rising can hardly in many hour consume and drive at away the cold humour and moist vapour of the night Paris ' past , which be clean contrary in the parallel of Paris : for the sun go under their horizon but very little , after a slope sort , whereby their night be not very dark , but lightsome , as look into the north in a clear night without cloud it do manifest appear , their twilight be long : for the parallel of Cancer cut not the horizon of Paris at right angle , but at angle very uneven , and unlike as it do the horizon of the equinoctial . also the summer day at Paris be sixteen hour long , and the night but eight : where contrariwise under the equinoctial the day be but twelve hour long , and so long be also the night , in whatsoever parallel the sun be : and therefore look what odds and difference of proportion there be between . the sun abode above the horizon in Paris , and the abode it have under the equinoctial , ( it be in cancer ) the same proportion will seem to be between the heat of the one place , and heat of the other : [ three . 51. ] for other thing ( as the angle of the whole ark of the sun progress that day in both place ) be equal . but under the equinoctial the presence and abode of the sun above the horizon be equal to his absence , and abide under the horizon , each be twelve hour . and at Paris the continuance and abode of the sun be above the horizon sixteen hour long , and but eight hour absence , which proportion be double , from which if the proportion of the equality be subtract to find the difference , there will remain still a double propor - 259 inn what proportion the angle of the sun beante heat . they use and have need of fire under the equinoctial . cold intermingle with heat under the equinoctial . the english voyage cion , whereby it seem to follow , that in June the heat at Paris be double to the heat under the equinoctial . for ( as i have say ) the angle of the sun beam be in all point equal , and the cause of difference be , Mora solis supra horizontem , the stay of the sun in the one horizon more than in the other . therefore , whosoever can find out in what proportion the angle of the sun beam heat , and what increase the sun continuance do add thereunto , it may express be set down , what force of heat and cold be in all region . thus you partly see by compare a climate to we well know , and familiar acquaint by like height of the sun in both place , that under the equinoctial in June be no excessive heat , but a temperate air rather tend to cold . for as they have there for the most part a continual moderate heat , so yet sometime they be a little pinch with cold , and use the benefit of fire as well as we , especial in the evening when they go to bed , for as they lie in hang bed tie fast in the upper part of the house , so will they have fire make on both side their bed , of which two fire , the one they devise superstitious to drive away spirit , and the other to keep away from they the coldness of the night . also in many place of torrida zona , especial in the high land somewhat mountainous , the people a little shrink at the cold , and be often force to provide themselves clothing , so that the Spaniard have find in the west Indies many people clothe , especial in winter , whereby appear , that with their heat there be cold intermingle , else will they never provide this remedy of clothing , which to they be rather a grief and trouble then otherwise . for when they go to war , they will put off all their apparel , think it to be cumbersome , and will always go naked , that they thereby may be more nimble in their fight . some there be that think the middle zone extreme hot , because the people of the country can , and doe 260 • .... IS78 ' live without clothe , wherein they childish be deceive : for our climb rather tend to extremity of cold , because we can live without clothe : for this our double line , fur , and wear so many clothes , be a remedy against extremity , and argue not the goodness of the habitation , but inconvenience and injury of cold : and that be rather the moderate , temperate , and delectable habitation , where none of these troublesome thing be require , but that we may live naked and bare , as nature bring we forth . other again imagine the middle zone to be extreme hot , because the people of Africa , especial the ethiopian , be so coal black , and their hair like wool curl short , which blackness and curl hair they suppose to come only by the parch heat of the sun , which how it shall be possible i can see : for even under the equinoctial in America , and in the east Indies , and in the hand Moluccae the people be not black , but tauney and white , with long hair uncurl as we have , so that if the ethiopian blackness ethiopian come by the heat of the sun , why shall not those Americans and Indians also be as black as they , see ’ the sun be equal distant from they both , they abide in one parallel : for the concave and convex superficies of the orb of the sun be concentrike , and equidistant to the earth ; except any man shall imagine somewhat of aux solis , and oppositum , which indifferent may be apply aswell to the one place as to the other . but the sun be think to give no otherwise heat , but by way of angle in reflection , and not by his nearness to the earth : for throughout all Africa , yea in the midst of the middle zone , and in all other place upon the top of mountain there lie con - ume tinuall snow , which be near to the orb of the sun , ^ateth not then the people be in the valley , by so much as the but oneiy height of these mountain amount unto , and yet the reflection . sun notwithstanding his nearness , can not melt the snow for want of convenient place of reflection . also 261 at black moor son bear in England . [ Iii . 52. ] the colour of the people in Meta incognita . the complexion of the people of Meta incognita . the english voyage the middle region of the air where all the hail , frost , and snow be engender , be near unto the sun then the earth be , and yet there continue perpetuali cold , because there be nothing that the sun beam may reflect against , whereby appear that the nearness of the body of the sun work nothing . therefore to return again to the black moor . i my self have see a ethiopian as black as a coal bring into England , who take a fair english woman to wife , beget a son in all respect as black as the father be , although England be his native country , and a english woman his mother : whereby it seem this blackness proceed rather of some natural infection of that man , which be so strong , that neither the nature of the climb , neither the good complexion of the mother concur , can any thing alter , and therefore , we can impute it to the nature of the climb . and for a more fresh example , our people of Meta incognita ( of who and for who this discourse be take in hand ) that be bring this last year into England , be all general of the same colour that many nation be , lie in the midst of the middle zone . and this their colour be not only in the face which be subject to sun and air , but also in their body , which be still cover with garment as we be , yea the very suck child of twelve month age have his skin of the very same colour that most have under the equinoctial , which thing can proceed by reason of the climb , for that they be at least ten degree more towards the north than we in England be , no , the sun never come near their zenith by fourty degree : for in effect , they be within three or four degree of that which they call the freeze zone , and as i say , fourty degree from the burn zone , whereby it follow , that there be some other cause then the climate or the son perpendicular reflection , that shall cause the ethiopian great blackness . and the most probable cause to my judgement be , that this blackness proceed of some 262 naturali infection of the first inhabitant of that country , and so all the whole progeny of they descend , be still pollute with the same blot of infection . therefore it shall not be far from our purpose , to examine the first originali of these black man , and how by a lineali descent they have hitherto continue thus black . it manifest and plain appear by holy scripture , the cause of that after the generail inundation and overflow of EthwPians the earth , there remain no more man alive but no ‘ and his three son , Sem , cham , and Japhet , who only be leave to possess and inhabit the whole face of the earth : therefore all the sundry descent that until this present day have inhabit the whole earth , must needs come of the offspring either of Sem , cham , or Japhet , as the only son of Noe , who all three be white , and their wife also , by course of nature shall have beget and bring forth white child . but the envy of our great and continual enemy the wicked spirit be such , that as he can not suffer our old father Adam to live in the felicity and angellike state wherein he be first create , but tempt he , seek and procure his ruin and fall : so again , find at this flood none but a father and three son live , he so cause one of they to transgress and disobey his father commandment , that after he all his posterity shall be accurse . the fact of disobedience be this : when the ark of Noe at the commandment of God have make the ark and enter therein , and the floodgate of heaven be open , so that the whole face of the earth , every tree and mountain be cover with abundance of water , he straite command his son and their wife , that they shall with reverence and fear behold the justice and mighty power of God , and that during the time of the flood while they remain in the ark , they shall use continency , and abstain from carnail copulation with their wife : and many other precept he give unto they , and admonition touch the justice of God , in revenge sin , and his mercy in deliver they , 263 [ in . 53. ] the english voyage who nothing deserve it . which good instruction and exhortation notwithstanding his wicked son I|be disobey , and be persuade that the first child bear after the flood ( by right and law of nature ) shall inherit and possess all the dominion of the earth , he contrary to his father commandment while they be yet in the ark , use company with his wife , and crafty go about thereby to disinherit the offspring of his other two brethren : for the which wicked and detestable fact , as a example for contempt of almighty God , and disobedience of parent , God will a son shall be bear who name be Chus , who not only it self , but all his posterity after he shall be so black and loathsome , that it may remain a spectacle of disobedience to all the world . and of this black and curse Chus come all these black moor which be in Africa , for after the water be vanish from off - the face of the earth , and that the land be dry , Sem choose that part of the land to inhabit in , which now be call Asia , and Japhet have that which now be call Europa , wherein we dwell , and Africa remain for cham and his black son Chus , and be call Chamesis after the father name , be perhaps a curse , dry , sandy , and unfruitful ground , fit for such a generation to inhabit in . thus you see , that the cause of the ethiopian blackness be the curse and naturali infection of blood , and not the distemperature of the climate ; which also may be prove by this example , that these black man be find in all part of Africa , as well without the tropicke , as within , even unto Capo de buona Speranza southward , where , by reason of the sphere , shall be the same temperature that be in Sicilia , Morea and Candie , where all be of very good complexion . wherefore i conclude , that the blackness proceed not of the hotenesse of the climb , but as i say , of the infection of blood , and therefore this their argument gather of the african blackness be not able to destroy the temperature of the middle zone . we may therefore very well be ascertain , 264 that under the equinoctial be the most pleasant and delectable place of the world to dwell in ; where although the sun for two hour in a year be direct over their head , and therefore the heat at that time somewhat of force , yet because it come so seidome , and continue so small a time , when it come , it be not to be weigh , but rather the moderate heat of other great tem-time in all the year to be remember . and if the feature under heat at any time shall in the short day wax somewhat ^umoc~ urgent , the coldness of the long night there will easy refresh it , accord as Honterus say , speak of the temperature under the equinoctial . qu6dque die solis violento incanduit aestu , Humida nox reficit , paribusque refrigerat horis . if the heat of the sun in the day time do burn or parch any thing , the moisture of the night do cool and refresh the same again , the sun be as long absent in the night , as it be present in the day . also our author of the sphere , Johannes de Sacro Bosco , in the chapter of the zodiac , derive the etymologic of Zodiacus , of the greek word so , which in latin signify vita , life ; for out of Aristotle he allege , that secundum accessum and recessum solis in Zodiaco , fiunt generationes and corruptione in rebus inferioribus : accord to the sun go to and fro in the zodiac , the inferior body take their cause of generation and corruption . than it follow , that where there be most go too and fro , there be most generation and corruption : which must needs be between the two tropicke ; for there the sun go too and from most , and no where else but there . therefore between they under the two tropike , that be , in the middle zone , be great Equinoctiallis increase , multiplication , generation , and corruption of thing , which also we find by experience ; for there be it summer twice in the year , and twice winter , so that they have two harvest in the year , and continual spring . see then the middle zone fall out so 265 great heat under the tropics . the english voyage temperate , it rest to dedare where the hot part of the world shall be , for we find some place more hot than other . to answer this doubt , reason persuade , the ho test place in the world to be under and about the two tropicke ; for there more then in any other place do both the cause of heat concur , that be , the perpendicular fall of the sun beam , at right angle , and a great continuance of the sun above the horizon , the pole there be elevate three or four and twenty degree . and as before i conclude , that though the sun be perpendicular to they under the equinoctial , yet because the same continue but a small time , ( their day be short , and their night long ) and the speedy departure of the sun from their zenith , because of the sudden cross of the zodiac with the equinoctial , and that by such continual course and recourse of hot and cold , the temperature grow moderate , and very well able to be endure : so now to they under the two tropicke , the sun have once by his proper motion decline twenty degree from the equinoctial , begin to draw near their zenith , which may be ( as before ) about the eleven day of May , and then begin to send his beam almost at right angle , about which time the sun enter into the first degree of gemini , and with this almost right angle the sun beam will continue until it be past cancer , that be , the space of two month every day at noon , almost perpendicular over their head , be then the time of solstitium Aestivale : which so long continuance of the sun about their zenith may cause a extreme heat ( if any be in the world ) but of necessity far more heat than can be under the equinoctial , where the sun have not such long abode in the zenith , but pass away therehence very quick . also under the tropicke , the day be long by a hour and a half , than it be under the equinoctial ; wherefore the heat of the sun have a long time of operation , must needs be increase , 266 especial see the night wherein cold and moisture do abound under the tropicke , be less than it be under the equinoctial . therefore i gather , that under the tropicke be the hot place , not only of torrida zona , but of any other part of the world , especial because there both cause of heat do concur , that be , the perpendicular fall of the sun beam two month together , and the long abode of the sun presence above the Horison . and by this mean more at large be prove , that Marochus in summer be far more hot , then at any time under the equinoctial , because it be situate so near the Tropic of Cancer , and also for the length of their day . neither yet do i think , that the region situate under the Tropic be not habitable , for they be find to be very fruitful also ; although Marochus and some other part of Africa near the Tropike for the dryness of the native sandy soil , and [ three . 54. ] some accident may seem to some to be intemperate for over much heat . for Ferdinandus Oviedus speak of Cuba and Hispaniola , hand of America , lie hard Cuba . under , or by the Tropike of Cancer , say , that these htspant°la-hands have as good pasture for cattle , as any other country in the world . also , they have most wholesome and clear water , and temperate air , by reason whereof the herd of beast be much big , fat , and of better taste , than any in Spain , because of the rank pasture , who moisture be better digest in the herb or grass , by continual ! and temperate heat of the sun , whereby be make more fat and unctious , it be of better and more steadfast nourishment : for continual and temperate heat do not only draw much moisture out of the earth to the nourishment of such thing as grow , and be engender in that climb , but do also by moderation preserve the same from putrify , digest also , and condensate or thicken the say moist nourishment into a gum and ■ unctious substance , whereby appear also , that under moderat'tem the tropike be both wholesome , fruitful , and pleasant perature . 267 habitation , whereby last it follow , that all the middle zone , which until of late day have be count and call the burn , broil , and parch zone , be now find to be the most delicate , temperate , commodious , pleasant , and delectable part of the world , and especial under the equinoctial . have now sufficient at large declare the temperature of the middle zone , it remain to speak somewhat also of the moderate and continual heat in cold region , as well in the night as in the day all the summer long , and also how these region be habitable to the inhabitant of the same , contrary to the opinion of the old writer . of the temperature of cold region all the summer long , and also how in winter the same be habitable , especial to the inhabitant thereof . he cold region of the world be those , which tend towards the pole arctike , and antarctike , be without the circuit or bound of the seven climate : which assertion agreeable to the opinion of the old writer , be find and set out in our author of the sphere , Johannes de Ninus climate . Sacrobosco , where he plain say , that without the seven climate , which be bound by a parallel pass at fifty degree in latitude , all the habitation beyond be discommodious and intolerable . but gemma Frisius a late writer find England and Scotland to be without the compass of those climate , wherein he know to be very temperate and good habitation , add thereunto two other climate , the uttermost parallel whereof pass by 56. degree in latitude , and therein com-prehendeth over and above the first computation , England , Scotland , Denmark , Moscovia , etc which all be rich and mighty kingdom . 268 the old writer persuade by bare conjecture , go about to determine of those place , by compare they to their own complexion , because they feel they to be hardly tolerable to themselves , and so take thereby a argument of the whole habitable earth ; as if a man bear in Marochus , or some other part of Barbary , comparison shall at the latter end of summer upon the sudden , either naked , or with his thin vesture , be bring into England , he will judge this region present not to be habitable , because he be bring up in so warm a country , be not able here to live , for so sudden a alteration of the cold air : but if the same man have come at the begin of summer , and so afterward by little and little by certain degree , have feel and acquaint himself with the frost of autumn , it will have seem by degree to harden he , and so to make it far more tolerable , and by use after one year or two , the air will seem to he more temperate . it be count a great matter in the old time , that there be a brass pot break in sunder with freeze water in Pontus , which after be bring and show in Delphis , in token of a miraculous cold region and winter , and therefore consecrate to the temple of Apollo . this effect be wrought in the parallel of fouretie three degree in latitude , it be present count a place very hardly and uneasy to be inhabit for the great cold . and how then can such man define upon other region very far without that parallel , whether they be inhabit or not , see that in so near a place they so gross mistake the matter , and other their follower be content with the invention of the old author , have persist willing in the same opinion , with more confidence than consideration of the cause : so light be that opinion receive , as touch the unhabitable climb near and under the pole . therefore i be at this present to prove , that all the land lie between the last climate even unto the point ° ' direct under either pole , be or may be inhabit , habitable . 369 especial of such creature as be engender and breed therein . for indeed it be to be confess , that some particular live creature can live in every particular place or region , especial with the same joy and felici tie , as it do where it be first breed , for the certain agreement of nature that be between the place and the thing elephant . breed in that place ; as appear by the elephant , which be translate and bring out of the second or three climate , though they may live , yet will they never engender or bring forth young . also we see the like in many kind orange tree , of plant and herb ; for example , the orange tree , although in Naples they bring forth fruit abundant , in room and Florence they will bear only fair green leaf , but not any fruit : and translate into England , they will hardly bear either flower , fruit , or leaf , but be the next winter pinch and wither with cold : yet it follow not for this , that England , Rome , and Florence shall not be habitable . twa cause of ln the prove of these cold region habitable , i shall heat - very short , because the same reason serve for this purpose , which be allege before in the prove the middle zone to be temperate , especial see all heat and cold proceed from the sun , by the mean either of the angle which his beam do make with the horizon , or else by the long or short continuance of the sun presence above ground : so that if the sun beam do beat perpendicular at right angle , than there be one cause of heat , and if the sun do also long continue above the horizon , than the heat thereby be much increase by access of this other cause , and so grow to a kind of extremity . and these two cause , as i say before , do most concur under the two Tropic , and therefore there be the great heat of the world . and likewise , where both these cause be most absent , there be great want of heat , and increase of cold ( see that cold be nothing but the privation and absence of heat ) and if one cause be want , and the other present , the effect will grow indifferent . therefore this be to be 270 understand , that the near any region be to the equinoctial , the high the sun do rise over their head at noon , and so make either right or near right angle , but the sun tarry with they so much the short time , and cause short day , with long and cold night , to restore the damage of the day past , by reason of the moisture consume by vapour . but in such region , over the which the sun rise low ( as in region extend towards either pole ) it make there unequal angle , but the sun continue long , and make long day , and cause so much short and warm night , as retain warm vapour of the day past . for there be find by experience summer hight night night in Scotland and Gothland very hot , when under near t / ie the equinoctial they be find very cold . this benefit of the sun long continuance and increase of the day , do augment so much the more in cold region as they be near the pole , and cease not increase until it come direct under the point of the pole arcticke , where the sun continue above ground the space of .. six month or half a year together , and so the day ? it be half a year long , that be the time of the sun be in the north sign , from the first degree of Aries until the last of virgo , that be all the time from our io day of march until the 14 of September . the sun their - °f fore during the time of these six month without any six monet , is-offence or hindrance of the night , give his influence upon those land with heat that never cease during that time , which make to the great increase of summer , by reason of the sun continuance . therefore it follow , that though the sun be not there very high over their head , to cause right angle beam , and to give great heat , yet the sun be there sometime almost 24 degree high do cast a convenient and mean heat , which there continue without hindrance of the night the space of six month ( as be before say ) during which time there follow to be a convenient , moderate and moderate heat temperate heat : or else rather it be to be suspect then under you pole . 271 the sun never set in 182 day . [ Iii . 56. ] horizon and equinoctial all one under the pole . the english voyage heat there to be very great , both for continuance , and also , quia virtus unita crescit , the virtue and strength of heat unite in one increase . if then there be such a moderate heat under the pole , and the same to continue so long time ; what shall move the old writer to say there can be place for habitation . and that the certainty of this temperate heat under both the pole may more manifest appear , let we consider the position and quality of the sphere , the length of the day , and so gather the height of the sun at all time , and by consequent the quantity of his angle , and so last the strength of his heat . those land and region lie under the pole , and have the pole for their zenith , must needs have the equinoctial circle for their horizon : therefore the sun enter into the north sign , and describe every 24 hour a parallel to the equinoctial by the diurnal motion of primum mobile , the same parallel must needs be whole above the horizon : and so look how many degree there be from the first of Aries to the last of virgo , so many whole revolution there be above their horizon that dwell under the pole , which amount to 182 , and so many of our day the sun continue with they . during which time they have there continual day and light , without any hindrance of moist night . yet it be to be note , that the sun be in the first degree of Aries , and last degree of virgo , make his revolution in the very horizon , so that in these 24 hour half the body of the sun be above the horizon , and the other half be under his only centre , describe both the horizon and the equinoctial circle . and therefore see the great declination of the sun be almost 24 degree , it follow , his great height in those country to be almost 24 degree . and so high be the sun at noon to we in London about the 29 of October , be in the 15 degree of Scorpio , and likewise the 21 of January be in the 15 of Aquarius . therefore look what force the sun at noon have in 272 London the 29 of October , the same force of heat it London . have , to they that dwell under the pole , the space almost of two month , during the time of the summer solstitium , and that without intermingle of any cold night ; so that if the heat of the sun at noon can be well measure in London ( which be very hard to do , because of the long night which engender great moisture and cold ) then will manifest appear by express number the manner of the heat under the pole , which certain must needs be to the inhabitant very commodious and profitable , if it incline not to overmuch heat , and if moisture do not want . for as in October in England we find temperate air , and have in our garden herb and flower notwithstanding our cold1 night , how much more shall they have the same good air , be continual without night . this heat of we continue but one hour , while the sun be in that meridian , but they continue a long time in one height . this our heat be weak , and by the coolness of the night vanish , that heat be strong , and by continual access be still increase and strengthen . and thus by a similitude of the equal height of the sun in both place appear they come - commodious modious and moderate heat of the region under the t^ngt " ider . ° the pole . pole . 1 and sure i can think that the divine providence have make any thing uncommunicable , but to have give such order to all thing , that one way or other the same shall be employ , and that every thing and place shall be tolerable to the next : but especial all thing in this low world be give to man to have dominion and use thereof . therefore we need no long to doubt of the temperate and commodious habitation under the pole during the time of summer . but all the controversy consist in the winter , for than the sun leave those region , and be no more see for the space of other six month , in the which time all the sun course be under their horizon for seven 273 s the space of half a year , and then those region ( say some ) must needs be deform with horrible darkness , and continual night , which may be the cause that beast can not seek their food , and that also the cold shall then be intolerable . by which double evil all live creature shall be constrain to die , and be not able to endure the extremity and injury of winter , and famine ensue thereof , but that all thing shall perish before the summer follow , when they shall bring forth their brood and young , and that for these cause the say climb about the pole shall be desolate and not habitable . to all which objection may be answer in this manner : first , that though the sun be absent from they those six month , yet it follow not that there shall be such extreme darkness ; for as the sun be depart under their horizon , so be it not far from they : and not so soon as the sun fall so sudden come the dark night ; but the evening do substitute and prolong the day a good while after by twilight . after which time the residue of the night receive light of the moon and star , until the break of the day , which give also a certain light before the sun rise ; so that by these mean the night be seidome dark ; which be verify in all part of the world , but least in the middle zone under the equinoctial , where the twilight be short , and the night dark than in any other place , because the sun go under their horizon so deep , even to their antipode . we see in England in the summer night , when the sun go not far under the horizon , , that by the light of the moon and star we may travel all night , and if occasion be , do some other labour also . and there be no man that doubt whither our cattle can see to feed in the night , see we be so well certify thereof by our experience : and by reason of the sphere our night shall be dark than any time under the pole . the astronomer consent that the sun descend 274 from our upper hemisphere at the 18 parallel under the horizon make a end of twilight , so that at length the dark night ensue , and that afterward in the morning the sun approach again within as many parallel , do drive away the night by access of the twilight . again , by the position of the sphere under the pole , the horizon , and the equinoctial be all one . Theise revolution therefore that be parallel to the equinoctial be also parallel to the horizon , so that the sun descend under that horizon , and there describe certain parallel not far distant , do not bring dark night to those region until it come to the parallel distant 18 [ three . 57 ] degree from the equinoctial , that be , about the 21 degree of Scorpio , which will be about the 4 day of our November , and after the winter solstitium , the sun return back again to the 9 degree of Aquarius , which will be about the 19 of January ; during which time only , that be , from the 4 day of November until the 19 day of January , which be about six week space , those region do want the commodity of twilight : therefore , during the time of these say six month of darkness under the pole , the night be destitute of the benefit of the sun and the say twilight only for the the region space of six week or thereabouts . and yet neither this under thepole time of six week be without remedy from heaven ; for the moon with her increase light have access at that time , and illuminate the month lack light every one of themselves several half the course of that month , by who benefit it come to pass that the night name extreme dark possess those region no long than one month , neither that continual , or all at one time , but this also divide into two sort of short night , of the which either of they endure for the space of 15 day , and be illuminate of the moon accord . and this reason be gather out of the sphere , whereby we may testify that the summer be warm and fruitful , and the winter night under the pole be tolerable to live creature . and if it be so that the winter and 275 winter night time of darkness there be very cold , yet have not nature unfer^ leave they provide therefore : for there the beast be sng crea - cover with hair so much the thick inn how much the ture . vehemency of cold be great ; by reason whereof the best and rich fur be bring out of the cold region . also the fowl of these cold country have thick skin , thick feather , and more store of down then in other hot place . Oure english man that travel to saint Nicholas , and go a fish to Wardhouse , enter far within the circle arctike , and so be in the freeze zone , and yet there , aswell as in island and all along those northern sea , they find the great store of the great fish that be ; as whale , etc and also abundance of mean fish ; as herring , cod , haddock , bret , etc which argue that the sea as well as the land may be and be well frequent and inhabit in the cold country . a objection but some perhaps will marvel there shall be such °f Meta incog - temperate place in the region about the pole , when at it under 62 degree in latitude our captain Frobisher and his company be trouble with so many and so great mountain of fleet ice , with so great storm of cold , with such continual snow on top of mountain , and with such barren soil , there be neither wood nor tree , but low shrub , and such like . to all which objection may be answer thus : first , those infinite island of ice be engender and congeal in time of winter , and now by the great heat of summer be thaw , and then by ebb , flood , wind , and current , be drive to and fro , and trouble the fleet ; so that this be a argument to prove the heat in summer there to be great , that be able to thaw so monstrous mountain of ice . as for continual snow on top of mountain , it be there not otherwise then be in the hot part of the middle zone , where also lie great snow all the summer long upon top of mountain , because there be not sufficient space for the sun reflection , whereby the snow shall be melt . touch the cold stormy 276 wind and the barrenness of the country , it be there as it be in Cornwall and Devonshire in England , which part though we know to be fruitful and fertile , yet on the north side thereof all alongst the coast within seven or eight mile off the sea there can neither hedge nor tree grow , although they be diligent by art husband and see unto : and the cause thereof be the northern drive wind , which come from the sea be so bitter and sharp that they kill all the young and tender plant , and suffer scarce any thing to grow ; and so be it in the island of Meta incognita , which be subject most to Meta incogeast and northeastern wind , which the last year choke habit . up the passage so with ice that the fleet can hardly recover their port . yet notwithstanding all the objection that may be , the country be habitable ; for there be man , woman , child , and sundry kind of beast in great plenty , as bear , dear , hare , fox and dog : all kind of fly fowl , as duck , seamewe , wilmot , partridge , lark , crow , hawk , and such like , as in the three book you shall understand more at large . than it appear that not only the middle zone but also the zone about the pole be habitable .