a brief relation of the new find land , and the commodity thereof . menappoint to make search . hat which we do call the newfound land , and the Frenchman bacalaos , be a hand , or rather ( after the opinion of some ) it consist of sundry hand and break land , situate in the north region of America , upon the gulf and entrance of the great river call S. Laurence in new find land be all island or break land Canada . into the which , navigation may be make both on the south and north side of this hand . the land lie south and north , contain in length between three and 400 mile , account from cape race ( which be in 46 degree 25 minute ) unto the grand bay in 52 degree of septentrionali latitude . the hand round goodly road about have very many goodly bay and harbour , safe and harbour . roajs for ship , the like not to be find in any part of the know world . the common opinion that be have of intemperature and extreme cold that shall be in this country , as of some part it may be verify , namely the north , where i grant newfound ft be more cold than in country of Europe , which be land be habit - unjer g same elevation : even so it can stand with ’ reason and nature of the clime , that the south part shall be so intemperate as the brute have go . for as the same do lie under the climate of Briton , Anjou , Poictou in France , between 46 and 49 degree , so can they not so much differ from the temperature of those country : unless upon the outcoast lie open unto the ocean and sharp wind , it must in deed be subject to more cold , then further within the land , where the mountain be interpose , as walk and bulwark , to defend and to resist the asperity and rigor of the sea and weather . some hold opinion , that the newfound land may be the more subject to cold , by how much it lie high and near unto the middle region . i grant that not in newfound land alone , but in Germany , Italy and Africa , even under the equinoctial line , the mountain be extreme cold , and seldom uncover of snow , in their culme and high top , which come to pass by the same reason that they be extend towards the middle region : yet in the country lie beneath they , it be find quite contrary . Even so all hill have their descent , the valley also and low ground must be likewise hot or temperate , as the clime do cold by aai - give in newfound land : though i be of opinion that the dental mean . gun reflection be much cool , and can be so forcible in the newfound land , nor general throughout America , as in Europe or Africa : by how much the sun in his diurnal course from east to west , pass over ( for the most part ) dry land and sandy country , before he arrive at the west of Europe or Africa , whereby his motion increase heat , with little or no qualification by moist vapour . where , on the contrary fie pass from Europe and Africa unto America over the ocean , from whence it draw and carry with he abundance of moist vapour , which do qualify and enfeeble great the sun reverberation upon this country chief of newfound land , be so much to the northward . nevertheless ( as i say before ) the cold can be so intolerable under the latitude of 46 47 and 48 ( especial within land ) that it shall be unhabitable , as some do suppose , see also there be very many people more to the north by a great deal . and in these south part there be certain beast , ounce or leopard , and bird in like manner which in the summer we have see , not hear of in country of extreme and vehement coldness . beside , as in the month of June , July , August and September , the heat be somewhat more than in England at those season : so man remain upon the south part near unto cape receive , until after Hollandtide , have not find the cold so extreme , nor much differ from the temperature of England . those which have arrive there after November and December , have find the snow exceed deep , whereat no marvel , consider the ground upon the coast , be rough and uneven , and the snow be drive into the place most decline as the like be to be see with we . the like depth of snow happy shall not be find within land upon the plain country , which also be defend by tfie mountain , break off [ three . 153. ] the violence of wind and weather . but admit extraordinary cold in those south part , above that with we here : it can not be so great as in Swedland , much less in Moscovia or Russia : yet • be the same country very populous , and the rigor of cold be dispense with by the commodity of stove , warm clothing , meat and drink : commodity . all which need not to be want in the newfound land , if we have intent there to inhabit . in the south part we find no inhabitant , which by all likelihood have abandon those coast , the same be so much frequent by Christians : but in the north be savage altogether harmless . touch the commodity of this country , serve either for sustenta-tion of inhabitant , or for maintenance of traffic , there be and may be make diverse : so ill it seem nature have recompense that only defect and incommodity of some sharp cold , by many benefit : viz. with incredible fish of sea quantity , and no less variety of kind of fish in the sea and fresh anj fresh water , as trout , salmon and other fish to ’ we unknown : also cod , which alone draw many nation thither , and be become the most famous fish of the world . abundance of whale , for which also be a very great trade in the bay of Placentia and the grand bay , where be make train oil of the whale : herring the large that have be hear of , and exceed the malstrond herring of Norway : but hitherto be never benefit take of the herring fish . there be sundry other fish very delicate , namely the Bonito , lobster , Turbut , with other infinite not seek after : oyster have pearl but not orient in colour : i take it by reason they be not gather in season . concern the inland commodity , aswell to be draw from this land , as from the exceed large country adjoin : there be nothing which our east and northerly country of Europe do yield , but the like also may be make in they as plentiful by time and industry : namely , rosin , pitch , tar , sopeash , deal-boord , mast for ship , hide , fur , flax , hemp , corn , cable , cordage , linen-cloth , metal and many more . all which the country will afford , and the soil be apt to yield . the tree for the most in those south part , be firtree , pine and cypress , all yield gum and turpentine . cherry tree bear fruit no big than a small pease . also pear tree , but fruitless . other tree of some sort to we unknown . the soil along the coast be not deep of earth , bring forth abundant peason small , yet good feed for cattle . Roses pass sweet , like unto our musk rose in form , raspase , a berry which we call hurt , good and wholesome to eat . the grass and herb do fat sheep in very short space , prove by english merchant which have carry sheep thither for fresh victuali and have they raise exceed fat in less than three week . peason which our countryman have sow in the time of May , have come up fair , and be gather in the begin of August , of which our generali have a present acceptable for the rareness , be the first fruit come up by art and industry in that desolate and dishabit land . Lakes or pool of fresh water , both on the top of mountain and in the valley . in which be say to be muscle not unlike to have pearl , which i have put in trial , if by mischance fall unto i , i have not be let from that and other good experiment i be mind to make . foul both of water and land in great plenty and diversity . all kind of green foul : other as big as bustard , yet not the same . a great white foul call of some a gaunt . upon the land diverse sort of hawk , as falcon , and other by report : partridge most plentiful large than we , grey and white of colour , and rough footed like dove , which our man after one flight do kill with cudgel , they be so fat and able to fly . bird some like blackbird , linnet , canary bird , and other very small . beast of sundry kind , red dear , buffle or a beast , as it seem by the tract and foot very large in manner of a ox . bear , ounce or leopard , some great and some lesser , wolf , fox , which to the northward a little further be black , who fur be esteem in some country of Europe very rich . otter , beaver , martern : newfound land do minister commodity abundant for art y industry . [ Iii . 154. ] silver over bring unto the generali . the english voyage and in the opinion of most man that see it , the generali have bring unto he a sable alive , which he send unto his brother sir John Gilbert knight of Devonshire : but it be never deliver , as after i understand . we can not observe the hundred part of creature in those unhabit land : but these mention may induce we to glorify the magnificent God , who have superabundant replenish the earth with creature serve for the use of man , though man have not use a five part of the same , which the more do aggravate the fault and foolish sloth in many of our nation , choose rather to live indirect , and very miserable to live and die within this realm pester with inhabitant , than to adventure as become man , to obtain a habitation in those remote land , in which nature very prodigal do minister unto man endeavour , and for art to work upon . for beside these already recount and infinite more , the mountain general make show of minerail substance : iron very common , lead , and somewhere copper . i will not aver of rich metal : albeit by the circumstance follow , more than hope may be conceive thereof . for among other charge give to inquire out the singularity of this country , the generali be most curious in the search of metal , command the minerali man and refiner , especial to be diligent . the same be a saxon bear , honest and religious , name Daniel . who after search bring at first some sort of ore , seem rather to be iron then other mettle . the next time he find over , which with no small show of contentment he deliver unto the general , use protestation , that if silver be the thing which may satisfy the generali and his follower , there it be , advise he to seek no further : the peril whereof he undertake upon his life ( as dear unto he as the crown of England unto her majesty , that i may use his own word ) if it fall not out accord . my self at this instant like to die then to live , by a mischance , can not follow this confident opinion of our refiner to my own satisfaction : but afterward demand our general opinion therein , and to have some part of the ore , he reply : content your self , i have see enough , and be it but to satisfy my private humour , i will proceed no further . the promise unto my friend , and necessity to bring also the south country within compass of my patent near expire , as we have already do these north part , do only persuade i reason why further . And touch the ore , i have send it aboard , whereof i will have no speech to be make so long as ma^efor we remain within harbour : here be both Portugal , silver my . Biscains and Frenchmen not far off " , from who must be keep any bruit or mutter of such matter . when we be at sea proof shall|be make : if it be to our desire , we may return the soon hither again . who answer i judge reasonable , and content i well : wherewith i will conclude this narration and description of the newfound land , and proceed to the rest of our voyage , which end tragical . while the better sort of we be serious occupy in repair our want , and contrive of matter for the commodity of our voyage : other of another sort misdemeanour 8c disposition be plot of mischief . some cast ** °ur come to steal away our ship by night , watch opor - ? aunt ' tunitie by the general and captain lie on the shore : who conspiracy discover , they be prevent . other draw together in company , and carry away out of the harbour adjoin , a ship lade with fish , set the poor man on shore . a great many more of our people steal into the wood to hide themselves , attend time and mean to return home by such ship as daily depart from the coast . some be sick of flux , and many dead : and in brief , by one mean or other our company be diminish , and many by the generali license to return home . insomuch as after God bring together these man into the ship ordain to perish , who before have commit such outrage . why sir Humf. Gilbert go in the frigate . liberalise of the Portugal . August 20 saint Johns in 47 deg . 40 min. cape race in 46 degree z 5 minute . the english voyage we have review our people , resolve to see a end of our voyage , we grow scant of man to furnish all our ship : it seem good therefore unto the generali to leave the swallow with such provision as may be spare for transport home the sick people . the captain of the delight or admiral return into England , in who stead be appoint captain Maurice brown , before captain of the swallow : who also bring with he into the delight all his man of the swallow , which before have be note of outrage perpetrate and commit upon fisherman there meet at sea . the generali make choice to go in his frigate the squirrel ( whereof the captain also be among they that return into England ) the same frigate be most convenient to discover upon the coast , and to search into every harbour or creek , which a great ship can not do . therefore the frigate be prepare with her netting and fight , and overcharge with base and such small ordinance , more to give a show , then with judgement to foresee unto the safety of she and the man , which afterward be a occasion also of their overthrow . now have make ready our ship , that be to say , the delight , the golden hind , and the squirrel , and put aboard our provision , which be wine , bread or rusk , fish wet and dry , sweet oil : beside many other , as marmalade , fig , lymmon barrel , and such like : also we have other necessary provision for trim our ship , net and line to fish withal , boat or pinnaces fit for discovery . in brief , we be supply of our want commodious , as if we have be in a country or some city populous and plentiful ! of all thing . we depart from this harbour of saint Johns upon Tuesday the twenty of August , which we find by exact observation to be in 47 degree 40 minute . and the next day by night we be at cape race , 25 league from the same harbour . this cape lie south Southwest from S. Johns : it be a low land , be off from the cape about half a league : 62 within the sea rise up a rock against the point of the cape , which thereby be easy know : it be in latitude 46 degree 25 minute . under this cape we be becalm a small time , [ three . 155. ] during which we lay out hook and line to take Codde , and draw in less than two hour , fish so large fish large and and in such abundance , that many day after we feed entiful1-upon not other provision . from hence we shape our course unto the island of Sablon , if convenient it will so fall out , also direct to cape Briton . Sablon lie to the seaward of Cape briton about Mattel in the 25 league , whither we be determine to go upon intelligence we have of a Portugal , ( during our abode in saint Johns ) who be himself present , when the Portugal ( above thirty year pass ) do put into the same island both neat and swine to breed , which be since exceed multiply . This seem unto we very happy tiding , to have in a island lie so near unto the main , which we intend to plant upon , such store of cattle , whereby we may at all time convenient be relieve of victuali , and serve of store for breed . in this course we trend along the coast , which from cape race stretch into the northwest , make a bay which some call Trepassa . than it go out again towards the west , and make a point , which with cape race lie in manner east and west . but this point incline to the north : to the west of which go in the bay of Placentia . we send man on land to take view of the soil along this coast , whereof they make good good soil . report , and some of they have will to be plant there . they see Pease grow in great abundance every where . the distance between cape race and Cape briton be 87 league . in which navigation we spend 8 day , have many time the wind indifferent good : yet can we never attain sight of any land all that time , see we be hinder by the current . at last we fall into such flat and danger , that hardly any of we escape : where nevertheless we lose our admiral with all the man and provision , not know certain the place . yet for induce man of skill to make conjecture , by our course and way we hold from cape race thither ( that thereby the flat and danger may be insert in sea card , for warn to other that may follow the same course hereafter ) i have set down the best reckon that be keep by expert man , William Cox master of the hind , and John Paul his mate , both of Limehouse . 