the three chapter do show the lawful title which the queen most excellent majesty have unto those country , which through the aid of almighty God be mean to be inhabit . 1170. Owen Gwyneth be then prince of North-wales , nullum tempus occurrit regi . [ he . 173. ] this island be discover by sir Humphrey and his company , in this his last journey . Mutezuma his oration to his subject in presence of Hernando Cortes , which oration be make about the year 1520. a nd it be very evident that the plant there shall in time right ample enlarge her majesty territory and dominion , or ( i may rather say ) restore to her highness ancient right and interest in those country , into the which a noble and worthy personage , lineal descend from the blood royal , bear in wale , name Madock ap Owen Gwyneth , depart from the coast of England , about the year of our lord God 1170. arrive and there plant himself and his colony , and afterward return himself into England , leave certain of his people there , as appear in a ancient welsh chronicle , where he then give to certain hand , beast , and fowl sundry Welsh ' name , as the hand of Pengwin , which yet to this day bear the same . there be likewise a foul in the say country call by the same name at this day , and be as much to say in english , as Whitehead , and in truth the say fowl have white head . there be also in those country a fruit call gwynethe which be likewise a welsh word . Moreover , there be diverse other welsh word at this day in use , as David Ingram aforesaid report in his relation . all which most strong argue , the say prince with his people to have inhabit there . and the same in effect be confirm by Mutezuma that mighty emperor of Mexico , who in a oration unto his subject for the better pacify of they , make in the presence of Hernando Cortes use these speech follow . my kinsman , friend , and servant , you do well know that eighteen year i have be your king , as my father and grandfather be , and always i have-bene unto you a love prince , and you unto i good 108 and obedient subject , and so i hope you will remain unto i all the day of my life . you ought to have in remembrance , that either you have hear of your father , or else our divine have instruct you , that we be not natural of this country , nor yet our kingdom be durable , because our forefather come from a far country , and their king and captain , who bring they hither , return again to his naturali country , say that he will send such as shall rule and govern we , if by chance he himself return not , etc Theise be the very word of Mutezuma set down in the spanish chronicle , the which be thorough consider , because they have relation to some strange noble person , who long before have possess those country , do all sufficient argue the undoubted title of her majesty : forasmuch as no other nation can true by any chronicle they can find , make prescription of time for themselves , before the time of this prince Madoc . beside all this , for further proof of her highness title sithence the arrival of this noble briton into those part ( that be to say ) in the time of the queen grandfather of worthy memory , king Henry the seven , letter patent be by his majesty grant to John Cabota a italian , to Lewis , Sebastian and Sancius , his three son , to discover remote , barbarous and heathen country , which discovery be afterwards execute to the use of the crown of England , in the say king time , by Sebastian and Sancius his son , who be bear here in England : in true testimony whereof there be a fair haven in Newfoundland , know , and call until this day by the name of Sancius haven , which prove that they first discover upon that coast from the height of 63 unto the cape of Florida , as appear in the decade . and this may stand for another title to her majesty : but any of the foresay title be as much or more than any other christian prince can pretend to the Indies , before such time as they have actuali possession thereof , 109 m. Oliver Dalbony . m. Edward reow . m. R. H. m. i A. obtain by the discovery of Christopher Columbus , and the conquest of Vasques nun de Balboa , Hernando Cortes , Francisco Pizarro , and other . and therefore i think it needless to write any more touch the lawfulness of her majesty title . the four chapter show how that the trade , traffic , and plant in those country , be likely to prove very profitable to the whole realm in generali . now to show how the same be likely to prove very profitable and beneficial general to the whole realm : it be very certain , that the great jewel of this realm , and the chief strength and force of the same , for defence or offence in martial matter and manner , be the multitude of ship , master and mariner , ready to assist the most stately and royal navy of her majesty , which by reason of this voyage shall have both increase and maintenance . and it be well know that in sundry Cox the place of this realm ship have be build and set forth master . of jate jaye } for the trade of fish only : yet notwithstanding the fish which be take and bring into England by the english navy of fisherman , will not suffice for the expense of this realm four month , if there be none else bring of stranger . and the chief cause why our english man do not go so far westerly as the especial fish place do lie , both for plenty and greatness of fish , be for that they have no succour and know safe harbour in those part . but if our nation be once plant there , or near thereabouts ; whereas they now fish but for two month in the year , they may then fish so long as please themselves , or rather at their come find such plenty of fish ready take , salt , and dry , as may be sufficient to fraught they home without long delay ( God grant that salt may be find there ) whereof David [ three . 174. ] Ingram ( who travel in those country as aforesaid ) say that there be great plenty : and withal the climate do give great hope , that though there be none not natural grow , yet it may as well be make there by art , as it be both at rochel and Bayon , or elsewhere . which be bring to pass , shall increase the number of our ship and mariner , be it but in respect of fish only : but much more in regard of the sundry merchandize and commodity which be there find , and have in great abundance . Moreover , it be well know that all savage , aswell those that dwell in the south , as those that dwell in the north , so soon as they shall begin but a little to taste of civility , will take marvelous delight in any garment , be it never so simple ; as a shirt , a blue , yellow , red , or green cotton cassock , a cap , or such like , and will take incredible pain for such a trifle . for i my self have hear this report make sundry clothier , time by diverse of our countryman , who have dwell wwlman . in the southerly part of the west Indies , some twelve year together , and some of less time ; that the people weaver . in those part be easy reduce to civility both in manner fuller . and garment . which be so , what vent for our steerman . English clothes will thereby ensue , and how great benefit to all such person and artificer , who name be quote capper . in the margin , i do leave to the judgement of such as hatter , be discreet . an man3 te - and questionless , hereby it will also come to pass , cayedt ™ nes that all such town and village as both have be , ’ and now be utter decay and ruinate ( the poor people thereof be not set on work , by reason of the transportation of raw wool of late day more excessive then in time past ) shall by this mean be restore to their pristinate wealth and estate : all which do likewise tend to the enlargement of our navy , and maintenance of our navigation . to what end need i endeavour my self by argument to prove that by this voyage our navy and navigation shall|be enlarge , when as there need none other reason then the manifest and late example of the near neighbour to this realm , the king of Spain and Portugal , who m the idle person of this realm shall by occasion of thisjourneybee well employ y set on work . hemp do grow near saint Laurence river natural . Read the begin of the bookeintitule , diverse voyage touch the discovery of America . the english voyage since the first discovery of the Indies , have not only mighty enlarge their dominion , great enrich themselves and their subject : but have also by just account treble the number of their ship , master and mariner , a matter of no small moment and importance ? beside this , it will prove a general ! benefit unto our country , that through this occasion , not only a great number of man which do now live idle at home , and be burdenous , chargeable , and unprofitable to this realm , shall hereby be set on work , but also child of twelve or fourteen year of age , or under , may be keep from idleness , in make of a thousand kind of trifle thing , which will be good merchandise for that country . and moreover , our idle woman ( which the realm may well spare ) shall also be employ on pluck , dry , and sort of feather , in pull , beat , and work of hemp , and in gather of cotton , and diverse thing right necessary for die . all which thing be to be find in those country most plentiful . and the man may employ themselves in drag for pearl , work for mine , and in matter of husbandry , and likewise in hunt the whale for Trane , and make cask to put the same in : beside in fish for cod , salmon , and herring , dry salt and barrel the same , and fell of tree , hew and saw of they , and such like work , meet for those person that be no man of art or science . many other thing may be find to the great relief and good employment of no small number of the naturali subject of this realm , which do now live here idle to the common annoy of the whole state . neither may i here omit the great hope and likelihood of a passage beyond the grand bay into the south sea , confirm by sundry author to be find lead to Cataia , the Moluccas and spicery , whereby may ensue as generali a benefit to the realm , or great than yet have be speak of , without either such charge , or other inconvenience , as by the tedious tract of time and 112 peril , which the ordinary passage to those part at this day do minister . and to conclude this argument withal , it be well know to all man of sound judgement , that this voyage be of great importance , and will be find more beneficial to our country , than all other voyage at this day in use and trade among we . the five chapter show , that the trade and plant in those country be likely to prove to the particular profit of all adventurer . must now accord to my promise show forth some probable reason that the adventurer in this journey be to take particular profit by the same . it be therefore convenient that i do divide the adventurer into two sort : the nobleman and gentleman by themselves , and the [ three . 175. ] Merchants by themselves . for , as i do hear , it be mean that there shall be one society of the nobleman and gentleman , and another society of the merchant . and yet not so divide , but that each society may free and frank trade and traffic one with the other . and first to bend my speech to the nobleman and gentleman , who do chief seek a temperate climate , wholesome air , fertile soil , and a strong place by nature whereupon they may fortify , and there either plant themselves , or such other person as they shall think good to send to be lord of that place and country : to they i say , that all these thing be very easy to be find within the degree of 30 and 60 aforesaid , either by south or ■ North , both in the continent , and in island thereunto adjoin at their choice : but the degree certain of the elevation of the pole , and the very climate where these place of force and fertility be to be find , i omit to make public , for such regard as the wise sort can easy conjecture : the rather because i do certain understand , that some of those which have the manage of this vni i13 he hide sell for forty shilling a piece . great grape . wine of the palm tree . the english voyage matter , know it as well or better than i my self , and do mean to reveal the same , when cause shall require , to such person who it shall concern , and to no other : so that they may seat and settle themselves in such climate as shall best agree with their own nature , disposition , and good like : and in the whole tract of that land , by the description of as many as have be there , great plenty of minerail matter of all sort , and in very many place , both stone of price , pearl and crystal , and great store of beast , bird , and fowl both for pleasure and necessary use of man be to be find . and for such as take delight in hunt , there be stag , wild bore , fox , hare , cony , badger , otter , and diverse other such like for pleasure . also for such as have delight in hawk , there be hawk of sundry kind , and great store of game , both for land and river , as fezant , partridge , crane , heronshawe , duck , mallards , and such like . there be also a kind of beast much big than a ox , who hide be more than eighteen foot long , of which sort a countryman of we , one Walker a sea man , who be upon that coast , do for a truth report in the presence of diverse honourable and worshipful person , that he and his company do find in one cottage above two hundred and forty hide , which they bring away and sell in France for forty shilling a hide ; and with this agree David Ingram , and describe that beast at large , suppose it to be a certain kind of buff ; there be likewise beast and fowl of diverse kind , which i omit for brevity sake , great store of fish both in the salt water and in the fresh , plenty of grape as big as a man thumb , and the most delicate wine of the palm tree , of which wine there be diverse of good credit in this realm that have taste : and there be also a kind of grain call Maiz , potato root , and sundry other fruit natural grow there : so that after such time as they be once settle , they shall need to take no great care for victuali . and now for the better contentation and satisfaction 114 of such worshipful , honest mind , and well dispose merchant , as have a desire to the furtherance of every good and commendable action , i will first say unto they , as i have do before to the nobleman and gentleman , that within the degree abovesaid , be doubtless to be find the most wholesome and best temperature of air , fertility of soil , and every other commodity or merchandise , for the which , with no small peril we do travel into Barbary , Spain , Portugal , France , Italy , Moscovie and Eastland . all which may be either present have , or at the least wise in very short time procure from thence with less danger than now we have they . and yet to the end my argument shall not altogether stand upon likelihood and presumption , i say that such person as have discover and travel those part , do testify that they have find in those country all these thing follow , namely : ' of beast for fur . martern . Beavers . fox , black and white . leopard . of worm . silk worm great and large . < of bird . Hawkes . Bitters . curlewe . herons . partridge . crane . mallards . wild goose . stock dove . and sundry other strange Margaus . black bird . parrot . Pengwins . of fish . Codde . Salmon . Seales . herring . of tree . palm tree yield sweet wine . Cedars . firre . sassafras . Oake . Eime . popler . Trees to we unknown . TI5 of fruit . grape very large . muskemellon . lemon . date great . orange . fig . prune . Raisins great and small . Pepper . almond . citron . of metal . ' gold . silver . copper . lead . tin . of stone . turkeis . ruby . pearl great and fair . marble , of diverse kind . Jasper . crystal . sundry other commodity of all sort . ' rosin . pitch . tar . turpentine . frankincense . honey . wax . rhubarb . oil olive . train oil . musk codde . x. salt . ' tallow . Hides . hemp . flax . Cochenello and die of diverse sort . feather of sundry sort , as for pleasure and fill of featherbed . And see that for small cost , the truth of these thing may be understand ( whereof this intend supply will give we more certain assurance ) i do find no cause to the contrary , but that all well mind person shall be willing to adventure some competent portion for the furtherance of so good a enterprise . now for the trial hereof , consider that in the article of the society of the adventurer in this voyage , there be provision make , that no adventurer shall be bind to any further charge than his first adventure : and yet notwithstanding keep still to himself his child , his 116 apprentice and servant , his and their freedom for trade and traffic , which be a privilege that adventurer in other voyage have not : and in the say article it be likewise provide , that none other than such as have adventure in the first voyage , or shall become adventurer in this supply , at any time hereafter be to be admit in the say society , but as redemptionary , which will be very chargeable : therefore general i say unto all such accord to the old proverb , nothing venture , nothing have . for if it do so fall out , accord to the great hope and expectation have , ( as by god grace it will ) the gain which now they reap by traffic into other far country , shall by this trade return with less charge , great gain , and more safety : less charge , i say , by reason of the ample and large deep river at the very bank , whereof there be many , whereby both easy and quiet they may transport from the innermost part of the main land , all kind of merchandise , yea in vessel of great burden , and that three time , or twice in the year at the least . but let we omit all presumption how vehement soever , and dwell upon the certainty of such commodity as be discover by saint Humphrey Gilbert , and his assistant in newfound land in August last . for . there may be very easy make pitch , tar , Rosen , soap 4*^1 last ash in great plenty , yea , as it be think , enough to serve the whole realm of every of these kind : and of train oil such quantity , as if i shall set down the value that they do esteem it at , which have be there , it will seem incredible . it be hereby intend , that these commodity in this abundant manner , be not to be gather from thence , without plant and settle there . and as for other thing of more value , and that of more sort and kind then one or two ( which be likewise discover there ) i do hold they for some respect , more meet for a time to be conceal then utter . of the fish i do speak nothing , because it be general know : and it be not to be forget , what trifle 117 the english voyage they be that the savage do require in exchange of these commodity : yea , for pearl , gold , silver , and precious stone . all which be matter in trade and traffic of great moment . but admit that it shall so fall out , that the above specify commodity shall not happy be find out within this first year : yet it be very clear that such and so many may be find out as shall minister just occasion to think all cost and labour well bestow . for it be very certain , that there be one seat fit for fortification , of great safety , wherein these commodity follow , especial be to be have , that be to say , grape for wine , whale for oil , hemp for cordage , and other necessary thing , and fish of far great size and plenty , than that of newfound land , and of all these so great store , as may suffice to serve our whole realm . beside all this , if credit may be give to the inhabitant of the same soil , a certain river do thereunto adjoin , which lead to a place abound with rich substance : i do not hereby mean the passage to the molucca , whereof before i make mention . and it be not to be omit , how that about two year past , certain merchant of saint Malo in France , do hire a ship out of the island of Jersey , to the end that they will keep that trade secret from their countryman , and they will admit no mariner , other than the ship boy belong to the say ship , to go with they , which ship be about 70. ton . i do know the ship and the boy very well , and be familiar acquaint with the owner , which voyage prove very beneficial . to conclude , this which be already say , may suffice any man of reasonable disposition to serve for a taste , until such time as it shall please almighty God through our own industry , to send we better tiding . in the mean season , if any man well affect to this journey , shall stand in doubt of any matter of importance touch the same , he may satisfy himself with the judgement and like of such of good call and credit , as be principali dealer herein . for it be not necessary in this the western plant treatise , public to set forth the whole secret of the voyage . 