 and in truth the Indians which take pleasure in paint of their skin , know very well how to use the same . the man be of a olive colour , of great stature , fair , without any deformity , and well proportion . they cover their privity with the skin of a stag well dress . the most part of they have their body , arm , and thigh paint with very fair devise : the paint whereof can never be take away , because the same be prick into their flesh . their hair be very black and reach even down to their hip , howbeit they truss it up after a fashion that become they very well . they be great dissembler and traitors , valiant of their person and fight very well . they have none other weapon but their bow and arrow . they make the string of their bow of a gut of a stag , or of a stag skin , which they know how to dress as well as any man in France , and with as different sort of colour . they head their arrow with the tooth of fish and stone , which they work very fine and handsome . they exercise their young man to run well , and they make a game among themselves , which he win that have the long breath . they also exercise themselves much in shoot . they play at the ball in this manner : they set up a tree in the midst of a place which be eight or nine fathom high , in the top whereof there be set a square mat make of reed or bulrush , which whoso - 45 2 hunt . fish . their form of war . their triumph after the victory . they worship Rene Laudonniere ever hit in play thereat , win the game . they take great pleasure in hunt and fish . the king of the country make great war one against the other , which be not execute but by surprise , and they kill all the man they can take : afterward they cut of their head to have their hair , which return home they carry away , to make thereof their triumph when they come to their house . they save the woman and child and nourish they and keep they always with they . be return home from the war , they assemble all their subject , and for joy three day and three night they make good cheer , they dance and sing , likewise they make the most ancient woman of the country to dance , hold the hair of their enemy in their hand : and in dance they sing praise to the sun , ascribe unto he the honour of the victory . they have no m knowledge of God , nor of any religion , save of that ’ which they see , as the sun and the moon . they have their priest to who they give great credit , their priest because they be great magician , great soothsayer , and be . e . caller upon devil . Theise priest serve they in stead physician . of physician and chirurgeon . they carry always about they a bag full of herb and drug to cure the sick disease which for the most part be sick of the pock , for they love woman and maiden exceed , which they call the daughter of the sun : and some of they be sodomite . they marry , and every one their marri-hath his wife , and it be lawful for the king to have two ase ' or three : yet none but the first be honour and acknowledge for queen : and none but the child of the first wife inherit the good and authority of the father . the woman do all the business at home . they keep the painefal-not house with they after they know they be with child . ness the and they eat not of that which they touch as long as ’ they have their flower . there be in all this country manyherma-many hermaphrodite , which take all the great pain , and bear the victual when they go to war . they the naije paint their face much , and stick their hair full of both sex . 453 their food and provision for war . their dress their flesh and fish over the smoke . their order in march to the war . their consultation . [ he . 307. ] the english voyage feather or down , that they may seem more terrible . the victual which they carry with they , be of bread , of honey , and of meal make of Maiz parch in the fire , which they keep without be mar a long while . they carry also sometime fish , which they cause to be dress in the smoke . in necessity they eat a thousand rifraffe , even to the swallow down of coal , and put sand into the pottage that they make with this meal . when they go to war , their king march first , with a club in the one hand , and his bow in the other , with his quiver full of arrow . all his man follow he , which have likewise their bow and arrow . while they fight , they make great cry and exclamation . they take no enterprise in hand , but first they assemble oftentimes their council together , and they take very good advisement before they grow to a resolution . they meet together every morning in a great common house , whither their king repair , and set he down upon a seat which be high than the seat of the other : where all of they one after another come and salute he : their salute and the most ancient begin their salutation , lift up of their king , their hand twice as high as their face , say , ha , he , ya , and the rest answer ha , ha . assoon as they have do their salutation , every man sit he down upon the seat which be round about in the house . if there be any thing to entreat of , the king call the Jawas , that be to say , their priest , and the most ancient man , and ask they their advice . afterwards he command Cassine to be brew , which be a drink make of they the drink leaf of a certain tree : they drink this cassine very °LfonfhL i otte : he rink first , than he cause to be give to battle thereof to all of they one after another in the same bowl , which hold well a quart measure of Paris . the honour ex - they make so great account of this drink , that no man menofvdure taste thereof in this assembly , unless he have make above other . proote ot his valour in the war . Moreover this drink the excellent - have such a virtue , that assoon as they have drink it aeof cassine . they become all in a sweat , which sweat be pass , it 454 take away hunger and thirst for four and twenty hour after . when a king die , they bury he very their manner solemn , and upon his grave they set the cup oft^^all wherein he be wont to drink : and round about the say grave they stick many arrow , and weep and fast three day together without cease . all the king which be his friend make the like mourning : and in token of the love which they bear he , they their cut cut of more than the one half of their hair , as well man as woman . during the space of six moon ( so tr they reckon their month ) there be certain woman appoint which bewail the death of this king , cry with a loud voice thrice a day , to wit , in the morning , at noon , and at evening . all the good of this king be put into his house , and afterward they set it on fire , so that nothing be ever more after to be see . the like be do with the good of the priest , and beside they bury the body of the priest the burial of their priest . soio twice in 6 month . Maiz from the time that it be sow until the time that it be ready to be gather , be but three month on the ground . the other 6. month they let the earth rest . they have also fair pumpion , and very fair pumpi-good bean . they never dung their land , only ms-when they will sow , they set the weed on fire , goodh bean . which grow up the 6. month , and burn they all . they dig their ground with a instrument of wood instrument which be fashion like a broad mattock , wherewith . they dig their vine in France , they put two grain encage etr of Maiz together . when the land be to be sow , ’ the king command one of his man to assemble his subject every day to labour , during which labour the king cause store of that drink to be make for they , whereof we have speak . at the time when the bring the Maiz be gather , it be all carry into a int0 a common common house , where it be distribute to every man house . 455 in their house , and then they set they on fire . they sow their Maiz twice a year , to wit , in march and in June , and all in one and the same soil . the say their provi - accord to his quality . they sow no more but sum of corn that which they think will serve their turn for for 6 month six month > and that very scarce . for during the ' r^ir manner winter they retire themselves for three or four month of live in in the year into the wood , where they make little the winter , cottage of palm bough for their retreat , and live there of Maste , of fish which they take , of oyster , of stag , of turkeycocke , and other beast which Thedressingoj - they take . they eat all their meat broil on they their meat in coal , and dress in the smoke , which in their the smoke . janguage they call boucane . they eat willing the flesh of the crocodile : and in deed it be fair and white : and be it not that it savour too much like their manner musk we will oftentimes have eat thereof . they of cure this - have a custom among they , that when they find ease ' themselves sick , where they feel the pain , whereas we cause ourselves to be let blood , their physician suck they until they make the blood follow . their woman the woman be likewise of good proportion and ndm^rs tal1 ’ and °f the same colour that the man be of , ' paint as the man be : howbeit when they be bear , they be not so much of a olive colour , and be far oil in white . for the chief cause that make they to be Florida . of cojour proceed of anointing of oil which they use among they : and they do it for a certain ceremony which i can not learn , and because of the sun which shine hot upon their body . the woman great agility of the woman be so great , that they can swimmer . swim over the great river bear their child upon one of their arm . they climb up also very nimble upon the high tree in the country . behold in brief the description of the country , with the nature and custom of the inhabitant : which i be very willing to write , before i enter any further into the discourse of my history , to the end that the reader may be the better prepare to understand that , which i mean hereafter to entreat of . 