under this shelter we ride Thursday , Friday , and Saturday until noon , which be the last of January in the year 1540 about noon the wind begin to blow soft at Southwest , whereupon the general tell the pilot , that we shall do well to put over to the main land , where with some wind off the shore we may by the grace of God sail somewhat far . thus we hoist our sail , February . 267 the english voyage and sail until evening three or four league , for the wind scant , and we remain becalm . the night be come there arise a contrary wind , and we be enforce of necessity to retire the three time to the same shelter of the isle of cedar , where we stay from the first of February until Shrovesunday , in the which mean time we take in two butt of water which we have spend . during the space of these eight day we seek to make sail two or three time , but as we go out a little beyond the point of this isle , we find the wind so boisterous and contrary , and the sea so grow , that of force we be constrain to return under the succour of the island , and often time we be in great fear that we shall not be able to get in thither again . during this time that we can not proceed on our journey , we employ our self in catch a few fish for the Lent. from Shrovesunday be the 8 of February , on which day we set sail , we sail with a very scant wind , or rather a calm , until shrove-tewsday , on which we come within ken of the firm land , from whence we be put back these twenty league ( for in these two day and a half we sail some 20 small league ) and we lay in sight of the say point of the firm land . and on the Tewsday we be becalm , wait till God of his mercy will help we with a prosperous wind to proceed on our voyage . on Shrovesunday at night , to make good cheer withal we have so great wind and rain , that there be nothing in our ship which be not wet , and a very cold air . on Ash-wednesday at sunrising we strike sail near a point which we fall somewhat short withal in a great bay run into this firm land : and this be the place where we see five or six fire , and at the rise of the sun be so near the shore that we may well descry and view it at our pleasure we see it to be very pleasant , for we descry as far as we can discern with our eye , fair valley and small hill , with green shrub very pleasant to 268 behold , although there grow no tree there . the situation show their length and breadth . this day be little wind , it be in a manner calm , to our no small grief : and the father friar Raimund say we a dry mass , and give we ash , preach unto we accord to the time and state wherein we be : with which sermon we be great comfort . after noontide we have contrary wind , which still be our enemy in all our journey , at the least from the point of the port of Santa Cruz. here we be constrain to anchor in five fathom water , and after we ride at anchor we begin to view the country , and take delight in behold how goodly and pleasant it be , and near unto the sea we judge that we see a valley of white ground . at evening so great a tempest come upon we of wind and rain , that it be so fearful and dangerous a thing that a great can be express ; for it have like to have drive we upon the shore , and the chief pilot cast out another great anchor into the sea , yet all will not serve , for both these anchor can not stay the ship . whereupon all of we cry to God for mercy , attend to see how he will dispose of we ; who of his great goodness , while we be in this danger , vouchsafe a little to slake the tempest , and with great speed the chief pilot command the mariner to turn the capsten , and the generali command and pray all the soldier to help to turn the capsten , which they be nothing slow to perform : and thus we begin to weigh our anchor , and in weigh of one which be far great than the other , the sea be so boisterous that it force the capsten in such sort , that the man which be at it can not rule the same , and it strike a negro of the general such a blow , that it cast he down along upon the deck , and do the like unto another mariner and one of the bar strike our fire-furnace so violent , that it cast it overboard into the sea . yet for all these trouble we weigh our anchor , and set sail , and albeit we have great tempest at sea , yet make we not 269 the point of Santa Cruz otherwise call Punta de balenas . account thereof in respect of the joy which we conceive to see our self free of the peril of be cast on that shore with our ship , especial see it fall out at midnight , at which time no man can have escape , but by a mere miracle from God . we sail up and down the sea all Thursday , and until Friday in the morning be then fourteen day of February , and the wave of the sea continual come rake over our deck . at length , on Saturday morning at break of day we can find no remedy against the contrary wind , notwithstanding the generali be very obstinate to have we keep out at sea , although it be very tempestuous , lest we shall be drive to put back again , but no diligence nor remedy prevail : for the wind be so boisterous and so contrary , that they can not be worse , and the sea go still high , and swell more and more , and that in such sort , that we great fear we shall all perish . whereupon the pilot think it our best course to return to the isle of cedar , whither we have repair three or four time before by reason of the self same contrary wind , for we take this island for our father and mother , although we receive no other benefit thereby save this only , namely , to repair thither in these necessity , and to furnish our self with water , and with some small quantity of fish . be therefore arrive at this island , and ride under the shelter thereof , the contrary wind do always blow very strong , and here we take water which we drink , and wood for our fuel , and great desire , that the wind will be more favourable for proceed on our journey . and though we ride under the shelter of the isle , yet feel we the great fury of those wind , and the rage of the sea , and our ship never cease roll . at break of day the twenty of February we find the cable of our admiral crack , whereupon , to our great grief , we be constrain to set sail , to fall down low the space of a league , and the Trinity come and ride in our company . 270 [ three . 422. ] they go on land in the isle of cedar , and take diverse wild beast , and refresh and solace themselves . they be strange toss with the northwest wind , and seek often to depart they be force , for the avoid of many mischief , to repair thither again for harbour . the two and twenty of February be the second Sunday in Lent , the general go on shore with the great part of his people and the friar , near unto a valley which they see before they . And hear mass on land , certain soldier and mariner , with certain dog which we have in our company go into the say valley , and we meet with certain deer , whereof we take a female , which be little , but fat , who hair be like the hair of a wild goat then of a dear , and we find she not to be a perfect dear , for she have four dug like unto a cow full of milk , which make we much to marveile . and after we have flay off her skin , the flesh seem more like the flesh of a goat , then of a dear . we kill likewise a grey conie , in shape like unto those of Nueva Espanna , and another as black as heben-wood . in the cottage at the shelter above , where we break our cable , we find many pinenut open , which ( in my opinion ) the Indians have gather together to eat the kernel of they . on Monday the 23 of the say month we ride at anchor , take our pleasure and pastime with fish . and than northwest wind begin to blow , which wax so great a little before midnight , as it be wonderful : so that although we be under the shelter of the island , and great defend from that wind , yet for all that it be so furious , and the sea become so rage and boisterous , that it great shake our ship , and we be in great fear of break our cable , whereof ( to say the truth ) we have very much need : for have spend long time in this voyage than we look for , we have break two , and 271 lose two of our best anchor . this furious wind continue until the next day be Tewsday the 24 when as we go on shore with the friar , who say we mass , recommend our self to God , beseech he to vouchsafe to succour and help we with some good weather that we may proceed on our voyage , to the advancement of his service . and still the wind be so high and outrageous , that the devil seem to be loose in the air . whereupon the pilot cause all the mast to be let down , lest they shall be shake with the wind , and take off all the shrowd , and likewise cause the cabbens in the stern to be take away , that the wind may have more free passage , for the safety of the ship : yet for all this they cease not to be in great trouble . on Tewsday the second of march , about midnight or somewhat after , ride under the island in this distress , there come a gust of northwest wind , which make the cable of the admiral to slip , and the Trinity break her cable , and have be cast away , if God of his mercy have not provide for we , together with the diligence which the pilot use , in hoist the sail of the trinket and mizzen , wherewith they put to sea , and ride by another anchor until day , when the man of both the ship go with their boat to seek the anchor until noon , which at length they find and recover , not without great pain and diligence which they use in drag for it , for they be till noon in seek the same , and have much ado to recover it . after this we set up our shrowd , and all thing necessary to sail , for to proceed on our voyage , if it please God , and not to stay always in that place , as lose and forlese . thus on the Wednesday two or three hour after dinner we set sail , with a scarce wind at southeast , which be favourable for our course and very scant ; and our pilot 8c all the rest of we be in no small fear , that it will not continue long . we begin therefore to set forward , although we seem to see before our eye , that at the end of the 272 island we shall meet with contrary wind at north and northwest . this day about evening when our ship have discover the point of this isle of cedar , we begin to perceive those contrary wind , and the sea to go so lofty , that it be terrible to behold . and the far we go , the more the wind increase , so that they put we to great distress , sail always with the sheate of our mainesaile and trinket wary in our hand , and with great diligence we loose the tie of all the sail , to save they the better , that the wind may not charge they too vehement . for all this the mariner think it best to return back , and that by no mean we shall run far into the sea , because we be in extreme danger . whereupon we follow their counsel , turn back almost to the place from whence we depart , whereat we be all not a little grieve , because we can not prosecute our voyage , and begin to want many thing for the furniture of our ship . the 8 of march be Monday about noon the generali command we to set sail , for a small gale of wind blow from the west , which be the wind whereof we have most need , to follow our voyage , whereat we be all glad for the great desire which we have to depart out of that place . therefore we begin to set sail , and to pass towards the point of the island , and to shape our [ three . 423. ] course towards the coast of the firm land , to view the situation thereof . and as we pass the island , and be betwixt it and the main , then northwest be a contrary wind begin to blow , which increase so by degree , that we be constrain to let fall the bonnet of our sail , to save they , strike they very low . and the Trinity see this bad weather return forthwith unto the place from whence we depart , and the admiral cast about all night in the sea , until the morning ; and the chief pilot consider that by no mean we can proceed far without danger , if we shall continue at sea any long , resolve that we shall retire our self again to that shelter , where we ride at ix 273 sister anchor until Thursday . and on Friday about noon we set sail again with a scarce wind , and in come forth unto the point of the island , we meet again with contrary wind at northwest : whereupon run all night with the firm land , on Saturday in the morning be saint Lazarus day and the 13 of march , we come in sight thereof , in view of the which we all rejoice , and we soldier will very willing have go on shore . this night fall great store of rain like the rain in Castilia , and we be all well wet in the morning , and we take great pleasure in behold the situation of Thefirmeland that firm land , because it be green , and because we very green and discover a pleasant valley and plain of good ^gomy valley largenesj which seem to be environ with a garland and plain . of mountain . at length for fear of misfortune , see the sea so high , we dare not stay here or approach near the land , and because we have great want of cable and anchor , we be again constrain to put to sea ; and be in the same , and find the say contrary wind , the pilot judge that we have none other remedy , but again to retire our self to our wont shelter . and thus we return , but somewhat above the old place . on Sunday we ride here to the great grief of all the company , consider what trouble we endure , and can not get forward ; so that this be such a corrasive , as none can be more intolerable . this day be come to a anchor we have a mighty gale of wind at northwest , which be our adversary and capital enemy , and when day be shut in , it still grow great and great , so that the ship roll much . and after midnight , towards break of day , the Trinity break she two cable , which hold the two anchor which she have , and see her self thus forlese , she turn up and down in the sea until day , and come and ride near we , by one anchor which she have leave . this day all of we go to seek these lose anchor , and for all the diligence which we use , we can find but one of they . we ride at anchor all day until night , when 274 than Trinity again break a cable , which certain rock have cut asunder : whereupon the general command that she shall ride no long at anchor , but that she shall turn up and down , as she have do before in sight of we , which she do all day long , and at night she come to a anchor over against a fresh water somewhat low , and we go and ride hard by she . on Palme-sunday we go on shore with the father , which read the passion unto we and say mass , and we go in procession with branch in our hand . and so be comfort , because we have receive that holy sacrament , we return to our ship . Chap. 16. return to the isle of cedar weather-beaten , and with their ship in evil case , they conclude , that the ship call Santa Agueda or Santa Agatha shall return unto Nueva Espanna . of the multitude of whale which they find about the point of California : with the description of a weed , which grow among the island of those sea . here we continue until the Wednesday before Easter be the four and twenty of march , on which day we consult together , that because the ship be ill condition , and want necessary furniture to proceed any further , it be best for we to return back to new Spain , as also because our clothes be consume : but the generali seem not willing to return , but to proceed on his voyage : and in fine it be resolve , that see both the ship can not proceed forward , as well because they have lose their necessary furniture , as also that the Santa Agatha have need of calk , because she receive much water , and be the worst furnish of the twain , that she shall return back to advertise the mark of our success in this voyage , and what hinder our proceed , and in what case we stand , and how we be bereave of our necessary furniture . and because the Trinity be 275 A.D. J54O . the swift ship , and better appoint than the other , it be conclude , that it shall be provide in the best manner that may be , and that the general shall proceed on his journey in she with such company as he shall make choice of , and that the rest shall return at their good leisure . wherefore upon this determination we go under a point of this island , because it be a fit place to carene the ship : and in recover the same we spend Wednesday , Thursday , and Friday till noon , and yet for all that we can not well double it , until Easter day about noon . here we anchor very near the shore , and in a valley we find very excellent fresh water , whereof we make no small account , and here stay all the easter-holiday , to set our self about the furnish up of the Trinity : and [ three . 424. ] after the work be take in hand by the two master which be very sufficient calker ( one of which be Juan castiliano chief pilot , and the other Peruccio de Bermes ) they finish the same so well in five day , as it be wonderful ; for no man can perceive how any drop of water can enter into any of the seam . afterwards they mend the other ship from Saturday till Monday , during which time all those be shrive that have not confess , and receive the communion , and it be resolve by charge of the confessor , that all those seal-skin which they have take from the Indians shall be restore again ; and the generali give charge to Francis Preciado to restore they all , charge he on his conscience so to do . thus they gather they together , and deliver they into the hand of the father , to be keep until they return to the place , the Santa where they be to restore they . after this manner on Monday before noon we take our leaf of the New-spaine generali Francis Ulloa , and of the people that stay the 5. of with he , who at our departure shed no small number April . of tear , and we choose for our captain in the Santa Agueda master Juan castiliano the chief pilot , as well of the ship , as of we all , and set sail the same day 276 be the five of April , have our boat tie at our stern , till we come over against the cottage , whence we have take the seal-skin . from the country of the °f the Christians and the port of Colima we be now distant some three hundred league , which be the first port where we determine to touch at . and have sail a league from the Trinity the captain Juan castiliano command we to salute they with three piece of great ordinance , and she answer we with other three , and afterward we answer one another with two shot apiece . we sail on Monday and * Tewsday till noon with ThesixtoJ contrary wind in sight of the island , and at noon we have a fresh gale in the poop , which bring we over against the cottage of the Indians where we take away those seal skin ; and there certain soldier and mariner with the father friar Antony de Melo leap on shore with the boat , carry the skin with they , and fling they into the say cottage out of which they be take , and so return to their ship . this day the then quoth of weather calm , whereupon we be drive to cast anchor , ^P^ fear that we shall forthwith be distress for want of victual , if we shall stay there any long time : but God which be the true helper provide better for we than we deserve or imagine ; for as we ride here , they sail after midnight the Wednesday follow before ten the clock we have a favourable gale of wind from they the point of southeast , which put we into the sea ; whither be santa Cruz drive , we have the wind at northwest so good and con - or California stant , that in six day it bring we to the cape of the tn stxe point of the port of Santa Cruz : for which so great blessing of God we give unto he infinite thanks . and here we begin to allow our self a great proportion of victual than we have do before , for we have eat very spare for fear lest our victual will fail we . before we come to this point of the haven of Santa Cruz by six or seven league we see on shore between certain valley diverse great smoke . and have pass 277 read more of these vieede cap . 13. Sant Iago de buena esfer-anza in 19 degree . Cabo deal en-gtinno in 30 degree in a half . the english voyage the point of this port , our captain think it good to launch forth into the main ocean : yet although we run a swift course , above 500 whale come athwart of we in 2 or 3 skull within one hour space , which be so huge , as it be wonderful , and some of they come so near unto the ship , that they swim under the same from one side to another , whereupon we be in great fear , lest they shall do we some hurt , but they can not because the ship have a prosperous and good wind , and make much way , whereby it can receive no harm , although they touch and strike the same . among these island be such abundance of those weed , that if at any time we be enforce to sail over they they hinder the course of our ship . they grow fourteen or fifteen fathom deep under the water , their top reach four or five fathom above the water . they be of the colour of yellow wax , and their stalk grow great proportionable . this weed be much more beautiful than it be set forth , and no marvel , for the naturali painter and creator thereof be most excellent . this relation be take out of that which Francis Preciado bring with he . after this ship the Santa Agueda depart from the generali Ulloa , and return back the 5 of April , she arrive in the port of Sant Iago de bvena esperan^a the 18 of the say month , and after she have stay there four or five day , she depart for Acapulco : howbeit until this present seventeenth of May in the year 1540 , i have hear no tiding nor news of she . Moreover after the departure of the Santa Agueda for Nueva Espanna , the general Francis Ulloa in the ship call the Trinity proceed on his discovery coast the land until he come to a point call Cabo deal Enganno stand in thirty degree and a half of northerly latitude , and then return back to Newspaine , because he find the wind very contrary , and his victual fail he . 