the three voyage set forth by sir Walter Ralegh to Guiana , with a pinnace call the Watte , in the year 1596. write by m. Thomas Mash be a gentleman of the company . Pon Thursday the 14. of October 1596. we set sail from limehouse upon the river of Thames , and through much contrariety of wind and other accident , we make it the 27. of December , before we can get out of Waimouth . the 25. of Januarie in the morning we come to the north side of the island of grand Canaria , where we hope to have get a boat to serve we upon the coast of Guiana , but the wind be so great , that we can not launch our shalope : so we pass along by the road and the town , and at length see a boat lie on shore , which be too big for we , we rip up , and wooded our self with she . that day we descry a sail , which at length we find to be a flyboat of Dartmouth , of 200. ton , bind to the island of Mayo for salt . we fall in consort with she , and that night stand for the southermost part of the island there to water , where we stay all the next day , and water at the southsouthwest part thereof . that night we weigh and stand away together southsoutheast , and south and by east , purpose by their persuasion to go for the river Doro. the 28. of Januarie we make the furthermost part of Barbary ; and this morning we jor the u^outk meet with m. Benjamin wood with his fleet of 3 sail sea . xi i a bind for the straight of Magellan and China , to wit , the bear , the whelp , and the Benjamin : who tell we that there be no good to be do in the river Doro. Cape Blanco . whereupon we stand along with they for cape Blanco , unto which we come upon Sunday night next follow . and upon Monday morning the first of February , we see two ship in a sandy bay : so we stir in with they , which be Frenchman bind for the west Indies , and put all into the bay , where we refresh our self with fish , in which there be infinite store , and stay there until Thursday the 5. at which time we stand up with the cape again , where ride the Frenchman and his pinnace , who put forth right afore we , and another Frenchman and his caravel well man : so all our 5. English come to a anchor by they , where after kind greeting with many shot out of every ship both english and french , all our captains be invite to a feast aboard the french admiral : where after great cheer and kind entertainment , it be conclude on all hand to take the isle of Fogo , if God will give we leave . the same day we all weigh and stand along for the the island jsje of ga^ unto which we come the 8. of February , of and anchor altogether at a bay in the west part thereof : in which island we have good store of goat and fresh fish . there be no man dwell upon the island that we can see . we can find no fresh water upon it , but one stand puddle of bad water : it have four great mountain upon the 4. corner of it . here the Frenchman ( as it seem being overcome with drink , have be aboard our generali at a feast ) be on shore , one of the gentleman of their company be slay , and their chief captain sore wound : by reason whereof , and of the set together of a pinnace which they be about , the french admiral and the caravel stay behind . so we in the Watte , and the other 6. ship weigh the 10. of [ three . 693. ] February , and stand away for the isle of Maio . this night the other two french ship that come from Sal with we ( as it seem of purpose , because their consort be not with they ) lose we . the next morning we see Maio . so we and the flyboat of Dartmouth compass the northermost part of the island , and master Benjamin wood in the china-fleete , the southermost , and come all to a anchor together at the southwest part thereof : where ride six sail of psalle of Fleming lade salt ; who have bring their horse and cart , and wheelbarrow , and plank for their m0j0r sa ’ barrow to run upon . here be abundance of salt in this island make by God hand without man labour . Theise tell we that there be thirty sail more , which fall to leeward of Fogo , who , as i hear since , beat it up with much ado , and come thither also for salt . this trade may be very beneficial to England , consider the dearness of salt . of goat on this island there be such store , as be incredible , but to those that have see they : and it be a wonder how they live one by the other , the ground be stony and barren . it be think that there be dwell in it some twenty mountainier , which get one of the Fleming man straggle , and God know what they do with he : for they see he no more . this island be somewhat low and round , have no great mountain upon it . here end our determination concern the invade of Fogo . and here we leave the flyboat of Dartmouth lade salt , and the china-fleete to refresh themselves with goat , who as i have hear since have at the village ( from whence the mountainier be flee into the further part of the island and rock ) great store of dry goat which they carry along with they : which be like to be a great help unto they in their long voyage . so upon Saturday the 12 of February at night we set sail and stand for the coast of Wiana , which we be bind for . upon Sunday the twenty of February we come into the main current that set from the cape of buena esperanza along the coast of Brasil , and so towards the west Indies , for the most part set away northwest . the Tuesday night follow , whereas before our course be westsouth west , we stand away west and by south : by reason whereof , and of the current that set we to the northward , we be the next day by noon twenty minute further to the northward then the day before . so that than we lay away Southwest , because we be loath to fall to the northward of our place intend : which if we shall be put to leeward of , there be small hope leave to recover it . by Thursday we be within one degree i of the equinoctial line : therefore this day we hail away west and by south , and west among . this night we sound , but have no ground at 90 fathom . the next day in the morning the colour of the water begin to change , and to be more white , so we make another sound and have ground at thirty fathom , but see no land , and in the afternoon we hail away westnorthwest , northwest , and northnorthwest . in the night we sound diverse time , and have twelve , ten , and nine fathom water . all Saturday we have a thick red water , and have seven and eight fathom both day and night , and upon Sunday morning by day be the seven and twenty of February , we make the land which appear low , and trend near as we fall with it , south and by east , north and by west about two degree towards the north . right on head of we be a cape or head land , so that have we be shoot a little further into the bay , the wind be more northerly , we shall hardly have double it off . for with much ado make many board , and stop every tide , it be the Tuesday follow before we clear our self of the bay , and recover the cape . now the land trend northwest and by north , and southeast and by south . and still we be fain to anchor every tide sometime in four fathom , and sometime in three , as far as we can the river of Wiapoucou almost in 4 degree north . Thomas Masham ad .. * 597 - see land . so about night we see cape Cecill : and cape Cecil in after some two hour come to a anchor . between these 3 degree and two cape the land lie low and even . a half - upon Wednesday morning , have the wind large at Eastnortheast , we lay it away upon a board into the bay of Wiapoucou and come to a anchor in the river mouth in two fathom : over the bar there be little water , as 6 and 7 foot , and less in many place . and this river of Wiapoucou stand almost in 4 degree to the northward of the line . the next morning we weigh , and stand in with our pinnace by night , we get some eight league up the river . this day sometime we have but 5 foot water and draw 7 foot , but be soft oaze we go clear : and a little before we come to anchor , we be on ground upon a rock , but with some trouble and labour we get off and have no hurt . upon Friday the 4 of march towards night we come to the fall . the next day m. Leonard Berrie our captain , the master , my self and some 5 more , go through the wood , and spend all the day in search the head of the fall , but can not find it : for though we pass by many , yet be there more still one above [ three . 694. ] the other . so that find no Indians in this river to buy victual of , neither any kind of thing that may entice we to come to so short allowance , as we must have do , if we have spend any long time here , find it over hard to pass the fall , we fall down the river again , and by Friday the 11 of march we clear our self of the river and bay . this river from the mouth to the fall be some 16 league , in many place a mile over , but for the most part half a mile . there be many island in it : as be also in most of the river upon the coast . this night we anchor against Cawo in two fathom ; whereinto we Cam. think to have put with our pinnace : but find the water so shall , and the sea so grow , that neither with our ship nor shallope we dare go in . on Saturday by noon we come to anchor under one the 7 hand , of the 7 island : upon which go on shore we find neither man nor beast , but great store of yellow plumb which be good to eat . upon Sunday after dinner our master William Dowie and 6 moor go off with our boat to a town Aramatto a call Aramatto ; where they find many inhabitant , great tosvne . anj bring victual and some tobacco with they , and one indian name caprima , who lie aboard all night , the next day be Monday the 14 of march go with TheCaribestf our captain into Wias , and there trade with the wiastractable caribe for such thing as they have . and afterward ' they of Aramatto come off with their canoas to we , and we go on shore to they : and from thence our captain send a canoa with seven man , which have every one of they a knife to go back to the river of Cawo , and to tell ritimo captain of that place , that because we can not come to he , we will Chiana a stay at Chiana for he , whither we entreat he to river and bay . come to we . so upon Thursday the 17 we stand in for Chiana , and come to a anchor without in the bay in 3 fathom that night : and have the caribe come continual to we with their canoas , which bring we great store of victual and some tobacco , show themselves very kind and love , and come all from their town , and dwell on shore by we until ritimo come : at who come they return all up to their town again , which be upon the Sunday follow . all this day we feast he and his train , and the next day we traffic with they for such thing as they bring , which be principal tobacco . after that they have make know their mind of the desire that they have to have the english come and kill the Spaniard , and to dwell in Orenoque and in the country , they depart with their 3 canoas the next day . and we with the help of the caribe of Chiana , have by their mean from the shore water , because the river mouth be salt , depart out of 6 the bay the Thursday follow , and pass by Macerea , couroura , and Manamanora , by reason of shoald , rock , and great wind , be a lee shore ; and for want of a good shalope , we come to a anchor the next day be good Friday in five fathom near the triangle Islands call the carere . and upon the Carenes . Saturday stand to the westward , we stop against the town of Maware , which be a little to the Maware . Westward of the town Comanamo : from whence and from the other town in that bay , which be some 6 or 7 , we have canoas come off to we as before with such thing as they have themselves in use , with parrot , monkey , and cotton-wool , and flax . from whence we depart upon Monday follow the 28 of march 1597. And pass by the river of euracco and Amano , which open but a small river , and be shall off , we come to marawinne the next day : and find a marawinne channel of three , four , and five fathom , we stand a rtver ' into the river : and the same day come to a anchor some 2 league in against the mouth of cooshepwinne , which river go into Amana . into which , ( understand that there be arwaccawe dwell ) this night we send our boat and come to a town call Marrac one league in : and find the people some - Marrac , a thing pleasant , have drink much that day , be as towne-it seem a festival day with they , yet be they very fearful and ready to run away at the first sight of we , have seidome see any christian before . but assoon as Henry our indian interpreter have tell they what we be , and our intent , they come to we and use we kind , and bring we victual and other thing . and the next day their captain Mawewiron come out into marawinne , with diverse canoas , and trade with we , and we go in again to they on shore , who make very much of we , and carry we from house to house , and make we eat and drink in every house which we come in . and the next day follow be the last of march , have the captain of Marrack with we , we weigh and stand into the river , and about two of the clock in the afternoon come to a anchor some eight league within the river , a little short of a Quiparia a town call Quiparia , the people whereof be caribe : tCmibffae W^° ’ w^en see we come towards their town with ' our boat , begin all to run into the wood , until the captain of Marrac which be with we in the boat , leap overboard and swim on shore unto they , and tell they that we be Englishman , and come in friendship to trade with they . upon who report they come before night six or [ three . 695. ] seven canoas aboard we , yet very fearful , because there be never either ship or Christian see in that river before . the first of April , we weigh Macirria a again , and stand in to the next town call Macirria : town . where come to anchor , there come a canoa from Amano to we , with great store of victual , which canoa we buy : and because we meet with some shold , we be loath to go any far with our pinnace : so there we more she , and the next day at three of the clock in the afternoon , eleven of we ( master Monax have the government of the action , by the captain appointment ) with Mawerirou , Henry , and William of Cawo , in the canoa which we buy , go into the river far to search it so far as we can , and that night get some five league from our ship . and between two village , awodwaier and Mapeributto , we take up our lodging in the wood . the three of April , betimes in the morning , we take our course still unto the river , and in the afternoon come to one house where we find many Indians , where we hire another canoa and four Indians , into the which i go , and one more of our man , and this night get twelve league far , and as before , lodge among the wild beast . on Monday the four of April , we come to the fall of this river about two in the afternoon : and have 8 shot up some of the rock , we go on shore upon a island , and there confer of our far proceed . And inquire of the Indians that we hire for our pilot of the last house , whether the fall be passable or not : their first answer be , that they have nothing to eat : but we be loath to loose so much labour , and the sight of that upper rich country , which we desire , tell they that they shall have victual of we ( though God know we have none for our self ) who see we so importunate , say far , that the rock will kill the canoas : which they say because indeed they have no victual : which by some be take for sufficient to proceed no far , and so we leave off , and only stay some two hour upon the island , and with the swiftness of the current , fall that night down io league again . though i for my own part offer in that small canoa that i be in , be so leak , that my self do nothing but lave out the water , to lead they the way , and if they see any danger to i , they may choose whether they will come into it or not themselves . for see the country above be rich as we be inform , that their bow be handle with gold , ( be man of a extraordinary stature for talnes ) we shall have take the more pain , and have fare the hard , until we have get up in the country which we see with our eye : for though we have not victual in any sort to carry we up , yet the wood do yield fruit and the palmito tree afford meat , whereby we may have make shift to live , until we have come to the inhabitant , by who we may both be refresh with victual , and also have reap that , which may have do we good as long as we have live . but to return to the rest of our voyage : the day after we go from the fall we come to our ship , which be the five of April 1597. on Wednesday we fall with our pinnace to Quiparia again : where 9 A.D. * 597 - a rich country . Bowes handle with gold . we bring she on ground right before the town , and pitch to trim trim she with the pitch of the country : and until ship . we hac | do , keep a corpse du guard , night and day on shore , which be upon Saturday follow the nine of April . all the while we be there we have a house of the caribe , and be kind use of they , and have victual , and every thing we need of they . and so take our leave on Tuesday be then the river of twelve of April , we come to the mouth of cusse-cusse-winne . wonderful [ nnej where the Arwaccas of Marrac and of the river have provide and bring to we such infinite store of potato , and guiney-wheate , that the steward say we have no stowage for they ; and so they be turn back , and we by that mean come to short allowance home ward bind , then ( if there have be any good care ) we need to have do . on Friday the fifteeneth of April , we put forth marawime . of marawinne , which be some four league over , and within one league and a half for the most part broad ; full of island , and diverse small river run into it : and it be between forty and fifty league , from the mouth to the fall , and lie for the most part south Southwest up , alter some 3 point , be almost straight . And stand along to the westward , this night we try with our main coarse and bonnet . on Saturday night we Sewramo . come to a anchor , in three fathom against Sewramo . on Sunday morning we think to have go into cuppa-namo : but send off our boat and find uncertain sound , sometime 3 fathom and present 9 foot , Coritine we stand along to Coritine , and come into it upon the river . Monday be the 18 of April : and the next night we come to anchor against Warrawalle in 10 fathom . on Wednesday the Indians of the town have hunt a doe , she take soil and come near our ship , and put off with our boat we take she , be like unto our deer in England , not altogether so fat , but very good flesh and [ three . 696. ] great body . in this river we meet a bark call the John of London captain leigh be in she . And be both fall down within some five league of the mouth of the river , upon intelligence that one Marracon , ( who we bring along with we ) give we , namely that the river Desekebe , in which he dwell ( and wherein there be some three hundred Spaniard , which for the most part now be destroy and dead ) do lead so far into the country , that it come within a day journey of the lake call perima , whereupon Manoa be suppose the great lake to stand ; and that this river of Coritine do meet with ? er‘ma-desekebe up in the land : by mean whereof we make account to go up into the country , and to have discover a passage unto that rich city . So have conclude both ship , we stand up into the river again , and come to Warawalle the 24 of April there our ship ride until we go up to Mawranamo to speak with Marracon , to know the truth of these thing : who when we have find , he verify all that before he have speak : master Monax be the man that of Leonard of Cawe take all the intelligence : who be bring up with Antony Berreo can speak some spanish and marracons language also . and beside we our self by sign , and draw the two river on the ground , and the meeting of they aloft , do perceive as much . now come down with our boat the six and twenty of April we go up with our ship to Mawranama , where we mor they , and take some twenty out of both , upon Thursday the eight and twenty in the afternoon with two shallop and two canoas , in one of which Henry the indian be and some twenty Indians moor , we go up the river ; and by night get some three league far we lodge in the wood , and the next morning we with our boat and the two canoas went into a small river call they bring their ship up to the Mawranamo . tapuere , to a town call Macharibi , think to have have Casavi and other victual , which they be altogether unprovide of , by reason that they make no more ready than serve themselves from hand to mouth , live in this town for the most part by fish . by mean of go both into this river , though we row very hard it be noon before we overtake the big shallop wherein both the captain be . this night we come to a town call Vaperon , where we stay all Saturday and the night follow , for Casavi : whereof they bake good store for we being but a few leave in the town . for not a month before we come thither , the waccawa that dwell above the fall come down to the town , and slay some ten of they , and many of the rest flee away , so that we find most of the house empty . upon Sunday morning be may day , we go from this place , and by night get some twelve league beyond , and be past all town we lodge as before in the wood , and the next day come to the fall of the river ; up some of which fall we shoot with our boat , and go upon a rock there come some nine canoas up the river to we , and will have go up with we to kill the waccawayans , because they have kill some of they , as before be say . whereupon the captain and master Monax take advice : and because now they have learn , as they say , that five day journey far there be a fall not passable , and that by this mean they shall make the wacchawayans their enemy , which will turn to our great hurt , when sir Walter Ralegh shall come thither , have occasion to use this river , where we be inform be good store of gold , they resolve to return , though i yield diverse reason to the contrary . so upon Tuseday night , we come back to Vaperon , where we lodge . and upon Wednesday the four of May , we come to our ship : where it be report that the Spaniard be go ne out of Desekebe , which be not so : but as it seem in policy by they give out to make our man that we leave in our ship more careless , that they may the easy have surprise they in our absence . the next night we have news bring we to Mawranamo , where we yet ride , that there be ten canoas of Spaniard in the mouth of Coritine ; and fear lest they 12 have intend to come to we in the night , we fit all our gun and musket , and keep good watch to prevent they of their purpose ; who , as it be afterward tell we , go along the coast to buy bread and other victual for they in Orenoque , Marowgo , and Desekebe . upon Friday the six of May we weigh and make down the river , and upon Sunday the eight we get clear of it . this river be much like unto Marawynne in breadth , and about fifty league from the mouth to the first fall , full of island as the other : in which three river , Mano , tapuere , and tabvebbi , otherwise Tapuellibi : with six town , Warrawalle , Mawranamo , maapuere , maccha-ribi , Yohoron , and Vaperon . and so clere our self of this coast , we take our course to the island of the west Indies . now i think it not amiss to speak something of this country . and first touch the climate ; though it stand within the Tropic , and something near to the equinoctial , so that the sun be twice a year over their head and never far from they , yet be it temperate enough in those part . for beside that we lose not a man [ he - 697. ] upon the coast , one that be sick before he come there , be nothing sick for be there , but come home safe , thank be to God . and for my own part , i be never better in body in all my life , and in like sort fare it with the rest of the company : for indeed it be not so extreme hot as many imagine . the people in all the low part of the country go naked , both man and woman , be of several language , very tractable , and ingenious , and very love and kind to Englishmen general ; as by experience we find , and upon our own knowledge do report . in the upper country they go apparel , be , as it seem , of a more civil disposition , have great store of gold , as we be certain inform by the great store low Indians , of who we have some gold , which they m bring and buy in the high country of Wiana , be able to buy no more , because they want the thing the english voyage which now we have leave among they . they keep no order of marriage ; but have as many wife as they can buy , or win by force of their enemy , which principal be the cause of all their war . for bread there be infinite store of casavi , which be as good bread as a man need to eat , and better than we can carry any thither . we spend not a bit of our own all the while we be upon the coast . it be make of a root so call ; which they take and scrape , and crush all the juice out , be poison ; and when it be dry it be as fine flower as our white meal make : which dry as it be , without any moisture , they strew upon a round stone , have a still fire under it , and so it congeal to a cake ; and when it come new off , it eat like to our new white bread . beside there be great store of guiny-wheat ( whereof they make pass good drink ) which after it be once sow , if you cut off the ear , on the same stalk grow another . for victual , we either do not , or at least need not to have spend any of our own : for there be great store of as good fish in the river , as any be in the world . great store of fowl , of diverse sort . tortoise-flesh plentiful , and tortoise egg innumerable . deer , swine , cony , hare , cock and hen , with potato more than we can spend . beside , all kind of fruit , at all time of the year : and the rare fruit of the world , the pine , the plantan , with infinite other variable and pleasant , grow to their hand , without plant or dress . for commodity , though we have but small time to search , because we spend so much time in search the river : yet we have bring example of some , which the country yield in great plenty : as a kind of long hemp like unto steel hemp , fine cotton wool , which the tree yield great store of ; and wherewith the woman make a fine thread , which will make excellent good fustian or stocking . great store of pitch , diverse sort of sweet gum , and west indian pepper , balsamum , parrot and monkey . beside diverse other commodity , which in good time may be find out to the benefit of our 1597-countrey , and profit of the adventurer , who as yet have venture much , have gain little . now leave the river of Cori tine , pass by saint Vincent , Santa Lucia , and Matalina , we come to Dominica upon the Friday follow , be the thirteenth of May , have lose the bark that come out with we the wednes - tty thy ty-day before . upon Sunday morning , the fifteen of tn may , we come to Guadalupe , where we water at ” ° the Souther part of the island , and have do by night , we set sail , and stand away to the northward , but be becalm all night , and until ten of the clock on Monday night : at which time have a fair gale at east , and after at southeast , we pass along in the sight of monserate , Antigua , and Barbuda . upon the nine of June , be Thursday , we make the island of Flores and Corvo : and the eight and twenty of June we make the lisart , and that night come all safe to Plymmouth , bless be God . between the isle of Barbuda in the west Indies and England we have three mighty storm , many calm , and some contrary wind . and upon the fourteen of June 1597 , there be diverse whale play about our pinnace , one of they cross our stem , and go under , rub she back against our keel : but by none of all these we sustain any loss . thank be to he that govern all thing . write by master Thomas Masham . 