a rutty which declare the situation of the coast of Brasil from the isle of Santa Catelina unto the isle of Santa Catelina . Rio Grande . Puerto de Biaza , or Laguna . Isla de raparo . the mouth of the river of plata , and all along up within the say river , and what arm and mouth it have to enter into it , as far as it be navigable with small bark . Rome the isle of Santa Catelina , ( which be in 28 degree of southerly latitude ) unto Rio Grande be forty league . this river by another name be call Ygai . the island of Santa Catelina be six league in length : it have two small hand on the north side between the main land and it : and on the south side it have a shall of rock , which lie hide very near unto the point of the isle . you be to pass between the firm land and the point of the isle . from Santa Catelina to the haven of Biaza , which by another name be call la Laguna , be twelve league : it be a good haven within : but you must stay the full sea to enter into it , because it have shoalde in the mouth , and it may be know by a small island which lie a league into the sea which be call la Isla de raparo , that be the island of succour or defence , and you must ride there to search the channel . from this harbour unto the river before name there Rio Grande . be not haven for a ship to harbour it self . and Rio Grande have many shoald in the mouth thereof . it be a river that none but very small ship can enter into . certain and this river divide the country of the people call hand 12 cario from other nation which be call guavaes . and league distant from this river unto the entrance of the mouth of they from the mouth river of plate it be all a plain land , and very low : you °plate ’which " must sa^e a ons two or three league into the sea from aree^n the sh°re > untiu you come to certain island which lie number . twelve league from the mouth of the river of plate . from Rio Grande unto these island be 68 league . and from these island unto the cape of saint marry the coast run north-east and Southwest , somewhat incline a point to the south . the island be three , and may be know as you come from the sea by two point , which show like the ear of a conie : you may ride between they and the main . from Rio Grande to the cape of saint Marie be 80 the cape of league : and the cape may be know by one island s - ma ™ - which lie from it a league and a half into the sea . you may sail between the main and that island , be - from cape cause there be above 8 or 9 fathom water . the cape of saint marie . saint mary stand in 3 5 degree of southerly latitude . Isla de the cape of Santa Maria upon the point thereof have a little hill which stand over against the isle of Seales . from this coast of Santa Maria you must coast along they the way to land always on the north shore , and along the same be en . ter certain bay . from the cape unto the river of Solis be ' ten league , the coast run east and west . there io league stand a island over against the mouth thereof . from within the this river of Solis unto los tres mogote which be on e-the main land be three league . and from los mogote tes league ’ unto the isle of saint Graviel be other 8 or 9 league saint Graviel more : all this distance run east and west . Theise 8 league . be five small island : to ride here you must keep somewhat near the main within a harquebus shoot half a league before you come at the island , and straightway you shall see a cross stand on the say land , and there be a harbour for some wind . from saint Graviel unto the river of Sant Juan go Rio the 8. Juan along the same coast , i say on the north shore , be three 3 league . league : it be very well know by the break cliff which it have , which be a white hill . the entrance into this river be very dangerous : because it be shallow , and none but very small ship can enter into the same : the entrance thereof be on the west side very near the land , great carack may ride within the harbour . from this Martin gar-river unto the isle of Martin Garzia be three league : it zia 3 league . xi 97 g be one island alone , and you must sail along the coast on the north shore : and after you be come unto the island , i say , over against the same , you shall have three fathom water , and on the west side it have a little creek where you may ride . he that desire to cross over the river of plate unto Rio de Buenos the river de Buenos aeres from the isle of saint Graviel , aeres on the must shape his course Southwest : and the cut over be Sthe river f sixteen league and upon his arrival on the south plate . shore of the river , he must seek a channel of three [ three . 729. ] fathom water , and strait he must go along the coast until he come to a break cliff and a point like unto the firm land , which be distant from this channel three or four league : and when thou see this break cliff , the first keep thou a league from it . here upon this river of spanish colonic Buenos Aeres be the first colony that don Pedro de Oliver of ” Mendoza plant . this river lie very much hide : Buenos Aeres , because it be not see , it be very shallow at a low sea , wherefore you must come in with the first of the flood . from the isle of Martin Garzia unto certain small the isle of island which be call the isle of saint Lazarus be two San Lazaro . league ) these be shoald : and to go thither you must go hard aboard the main . for there go the channel : all this be to be pass on the north shore , and with small bark , and with good heed . from the isle of Martin Garzia to the mouth of the river be eight league in pass along on this side to seek one of the mouth of the river Parana , as it be hereafter describe . but you have need first to harbour in a bay , which be in the very cliff or Barranca , and you must stay for the full sea . and if you fall into the Rio uruay . mouth of the river which be call uruay , you must leave it on the right hand , i say on the north side . and forthwith leave the say mouth forward towards the west , you may enter into the first mouth although it seem narrow ; or rather you may enter into any of Parana be then the mouth : for all of they meet together in Parana , great river . which be the main river . and he that desire to go from the isle of Martin Garzia to the river of Palmas , which be the best of all Rio de las these arm , or mouth to speak more proper , be to palmat ' shape his course to the west , and come over to the other shore , and sail along the coast northnorthwest he shall discover the mouth of this river of Palmas : and he must enter hard by los juncale , which lie on the south side : and afterward within be very deep sound . all these mouth of this river which be 5 , be full of shold towards the east above the space of two league . and if the course of the water be not swift there , you can not enter into they , as i have already say , and you must pass all along with much heed and foresight . and if peradventure you have pass cape saint marie and be come over to cape Blanco , consider it , that it be so even and smooth a land , that you can scarce discern it a league from the main , unless it be a very clear day : and after this sort the coast lie low unto the river de Buenos aeres . and from thence the coast lie somewhat high unto the entrance of the river de Palmas : all the coast run as i say before . and all along this coast be naughty people , which eat those which they kill , and many tiger . from the isle of Martin Garzia unto Sant Salvador be nine or ten league . this be a island which stand two league within the first mouth : where Sebastian Cabota take possession . and this country be very well people by a people call Carios ; and you must beware of all these people : for they be your deadly enemy . the most southerly mouth of Parana call Rio de Palmas be sixteen league long , and it have many turn , and many palm or datetree grow near it , whereupon it be call the river of palm tree : and forthwith it enter into the river Parana , as soon as these sixteen league be finish . all the other arm contain likewise sixteen league in length , save one small or narrow arm , which be call the river de los beguaes ; for this contain forty league in length . from this 99 cape Blanca on the south side of the mouth of the river of plate a very low and even land . man-eater upon the south shore . Sant Salvador a island ten league off . Sebastian Cabota . 16. league . Santo Spirito 50 league from Rio de Palmas . los tenbuis a people . 15. league . the Quiloacas 20. league . this town perhaps may be the town ofSantaAnna , 15. league . the mequaretas a people . 20 league . the mepenes 30 league . 8. league . the river Paraguai . the 7. current . [ he . 730. ] the town of Piquiri or Picora 170 league up the river of Parana . you must enter by the mouth of the river of Palmas unto Santo Spirito , the way be fifty league : you be to pass still along the cliff . as you enter on the left hand which be on the west shore up this river there be many isle , lake and small river , and many Indians which be your enemy . from Santo Spirito unto a people which be call los tenbuis be fifteen league . this be by the narrow arm whereby they pass into the river Parana : it be the more because it be the long way . from the tenbuis by this narrow arm upward unto the Quiloacas , which be another nation , be twenty league ; and all up this river be great store of people . from the Quiloacas , to a place where the Spaniard now have build a town , be fifteen league . from this town unto the people call los Mequaretas be twenty league . here be many shold which continue thirty league . all these thirty league be sink land : where be many isle , flat , and nation , which be our enemy . from the Mequaretas unto the people call mepenes be these thirty league . and from hence begin the coast of the firm land unto the mouth of the river Paraguai ; save that there be eight league more of sink ground . from the mepenes unto the mouth of the river of Paraguai be thirty league : it be a river that can be mistake although it have many arm and island and danger , it have a mark two league beneath the mouth on the east side , to wit , a high land , where be 7 point , which we call the 7 current : and immediate above these current there be a island as you pass up the river over against the point aforesaid stand the mouth of Paraguai . this mouth be very plain to be find in seek whereof a man can be deceive . from this mouth the river of Parana be divide , which be a very great river : and it go unto the town of Piquiri , which be a hundred and seventie league : and it run all this space ioo north and south , and in the way be many flat and shoald ; and great store of people , which be a bad nation , although they be divide . from the place where these two river be divide , that be to say , from the mouth of Paraguai be sixty league unto the city of Assumption . this be a good river , and better to sail then all the rest of the river , which be in this country . and from this town to los xaraes be 200. league , very well inhabit with people of diverse nation , which serve the Spaniard . the two famous voyage 