the relation of a voyage make by a pilot call 1579. Nuno da Silva for the viceroy of new Spain , the 20. of may , in the year of our lord 1579. in the city of Mexico , from whence it be send to the viceroy of the portugall-indy : wherein be set down the course and action pass in the voyage of sir Francis Drake that take the aforesaid Nuno da Silva at S. Iago one of the island of Cabo Verde , and carry he along with he through the strait of Magellan , to the haven of Guatulco in new Spain , where he let he go again . Uno da Silva bear in Porto , a citizen and inhabitant of Guaia , say , that he depart out of his house in the begin of November in the year of our lord 1577. take his course to Cabo Verde , or the green cape , where he anchor with his ship close by the haven of the island of Sant Iago , one of the island of Cabo Verde aforesay , be the nineteenth of 133 [ three . 743. ] January in the year of our lord 1578. And lie there , there come six ship , which seem to be Englishman , whereof the admiral board his ship , and by force with his man take he out of his ship , bring he in the boat aboard the admiral ship , leave some of his best man aboard his ship : and although the fortress of the island shoot four or five time at they , yet they hurt not the Englishman : who have do , set sail from thence to the island of Brava , take with they the ship of the say Nuno da Silva : be there , they fill certain vessel with fresh water : from thence hold their course inward to sea , have first with a boat set the man of Nuno da Silvas ship on land , only keep Nuno da Silva in his ship , as also his ship with the wine that be therein . and Nuno da Silva say , the cause why they keep he on board be , because they know he to be a pilot for the coast of Brasilia , that he may bring they to such place in those country as have fresh water . be put off " from the island of Brava , they hold their course to the land of Brasilia , which they descry upon the first of April , under the height of thirty degree : and without land or take in fresh water , Rio de plata , they hold on their course to Rio de la plata , that be , the river of silver , lie under five and thirty degree , little more or less : where they go on land , and provide themselves off fresh water . from thence they hold on their course till they come under nine and thirty degree , where they anchor : and be there they leave two of their six ship behind they , and sail but four in company ( that of Nuno da Silva be one ) till they come to the bay call bay de las Baya de las Islas , that be , the bay of the hand , lie under nine and forty degree , where it be say , that Magellan lie and winter there with his ship , when he first discover the strait , which now hold his name . into this bay the twenty of June they enter , and there anchor so close to the land , that they may 134 send to it with a harquebus shoot : and there they see the land to be inhabit with Indians , that be apparel with skin , with their leg from the knee downward , and their arm from the elbow downward naked , all the rest of their body be clothe , with bow and arrow in their hand , be subtle , great , and well form people , and strong and high of stature : where six of the Englishman go on land to fetch fresh water , and before they leap on land , four of the indian come unto their boat , to who the Englishman give bread and wine : and when the Indians have well eat and drink , they depart thence : and go somewhat far from they , one of the indian cry to they , and say : Magallanes , esta he minha terra , that be , Magallanes , this be my country : and because the Englishman follow they , it seem the indian flee upward into the land , and be somewhat far off , they turn back again , and with their arrow slay two of the english shipper , one be a Englishman , the other a Netherlander : the rest come back again and save themselves in the boat , wherewith they present put off from the shore . here they stay till the seventeenth of August , upon the which day they set sail , run along by the coast about a league and a half from the land , ( for there it be all fair and good ground , at twenty , and five and twenty fathom deep ) and be about four or five day before they come to the mouth or entry of the strait : but because the wind be contrary , they stay till the 24 of August before they enter . the entry or mouth of the strait be about a league the descrif-broad , on both side be bare and flat land : on the turn of the north side they see Indians make great fire , but on the south side they see no people stir . the four * ‘ and twenty day aforesaid , they begin to enter into the strait , with a eastnortheast wind . This straight may be about a hundred and ten league long , and in breadth a league . about the entry of the strait , and J35 half way into it , it run right forth without any wind or turn : and from thence about eight or ten league towards the end , it have some boutes and wind , among the which there be one so great a hook or headland , that it seem to run into the other land : and there it be less than a league broad from one land to the other : and from thence forward it run straight out again : and although you find some crooking , yet they be nothing to speak of . the issue of the straight lie westward , and about eight or ten league before you come to the end , than the straight begin to be broad , and it be all high land to the end thereof , after you be eight league within the strait , for the first eight league after you enter be low flat land , as i say before : and in the entry of the strait you find the stream to run from the south sea to the north sea . and after they begin to sail in with the eastnortheast wind , be enter they pass along without any let or hindrance either of wind or weather : and because the high land on both side lay cover with snow , and that all the strait be fair and clear , they hold their course a [ three . 744. ] harquebus-shot in length from off the north side , have nine and ten fathom depth , with good ground , as i say before , where ( if need require ) a man may anchor : the hill on both side be full of tree , some of the hill and tree reach down to the sea - side in some place have plain and even land : and there they see not any great river , but some small river that issue out of the rifle and breach of the land : and in the country where the great cape or crooking be , on the south side they see certain indian fisherman in their canoas or skiffs , be such as they see first on the north side , but more people they see not on the south side . be out of the strait on the other side , upon the sixth of September of the aforesaid year , they hold their course northwest for the space of three day , and the three day they have a north-east wind , that by force drive they westsouthwest , which course they hold for 136 the space of ten or twelve day with few sail up : and because the wind begin to be very great , they take in all their sail , and lay drive till the last of September . the 24 day of the same month have lose the sight of this be the one of their ship which be about a hundred ton , then again they hoist sail because the wind come winter better , hold their course Northeast for the space of seven day , and at the end of the say seven day , they have the sight of certain island , which they make towards for to anchor by they , but the weather will not permit they : and be there , the wind fall northwest : whereupon they sail Westsouthwest . the next day they lose the sight of another ship of their company , for it be very foul weather , so that in the end the admiral ship be leave alone , for the ship of Nuno da Silva be leave in the bay where they winter before they enter into the strait : and with this foul weather they run till they be under seven and they be fifty degree , where they enter into a haven of a drivenunt0 island , and anchor about the length of the shot of a great piece from the land , at twenty fathom deep , latitude . where they stay three or four day , and the wind come southward , they weigh anchor , hold their course northward for the space of two day , and then they espy a small unhabit island , where be arrive , they strike sail , and hoist out their boat , and there they take many bird and seal . the next day they set sail again , hold their course Northnortheast , and north , to another island lie five the isle of or six league from the firm land , on the north side Mocha in 38. of the strait , where they anchor about a quarter 3°‘ mm ' of a league from the land , in twelve fathom water . this island be small and low land , and full of Indians , the island be altogether possess and inhabit by they , where they hoist out their boat , wherein the admiral and twelve Englishman enter , go to fetch fresh water , and to seek for victual : and be land upon the island , the Indians in exchange of other thing , 137 bring two spanish sheep , and a little Maiz or root whereof they make bread , and because it be late , they return again unto their ship , without do any other thing for that day . the next day the say captain with the aforesaid twelve man be harquebusier , row to land again , and set two of their company on shore with their vessel to fetch fresh water , and by the place where they shall fill their water there lay certain Indians secret hide , that fall upon the two Englishman and take they : which they in the boat perceive , go out to help they , but they be so assail with stone and arrow , that all or sir Frandt the most part of they be hurt , the captain himself be wound with a arrow on the face , and with a w u ' other arrow in the head , whereby they be constrain to turn back again , without once hurt any of the Indians , and yet they come so near the boat , that they take four of their oar from they . this do , they set sail again , run along the coast with a south wind , sail so for the space of six day , pass by the haven call Sant Iago , and put into another haven , and there they take a indian that lie fish in a Canoa , give he linen and butcher chap knife , with other trifle , and not long after there come another indian aboard their ship call Felippe , and he speak Spanish , he give the english captain notice of a certain ship that lie in the haven of Sant Iago , which they have leave six league behind they : with that intelligence the indian be their guide , the next day they set sail and go to the aforesaid haven of saint Iago , and enter therein , they take the say ship , wherein they find a thousand seven hundred and 70 botija or spanish pot full of wine , and other thing : which have do , they leap on land , where they take certain sack with meal , with whatsoever they can find ; they take likewise the ornament and the relic out of the church , wherewith they depart from thence , take the aforesaid ship , with two 138 man ( that they find in she ) with they , and so depart from that haven , which lie under 32 degree and a half , run along by the coast till they come under one and thirty , and thirty degree : which be the place where they have appoint to meet , and there to stay for each other , if by tempest or foul weather they chance to be separate , and so loose each other company . And come under thirty degree , they find a very good haven , whereinto they enter , and anchor at six fathom deep , the shot of a great piece from the land , which be right over against a river , where they take in six pipe of fresh water : and to defend they that fetch the water , they set twelve man upon the land , and be busy in fill of their water , they espy a company of man come towards they , whereof half of they be Spaniard , be about two hundred and fifty horseman , and as many footman , but they have no soon espy they , but they present enter into the boat , and escape away , loose but one man . the same night they set sail again with both their ship , run along the coast about ten league far , where they take in some fresh water , but because they perceive certain horseman , they depart without lade any more water . from thence they follow on their course along the coast for the space of 30. league , where they enter into a desert or unhabit haven : yet they go not on land , for every day they see people upon the shore , and there they make out a small pinnace , the piece whereof they bring ready frame out of England , and have prepare it , they launch it into the water , wherein the captain with fifteen man enter with the chief boatesman call John the greek , ( be master of the ship which they have take in the haven of saint Iago , ) wherewith they go to see if they can find the two ship that they have lose by stormy 139 A.D. 1578. the haven of saint Iago in 32 degree and a half . [ Iii . 745. ] weather , as i say before : and likewise think to go on land to fill certain vessel with fresh water , they dare not venture , for they see people on all side of the shore : so that in the end they return again without hear of the other ship : be there , they take all the ordinance out of their ship , and new dress and rig she : which do , they put a small piece of ordinance into the pinnace , wherewith they set sail again , follow on their course . Having sail thirteen day , they come to a island lie about the shot of a base from the land , where they anchor , and there they find four indian fisherman in two canoas who tell they that on the firm land they may have fresh water , but they understand that there be not much , and that it be somewhat within the land , will not spend any time about it , but set sail again , leave the fisherman with their canoas , follow on their course along by the shore . the next day be somewhat further , they espy certain indian fisherman that be upon the land in their house , which the english captain perceive , present enter into his pinnace , and row on land , where he take three of the say fisherman , take with he half of the fish that lie pack upon the shore ready to be lade , with the which Indians and booty , they come on board again . the next day follow , they see a bark lade with fish , that belong to the Spaniard , with four Indians in it . this bark with the Indians and the fish they take , and bind the spanish ship to their stern , and so draw it after they , leave the say Indians within it , who by night unbind the bark , and secret make away with bark and fish , and be not more see . the next day the captain go into the pinnace , and because fie saw certain house upon the shore , he make thither , and be on land , he find two man in they , one whereof he take , leave the other 140 behind , and there he find three thousand pezo of silver , ( every pezo be the value of a rial of eight , ) and seven indian sheep , and hen , and take all ■ whatsoever they find : wherewith they depart from thence , follow on their course . and two day after they come to the haven call Arica , where they find Arica . two ship , the one lade with good and spanish ware , out of the which they take only two hundred botija , or spanish pot with wine , and out of the other seven and thirty bar of silver , which be piece of ten or twelve pound each bar , and think to leap on shore ( with two bark that they find in the say haven , with about seven and thirty harquebus and bow ) they perceive on the land certain horseman come towards they , whereupon they leave off their pretence , and take with they a negro that they find in the bark , with who they return aboard . the next day in the morning they burn the ship , that be lade with the spanish ware , and take the other with they , pass forward with it on their course , the captain sail along the shore with his pinnace , and the ship keep about a league from he to seaward , to seek for a ship whereof they have intelligence : and have in that manner sail about five and forty league , they find the ship that lie at anchor in a haven , who about two hour before have be advertise of a english pirate or sea-rover , and have discharge eight hundred bar of silver out of she , and hide it on the land , which silver belong to the king of Spain , of the which silver the english - [ three . 746. ] man have receive some intelligence , but they dare not go on land , because there be many Indians and Spaniards that stand to guard it , and they find nothing in the ship but three pipe of water : the ship they take with they , and be about a league in the sea , they hoist up all her sail and let she drive , do the like with the ship that they have take in Arica , as 141 also the other of Sant Iago , which likewise they let drive , follow on their course with their own ship , and the pinnace . be seven or eight league from the haven of Calao de Lyma , they espy three ship , and board one of they , they take three man out of she , and so hold on their course towards Calao de Lyma , where they enter , be about two or three hour within night , sail in between all the ship that lie there , be seventeen in number : and be among the ship , they ask for the ship that have lade the silver , but when answer be make they , that the silver be lay on land , they cut the cable of the ship , and the mast of two of the great ship , and so leave they . at the same time there arrive a ship from Panama lade with ware and merchandise of Spain , that anchor close by the english ship , which be , while the english captain seek in the other ship for the silver . assoon as the ship of Panama have anchor , there come a boat from the shore to search it : but because it be in the night , they let it alone till morning , and come to the english ship , they ask what ship it be : whereupon one of the spanish prisoner ( by the english captain commandment ) answer and say it be the ship of Michael Angelo , that come from Chili : which they of the boat hear send a man on board , who climb up , light upon one of the great piece , wherewith he be afraid , and present step back again into the boat ( because the ship that lie there , and that sail in those country , use to carry no great shot ) and therewith they be abash , and make from it : which the ship of Panama hear , that be new come in , she judge it to be a rover , and therewith cut her cable , she put to sea , which the Englishman perceive , ship certain man in their pinnace , and follow she : and be hard by she , they bid she strike , which they of the ship refuse to do , and with a harquebus shoot 142 kill one of the Englishman , wherewith they turn again into their ship , and present set sail , follow after the ship , which not long after they overtake : which they of the ship perceive hoist out their boat , and leap into it , row to the land , leave the ship with all the good , which the Englishman present take , and with she sail on their course . the next day they see a boat with sail make towards they , whereby they present mistrust it to be a spy , and not long after they perceive two great ship come towards they , which make the english think they come to fight with they , whereupon they let the ship of Panama drive , therein leave John the greek , with the two man that they have take the same day that they enter into the Calao de Lyma , as i say before , and present hoist all their sail , and sail forward , not once set eye again upon the aforesaid ship , for they make towards the ship of Panama , which the Englishman let drive . from thence they sail again along the coast , follow on their course : and have sail certain day , they meet a frigate that go towards Lyma , lade with ware and merchandise of the country , from whence the Englishman take a lamp and a fountain of silver , and ask the pilot be a Spaniard , if they meet not with a ship , that they understand shall be lade with silver , but the one pilot say he meet she not , and the other say he see she about three day before . this frigate come not to the ship , but to the pinnace , wherein the captain sail , for the pinnace run close by the shore , and the ship keep a league and a half from the land : whereupon they let the frigate go , follow on their course . two day after , they come to the haven call Payta , Payta . where they find a ship lade with spanish ware , which the pinnace board , and take without any resistance : for assoon as the Spaniard perceive the Englishman , they present make to land with their boat , and two of they leap into the sea , none stay in the ship , but 143 the master , pilot , and some negro , out of the which ship the Englishman take the pilot , and all the bread , hen and a hog , and so sail forward with the ship : but be about two harquebus shoot to seaward , they let it go again , not take any thing out of it , and ask after the ship , which they seek for , they tell they that about two day before she depart from that place , wherewith they follow on their course , and before night they meet with a ship of Panama , which they present board , but take nothing from she but only a negro , and so leave it , hold on their course . the next day be the first of February , they meet another ship that sail to Panama , lade with fish and other victual , and forty bar of silver , and some gold , but i know not how much , which they take , and send the passenger ( with two friar that be in she ) in a boat [ three . 747. ] to land . the next day they hang a man of the ship , because he will not confess two plate of gold that he have take , which after they find about he : which do , they let the ship drive , follow on their course . the first of march towards noon , they espy the ship lade with silver , be about four league to seaward from they : and because the english ship be somewhat heavy before , whereby it sail not as they will have it , they take a company of Botijas or a / retie de - spanish pot for oil , and fill they with water , hang vice to make they by rope at the stern of the ship to make her sail on wiftl^ better : and the ship that sail towards Panama swjty - maje towards the english ship to know what she be , think it to be one of the ship that use to sail along the coast , and to traffic in the country : and be hard by she , the english captain bid they strike , but the other refuse to do it , with a great piece he shoot her mast overboard , and have wound the master with a arrow , the ship present yield , which they take , and sail with her further into the sea , all that night and the next day and night , make all the way they can . 144 the three day be out of sight of the land , they begin to search the ship , and to lade the good out of she into their ship , which be a thousand three hundred bar or piece of silver , and fourteen chest with ryal of eight , and with gold : but what quantity it be i know not , only the passenger say that there be great store , and that three hundred bar of the silver belong to the king , the rest belong to certain merchant . that do , they let the ship with the man sail on their course , put the three pilot in she that they bring with they , so that as then they have none but their own man aboard , be the sixth of march , and from thence they hold their course towards the land of Nicaragua . the thirteenth of march , either the day before or after , in the morning they descry land , not be very high , be a small island two league from the firm land , and there they find a small bay , wherein they anchor at five fathom deep close by the land , and there they stay till the twenty day . upon the which day there pass a frigate close by the island , which with their pinnace they follow , and take she , bring she to the english ship , which frigate be lade with Salsaperilla , and Botijas or pot with butter and honey , and with other thing . the english captain go on board , and cast the Salsaperilla on the land , leave all the rest of the ware in the frigate , and then he put all his piece into the frigate , that so he may lay his ship on shore , to new calk and trim she , which continue till the three and twenty or four and twenty of march . which do , and have make provision of wood and fresh water , they hold on their course along by the coast , sail westward , take the say frigate and her man with they , and have sail two day , they take their man out of she , and set they in the pinnace , among the which be four sailor , that mean to sail to Panama , and from thence to China , whereof one they take , with the letter and patent that he have about he , among xi 145 king 1579 - Nicaragua the island of can . the first sight of Nueva Espanna . they calk and trim their ship at the lie of can over against Nicaragua . sea-charts of the south sea take . they arrive at Guatuko . a prill 13. Stilo novo . Nuno da Silva set on land . [ he - 748. ] the english voyage the which be the letter of the king of Spain , send to the governor of the philippinas , as also the sea-card wherewith they shall make their voyage , and direct themselves in their course . and so sail until the sixth of April , about evening they discover a ship that hold two league to seaward from the land : and before the next day in the morning they be hard by she , and sudden fall upon her while her man sleep , and present make the man enter into their ship , among the which be one don Francisco Xarate . which do , they follow on their course with the say ship , out of the which they take certain pack and other ware , but i know not what it be . they likewise take a negro out of it , and three day after they both let the ship and man go whether they will , set therein the two sailor that shall go for China , which they have take in the frigate , keep only one sailer to show they where they shall find fresh water , to the which end they take the empty vessel with they to fill with water , and so keep on their course to the haven of Guatulco , where they put in , be upon Monday the thirteenth of April , and have anchor , they stay there till the six and twenty of April : and about three or four hour within the night , they set sail , hold their course westward , and a hour or two before they let Nuno da Silva go , put he into another ship , that lie in the haven of Guatulco . from thence forward the Englishman pass on their voyage , to the island of Malucos , and from thence they pass by the cape de buena esperanza , and so to England , as it be well know , so that thjs be only the description of the voyage that they make , while the say pilot Nuno da Silva be with they . 