Instructions give by the right honourable the [ he . 75+1 lord of the counsel , to m. Edward Fenton esquire , for the order to be observe in the voyage recommend to he for the east Indies and Cathay . April 9 1582. irst you shall enter as captain generali , into the charge and government of these ship , viz. the bear Gallion , the Edward Bonaventure , the bark Francis , and the small frigate or pinnace . 2 item you shall appoint for the furnish of the vessel in the whole , to the number of 200 able person , account in that number the gentleman and their man , the minister , chirurgeon , factor , etc which say number be no way to be exceed , whereof as many as may be , to be seaman ; and shall distribute they into every vessel , as by advise here before your go shall be think meet : provide that you shall not receive under your charge and government , any disorder or mutinous person , but that upon knowledge have , you shall remove he before your departure hence , or by the way as soon as you can convenient avoid he , and receive better in his place . 3 item , for the more and better circumspect execution , and determination in any weighty cause incident in this voyage , we will that you shall take unto you for assistant , captain Hawkins , captain ward , m. Nicholas Parker , m. Maddox , m. Walker , m. Evans , Randolph Shaw , Matthew Taiboys , with who you shall consult and confer in all cause , matter , and action of importance , not provide for in these instruction touch this service now in hand . and in all such matter , so handle , argue , and debate , we think that convenient always to be execute , which you shall think meet with the assent also of any 4 of they , the matter have be debate , and so assent unto , in the presence of your 163 say assistant . and in case that such conference and debate the opinion of the aforesaid assistant be find in effect any way to differ , than it be think meet , that all such matter so argue upon , shall rest to be put in execution in such sort as you shall think most meet , have the assent of any 4 of they , as aforesaid . and if any of these assistant shall die , than the number of the one half of the survivor to join with the general captain for consent in all thing aforesaid . 4 of all which your assembly and consultation , for the matter aforesaid , we think it very convenient , that a particular and true note shall be keep , for which cause we appoint master Maddox minister , and if he shall decease , than the generali with half the assistant survivor , to name one to keep a book of all such matter as shall be bring in consultation , and of all such reason as shall be propound by any person , either on the one side , or on the other : what be resolve on , and by who consent , who dissent there from , and for what cause . in which book he shall in the begin of the note of every such assembly , set down particular the day , and the place , if it may be , the name of the person then present , and upon what occasion the say consultation be appoint or hold , and shall have to every act , the hand of the general , and of all , or so many of the say assistant as will subscribe : which book the say master Maddox , or the other upon his decease appoint in his place shall keep secret , and in good order to be exhibit unto we , at your return home . 5 item , if there happen any person or person employed in this service , of what calling or condition , he or they shall be , shall conspire , or attempt private or public , any treason , mutiny , or other discord , either touch the take away of your own life , or any other of authority under you , whereby her majesty service in this voyage may be overthrow or impugn : we will therefore , that upon just proof make of any such 164 instruction to Edward Fenton a.d. 1582. treason , mutiny , or any other discord attempt as aforesaid , the same shall|be punish by you , or your lieutenant , accord to the quality and enormity of the fact . provide always , and it shall not be lawful neither for you , nor for your lieutenant to proceed to the punishment of any person by loss of life or limb , unless the party shall be judge to have deserve it by the rest of your assistant , as be before express , or at the least by four of they . and that which shall concern life to be by the verdict of twelve man of the company employ in this voyage , to be impanele for that purpose , with the observation of the form of our country law in that behalf , as near as you may . provide , if it shall not appear , that the forbear of the execution by death , shall minister cause to increase the fact of the offender , than it be better to convince the party of his fact , by the oath of 12 indifferent person , and to commit he to hard imprisonment , until the return . and aswell of the fact commit by any , as also of the proof thereof , and of the opinion of you , and your assistant , and the manner of the punishment , the register shall make a particular and true note , in the book of your consultation , as be before appoint . 6 item , you shall not remove captain William haw - [ ni . 755. ] kins your lieutenant , master captain luke ward your viceadmiral , or captain of the Edward Bonaventure , nor captain Carlile from his charge by land , who we will m. Carlile not to refuse any such service as shall be appoint to he uPm occasion by the generali and the council , nor any captain of other mass not in * t vessel from their charge , but upon just cause due prove , and by consent of your assistant , or of four of they at the least . 7 item , for the succession of the generali , governor of this whole voyage , if it shall please God to take he away , it be think meet that there shall be the name of such gentleman secret set down to succeed in his place one after the other , which be several write in parchment , include in ball of wax , seal with her 165 majesty signet , put into two coffer lock with three several lock , whereof one key be to be in the custody of captain luke ward , the other of William Hawkins , the three of master Maddox the minister , and the same two coffer to be put into two several ship , videlicet , the one coffer in the Gallion , in the custody of the generali , the other in the Edward Bonaventure in the custody of the vice-admiral : the same two coffer upon any such casualty of the general death by consent of the assistant which shall overlive , to be open , and the party therein name to succeed in the place , who shall thereupon take upon he the charge in the say voyage accord to these instruction , in such sort as if they have be special direct unto he , and the rest of the company so to take and repute he in every respect , as they will answer to the contrary . but if it shall so fall out , ( as we hope it will ) that there shall be no such need , but that the generali do continue still , then shall you at your return deliver back the say coffer and ball of wax seal in such sort as they be , without open they , unless it be in the case aforesaid . 8 you shall make a just and true inventory in every ship and vessel appoint for this voyage of all the tackle , munition , and furniture belong to they at their set forth hence , and of all the provision whatsoever , and one copy thereof under your hand , and under the hand of your vice-admiral and lieutenant , to be deliver the gwernour to the earl of Leicester , and the other to the governor of this come - of company for they before your departure hence , ' ' and the like to be do at your return home of all thing then remain in the say ship and vessel , with a true certificate how and by what mean any parcel of the same shall have be spend or lose . 9 item , you shall use all diligence possible to depart they be in - from Southampton with your say ship and vessel before joynedto^by ^g iast of present month of April , and so go on buena Esper - 7our course by cape de bvena esperanza , not pass by anza . then straight of Magellan either go or return , except upon great occasion incident , that shall be think otherwise good to you , by the advice and consent of your say assistant , or four of they at the least . io item , you shall not pass to the northeastward of the 40 degree of latitude at the most , but shall take your right course to the isle of the Malucos for the better discovery of they northwest passage , if without hindrance of your trade , and within the same degree you can get any knowledge touch that passage , whereof you shall do well to be inquisitive , as occasion in this sort may serve . 11 item , you shall have speciali regard after your departure from the coast of England , so to order your course , as that your ship and vessel lose not one another , but keep company together both outward and homeward . and lest if they happen to sever the one from the other by tempest or otherwise , it shall not be amiss , that you appoint to the captain and master certain place , wherein you will stay certain day . and every ship pass aforehand , and not know what be become of the other ship , to leave upon every promontory or cape a token to stand in sight , with a writing lap in lead to declare the day of their passage . and if any wilfulness or negligence in this behalf shall appear in any person or person that shall have charge of any of the ship or vessel aforesaid , or if they or any of they shall do otherwise then to they appertain , you shall punish such offender sharp to the example of other . 12 item , we do straight enjoin you , and consequent all the rest employ in this voyage in any wise , and as you and they will answer the contrary at your come home by the law of this realm , that neither go , tarry abroad , nor return , you do spoil or take any thing from any of the queen majesty friend or ally , or any Christians , without pay just for the same , nor that you use any manner of violence or force against any such , except in your own 167 strange people to be bring home . the english voyage defence , if you shall be set upon or otherwise be force for your own safeguard to do it .. 13 item , we will that you deal altogether in this voyage like good and honest merchant , traffic and exchange ware for ware , with all courtesy to the nation you shall deal with , as well ethnic as other , and for that cause you shall instruct all those that shall go with you , that whensoever you or any of you shall happen to come in any place to conference with the people of those part , that in all your do and they , you and they so behave your self towards the say people , as may rather procure their friendship and good like towards you by courtesy , than to move they to offence or mislike , and especial you shall have great care of the performance of your word and promise to they . 14 item we will , that by the advice of your assistant , in place where you and they shall think most fit , you settle if you can a begin of a further trade to be have hereafter : and from such place do bring over with you some few man and woman if you may , and do also leave some one or two , or more , as to you and your assistant shall seem convenient of our nation with they for pledge , and to learn the tongue and secret of the country , have diligent care that in deliver and take of hostage , you deliver not personage of more value than you receive , but rather deliver mean person under colour of man of value , as the infidel do for the most part use . provide that you stay not long to make continuance of further trade , then shall be expedient for good exchange of the ware present carry with you . 15 item you shall have care , and give generali warning , that no person of what call soever he be , shall take up , or keep to himself or his private use , any stone , pearl , gold , silver , or other matter of commodity to be have or find in place where you shall come , but he the say person , so seize of such stone , pearl , gold , silver , 168 or other matter of commodity , shall with all speed , or so soon as he can , detect the same , and make delivery thereof to your self , or you vice-admiral , or lieutenant , and the factor appoint for this voyage , upon pain of forfeiture of all the recompense he be to have for his service in this voyage by share or otherwise : and further to receive such punishment , as to you and your assistant , or the more part of they shall seem good , and otherwise to be punish here at his return , if accord to the quality of his offence it shall|be think needful . 16 item , if the captain , merchant or any other , shall have any apparel , jewel , chain , armour , or any other thing whatsoever , which may be desire in country where they shall traffic , that it shall not be lawful for they or any of they to traffic , or sell any thing thereof for their private account : but the same shall be prize by the most part of those that shall be in commission in the place where the same may be so require , rate at such value , as it may be reasonable worth in England , and then sell to the profit of the whole voyage , and to go as in adventure for those to who it do appertain . 17 item you your self shall in the Gallion keep one book , and the factor appoint for the same ship another , wherein shall be a just account keep , aswell of the merchandise carry hence , as of those you shall bring home . and aswell at your set forth , as from time to time , as exchange shall|be make , you shall set your hand to their book , and they they to you , and the like order shall you see that the captain and the factor in the Edward Bonaventure shall use in their ship , and the other captain and factor in each other vessel . 18 item you shall give straight order to restrain , that none shall make any charts or description of the say voyage , but such as shall be depute by you the generali , which say charts and description , we think meet that 169 A.D. 15824 you the generali shall take into your hand at your return to this our coast of England , leave with they no copy , and to present they unto we at your return : the like to be do if they find any charts or map in those country . 19 item you shall at your return so direct your course , that all the ship under your government may come home together , and arrive here in the river of Thames , if it may convenient be . and wheresoever in this realm you , or any of the ship shall arrive , you shall give speciali and straight order , that no person of what condition soever he be , shall unlade , or bring on land , or forth of the vessel in which he come , any part or parcel of merchandise , or matter of commodity bring in any of the say vessel , until we be certify of your or their arrival , shall give further order and direction therein , under the penalty and forfeiture express in the fifteen article , against such as shall retain any thing to their private use , as in the say article be further express . 20 item , to the intent that all such person as shall go with you in this voyage , may better understand what they ought to do , and what to avoid , we think it requisite , that aswell out of these , as otherwise with the advice of your assistant and master of the ship , you shall cause some convenient order to be set down in write for their better government both at sea and land , if they shall happen to go on land any where : and the same to be open read and make know unto they , to the intent they may understand how to behave themselves , and upon any fault commit , not to have any excuse to pretend ignorance , and so to avoid such punishment as it be requisite to have minister for the keep of they in good order . 21 and to the end God may bless this voyage with happy and prosperous success , you shall have a especial care to see that reverence and respect be have to the minister appoint to accompany you in this 170 1582. voyage , as appertain to their place and calling , and to see such good order as by they shall be set down [ three . 757. ] for reformation of life and manner , due obey and perform , by cause the transgressor and contemner of the same to be severe punish , and the minister to remove sometime from one vessel to another . 22 provide always , that the whole direction and government of the people , life and limb except , as in the five article , and the course of this voyage , shall be whole at your disposition , except in the course by the strait of Magellan , either outward or homeward , and in your passage by the northward of 40 degree in latitude , wherein you shall follow direction set down in the nine and ten article , as also in the displace of the captain of the Edward Bonaventure , and other captain , wherein you shall follow the order appoint in the sixth article : provide that we mean not by this article to derogate any thing from the authority of your assistant establish in the three article , or in any other article of these instruction . 23 item , in all occasion and enterprise that may fall out to be upon the land , we will that captain Carlile Carlile shall have the generali and chief charge thereof . occasion 24 and final we require you and every of you to have a due regard to the observation and accomplishment of these our instruction , and of all such other thing , as may any kind of way tend to the furtherance and benefit of this service commit to your charge . 