certain rare and special note most proper belong to the voyage of m. Thomas can dish next before describe ; concern the height , sounding , lying of land , distance of place , the variation of the compass , the just length of time spend in sail between diverse place , and their abode in they , as also the place of their harbour and ancker , and the depth of the same , with the observation of the wind on several coast : write by m. Thomas Fuller of Ipswich , who be master in the desire of m. Thomas candish in his foresay prosperous voyage about the world . a note of the height of certain place on the coast of Barbary . nprimis cape Cantin stand in the latitude of item the island of mogador stand in item Cape d’oro stand in item the island of the canary about item cape bojador stand in item cape Verde stand in item the cape of Sierra Liona in item a island call ilha Verde in 348 32. degr . 4. min. 31. degr . 30. min. 30. degr . 20. min. 28. degr . 27. degr . 30. min. 14. degr . 30. min. 8. degr . 7. degr . 30. min. a note of the height of certain place from the coast of Brasill to the south sea . inprimis cape Frio stand in the latitude of item the island of saint Sebastian in item port desire stand in item seal bay stand in item port S. Julian stand in item the white river stand in item cape joy stand in item port famine within the strait of Magellan stand in item cape froward within the strait of Magellan stand in item . Cape desire in the enter into the south sea stand in 23. degr . 30. min. 24. degr . 47. degr . 50. min. 48. degr . 20. min. 50. degr . 50. degr . 30. min. 52. degr . 40. min. 53. degr . 50. min. 54. degr . 15. min. 53. degr . 10. min. a note of the height of certain place on the coast of Chili and Peru in the south sea . inprimis the island of Mocha stand in the latitude of item the island of saint marry in item the bay of * valpare in item the bay of Quintero in item coquimbo in item Morro moreno in item Arica stand in item the bay of Pisca stand in item the bay of Lima stand in item Santos stand in item the bay of cherrepe in item the bay of Paita , in item the island of Puna , in item cape Sant Francisco to the north of the equinoctial , in 349 38. degr . 30. min. 37. degr . 15. min. 33. degr . 40. min. * ra^arizo . 33. degr . 20. min. 29. degr . 30. min. 23. degr . 20. min. 18. degr . 30. min. 13. degr . 30. min. 11. degr . 50. min. 9 degr . 20. min. [ three . 826. ] 6. degr . 30. min. 5. degr . 4. min. 2. degr . 50. min. i . degr a note of the height of certain place to the northward of the equinoctial line , on the coast of new Spain . * or , Guatuko . * las tres Maria . or Panama . inprimis Panama stand in the latitude of item the island call Isla de canoas , in item cape Blanco , in item Rio Lexo , in item * Aguatulco , in item Acapulco , in item sant Iago , in item Cape de los Corrientes , in item the bay of Xalisco , in item the island of the * mary , in item the island of saint Andrew , in item the island of Ciametlan , in item , that the cape of Santa Clara on the point of California be in 9 degree . 9 degr . 10. min. 10. degr . 10. min. 12. degr . 40. min. 15. degr . 50. min. 17. degr . 20. min. 18. degr . 50. min. 20. degr . 30. min. 21. degr . 30. min. 21. degr . 20. min. 22. degr . 23. degr . 40. min. 23. degree . a note of the height of certain place begin from the island of the ladrone and pass by the philippinas , the Malucos , Java minor , Java major , the cape of Bona Speranza , and the isle of Santa Helena . INprim . one of the island of the ladrone call guana stand in item Cape de Spirito Santo on the isle of Luzon stand in item the island of Capul in item that the island of Seboyon stand in item that the easterly end of the island of * Pannay be in item that the open between the south head of Pannay and the south head of Isla de los negro be in 35° 13. degr . 50. min. 13. degr . 12. degr . 30. min. 12. degr . 11. degr . 10. degr . 10. min. item that the southhead of Isla de los negro be in item that the northhead of the island Mindanao be in item the southhead of Mindanao call cape cannel be in item the cape of Batochina be in * item that 12. small island stand in item the latitude of two other island be in item the westerly head of Java minor be towards the south in item the easterly head of Java major be towards the south in item Malaca stand to the northward in item cape Falso on the promontory of Africa , stand in item the cape of Bona Speranza stand in item the island of Santa Helena stand in item the cape of S. Augustine stand southward in note a.d. 1588. 9 degr . 10. min. 7. degr . 50. min. 6. degr . 40. min. 10. min. 3. degr . to the south - ward of the j „ • line . 4. degr . 10. min. 8. degr . 30. min. 8. degr . 20. min. 2. degr . 34. degr . 20. min. 34. degr . 40. min. 15. degr . 40. min. 8. degr . 40. min. sounding on the coast of Barbary from Rio del oro unto cape Blanco . nprimis about 3. league off Rio del oro you shall have very fair should , fine white sand 18. fathom , and so alongst unto cape Blanco two or three league off the shore you shall have 18. and 20. fathom . and when you come within one league of the cape you shall have twelve or thirteen fathom , brown sand , very fair should . and if you will hall in with cape Blanco , beware you come not within seven or eight fathom of the cape : for there lie a sand off the cape . 351 also about 7. or eight league off the cape lie a long shall next hand Southwest and by south off the cape . sounding on the coast of guiny . i tern , go unto Sierra Leona , have the cape Eastnortheast off you , 7. league off , you shall have 22 fathom brown sand . And hail in you shall find very fair shoald . you may be bold to borrow on the southermost shore : but take heed of a rock that lie in the fair way a good birth off the shore , but there be no fear of it : for it lie above the water , and be distant two mile off the south shore . item , you may be bold to borrow hard by the rock ; for on the north side go in there lie one long sand which run southeast and northwest , and lie distant from the south shore 2 league . and you shall anchor in 14 or 15 fathom hard by the shore . also go unto the island call illha Verde , the which island lie 10 league to the southward of Sierra Leona , the course be southsouthwest , and northnortheast : and you shall have between they 9 or 10 fathom . and if you will anchor at the say island , you shall have 5 or 6 fathom hard by the shore . also you must have especial care of a great current that set alongst the coast of guiny to the eastward . item , and if you be bind unto the southward , you must go westsouth west off , for fear of they shall that be call Madera Bomba , the which shall be to the southward of the island . sounding on the coast of Brasil . i tern , unto the northward of cape Frio , the cape bear southwest off you , about 17 or 18 league off , you shall have 45 fathom streamy ground : and run Southwest , you shall find 32 fathom black sand : and then run westsouthwest into a deep bay , which lie ten league to the northward of the 352 cape , you shall have 22 fathom oaze : that depth you shall have all alongst , except you be far into the bay ; and than you shall have 16 fathom all oazy . item , to the northward of cape Frio , about 6 or 7 league , you shall have many small island . item , to the northward of the cape 6. league , you shall have two small island one mile distant the one from the other , and they be distant from the main five league . and between those island and the cape you shall have very many island hard aboard the main . item , the cape bear west of you two league off , you shall have 55 fathom oaze . also you shall know when you be shoot about the cape unto the southward , by deep of the water . also if you will go for saint Sebastian from the cape , you must go west and south , and westsouthwest among . and the distance from the cape unto saint Sebastian be 50 league . And be shoot into the bay any thing near the shore , you shall have 24 fathom all oazy . And hail in for s. Sebastian , you shall know it by two little island which be round : and those island lie from the hand of S. Sebastian next hand east and by south ; and be distant the one from the other about four league . also off the southermost end of saint Sebastian , there lie one island about 6 league off ; which island be call the Alcatrarza , and there lie four little island about it . also you may know it by the trending of the land unto the southward . item , if you will go in at the northermost end of saint Sebastian , you must take heed of a sand that lie on the north-east part of the island : but you may be bold to borrow on the island : for the sand lie off the main side . also you may anchor on the northermost part of the island in ten fathom ; and the main be distant from you where you shall ride two league off . xi 353 z item , if you will come in at the southermost end of the island of saint Sebastian , your course from the Alcatrarza be southwest and Northeast , and their distance be 6 league the one from the other . item , unto the southward of the river of plate , be in the latitude of 45 degree and 60 league off the main , you shall have shoald in 60 fathom or 65 fathom oazy sand : and then hail in for the shore Westsouthwest 16 league , you shall have 50 fathom oaze , and you shall have fair shoald all along . item , in the latitude of 47J you shall see about one mile in length , not pass one league off the shore , a ledge of break ground , but no danger . also you shall have very fair shoald all along the coast ; and the land lie south and north until you come unto port desire , which stand in 48 degree . item , if you will go into port desire , on the north side there lie one ledge of rock about a league distant from the shore . also on the north side at the mouth of the harbour , there lie a couple of rock , which be at half flood under water : but be bold to borrow on the southermost shore ; for there be no danger ; and you shall have no less than 6 fathom water at a low water , the harbour lie east and west . also you may know the harbour by one little island that lie southeast off the mouth of the harbour , and it be distant 4 league . Furthermore , you may know the harbour by a high rock that stand on the south side ; and this rock be very much like a watch tower . also if you be any thing in , you may anchor in 5 fathom at a low water . item , it flow there south and north , and high at spring tide 3 fathom and a half water ; and in the off the flood set to the northward . item , in the latitude of 48 degree 50 minute you shall have 44 fathom black sand about 5 league off : and about 3 league off you shall have 25 fathom , and great shingle stone . 354 item , in the latitude of 49 degree you shall have sound in 38 fathom oazy sand . item , in the latitude of 51 degree 10 minute you shall have sounding 4 league from the shore in 44 fathom small black stone . sounding within the entrance of the strait . item , about two league from the northermost shore you shall have 38 fathom black sand , and all along you shall have deep water , not less than 18 or 20 fathom in the fair way . sounding on the coast of Chili in the south sea . item , in the latitude of 36 degree you shall have sounding in 12 fathom , 2 mile from the land , brown sand . item , in the latitude of 35 degree , you shall have sounding one league off from the land in 10 fathom white sand . sounding on the coast of new Spain in the south sea . item , in the latitude of 14 degree to the north of the line , you shall have sounding 4 league from the land in 30 fathom , brown sand . item , from the latitude of 14 degree unto the latitude of 15 degree , you shall have fair shoald 3 league from the land . sounding on the coast of Africa unto the eastward of the cape of buena esperanza 40 league . item , to the eastwards of the cape of buena esperanza 40 league , in the latitude of 34 degree and 10 minute , 8 league from the land , you shall have 65 fathom , and brown sand . [ A ought 355 a note of the lie of the land unto the southward of port desire . n primis , seal bay stand unto the southward of port desire 12 league southsouthwest . Furthermore , unto the southward of Seales bay 3 league , you shall have very low land . also more unto the southward of Seales bay 7 league , in the height of 48 degree 40 minute , you shall see a rock 5 league off the shore , the land lie southwest and by south . item , in the latitude of 49 degree you shall see a small flat island , about a league and a half off the shore , the land lie southwest and by south . Furthermore , from the latitude of 49 degree i unto the latitude of 50 degree , the land lie south and by west , and be high land . item , from the latitude of 50 degree unto the latitude of 50 degree 40 minute , the land lie southwest and by south . Furthermore , from the latitude of 50 degree 40 minute unto the latitude of 52 degree 17 minute , the land lie south and by west , north and by east . item , in the say latitude of 52 degree 17 minute , there go in a harbour , which be to be know by a long beache that lie on the south side of the harbour . Moreover , the say harbour stand 12 league unto the northward of cape joy . Furthermore , from the latitude of 52 degree 17 minute unto the latitude of 52 degree 40 minute ( in which heighth stand cape joy ) the land lie southsoutheast , and n orthnorthwest . item , come from the northward , you shall see before you come to cape joy , a very long beach , about the length of 8 league , be 5 league short of the cape unto the northward . also unto the southward of the cape , you shall see another beach about a league 356 long , adjoin hard under the cape ; about which beach be the entrance of the strait of Magellan , the which strait be in breadth six league over , from the cape unto the south shore , lie south and by east . item , from cape joy , be the entrance of the strait of Magellan , unto the first narrow passage of the say strait ; the course be west and by north , and east and by south , and be distant 18 league ; the land be in breadth from the one side to the other one league . item , from the first narrow unto the second narrow passage , the course be west and by south , and east and by north ; and the distance be 12 league : and in breadth the one side be from the other about two league over . item , from the second narrow unto the island that be call Elizabeth , Bartholomew , and Penguin island , the distance be 5 league , and the course be southwest and Northeast : the island be distant a league and a half the one from the other . item , from the say island unto port famine be 16 league : the course be southsouthwest , and northnortheast . Moreover , from port famine unto cape froward , the course be south and by west , and north and by east : and they be distant 8 league asunder . item , from cape froward unto saint Jeromes river , be 16 league : the course be northwest and southeast . also from saint Jeromes river unto the uttermost land on the south side , the which be call Cabo Deseado , the course be northwest and somewhat to the northward , and be distant 30 league . So the whole length of the strait of Magellan be 105 league . [ Iii . 829. ] the entrance of the strait . the end of the strait . a note of the lie of the land in the south sea . in primis , there stand in the latitude of 52 degree and 50 minute , three or four island , about 8 league from Cabo Deseado : the course be northnorthwest , and 357 inn which height stand Quintero . 27 deg . 40 mi . in which height stand Copiapo . the english voyage southsoutheast . and those island stand in the mouth of the strait of Magellan , at the go into the south sea .. item , from the latitude of 52 degree 50 minute , unto the latitude of 51 degree , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest . item , from the latitude of 50 degree untq the latitude of 38 degree and 30 minute , the land lie north-east and by north , Southwest and by south . item , from the latitude of 38 degree 30 minute unto the latitude of 37 degree 14 minute , the land lie north and south . item , from the island of saint marie , be in the latitude of 37 degree 14 min. unto the height of 36 degree 14 minute , in which height stand the bay of conception , the course be Northeast and Southwest , and the distance 12 league . item , from the latitude of 36 degree 40 minute unto the latitude of 35 degree 20 minute , the land lie north-east and by north , Southwest and by south . item , from the latitude of 35 degree 20 minute unto the latitude of 33 degree 30 minute , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest . item , in the latitude of 34 degree you shall see about five mile off from the shore a bank of sand , on the which you shall have but shall water . item , from the latitude of 33 degree 20 minute unto the latitude of 29 degree 20 minute , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest . item , from the latitude of 29 degree 20 minute unto the latitude of 27 degree 40 minute , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest . item , in the latitude of 29 degree 20 minute , there lie two island distant 4 league asunder , and about one league from the main . item , from the latitude of 27 degree 40 minute unto the latitude of 23 degree 30 minute , the land lie north and by east , south and by west . 358 11 deg . 50 i . in which height stand the island oj Lobos . 5. degree . in which height stand Paita . Thomas fuller’s note a.d. 1588. from the latitude of 25 degree unto the of 23 degree and 30 minute , the land be very 23^ . 30 « « . in which from the latitude of 23 degree unto the of 22 degree , the land lie northnortheast , and southsouthwest . item , from the latitude of 22 degree unto the latitude of 18 degree and 30 minute , the land lie north and by 18 deg . 0,0 mi . east , south and by west . afab item , from the latitude of 18 degree 30 minute , unto et the latitude of 18 degree , the land lie northwest and by west , southeast and by east . item , from the latitude of 18 degree unto the latitude of 13 degree 30 minute , the land lie northwest and 13 deg . 30 mi . southeast : in which heighth there lie two or three island , whtc^ which island lie off a place where be two town call Paraca , and Pisca . “ item , from the latitude of 13 degree 30 minute , unto the latitude of 11 degree 50 minute , the land lie northnorthwest , and southsoutheast . item , from the latitude of 11 degree 50 minute , unto [ three . 830. ] the latitude of 6 degree , the land lie north and by west , south and by east . also you shall see two island , which be call the land of Lobos , that stand in the latitude of 6 degree . item , from the latitude of 6 degree , unto the latitude of 5 degree , the land lie northwest and by west , southeast and by east . item , from the latitude of 5 degree unto the latitude of 4 degree , the land lie northwest and southeast : in which height of 4 degree stand cape Blanco . item , from the latitude of 4 degree unto the latitude of 2 degree 50 minute ( in which latitude of 2 degree 50 minute stand the island of Puna ) the course be Northeast and Southwest . [ A ought 359 2 deg . 50 min. in which height stand the island of Puna . league 12. league 80. league 7. league 55. league 70. league 90. league 120. league 71. a note of the distance between certain place on the coast of Chili and Peru. HN primis , from the island of Mocha unto the island of saint mary , the course be north and south , and the distance be 25 league . item , from the island of saint marry unto the bay of conception , the course be Northeast and Southwest , and the distance be 12 league . item , from the bay of conception unto the port of Valpariso , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 80 league . item , from the port of Valpariso unto the bay of Quintero , the course be Northeast and by north , and Southwest and south , and the distance be 7 league . in which bay of Quintero there lie one small island . item , from the bay of Quintero unto the bay of coquimbo , the course be Northnortheast , and southsouthwest , and the distance be 72 league : in which height stand two island . item , from the bay of coquimbo unto the bay of Copiapo , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 55 league : in which height stand one island . item , from the bay of Copiapo unto the bay of Morro moreno , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 70 league . item , from the bay of Morro moreno , unto the bay of Arica , the course be north and by east , south and by west , and the distance be 90 league : in which bay of Arica stand one small island . item , from the bay of Arica unto the bay of parraca , the course be northwest and southeast , and the distance be 120 league : in which bay of Parraca stand three or four island . item , from the bay of Parraca unto the bay of 360 1588. Lima , the course be northwest and by north , southeast and by south , and the distance be 35 league : in league 35. the bay of Lima be one island . item , from the bay of Lima unto the bay of cherrepe , the course be north and by west , south and by east , and the distance be 90 league . league 90. item , from the bay of cherrepe unto the bay of Paita it be 45 league , the course be 20 leag west - league 45. northwest unto two island that be call the island of Lobos , and from thence unto the bay of Paita it be 25 league , the course be north and by east . item , from Paita unto cape Blanco , the course be north and by west , south and by east , and the distance be 25 league . league 25. item , from cape Blanco unto the island of Puna , the course be eastnortheast and Westsouth west , and the distance be 25 league : and you shall see one island that league 25. be call Santa Clara , which stand 10 league to the league in all southward of Puna . « « 751. a note of certain place unto the northward of the line . in primis , from cape Blanco unto cape S. Laurence , the course be north and by east , south and by west , and the distance 60 league . league 60. item , from cape S. Lorenzo unto cape S. Francisco , the course be north and by east , south and by west , and the distance be 40 league . league 40. item , from cape S. Francisco unto the cape that be call cape Blanco , which cape be on the coast of new Spain , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 160 league : and you league 160. shall have a great current that set out of the bay of Panama ; and the say current set south out . item , from cape Blanco unto the port de Veles , the course be Northeast and Southwest , and the distance 8 league . league 8. 361 item , from the port de Veles unto the port of saint John , the course be northwest and southeast , and the league 17. distance be 17 league . [ Iii . 831. ] item , from the port of saint John unto Rio Lexo , the course be northwest , and southeast , and the distance be league 40. 40 league . item , from Rio Lexo unto the gulf of Fonsecco , the course be westnorthwest , and eastsoutheast , and league 14. they be distant 14 league . item , in the mouth of Rio Lexo there lie one island , and you must go in on the northwest part of that island ; on the which island you may be bold for to borrow on : and you must go from that island southeast up . item , that in the gulf of Fonsecco you shall have lie ten island , whereof three be people with Indians , whereon you may have water , wood , and salt . item , on the west side of the gulf of Fonsecco there be one town of Indians , which be call mapal , in which town there be great store of beef . item , from the river Lexo unto the bay of sonsonate , the course be east and west , and the distance be league 60. 60 league . item , from the bay of sonsonate unto the port of Aguatulco , the course be northwest and by west , southleague 160. east and by east , and the distance 160 league . item , from the bay of Coppeleto unto the port of league z . Aguatulco it be 2 league , the course be west and by north , east and by south . item , from the port of Aguatulco unto the port of angel , the course be east and west , and they be league 12. distant 12 league . item , from the port of Aguatulco unto the port of Acapulco , the course be west and by north , east and league 78. by south , and the distance be 78 league . item , from the port of Acapulco unto the port of saint Iago , the course be west and by north , east and league 80. by south , and the distance be 80 league . item , from the port of saint Iago unto the port of 362 1588. Natividad , the course be east and west , and the distance be 7 league . league 7. item , from the port of Natividad unto the port of the island of Chiametla , the course be east and west , and the distance be 10 league . league 10. item , from the island of Chiametla unto Cape de los Corrientes , the course be northwest and by west , southeast and by east , and the distance be 30 league . league 30. item , from the cape de los Corrientes unto the bay of Xalisco , the course be Northnortheast , and southsouthwest , and the distance be 18 league . league 18. item , from the bay of Xalisco unto the port of Chiametlan , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance be 30 league . league 30. item , from the cape de los Corrientes unto the island call las tres Maria , the course be northwest and southeast , and the distance be 20 league . league 20. item , from the cape de los Corrientes unto the cape of Santa Clara on the point of California , the course be westnorthwest , and eastsoutheast , and the distance be 108 league . league 108. a note from the coast of America unto the westwards . item , from the cape of Santa Clara unto the island of the ladrone , the course be west and by south , east and by north , and the distance between they be 1850 iMpm league . l85° - item , that the southermost island of the ladrone stand in the latitude of 12 degree and 10 minute , and from thence unto the northermost island , the course be northnortheast and Southsouthwest , and the distance between they be 200 league : and the say northermost island stand in 21 degree 10 minute . item , from one of the island of the ladrone , which stand in the latitude of 13 degree and 50 minute , which island be call * guaihaime , unto the cape de Spirito or Guana . 363 santo , which cape be upon one of the island of the fillip — pina , the course be west and to the southward , and the league 320. distance be 320 league . item , from the cape of Spirito santo unto the mouth of the entrance of the strait of the philippinas , the course be west and by north , east and by south , and league 15. the distance be 15 league . item , from the mouth of the strait unto the island league 6. Capul , the course be southwest and by west 6 league . item , from the island of Capul unto the north head of the island call masbat , the course be northwest and league 15. southeast , and the distance between they be 15 league . item , from the north head of the island call masbat l unto the island call Sebojon , the course be westsouth - league 1 » all west and eastnortheast , and the distance between they 2414. be 15 league . [ Iii . 832. ] a note of our course keep from the island Sebojon unto the southward . item , from the island of Sebojon unto the east end of the island call Pannay , the course be southeast and by south , northwest and by west , and the distance be league 22. 22 league . item , that off the easter end of the island of Pannay there lie certain small island , unto the number of 12 or moor , and you shall have shall water among they . item , from the easter end of Pannay unto a bay that be call the bay of Lago grande , on the same island , the course be westsouthwest , and eastnortheast , league 18. and the distance be 18 league . item , from the bay of Lago grande unto the island league 6. that be call Ysla de los Negros , be the distance of 6 league southeast and northwest . item , from the bay of Lago grande unto three small island that stand in the latitude of 10 degree , the course be south and by west 12 league . Furthermore , from those three island unto the westermost end of Ysla de league 10. los negro , the course be southwest and Northeast 10 364 1588. league , where we be clear of the island of the philippinas . item , from the south end of Ysla de los negro unto the north head of the island call Mindanao , the course be south and north , and the distance be 30 league 30. league . item , from the north end of Mindanao unto the south head of the say island , which be call cape Cannal , the course be south and by west , north and by east , and the distance be 26 league . league 26. item , from the cape of Cannal between the south and the westsouthwest about 10 or 12 league off you league 12. shall have great store of small island , about the number of 24 or moor . item , from the cape of Cannal unto the cape of batochina , the course be southsouthwest , and northnortheast , and the distance be 100 league , and between they set league 100 a great current unto the eastward . item , from the cape of Batochina unto the west head of Java minor , the course be southwest and by south , Northeast and by north , and the distance between they be 220 league . league 220. item , from the west end of Java minor unto the east end of Java major , the course be west and by north , and east and by south , and the distance between they be 18 league : in the which course there lie one league 18. * island between they , which island be in length 14 * this be the league . ofbaly . item , from the east end of Java major unto the cape of buena esperanza , the course be west and by south , and westsouth west , and the distance between £easues they be 1800 league . j8oo . item , that cape Falso stand 30 league to the league 30. eastward of cape de buena esperanza , and off the say cape Falso you shall have shoald 20 league off in 80 or 90 fathom , and the course be from cape Falso unto the cape of buena esperanza westnorthwest and league in all eastsoutheast . be 2292 - 365 league 1200. a note of the distance and course from the cape of buena esperanza unto the northward . item , from the cape of buena esperanza unto the island of Santa Helena , the course be northwest , and northwest and by west , and the distance between they be 600 league . item , from the island of Santa Helena unto the island of Flores , the course between they be northnorthwest , and northwest and by north , and the distance between they be 1200 league . item , from the island of Flores unto the land end of England , the course be between the eastnortheast , and the north-east and by east , and the distance between they be four hundred and fifty league . a note of the variation of our compass . n primis , the variation of our compass on the coast of new Spain in the south sea in the latitude of 12 degree , be one point to the eastwards . item , the variation of our compass between the cape of California and the island of the philippinas , be one point and a half unto the eastward , that be , that the north do stand north and by east , and half a point unto the east . item , the variation of our compass between the island of Maluco and the cape of buena esperanza , be two point and a half at the most to the westward , that be , that the northnortheast be our north . 366 a note of our time spend in sail between [ he . 833. ] certain place out of England , 1586. n primis , we be sail between England and the coast of Guinea from the 21 day of July unto the 26 day of August unto the haven call Sierra leona , where we water and stay until the 6 day of September . item , we depart from the coast of of our abode ten day where we water . Guinea for the coast of Brasil the 10 day of September , and we have sight of the coast of Brasil the 26 day of October , be six league to the northward of cape Frio : and from thence we be sail unto the island of saint Sebastian until the 31 and last day of October , where we water and set up our pinnace : and we of our abode anchor on the northwest part of the island in ten four fathom , and stay there until the 23 day of November , item , the 23 day of November we depart from the water . island of Sant Sebastian , keep our course south and by west unto the port that be call port desire , where we arrive the 17 day of December ; in which port we grave our ship : and we stay there until °four the 28 day of December , where we anchor in 5 fathom . item , the eight and twenty day of December we -a^our depart from the port of desire towards the strait of ship . Magellan , where we arrive the three day of January : and we remain in the strait until the four and twenty day of February ; where we water in many place on the south side , have the wind all that while between the Westsouth west and than northwest . item , we depart out of the strait the 24 day of February towards the island of Mocha , which island we have sight of the 14 day of march . item , the 14 day of march at night we anchor in the bay of marrocco ; where we ride in 9 fathom water . item , the 15 day of march we anchor in the island of saint marie , on the north part of the island in f01* ™ 367 of our abode two in fifAe day , where we water . of our abode eight fathom water , black sand , where we stay four day . item , the 19 day of march we depart from the island of saint marie , and the same day we anchor in the bay of conception , where we stay until the next day : and there we ride in ten fathom water , shingle stone . item , the 20 day of march we depart from the bay of conception , and the thirty day of march we of our abode arrive in the bay of Quintero , where we water : 6 day , where anj there the first day of April we have twelve of our we wa re . man s ] a ; nej being on land for water : and we stay there six day : and we anchor in 7 fathom water , white sand . of our abode item , we depart from the bay of Quintero the 5 day three day . qf April , and we arrive at the bay of Arica the 24 day of April , and we anchor in 7 fathom water . of our abode item , the 27 day of April we depart from the bay of two day . Arica , and the three day of may we arrive in the bay of Pisca , and we anchor in 4 fathom water in oaze . of our abode item , the 5 day of may we depart from the bay of six day . Pisca ) and the 12 day we anchor in the bay of cherrepe , where we anchor in 7 fathom water , in white sand . of our abode item , the 18 day of may we depart from the bay of one day . cherrepe , and the 20 day of may we arrive in the bay of Payta , where we anchor in 6 fathom water . item , the 20 day of may we depart from the bay of Paita , and the 26 day of may we anchor at the island of Puna , and we anchor in 5 fathom . of our abode item , from the island of Puna we depart the four watered* ^une Unt° °^ce main , where we ' water , and we anchor in 10 fathom water , brown sand . of our abode item , the 12 day of June we depart from the place % day , where where we water , be bind for the coast of new we water , gpaine , and the 29 day of July we arrive in the port of Aguatulco , where we water , and anchor in 6 fathom water . 368 item , the 3 day of August we depart from the port of Aguatulco , and the 26 day of August we arrive at the port of saint Iago , where we water , and stay of our abode there until the second day of September , and anchor in 7 wbere o radom . item , the 2 of September we depart from the port of saint Iago , and the 3 day of September we put into a port one league unto the westwards of Natividad , where of our abode we anchor in 8 fathom water . one day . item , the 4 day of September we depart from the ° / °ur “ bode port of Natividad , and the 7 day of September we put three into the bay of Xalisco , where we anchor in 9 fathom water , and the 10 day of September we depart from the [ he . 834 ] bay of Xalisco , and the 12 day of September our anchor at the island of saint Andrew , where we anchor in 17 fathom water . item , the 17 day of September we depart from of our abode the island of saint Andrew , and the 24 day of September we put into the bay of Chiametlan , where we anchor in 8 fathom water , and the 26 of September we depart from the bay of Chiametlan , and the 28 day we anchor of our abode under the island of Chiametlan in 4 fathom . z day es , where item , the 9 day of October we depart from the island of Chiametlan , and cross over the mouth of twelve day , mar vermejo , the 14 day of October we have sight of they where we cape of California . water . item , the 15 day of October we lie off the cape of S. Lucas , and the 4 day of November we take the great and rich ship call Santa Anna , come from the philippinas : and the 5 day of November we put into the of our abode port of saint Lucas , where we put all the people on shore , and burn the Santa Anna : and we anchor in 12 fathom water . water . item , the 19 day of November we depart from the port of saint Lucas , and the 3 day of January we have sight of one of the island of the ladrone , which island be call the island of * Iwana , stand in the latitude * Guana . of 13 degree and 50 minute . xi 369 2 a item , the 3 day of January we depart from the island of Iwana , and the 14 day of Januarie we have sight of the cape of Spirito santo , and the same day we put of our abode into the strait of the philippinas ; and the 15 day mne ayes . of january we anchor under the island of Capul , on the which island we water and wooded . , item , the 24 of January we depart from the island of Capul , and the 28 day of January we arrive in the bay of Lago grande , which bay be in the island of Pannay , Spaniards where there be Spaniards build of a new ship . eld of a item , the 29 of January we depart from the bay of nevi ship tn the t ’ , , 7 , r . , , philippinas , Lago grande , and the same day at night we be clear from the island of the philippinas , shape our course towards the island of Maluco . day 30. item , from the 29 day of January unto the first day of march , we be navigate between the west end of the island of Pannay and the west end of the island of Java minor . of our abode item , the first day of march we pass the strait wzr ” at west head of the island of Java minor , and the 5 water . day of march we anchor in a bay at the Wester end of Java major , where we water , and have great store of victual from the town of Polambo . Java major . item , the 16 day of march we depart from the total of and Java major , and the 11 day of may we have sight buena Espe - and 4° league unto the eastwards of the cape of ranxa . buena esperanza , the land be low land . a note from the cape of buena esperanza unto the northward . of our abode TTem , the 21 day of may we depart from the cape herem1^ ®uena esperanza , and the 8 day of June we water anchor on the northwest part of the island of Santa Helena , where we water , and make our abode 12 day . item , the 20 day of June at night we depart day 14. from the island of Santa Helena , and the 4 day of July we pass under the equinoctial line . 370 item , the 20 day of June at night we depart from the island of Santa Helena , and the 25 day of August in the morning we have sight of the island of Flores and 2*4# space of Corvo in the latitude of 40 degree . ournavigation item , the 9 day of September 1588 we arrive , after iia^ewas a long and terrible tempest , in the narrow sea , in the threescore y haven of Plymouth in safety , by the gracious and most five day . merciful protection of the almighty , to who therefore be render immortali praise and thanksgiving now and for ever . amen . a note of our anker in those place where we arrive after our departure from England 1586. hr = = = = = = | n primis , we anchor in the harbour of Sierra leona in 10 fathom water : and fathom 10. a northwest wind in that road be the worst that can blow . item , you may anchor under the island that be call ilha Verde in 6 fathom fathom 6. — — i water : and the wind be at the westnorthwest be the worst wind that can blow . item , you may anchor under the island of saint Sebastian on the northwest part in 10 fathom : and a Westsouth - fathom 10. west wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor in port desire in 5 fathom [ hl 835. ] water , and a west and by south wind be the worst . fa < i°ms 5 - item , you may anchor under cape joy without the mouth of the strait of Magellan in 7 fathom water . fathom 7. item , you may anchor within the strait of Magellan , until you come unto the first narrow in 25 or 30 fathom 25. fathom water , in the mid way of the strait . item , you may anchor in the second narrow of the strait in 16 fathom water . fathom 16. item , you may anchor under Penguin island on which side you please in 6 or 7 fathom water . fathom 7. item , you may anchor in port famine in 5 or 6 fathom fathom 6. water , and a southsoutheast wind be the worst . item , you may anchor in muscle cove , which cove be on 371 the south side , and be 7 league to the southward of fathom 12. cape froward , and you shall ride in 12 fathom . item , you may anchor in Elizabeth bay , which bay be on fathom 8. the north side of the strait in 8 fathom water . item , from Elizabeth bay unto Cabo deseado , you may anchor on both side of the strait in many place . a note of our anker after we be enter into the south sea . in primis , you may anchor in the bay of Mocha in 7 or 8 fathom water , and there a north-east wind be the worst . item , you may anchor on the north side of saint mary fathom 9 island in nine fathom water : and there a northnorthwest wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor in the bay of conception under fathom 9 one small island in 9 fathom water , and a northnorthwest wind be the worst wind in that bay . fathom 7. item , you may anchor in the bay of Quintero in 7 fathom water , and a northnorthwest wind be the worst wind . fathom 6. item , you may anchor in the bay of Arica in 6 fathom , and in that bay a westnorthwest wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor in the bay of Pisca and Paraca fathom 5. in five fathom : and in that bay a northnorthwest wind be the worst . fathom 8. item , you may anchor in the bay of cherepe in 8 fathom , and there from the northwest unto the south . east it be open . fathom 7. item , you may anchor in the bay of Paita in 7 fathom water : and there a northnortheast wind be the worst wind . item , you may anchor on the north-east part of the fathom 4. island of Puna in 4 fathom : and a north-east wind be the worst . item , you may anchor at Rio dolce , where we water , fathom 10. unto the eastwards of the island of Puna in 10 fathom . 372 a note of what depth we anchor in on the coast of new Spain . item , you may anchor in the port of Aguatulco in six fathom water : and a southsouthwest wind be fathom 6. the worst . item , you may anchor in the port of saint Iago in 6 fathom 6. fathom water : and a westsouthwest wind be the worst . item , you may anchor in the port of Natividad in 8 fathom 8. fathom water : and a southeast wind be the worst . item , you may anchor on the bay of Xalisco in 9 fathom 9 fathom water : and a westsouthwest wind be the worst . item , you may anchor on the northwest part of the island of saint Andrew in 17 fathom water . fathom 17. item , you may anchor under the island of Chiametlan in 4 fathom water : and a southeast wind be the worst . fathom 4. item , you may anchor in the port of saint Lucas on the cape of California in 12 fathom water : and a fathom 12. southeast wind be the worst . a note of what depth we anchor in , among the island of the philippinas . item , you may anchor on the southwest part of the island of Capul in 6 fathom water : and a west - fathom 6. southwest wind be the worst . item , you may anchor all along the south part of [ three . 836. ] the island of Panna in shall water , in the depth of io or 12 fathom . fathom 10. item , you may anchor in the bay of Lago grande in seven fathom water , which bay be on the south side of the island of Panna . item , you may anchor at the east end of Java major in 16 fathom water , and a eastsoutheast wind be the fathom 16. worst . item , you may anchor on the north part of the island of Santa Helena in 12 fathom water . fathom 12. 373 * to you south side of the equinoctial . a note of our find of the wind for the most part of our voyage 1586. n primis , from the 21 day of July unto the 19 day of August we find the wind at Northnortheast , be in the latitude of 7 degree . item , from the 19 day of August unto the 28 day of September , we find the wind for the most part be between the west and the southwest , be in * 24 degree . item , from the 28 day of September unto the 30 day of October , we find the wind between the north-east and the eastnortheast . item , from the 23 of November , from the island of saint Sebastian , unto the 30 day of November , we find the wind between the southeast and the southsoutheast , be in 36 degree . item , from the 30 day of November unto the 6 day of December , we find the wind to be between the west and the southwest . item , from the 6 day of December unto the first day of January , we find the wind for the most part between the north and the north-east , be then in the latitude of 52 degree . item , from the first day of January unto the 23 day of February , we find the wind to be between the northwest and the westsouthwest , we be all that time in the strait of Magellan . item , from the 23 day of February unto the first day of march , we find the wind to be between the south and the southeast , be then in the south sea in the latitude of 48 degree . item , from the first day of march unto the 7 day of march , we find the wind to be at the north and the northnortheast in the latitude of 43 degree . item , from the 7 day of march unto the 14 day of 374 march , we find the wind to be between the south and the southwest , in the latitude of 37 degree . item , from the 14 day of march unto the 28 day 1587. of may , we find the wind to be between the south and the southwest , in the latitude of 3 degree to the south of the line . a note of the vary of our wind to the north of the equinoctial line on the coast of new Spain - item , from the 28 day of may unto the 5 day of July , we find the wind for the most part to be between the southsoutheast , and the southsouthwest , be in the latitude of 10 degree to the northward of the line on the coast of new Spain . item , from the 5 day of July unto the 14 day of October , we find the wind for the most part to be at the eastnortheast in the latitude of 23 degree northward , and almost under the tropic of cancer . a note of the wind which we find between the coast of new Spain and island of the philippinas on the coast of Asia . in the year of our lord 1587 we depart from the cape of Santa Clara on the coast of California the 19 day of November , and we find the wind to be between the east and the eastnortheast , until the 29 day of January ; depart then from the island of the philippinas , be in the latitude of 9 degree . item , from the 29 day of January unto the 19 day of march , we find the wind for the most part between the northnortheast and than northwest , be then among the land of Maluco , in the latitude of 9 degree . item , from the 19 day of march unto the 20 day of May , we find the wind for the most part between the south and the eastsoutheast , be then 375 between the land of Maluco , and the cape of buena esperanza , in the latitude of 34 degree to the south of the line . item , from the 20 day of may unto the 11 day [ three . 837 - ] of July , we find the wind for the most part between the south and the southeast , be then between the cape of buena esperanza , and 15 degree unto the southward of the line . item , from the 11 day of July unto the 18 day of August , we find the wind for the most part between the north-east and Eastnortheast , be then between the latitude of 15 degree to the southward of the line , and 38 degree unto the northward of the line . 