the second voyage of master Martin Frobisher , make to the west and northwest region , in the year 1577. with a description of the country , and people : write by master dionise settle . n Whitsunday , be the six and twenty of May , in the year of our lord God 1577. captain Frobisher depart from black wall , with one of the queen majesty ship , call the aid , of nine score ton , or thereabouts : and two other little bark like wise , the one call the Gabriel , whereof master Fenton , a gentleman of my lord of warwikes , be captain : 211 theorcadians upon small occasion f . ee their home . the english voyage and the other , the Michael , whereof master York , a gentleman of my lord admiral be captain , accompany with seven score gentleman , soldier , and sailor , well furnish with victual , and other provision necessary for one half year , on this his second voyage , for the further discover of the passage to Cathay , and other country , thereunto adjacent , by west and northwest navigation : which passage or way , be suppose to be on the north and northwest part of America : and the say America to be a island environ with the sea , where through our merchant may have course and recourse with their merchandise , from these our northernmost part of Europe , to those orientali coast of Asia , in much short time , and with great benefit than any other , to their no little commodity and profit that do or shall frequent the same . Oure say captain and general of this present voyage and company have the year before , with two little pinnace , to his great danger , and no small commendation , give a worthy attempt towards the performance thereof , be also press , when occasion shall be minister ( to the benefit of his prince , and native country ) to adventure himself further therein . as for this second voyage , it seem sufficient , that he have better explore and search the commodity of those people and country , which in his first voyage the year before he have find out . upon which consideration , the day and year before express , we depart from black wall to Harwich , where make a accomplishment of thing necessary , the last of may we hoist up sail , and with a merry wind the 7. of June we arrive at the island call Orcades , or vulgar Orkney , be in number 30. subject and adjacent to Scotland , where we make provision of fresh water ; in the do whereof our generali license the gentleman and soldier for their recreation , to go on shore . at our land , the people flee from their poor cottage , with shriek and alarm , to warn their neighbour of enemy , but by gentle persuasion we reclaim 212 they to their house . it seem they be often fright with pirate , or some other enemy , that move they to such sudden fear . their house be very simple build with pibble stone , without any chimney , the fire be make in the midst thereof . the good man , wife , child , and other of their family eat and sleep on the one side of the house , and the cattle on the other , very beastly and rude , in respect of civility . they be destitute of wood , their fire be turf , and cowshard . no wood in they have corn , big , and oat , with which they pay their king rend , to the maintenance of his house . they take great quantity of fish , which they dry in the wind and sun . they dress their meat very filthy , and eat it without salt . their apparel be after the rude sort of Scotland . their money be all base . their church and religion be reform accord to the Scot . the fisher man of England can better declare the disposition fisher man oj of those people than i : wherefore i remit other their England have usage to their report , as yearly repair thither , in ta Orkney their course to and from island for fish . we depart herehence the 8. of June , and follow [ he . 33. ] our course between west and northwest , until the 4. June and of July : all which time we have no night , but that easy , thoseld^st and without any impediment we have when we be so and north-disposed , the fruition of our book , and other pleasure - west region . to pass away the time : a thing of no small moment , to such as wander in unknown sea , and long navigation , especial , when both the wind and rage surge do pass their common and wont course . this benefit endure in those part not 6. week , while the sun be near the Tropike of Cancer : but where the pole be raise to 70. or 80. degree , it continue much long . all along these sea , after we be six day sail great abun-from Orkney , we meet dote in the sea , great fir tree , dance of Fin e which as we judge , be with the fury of great flood fo^ngin root up , and so drive into the sea . island have ’ almost no other wood nor fuel , but such as they take up upon their coast . it seem , that these tree be 213 inquire drive from some part of the new find land , with the current that set from the west to the east . can ent . the we come within the make of fris - land . from this shore io . or 12. league , we meet great island of ice , of half a mile , some more , some less in compass , show above the sea , 30. or 40. fathom , and as we suppose fast on ground , where with our lead we can scarce sound the bottom for depth . here , in place of odoriferous and fragrant smell of sweet gum , and pleasant note of musical bird , which other country in more temperate zone do yield , we tee , snow , and taste the most boisterous boreal blast mix with snow hrite ui June j hail , in the month of June and July , nothing inferior to our untemperate winter : a sudden alteration , and especial in a place or parallel , where the pole be not elevate above 61. degree : at which height other country moor to the north , yea unto 70. degree , show themselves more temperate than this do . all along this coast ice lie , as a continual bulwark , and so defend the country , that those that will land there , incur great danger . Oure generali 3. day together attempt with the ship boat to have go on shore , which for that without great danger he can not accomplish , he defer it until a more convenient time . all along the coast lie very high mountain cover with snow , except in such place , where through the steepness of the mountain of force it must needs fall . four day coast along this land , we find no sign of habitation . little bird , which we judge to have lose Friseland sub - the shore , by reason of thick fog which that country ject tofigge . js much subject unto , come fly into our ship , which cause we to suppose , that the country be both more tolerable , and also habitable within , than the outward shore make show or signification . from hence we depart the eight of July : and the 16. of the same , we come with the make of land , which land our generali the year before have name the queen foreland , be a island as we judge , lie 214 near the suppose continent with America : and on the other side , opposite to the same , one other island call Halles isle , after the name of the master of the ship , near adjacent to the firm land , suppose continent with Asia . between the which two island there be a large entrance or strait , call Frobishers straight , after the name of our generali , the first finder thereof . This strni say straight be suppose to have passage into the sea of Sur , which i leave unknown as yet . it seem that either here , or not far hence , the sea shall have more large entrance , then in other part within the freeze or untemperate zone : and that some contrary tide , either from the east or west , with main force cast out that great quantity of ice , which come float from this coast , even unto Friseland , cause that country to seem more untemperate than other , much more northerly than the same . i can judge that any temperature under the pole , the time of the sun northern declination be half a year together , and one whole day , ( consider that the sun elevation surmount not 23. degree and 30. minute ) can have power to dissolve such monstrous and huge ice , comparable to great mountain , except by l^tsds of ice . some other force , as by swift current and tide , with t0 the help of the say day of half a year . mounatnes . before we come within the make of these land we taste cold storm , in so much that it seem we have change summer with winter , if the length of the day have not remove we from that opinion . at our first come , the strait seem to be shut up with a long mure of ice , which give no little cause of discomfort unto we all : but our generali , ( to who captain fn-diligence imminent danger , and difficult attempt seem ht s^e ' nothing , in respect of his willing mind , for the come - diligence fir moditie of his prince and country , ) with two little the benefit of pinnace prepare of purpose , pass twice through his prince and they to the east shore , and the island thereunto countrey-adjacent : and the ship , with the two bark lie off and 215 [ by . 34 ] the order of the people appear on shore . fierce and bold people . one take . on something further into the sea , from the danger of the ice . while he be search the country near the shore , some of the people of the country show themselves leap and dance , with strange shriek and cry , which give no little admiration to our man . Oure generali desirous to allure they unto he by fair mean , cause knife , and other thing to be proffer unto they , which they will not take at our hand : but be lay on the ground , and the party go away , they come and ' take up , leave some thing of they to countervail the same . at the length two of they leave their weapon , come down to our generali and master , who do the like to they , command the company to stay , and go unto they : who after certain dumb sign , and mute congratulation , begin to lay hand upon they , but they deliverly escape , and run to their bow and arrow , and come fierce upon they , ( not respect the rest of our company which be ready for their defence ) but with their arrow hurt diverse of they : we take the one , and the other escape . while our generali be busy in search the country , and those island adjacent on the eastshoare , the ship and bark have great care , not to put far into the sea from he , for that he have small store of victual , be force to abide in a cruel tempest , chance in the night , among and in the thick of the ice , which be so monstrous , that even the least of a thousand have be of force sufficient , to have shiver our ship and bark into small portion , if God ( who in all necessity , have care upon the infirmity of man ) have not provide for this our extremity a sufficient remedic through the light of the night , whereby we may well discern to flee from such imminent danger , which we avoid with 14. bourd in one watch the space of 4 hour . if we have not incur this danger among these monstrous island of ice , we shall have lose our 216 generali and master , and the most of our best sailor , which be on the shore destitute of victual : but by the valour of our master gunner , master Jackman , and hard Cox , Andrew Dier , the master mate , man expert both in easy gunnavigation , and other good quality , we be all content master jack-to incur the danger aforerehearse , before we will man . with our own safety , run into the sea , to the destrue - andrewdier . cion of our say generali , and his company . the day follow , be the 19 of Julie , our captain return to the ship , with report of suppose riches , which show it self in the bowel of those barren mountain , wherewith we be all satisfy . within foufe day after we have be at the entrance of the strait , then northwest and west wind disperse the ice into the sea , and make we a large entrance into the strait , so that without any impediment , on the 19 of Julie we enter they , and the 20. thereof , our generali and master with great diligence , seek out and sound the west shore , and find out a fair harbour for the ship and bark to ride in , and name it after our master mate , jackmans sound , and bring the ship , jackmans bark , and all their company to safe anchor , except one man , which die by God visitation . at our first arrival , after the ship ride at anchor , our generali , with such company as can well be spare from the ship , in march order enter the land , have speciali care by exhortation , that at our entrance thereinto , we shall all with one voice , kneel upon our knee , chief thank God for our safe arrival : second beseech he , that it will please his divine majesty , long to continue our queen , for who he , and all the rest of our company in this order take possession of the possession country : and three , that by our Christian study and taken-endevour , those barbarous people train up in paganism , and infidelity , may be reduce to the knowledge of true religion , and to the hope of salvation in Christ our redeemer . with other word very apt to signify his willing mind , and affection towards his prince and 217 country : whereby all suspicion of a undutifiill subject , may credible be judge to be utter exempt from his mind . all the rest of the gentleman and other deserve fee needful to be regard of seafaring man . [ he . 35. - ] stone glister with sparkle like gold . worthy herein , their due praise and commendation . Theise thing in this order accomplish , our generali command all the company to be obedient in thing needful for our own safeguard , to master Fenton , master York , and master beast his lieutenant , while he be occupy in other necessary affair , concern our come thither . after this order we march through the country , with ensign display , so far as be think needful , and now and then heap up stone on high mountain , and other place in token of possession , as likewise to signify unto such as hereafter may chance to arrive there , that possession be take in the behalf of some other prince , by those who first find out the country . whoso make navigation to those country , have not only extreme wind , and furious sea to encounter withal , but also many monstrous and great island of ice : a thing both rare , wonderful , and great to be regard . we be force sundry time , while the ship do ride here at anchor , to have continual watch , with boat and man ready with halser to knit fast unto such ice , as with the ebb and flood be toss to and fro in the harbour , and with force of oar to hale they away , for endanger the ship . Oure generali certain day search this suppose continent with America , and not find the commodity to answer his expectation , after he have make trial thereof he depart thence with two little bark , and man sufficient to the east shore be the suppose continent of Asia , and leave the ship with most of the gentleman , soldier , and sailor , until such time as he either think good to send or come for they . the stone of this suppose continent with America be altogether sparkle , and glister in the sun like 218 gold : so likewise do the sand in the bright water , yet they verify the old proverb : all be not gold that 4 common pro-glistereth . verb . on this west shore we find a dead fish float , which have in his nose a horn strait and torquet , of length two yard lack two inche , be break in the top , where we may perceive it hollow , into the which some of our sailor put spider they present die . i see not the trial hereof , but it be report unto i of a truth : by the virtue whereof we suppose it to be the sea unicorn . u " * - after our generali have find out good harbour for corn it the ship and bark to anchor in , and also such store of suppose gold over as he think himself satisfy withal , he return to the Michael , whereof master York aforesaid be captain , accompany with our master and his mate : who coast along the west shore not far from whence the ship ride , they perceive a fair harbour , and willing to sound the same , at the entrance thereof they espy two tent of seal skin , unto which the captain , our say master , and other company resort . at the sight of our man the people flee into the people the mountain : nevertheless they go to their tent , where leave certain trifle or we , as glass , bell , i „ 0 knife , and such like thing they depart , not take any thing of they except one dog . they do in like manner leave behind they a letter , pen , ink , and paper , whereby our man who the captain lose the year before , and in that people custody , may ( if any of they be alive ) be advertise of our presence and be there . on the same day after consultation have , all the gentleman , and other likewise that can be spare from the ship , under the conduct and lead of master master Phil-Philpot , ( unto who in our generali he absence , and his lieutenant master beast , all the rest be obedient ) go master beast . a shore , determine to see , if by fair mean we can either allure they to familiarity , or otherwise take some of 219 they , and so attain to some knowledge of those man who our generali lose the year before . at our come back again to the place where their tent be before , they have remove their tent further into the say bay or sound , where they may if they be drive from the land , flee with their boat into the sea . we part our self into two company , and compass a mountain come sudden upon they by land , who espy we , without any tarry flee to their boat , leave the most part of their oar behind they for haste , and row down the bay , where our two pinnace meet they and drive they to shore : but if they have have all their oar , so swift be they in row , it have be lose time to have chase they . when they be land they fierce assault our man with their bow and arrow , who wound three of they with our arrow : and perceive themselves thus hurt , they desperate leap off7 the rock into the sea , and drown themselves : which if they have not do , but have submit themselves , or if by any mean we can have take they alive ( be their enemy as they judge ) we will both have save they , and also have seek remedy to cure their wound receive at our hand . but they altogether void of humanity , and ignorant what mercy mean , in extremity look for no other then death : and perceive they shall fall into our hand , thus miserable by drown rather desire death then otherwise to be save by we : the rest perceive their fellow in this distress , flee into the high mountain . two woman not be so apt to escape as the man be , the one for her age , and the other be encumber with a young child , we take . the old wretch , who diverse of our sailor suppose to be either a devil , or a witch , have her buskin pluck off , to see if she be cleave footed , and for her ugly hue and deformity we let she go : the young woman and the child we bring away . we name the place where they be slay , bloody point : and the bay or harbour , York 220 sound , after the name of one of the captain of the two bark . have this knowledge both of their fierceness and fair mean cruelty , and perceive that fair mean as yet be not able to allure they to familiarity , we dispose our self , familiarity t0 contrary to our inclination , something to be cruel , return to their tent and make a spoil of the same : where we find a old shirt , a doublet , a girdle , and also shoe of our man , who we lose the year before : on nothing else unto they belong cold we set our eye . their riches be not gold , silver or precious drapery , [ he . 36. ] but their say tent and boat , make of the skin of red °f dear and seal skin : also dog like unto wolf , 5 s' but for the most part black , with other trifle , more to be wonder at for their strangeness , then for any other commodity needful for our use . thus return to our ship the 3. of August , we our departure depart from the west shore suppose firm with west America , after we have anchor there 13. day : and so ' the 4. thereof we come to our generali on the east shore , and anchor in a fair harbour name anne warwick's sound , unto which be annex a island both name after the countesseof Warwick , anne Warwick sound and isle . in this isle our generali thought good for this - voyage , to fraught both the ship and bark , with such stone or suppose gold minerali , as he judge to countervail the charge of his first , and this his second navigation to these country . in the mean time of our abode here some of they the country country people come to show themselves unto we , sundry setoe time on the main shore , near adjacent to the say unt0 we . isle . Oure generali desirous to have some news of his man , who he lose the year before , with some company with he repair with the ship boat to common , or sign with they for familiarity , whereunto he be persuaded to bring they . they at the first show make token , that three of his five man be alive , and desire 221 their usage in traffic or exchange . the people show themselves the three time . the people show themselves again on jirme land . the english voyage pen , ink , and paper , and that within three or four day they will return , and ( as we judge ) bring those of our man which be live , with they . they also make sign or token of their king , who they call Cacough , and how he be carry on man shoulder , and a man far surmount any of our company , in bigness and stature . with these token and sign of writing , pen , ink , and paper be deliver they , which they will not take at our hand , but be lay upon the shore , and the party go away , they take up : which likewise they do when they desire any thing for change of they , lay for that which be leave so much as they think will countervail the same , and not come near together . it seem they have be use to this trade or traffic , with some other people adjoin , or not far distant from their country . after 4. day some of they show themselves upon the firm land , but not where they be before . our general very glad thereof , suppose to hear of our man , go from the island , with the boat , and sufficient company with he . they seem very glad , and allure he about a certain point of the land : behind which they may perceive a company of the crafty villain to lie lurk , who our generali will not deal withal , for that he know not what company they be , and so with few sign dismiss they and return to his company . a other time as our say generali be coast the country with two little pinnace , whereby at our return he may make the better relation thereof , three of the crafty villain , with a white skin allure we to they . once again our generail , for that he hope to hear of his man , go towards they : at our come near the shore whereon they be , we may perceive a number of they lie hide behind great stone , and those 3. in sight labour by all mean possible that some will come on land : and perceive we make no haste 222 by word nor friendly sign , which they use by clap their first of their hand , and be without weapon , and but 3. in sight , they seek further mean to provoke we as^us 0 thereunto . one alone lay flesh on the shore , which their second we take up with the boat hook , as necessary victual mean . for the relieve of the man , woman , and child , who we have take : for that as yet they can not digest our meat : whereby they perceive themselves deceive of their expectation , for all their crafty allurement . yet once again to make ( as it be ) a full show of their their three crafty nature , and subtle sleight , to the intent thereby an^crafiest . 1 ° r allurement . to nave entrap and take some or our man , one or they counterfeit himself impotent and lame of his leg , who seem to descend to the water side , with great difficulty : and to cover his craft the more , one of his fellow come down with he , and in such place where he seem unable to pass , he take he on his shoulder , set he by the water side , and depart from he , leave he ( as it shall seem ) all alone , who play his counterfeit pageant very well , think thereby to provoke some of we to come on shore , not fear , but that one of we may make our party good with a lame man . Oure generali have compassion of his impotency , compassion to thought good ( if it be possible ) to cure he thereof : c “ re a crafty wherefore he cause a soldier to shoot at he with ’ his caleever , which graze before his face . the counterfeit villeine deliverly flee , without any impediment at all , and get he to his bow and arrow , and the rest from their lurk hole , with their weapon , bow , arrow , sling , and dart . Oure generali cause some caliver to be shoot off " at they , whereby some be hurt , they may hereafter stand in more fear of we . this be all the answer for this time we can have [ three . 37. ] of our man , or of our general letter . their crafty deal at these three several time be thus manifest unto we , may plain show their disposition in other thing to be correspondent . we judge that they use 223 these stratagem , thereby to have catch some of we , for the deliver of the man , woman and child who we have take . they be man of a large corporature , and good proportion : their colour be not much unlike the sun burn country man , who labour daily in the sun for his live . they wear their hair something long , and cut before either with stone or knife , very disorderly . their woman wear their hair long , and knit up with two loupe , show forth on either side of their face , and the rest foltre upon a knot . also some of their woman raze their face proportional , as chin , cheek , and forehead , and the wrist of their hand , whereupon they lie a colour which continue dark azurine . they eat their meat all raw , both flesh , fish , and foul , or something per boil with blood and a little water which they drink . for lack of water they will eat ice , that be hard freeze , as pleasant as we will do sugar Candie , or other sugar . if they for necessity sake stand in need of the premise , such grass as the country yield they pluck up and eat , not dainty , or salletwise to allure their stomach to appetite : but for necessity sake without either salt , oil or wash , like brute beast devour the same . they neither use table , stool , or table cloth for comeliness : but when they be imbrue with blood knuckle deep , and their knife in like sort , they use their tongue as apt instrument to lick they clean : in do whereof they be assure to loose none of their victual . dog like they frank or keep certain dog not much unlike unto wolf . wolf , which they yoke together , as we do ox and horse , to a sled or trade : and so carry their necessary over the ice and snow from place to place : as the captive , who we have , make perfect sign . and when those dog be not apt for the same use : or when with hunger they be constrain for lack of other victual , 224 > 577-they eat they : so that they be as needful for they they eat dtp in respect of their bigness , as our ox be for we . fresh - they apparel themselves in the skin of such beast as they kill , sew together with the sinew of they . all the foul which they kill , they skin , and make thereof one kind of garment or other , to defend they from the cold . they make their apparel with hood and tail , which hood and . tail they give when they think to gratify any friend - tatle ship show unto they : a great sign of friendship a " be ’ with they . the man have they not so side as the woman . the man and woman wear their hose close to their leg , from the waste to the knee without any open before , as well the one kind as the other . upon their leg they wear hose of leather , with the fur side inward two or three pair on at once , and especial the woman . in those hose they put their knife , needle , and other thing needful to bear about . they put a bone within their hose , which reach from the foot to the knee , whereupon they draw their say hose , and so in place of garter they be hold from fall down about their foot . they dress their skin very soft and souple with the hair on . in cold weather or winter they wear the fur side inward : and in summer outward . other apparel they have none but the say skin . those beast , fish , and fowl , which they kill , be their meat , drink , apparel , house , bed , hose , shoe , thread , and sail for their boat , with many other necessary whereof they stand in need , and almost all their riches . their house be tent make of seal skin , pitch up with 4. fir quarter four square meeting at the top , and the skin sew together with sinew , and lay thereupon : they be so pitch up , that the entrance into they be always south or against the sun . they have other sort of house which we find not their house of seal skin and fir . Vii 225 to be inhabit , which be raise with stone and whale bone , and a skin lay over they , to withstand the rain , or other weather : the entrance of they be not much unlike a oven mouth , whereto i think they resort for a time to fish , hunt , and foul , and so leave they until the next time they come thither again . their weapon their weapon be bow , arrow , dart , and sling . of defence . their bow be of wood of a yard long , sinew at the back with strong sinew , not glue too , but fast gird and tie on . their bow strings'are likewise sinew . their arrow be three piece nocked with bone , and end with bone , with those two end , and the wood in the midst , they pass not in length half a yard or little moor . they be feather with two feather the pen end be cut away , and the feather lay upon the arrow with the broad side to the wood ; insomuch [ three . 38. ] that they seem when they be tie on , to have four three sort of feather . they have also three sort of head to those head to their arrow . one sort of stone or iron , proportion like to ’ a heart : the second sort of bone , much like unto a stop head , with a hook on the same : the three sort of bone likewise make sharp at both side , and sharp point . they be not make very fast but light tie to , or else set in a knock , that upon small occasion the arrow leave these head behind they : and they be of small force , except they be very near when they shoot . two sort of their dart be make of two sort : the one with many rt ' fork of bone in the fore end and likewise in the midst : their proportion be not much unlike our toast - ing iron but long : these they cast out of a instrument of [ wood , very ready . the other sort be great than the first aforesaid , with a long bone make sharp on both side not much unlike a rapier , which i take to be their most hurtful weapon . two sort of they have two sort of boat make of leather , set out ather^ on * nner s^e quarter °f wood , artificial tie together with thong of the same : the great sort be not much unlike our wherry , wherein sixteen or 226 twenty man may sit : they have for a sail dress the gut of such beast as they kill very fine and thin , which they sew together : the other boat be but for one man to sit and row in with one oar . their order of fish , hunt , and foul be with these say weapon : but in what sort , or how they use they we have no perfect knowledge as yet . i can suppose their abode or habitation not to be here , for that neither their house or apparel , be of such force to withstand the extremity of cold , that the country seem to be infect with all : neither do i see any sign likely to perform the same . those house or rather den which stand there , have no sign of footway , or any thing else tread , which be one of the chief token of habitation . and those they use ft foul , fish , and hunt . it be to be suppose that their inhabit be elsewhere .. tent which they bring with they , when they have sufficient hunt and fish , they remove to other place : and when they have sufficient store they of such victual , as the country yield or bring forth , they return to their winter station or habitation . this conjecture do i make , for the infertility which i conjecture to be in that country . they have some iron whereof they make arrow head , t^ir ttse it knife , and other little instrument , to work their boat , bow , arrow , and dart withal , which be very unapt to do any thing withal but with great labour . it seem that they have conversation with some other people , of who for exchange they shall receive the same . they be great delight with any thing that be bright , or give a sound . what knowledge they have of God , or what idol anthropophagi . they adore , we have no perfect intelligence , i think they rather anthropophagi , or devourer of man flesh then otherwise : for that there be no flesh or fish which they find dead ( smell it never so filthy ) but they will eat it , as they find it without any other dress . a loathsome thing , either to the beholder or hearer . there be no manner of creep beast hurtful , except 227 signet of gold some spider ( which as many affirm , be sign of great eure - store of gold ) and also certain sting gnat , which bite so fierce , that the place where they bite short after swell and itch very sore . sign of gold they make sign of certain people that be bright from other plate of gold in their forehead , and other place of ' their body . description of the country on both side the strait lie very the country . high with rough stony mountain , and great quantity of snow thereon . there be very little plain ground and no grass , except a little which be much like unto moss that grow on soft ground , such as we get turffe in . there be no wood at all . to be brief there be nothing fit or profitable for the use of man , which that country with root yield or bring forth : howbeit there be great quantity of deer , who skin be like unto ass , there head or horn do far exceed , as well in length as also in breadth , any in these our part or country : their foot likewise be as great as our oxen , which we measure to be seven or eight inche in breadth . there be also hare , wolf , fish bear , and sea foul of sundry sort . as the country be barren and unfertile , so be they rude and of no capacity to culture the same to any perfection : but be content by their hunt , fish , and foul , with raw flesh and warm blood to satisfy their greedy paunch , which be their only glory . a sign oj there be great likelihood of earthquake or thunder : earthquake £or t^at there be huge and monstrous mountain , who great substance be stone , and those stone so shake with some extraordinary mean that one be separate from another , which be discordant from all other quarry . [ Iii . 39 ] there be no river or run spring , but such as uchatlhe111 trough heat of the sun , with such water as sun do descend from the mountain and hill , whereon cause to come great drift of snow do lie , be engender . of mow . it argue also that there shall be none : for that the earth , which with the extremity of the winter be so 228 1577-frosen within , that that water which shall have recourse probability within the same to maintain spring , have not his . motion , whereof great water have their originali , as by er experience be see otherwhere . such valley as be riser in the capable to receive the water , that in the summer time ground . by the operation of the sun descend from great abundance of snow , which continual lie on the mountain and have no passage , sink into the earth and so vanish away , without any runnell above the earth , by which occasion or continual stand of the say water , the earth be open , and the great frost yield to the force thereof , which in other place four or five fathom within the ground for lack of the say moisture , the earth ( even in the very summer time ) be freeze , and so combine the stone together , that scarce instrument with great force can unknit they . also where the water in those valley can have no such passage away , by the continuance of time in such order as be before rehearse , the yearly descent from the mountain fill they full , that at the low bank of the same , they fall into the valley , and so continue as fish pond or stagne in summer time full of water , and in the winter hard freeze : as by scar that remain thereof in summer may easy be perceive : so that the heat of summer be nothing comparable or of force to dissolve the extremity of cold that come in winter . nevertheless i be assure that below the force of the frost within the earth , the water have recourse , and empty themselves out of sight into the sea , which through the extremity of the frost be constrain to do the same : by which occasion the earth within be keep the warm , and spring have their recourse , which be the spring nou-onely nutriment of gold and mineral within the same . there be much to be say of the commodity of these country , which be couch within the bowel of the earth , which i let pass till more perfect trial be make thereof . 229 gur departure from those country . how when we lose our i . Barks , which God nevertheless restore . the conclusion . the english voyage the 24. of August , after we have satisfy our mind with fraught sufficient for our vessel , though not our covetous desire with such knowledge of the country , people , and other commodity as be before rehearse , we depart therehence . the 17. of September we fall with the land end of England , and so sail to Milford haven , from whence our generali road to the court for order , to what port or haven to conduct the ship . we lose our two bark in the way homeward , the one the 29. of August , the other the 31. of the same month , by occasion of great tempest and fog . howbeit God restore the one to Bristol , and the other make his course by Scotland to Yermouth . in this voyage we lose two man , one in the way by god visitation , and the other homeward cast over board with a surge of the sea . i can declare unto the reader , the latitude and longitude of such place and region as we have be at , but not altogether so perfect as our master and other , with many circumstance of tempest and other accident incident to sea fare man , which seem not altogether strange , but i let they pass to their report as man most apt to set forth and declare the same . i have also leave the name of the country on both the shore touch , for lack of understand the people yet to be declare . country new discover where commodity be to be look for , do better accord with a new name give by the discoverer , than a uncertain name by a doubtful author . our general name sundry island , mountain , cape , and harborough after the name of diverse noble man and other gendeman his friend , aswell on the one shore as also on the other . 