a generail and brief description of the country , and condition of the people , which be find in Meta incognita . ave now sufficient and true set forth the whole circumstance , and particular handle of every occurrent in the 3. voyage of our worthy general , captain Frobisher , it shall not be from the purpose to speak somewhat in general of the nature of this country call Meta incognita , and the condition of the savage there inhabit . First therefore touch the Topographical description of the place , it be now find in the last voyage , that queen Elizabeth cape be situate in latitude at 61. 367 a topographical description of Meta incognita . the people of Meta incognita like unto samoed . their native colour . the english voyage degree and a half , which before be suppose to be part of the firm land of America , and also all the rest of the south side of frobishers strait , be all several island and break land , and likewise so will all the north side of the say strait fall out to be as i think . and some of our company be enter above 60. league within the mistake strait in the three voyage mention , think certain that they have descry the firm land of America towards the south , which i think will fall out so to be . Theise break land and island be very many in number , do seem to make there a archipelagus , which as they all differ in greatness , form , and fashion one from another ; so be they in goodness , colour , arid soil much unlike . they all be very high land , mountains , and in most part cover with snow even all the summer long . the norther land have less store of snow , more grass , and be more plain country : the cause whereof may be , for that the Souther hand receive all the snow , that the cold wind and pierce air bring out of the north . and contrary , the north part receive more warm blast of mild air from the south , whereupon may grow the cause why the people covet to inhabit more upon the north part then the south , as far as we can yet by our experience perceive they do . Theise people i judge to be a kind of Tartar , or rather a kind of Samoed , of the same sort and condition of life that the samoed be to the northeastwards beyond Moscovy , who be call samoeds , which be as much to say in the Moscovy tongue as eater of themselves , and so the russian their borderer do name they . and by late conference with a friend of i ( with who i do sometime travel in the part of Moscovy ) who have great experience of those samoed and people of the north-east , i find that in all their manner of live , those people of the north-east , and these of they northwest be like . they be of the colour of a ripe olive , which how it may come to pass , be bear 368 description of Meta incognita a.d. in so cold a climate i refer to the judgement of other , for they be natural bear child of the same colour and complexion that all the american be , which dwell under the equinoctial line . they be man very active and nimble . they be a strong people and very warlike , for in our sight upon the top of the hill they will often muster themselves , and after the manner of a skirmish trace their ground very nimble , and manage their bow and dart with great dexterity . they go clad in coat make of theirapparel . the skin of beast , as of seal , deer , bear , fox , and hare . they have also some garment of feather , be make of the case of fowl , fine sow and compact together . of all which sort we bring home some with we into England , which we find in their tent . in summer they use to wear the hairy side of their coat outward , and sometime go naked for too much heat . and in winter ( as by sign they have declare ) they be four or five fold upon their body with the hair ( for warmth ) turn inward . hereby it appear , that the air there be not indifferent , but either it be fervent hot , or else extreme cold , and far more excessive in both quality , than the reason of the climate shall yield . for there it be cold , be under 62. degree in latitude , than it be at Wardhouse in the voyage to saint Nicholas in Moscovie , be at above 72. degree in latitude . the reason hereof perhaps acdden-may be , that this Meta incognita be much frequent taucauserjftlie and vex with eastern and northeastern wind , which metalncog-from the sea and ice bring often a intolerable cold nita . air , which be also the cause that this year our strait be so long shut up with so great store of ice . but there be great hope and likelihood , that further within [ ill . 94. ] the strait it will be more constant and temperate weather . Theise people be in nature very subtle and sharp witted , ready to conceive our meaning by sign , and to make answer well to be understand again . and if unto 369 2 a they have not see the thing whereof you ask they , they will wink , or cover their eye with their hand , as who will say , it have be hide from their sight . if they understand you not whereof you ask they , they will stop their ear . they will teach we the name of each thing in their language which we desire to learn , and be apt to learn any thing of we . they the savage delight in music above measure , and will keep time dehghtin anj stroke to any tune which you shall sing , both with ustc e ' their voice , head , hand and foot , and will sing the same tune apt after you . they will row with our oar in our boat , and keep a true stroke with our mariner , and seem to take great delight therein . hard kind of they live in cave of the earth , and hunt for their live . dinner or prey , even as the bear or other wild beast do . they eat raw flesh and fish , and refuse no meat howsoever it be stink . they be desperate in their fight , sullen of nature , and ravenous in their manner of feed . their sullen and desperate nature do herein manifest appear , that a company of they be environ by our man on the top of a high cliff , so that they can by no mean escape our hand , find themselves in this case distress , choose rather to cast themselves headlong down the rock into the sea , and so be bruise and drown , rather than to yield themselves to our man mercy . their wea - for their weapon to offend their enemy or kill it " ™ - their prey withal , they have dart , sling , bow , and arrow head with sharp stone , bone , and some with iron . they be exceed friendly and kind heart one to the other , and mourn great at the loss or harm of their fellow , and express their grief of mind , when they part one from another with a their chastity , mournful song , and dirge . they be very shamefast in betray the secret of nature , and very chaste in the manner of their live : for when the man , which we bring from thence into England the last voyage , 370 description of Meta incognita a.d. ... T578 - shall put off his coat or discover his whole body for change , he will not suffer the woman to be present , but put she forth of his cabin . and in all the space of two or three month , while the man live in company of the woman , there be never any thing see or perceive between they , more than may have pass between brother and sister : but the woman be in all thing very serviceable for the man , attend he careful when he be sick , and he likewise in all the meat which they do eat together , will carve unto she of the sweet , fat , and best morsel they have . they wonder much at all our thing , and be afraid of our horse and other beast out of measure . they begin to grow more civil , familiar , pleasant , and docible among we in very short time . they have boat make of leather , and cover clean their boat . over save one place in the middle to sit in , plank within with timber , and they use to row therein with one ore , more swift a great deal , than we in our boat can do with twenty . they have one sort of great boat wherein they can carry above twenty person , and have a mast with a sail thereon , which sail be make of thin skin or bladder , sow together with the sinew of fish . they be good fisherman , and in their small boat be disguise with their coat of seal skin , they deceive the fish , who take they rather for their fellow seal , then for deceive man . they be good marksman . with their dart or arrow they will common kill a duck , or any other foul in the head , and common in the eye . when they shoot at a great fish with any of their dart , they use to tie a bladder thereunto , whereby they may the better find they again , and the fish not able to carry it so easy away ( for that the bladder do boy the dart ) will at length be weary , and dye therewith . they use to traffic and exchange their commodity Sna^ with some other people , of who they have such thing know . 371 [ hl 95 - ] how they make fire . their kettle and pan . the people eat grass and shrub . the english voyage as their miserable country , and ignorance of art to make , deny they to have , as bar of iron , head of iron for their dart , needle make four square , certain button of copper , which they use to wear upon their forehad for ornament , as our lady in the court of England do use great pearl . also they have make sign unto we , that they have see gold , and such bright plate of metal , which be use for ornament among some people with who they have conference . we find also in their tent a guiny bean of red colour , the which do usual grow in they hight country : whereby it appear they trade with other nation which dwell far off , or else themselves be great traveller . they have nothing in use among they to make fire withal , save a kind of heath and moss which grow there . and they kindle their fire with continual rub and fret one stick against another , as we do with flint . they draw with dog in slead upon the ice , and remove their tent therewithal ! wherein they dwell in summer , when they go a hunt for their prey and provision against winter . they do sometime parboil their meat a little and see the same in kettle make of beast skin : they have also pan cut and make of stone very artificial ; they use pretty begin wherewith they take foul . the woman carry their suck child at their back , and do feed they with raw flesh , which first they do a little chaw in their own mouth . the woman have their face mark or paint over with small blow spot : they have black and long hair on their head , and trim the same in a decent order . the man have but little hair on their face , and very thin beard . for their common drink , they eat ice to quench their thirst withal . their earth yield no grain or fruit of sustenance for man , or almost for beast to live upon : and the people will eat grass and shrub 372 description of Meta incognita a.d. J578 - of the ground , even as our cow do . they have no wood grow in their country thereabouts , and yet we find they have some timber among they , which we think do grow far off to the southward of this place , about Canada , or some other part of new find land : for there belike , the tree stand on the cliff of the sea side , by the weight of ice and snow in winter overcharge they with weight , when the summer thaw come above , and also the sea underfretting they beneath , which win daily of the land , they be undermine and fall down from those cliff into the sea , and with the tide and current be drive to and fro upon the coast further off , and by conjecture be take up here by these country people , to serve they to plank and strengthen their boat withal , and to make dart , bow , and arrow , and such other thing necessary for their use . and of this kind of drift wood we find all the sea over great store , which be cut or saw asunder , by reason of long drive in the sea be eat of worm , and full of hole , of which sort they be find to be . we have not yet find any venomous serpent or a strange land other hurtful thing in these part , but there be a kind of °f small fly or gnat that stinge and offend sore , leave many red spot in the face , and other place where she stinge . they have snow and hail in the best time of their summer , and the ground freeze three fathom deep . Theise people be great enchanter , and use many enchanters . charm of witchcraft : for when their head do ache , they tie a great stone with a string unto a stick , and with certain prayer and word do to the stick , they lift up the stone from ground , which sometime with all a man force they can stir , and sometime again they lift as easy as a feather , and hope thereby with certain ceremonious word to have ease and help . and they make we by sign to understand , lie grovel with their face upon the ground , and make 373 the beast and fowl of the country . Ihe length of their day . the english voyage a noise downward , that they worship the devil under they . they have great store of deer , bear , hare , fox , and innumerable number of sundry sort of wild foul , as seawmewes , guile , Wilmotes , duck , etc whereof our man kill in one day fifteen hundred . they have also store of hawk , as falcon , tassel , etc whereof two alight upon one of our ship at their return , and be bring into England , which some think will prove very good . there be also great store of raven , lark , and partridge , whereof the country people feed . all these fowl be far thick clothe with down and feather , and have thick skin than any in England have : for as that country be cold , so nature have provide a remedy thereunto . our man have eat of the bear , hare , partridge , lark , and of their wild foul , and find they reasonable good meat , but not so delectable as we . their wild foul must be all fleine , their skin be so thick : and they taste best fry in pan . the country seem to be much subject to earthquake . the air be very subtle , pierce and search , so that if any corrupt or infect body , especial with the disease call morbus Gallicus come there , it will present break forth and show it self , and can there by any kind of salve or medicine be cure . their long summer day be of great length , without any dark night , so that in July all the night long , we may perfidy and easy write and read whatsoever have please we , which lightsome night be very beneficial unto we , be so distress with abundance of ice as we be . the sun set to they in the evening at a quarter of a hour after ten of the clock , and rise again in the morning at three quarter of a hour after one of the clock , so that in summer their sun shine to 374 they twenty hour and a half , and in the night be absent three hour and a half . and although the sun be absent these 3. hour and a half , yet it be not dark that time , for that the sun be never above three or four degree under the edge of their horizon : the cause be , that the Tropic of Cancer do cut their horizon at very uneven and oblique angle . but the moon at any time of the year be in cancer , have north latitude , do make a full revolution above their horizon , so that sometime they see the moon above 24. hour together . some of our company of the more ignorant sort , think we may continual have see the sun and the moon , have it not be for two or three high mountain . the people be now become so wary , and so circumspect , by reason of their former loss , that by no mean we can apprehend any of they , although we attempt often in this last voyage . but to say truth , we can not bestow any great time in pursue they , because of our great business in lade , and other thing . A.D. 158 ? . [ Iii . 96. ] a full revolution of the moon above their horizon . 