[ Iii . 119. ] a report of master John Davis of his three voyage make for the discovery of they northwest passage , take out of a treatise of he , entitle the world hydrographical description . the 1. voyage . owe there only rest the north part of America , upon which coast my self have have most experience of any in our age : for thrice i be that way employ for the discovery of this notable passage , by the honourable care and some charge of sir Francis Walsingham knight , princi pali secretary to her majesty , with who diverse noble man and worshipful merchant of London join in purse and willingness for the furtherance of that attempt , but when his honour die the voyage be friendless , and man mind alienate from adventure therein . in my first voyage not experience of the nature of those climate , and have no direction either by chart , globe , or other certain relation in what altitude that passage be to be search , i shape a northerly course and so seek the same towards the south , and in that my northerly course i fall upon the shore which in ancient time be call Greenland , five hundred league distant from the dursey westnorthwest northerly , the land be very high and full of mighty mountain all cover with snow , no view of wood , grass or earth to be see , and the shore two league off into the sea so full of ice as that not ship can by any mean come near the same . the loathsome view of the shore , and irksome noise of the ice be such , as that it breed strange conceits among we , so that we suppose the place to be waste and void of any sensible or vegetable creature , whereupon i call the same desolation : so coast this shore towards the south in the latitude of sixty degree , i 440 find it to trend towards the west , i still follow the lead thereof in the same height , and after fifty or sixty league it fail and lie direct north , which i still follow , and in thirty league sail upon the west side of this coast by i name desolation , we be past all the ice and find many green and pleasant isle border upon the shore , but the hill of the main be still cover with great quantity of snow , i bring my ship among those isle and there more to refresh our self in our weary travel , in the latitude of sixty four degree or there about . the people of the country have espy our ship come down unto we in their canoas , and hold up their right hand to the sun and cry yliaout , will strike their breast : we do then like the people come aboard our ship , man of good stature , unbearded , small eye and of tractable condition , by who as sign will permit , we understand that towards the north and west there be a great sea , and use the people with kindness in give they nail and knife which of all thing they most desire , we depart , and find the sea free from ice suppose our self to be pass all danger we shape our course westnorthwest think thereby to pass for China , but in the latitude of sixty six degree we fall with another shore , and there find another passage of twenty league broad direct west into the same , which we suppose to be our hope strait , we enter into the same thirty or forty league , find it neither to wyden nor straighten , then consider that the year be spend ( for this be the fine of August ) not know the length of the straight and danger thereof , we take it our best course to return with notice of our good success for this small time of search . and so return in a sharp fret of westerly wind the 29. of September we arrive at Dartmouth . And acquaint master secretary Walsingham with the rest of the honourable and worshipful adventurer of all our proceed , i be appoint again the second year to search the bottom of this straight , 441 A.D. 1587 - because by all likelihood it be the place and passage by the z . voyage , we labour for . in this second attempt the marcnant of Exeter , and other place of the west become adventurer in the action , so that be sufficient furnish for six month , and have direction to search these straight , until we find the same to fall into another sea upon the west side of this part of America , we shall again return : for than it be not to be doubt , but ship with trade may safe be convey to China , and the part of Asia . we depart from Dartmouth , and arrive upon the south part of the coast of desolation coast the same upon his west shore to the latitude of sixetie six degree , and there anchor among the isle border upon the same , where we refresh our self , the people of this place come likewise unto we , by who i understand through their sign that towards the north the sea be large . at this place the chief ship whereupon i trust , call the mermaid of Dartmouth , find many occasion of discontentment , and be unwilling to proceed , she there forsake i . then consider how i have give my faith and most constant promise to my worshipful good friend master William Sanderson , who of all man be the great adventurer in that action , and take such care for the performance [ three . 120. ] thereof , that he have to my knowledge at one time disburse as much money as any five other whatsoever , out of his own purse , when some of the company have be slack in give in their adventure : and also know that i shall loose the favour of m. secretary Walsingham , if i shall shrink from his direction ; in one small bark of 30 ton , whereof m. Sanderson be owner , alone without far company i proceed on my voyage , and arrive at these straight follow the same 80. league , until i come among many island , where the water do ebb and flow six fathom upright , and where there have be great trade of people to make train . but by such thing as there we find , we know that they be not Christians of Europe that have use 442 that trade : in fine by search with our boat , we find small hope to pass any far that way , and therefore recover the sea and coast the shore towards the south , and in so do ( for it be too late to search towards the north ) we find another great inlet near 40 league broad , where the water enter in with violent swiftness , this we also thought may be a passage : for no doubt the north part of America be all island by north aught that i can perceive therein : but because i be ali alone in a small bark of thirty ton , and the year jsian^ ’ spend , i enter not into the same , for it be now the seven of September , but coast the shore towards the south we see a incredible number of bird : have diverse fisherman aboard our bark they all conclude that there be a great skull of fish , we be unprovide of fish furniture with a long spike nail make a hook , and fasten the same to one of our sound line , before the bait be change we take more than forty great cod , the fish swim so abundant thick about our bark as be incredible to be report , of which with a small portion of salt that we have , we preserve some thirty couple , or thereabouts , and so return for England . and have report to m. secretary Walsingham the whole success of this attempt , he command i to present unto the most honourable lord high treasurer of England , some part of that fish : which when his lordship see , and hear at large the relation of this second attempt , i receive favourable countenance from his honour , advise i to prosecute the action , of which his lordship conceive a very good opinion . the next year , although diverse of the adventurer fall from the action , as all the western merchant , and most of those in London : yet some of the adventurer both honourable and worshipful continue their willing favour and charge , so that by this mean the next year two ship be appoint for the fish and one pinnace for the discovery . depart from Dartmouth , through God merciful the ^ . voyage . 443 favour , i arrive at the place of fish , and there accord to my direction i leave the two ship to follow that business , take their faithful promise not to depart until my return unto they , which shall be in the fine of August , and so in the bark i proceed for the discovery : but after my departure , in sixteen day the two ship have finish their voyage , and so present depart for England , without regard of their promise : my self not distrust any such hard measure proceed for the discovery , and follow my course in the free and open sea between north and northwest to the latitude of 67 degree , and there i may see America west from i , and Gronland , which i call desolation , east : then when i see the land of both side i begin to distrust it will prove but a gulf : notwithstanding desirous to know the full certainty i proceed , and in 68 degree the passage enlarge , so that i can not see the western shore : thus i continue to the latitude of 73 degree , in a great sea , free from ice , coast the western shore of desolation : the people come continual row out unto i in their canoas , twenty , forty , and one hundred at a time , and will give i fish dry , salmon , salmon peal , cod , caplin , lump , stone-base and such like , beside diverse kind of bird , as partridge , pheasant , gull , sea bird and other kind of flesh : i still labour by sign to know from they what they know of any sea towards the north , they still make sign of a great sea as we understand they , than i depart from that coast , think to discover the north part of America : and after i have sail towards the west 40 league , i fall upon a great bank of ice : the wind be north and blue much , i be constrain to coast the same towards the south , not see any shore west from i , neither be there any ice towards the north , but a great sea , free , large very salt and blue , and of a unsearchable depth : so coast towards the south i come to the place where i leave the ship to fish , but find they not . then be forsake and leave in this distress refer my self to the merciful providence of God , i shape my course for England , and unhoped for of any , God alone relieve i , i arrive at Dartmouth . by this last discovery it seem most manifest that the passage be free and without impediment towards the north : but by reason of the spanish fleet and unfortunate time of m. secretary death , the voyage be omit and never since attempt . the cause why i use this particular relation of all my proceed for this discovery , be to stay this objection , why have not Davis discover this passage be thrice that way employ ? how far i proceed and in what form this discovery lie , do appear upon the globe which m. Sanderson to his very great charge have publish , for the which he deserve great favour and commendation . 