a true report of the late discovery , and possession take in the right of the crown of England of the newfound land , by that valiant and worthy gentleman , sir Humphrey Gilbert knight . wherein be also brief set down , her highness lawful title thereunto , and the great and manifold commodity , that be likely to grow thereby , to the whole realm in general , and to the adventurer in particular : together with the easiness and shortness of the voyage . write by sir George Peckham knight , the chief adventurer , and furtherer of sir Humphrey gilbert voyage to newfound land the first chapter , wherein the argument of the book be contain . t be my fortune ( good reader ) not master ed-many day pass , to meet with a right ward honest and discreet gentleman , who accompany that valiant and worthy knight sir Humphrey Gilbert , in this last journey for the western discovery , and be owner and captain of the only vessel which be as yet return from thence . by he i understand that sir Humphrey depart the coast of England the eleven of June last pass , with five sail of ship , from caushen bay near plymouth , whereof one of the best forsake his company , the thirteenth day of the same month , and return into England . the other four ( through the assistance of almighty God ) do arrive at saint Johns haven , in newfound 89 sir Humphrey land , the 3. of August last . upon who arrival all Gilbert do Masters and chief mariner of the english fleet , saint Johns w^ich be in the say haven before , endeavour to haven in fraught themselves with fish , repair unto sir Humphrey , newfound who he make acquaint with the effect of his com-land , the 3. of mission : which be do , he promise to entreat they ^ » 1583 and eir good well and honourable as do become she ' majesty lieutenant . they do all welcome he in the best sort that they can , and show he and his all such courtesy as the place can afford or yield . than he go to view the country , be well accompany with most of his captain and soldier . they find the same very temperate , but somewhat warm than England at that season of the year , replenish with among these beast and great store of foul of diverse kind : and there be of sunjry sort , both in the salt water , and in the of a beast of rresh , in so great plenty as may suffice to victuali and 7 inche and army , and they be very easy take . what sundry ahalfeover . other commodity for this realm right necessary , the same do yield , you shall understand in this treatise hereafter , in place more convenient . on Monday be the five of August , the general cause his tent to be set upon the side of a hill , in the view of all the fleet of english man and stranger , which be in number between thirty and fourty sail : then be accompany with all his captain , master , gentleman and other soldier , he cause all the master , and principali officer of the ship , aswell Englishmen as Spaniard , Portugal , and of other nation , to repair unto his tent : and then and there , in the presence of they all , he do cause his commission under the great seal of [ three 166 ] England to be open and solemn read unto they , sir Humphrey whereby be grant unto he , his heir , and assign , tookepossession by the queen most excellent majesty , many great and of the new - [ arge royalty , liberty , and privilege . the effect whereof be signify unto the stranger by a inter-crowne of preter , he take possession of the say land in the right England . of the crown of England by dig of a turf and receive the same with a Hasell wand , deliver unto he , after the manner of the law and custom of England . than he signify unto the company both stranger and other , that from thenceforth , they be to live in that land , as the territory appertain to the crown of England , and to be govern by such law as by good advice shall be set down , which in all point ( so near as may be ) shall be agreeable to the law of England : and for to put the same in execution , present he ordain and establish three law . first , that religion public exercise , shall be such , and none other , then be use in the church of England . the second , that if any person shall be lawful convict of any practice against her majesty , her crown and dignity , to be adjudge as traitor accord to the law of England . the three , if any shall speak dishonourable of her majesty , the party so offend , to loose his ear , his ship and good , to be confiscate to the use of the general . all man do very willing submit themselves to these law . than he cause the queen majesty arm to be engrave , set up , and erect with great solemnity . after this , diverse Englishman make suit unto sir hum three law establish there by sir Humphrey . sundry person become tenant to sir Humphrey , and do maintain frey to have of he by inheritance , their accustom possession for stage , stand and dry place , in sundry place of in iver that land for their fish , as a thing that they do make ? * ete‘ great account of , which he grant unto they in fee farm . and by this mean he have possession maintain for he , in many part of that country . to be brief , he do let , set , give and dispose of many thing , as absolute governor there , by virtue of her majesty letter patent . and after their ship be repair , whereof one he be drive to leave behind , both for want of man sufficient to furnish she , as also to carry home such sick person as be not able to proceed any further : he depart from thence the 20. of August , with the other three , namely , 91 the delight , wherein be appoint captain in m. William winter place , ( that thence return immediate for England ) m. Maurice Browne : the golden hind , in which be captain and owner , m. Edward Hays : and the little frigate where the general himself do go , seem to he most fit to discover and approach the shore . the 21. day they come to cape race , towards the south part whereof , lie a while becalm , they take cod in largeness and quantity , exceed the other part of newfound land , where any of they have be . and from thence , trending the coast west , towards the bay of Placentia , the general send certain man a shore , to view the country , which to they as they sail along , seem pleasant . whereof his man at their return give great commendation , like so well of the place , as they will willing have stay and winter there . but have the wind fair and good , they proceed on their course towards the firm of America , which by reason of continual fog , at that time of the year especial , they can never see , till Cox master of the golden hind do discern land , and present lose sight thereof again , at what time they be all upon a breach in a great and outrageous storm , have under 3. fathom water . but God deliver the frigate and the golden hind , from this great danger . and the delight in the presence of they all be lose , to their unspeakable grief , with all their chief victuali , munition , and other necessary provision , and other thing of value not fit here to be name . whereupon , by reason also that winter be come upon they , and foul weather increase with fog and mist that so cover the land , as without danger of perish they can not approach it : sir Humphrey Gilbert and m. Hays be compel much against their will to retire homeward : and be 300. league on their way , be after by tempestuous weather separate the one from the other , the nine of September last , since which time m. Hays with his bark be safe arrive , but of sir Humphrey as yet they hear no certain news . upon this report ( together with my former intent , to write some brief discourse in the commendation of this so noble and worthy a enterprise ) i do call to my remembrance , the history of Themystocles the grecian , who ( be a right noble and valiant captain ) signify unto his countryman the citizen of Athens , that he have invent a devise for their common wealth very profitable : but it be of such importance and secrecy , that it ought not to be reveal , before private conference have with some particular prudent person of their choice . the athenian know Aristides the philosopher , to be a man endue with singular wisdom and virtue , make choice of he to have conference with Themystcles , and thereupon to yield his opinion to the citizen concern the say devise : which be , that they may set on fire the navy of their enemy , with great facility , as he have lay the plot : Aristides make relation to the citizen , that the stratagem devise by Themystocles be a profitable practice for the common wealth but it be dishonest . the athenian ( without further demand what the same be ) do by common consent reject and condemn it , prefer honesty and upright deal before profit . by occasion of this history , i draw my self into a more deep consideration of this late undertake voyage , whether it be as well please to almighty God , as profitable to man : as lawful , as it seem honourable : as well grateful to the savage , as gainful to the Christians . and upon mature deliberation i find the action to be honest and profitable , and therefore allowable by the opinion of Aristides if he be now alive : which be by i herein sufficient prove , ( as by god grace i purpose to do ) i doubt not but that all good mind will endeavour themselves to be assistant to this so commendable a enterprise , by the valiant and worthy gentleman our country man already attempt and undertake . now whereas i do understand that sir Humphrey Gilbert his adherent , associate and friend do mean 93 A.D. I583 - Plutarch . [ Iii . 167. ] | | Englishman . master John Hawkins . sir Francis drake . m. William winter . m. John Chester . m. Martin Frobisher . Anthony Parkhurst . William Bat . John Lovel . David Ingram . stranger . French . John Ribault . Jaques Cartier . Andrew Thevet . Monsieur Gourgues . Monsieur Laudonniere . Italians . Christopher Columbus . John VeraiMnus . the english voyage with a convenient supply ( with as much speed as may be ) to maintain , pursue and follow this intend voyage already in part perform , and ( by the assistance of almighty God ) to plant themselves and their people in the continent of the hither part of America , between the degree of 30. and 60. of septentrionali latitude : within which degree by computation astronomical and cosmographical be doubtless to be find all thing that be necessary , profitable , or delectable for man life : the climate mild and temperate , neither too hot nor too cold , so that under the cope of heaven there be not any where to be find a more convenient place to plant and inhabit in : which many notable gentleman , both | | of our own nation and stranger , ( who have be traveller ) can testify : and that those country be at this day inhabit with savage ( who have no knowledge of God : ) be it not therefore ( i say ) to be lament , that these poor pagan , so long live in ignorance and idolatry , and in sort thirst after Christianity , ( as may appear by the relation of such as have travail in those part ) that our heart be so harden , that few or none can be find which will put to their help hand , and apply themselves to the relieve of the miserable and wretched estate of these silly soul ? who country do ( as it be with arm advance ) above the climate both of Spain and France , stretch out it self towards England only : in manner pray our aid and help , as it be not only set forth in mercator general map , but it be also find to be true by the discovery of our nation , and other stranger , who have oftentimes travail upon the same coast . Christopher Columbus of famous memory , the first instrument to manifest the great glory and mercy of almighty God in plant the christian faith , in those so long unknown region , have in purpose to acquaint ( as he do ) that renown prince , the queen majesty grandfather king Henry the seven , with his intend voyage for the western discovery , be not only deride and mock general , even here in England , but afterward become a laugh stock to the Spaniard themselves , who at this day ( of all other people ) be most bind to laud and praise God , who first stir up the man to that enterprise . and while he be attend there to acquaint the king of Castille ( that then be ) with his intend purpose , by how many way and mean be he deride ? some scorn the pildnesse of his garment , some take occasion to jest at his simple and silly look , other ask if this be he that lowt so low , which do take upon he to bring man into a country that abound with gold , pearl , and precious stone ? if he be any such man ( say they ) he will carry another manner of countenance with he , and look somewhat lofty . thus some judge he by his garment , and other by his look and countenance , but none enter into the consideration of the inward man . A.D. 1583. God do not always begin hit great work by the great person . his custom be to bow himself very low in make of courtesy . in the end , what success his voyage have , who listen to read the decade , the history of the west Indies , the conquest of Hernando Cortes about Mexico , and those Hernando of Francisco Pizarro in Peru about Casamalcha and Cusco , may know more particular . all which their p^^ discovery , travail and conquest be extant to be have in the english tongue . this devise be then account a fantastical imagination , and a drowsy dream . but the sequel thereof have since awake out of dream thousand of soul to know their creator , be thereof before that time altogether ignorant : and have since make sufficient proof , neither to be fantastic nor vain imagine . withal , how mighty it have enlarge the dominion of the crown of Spain , and great enrich the subject of the same , let all man consider . beside , it be well know , that sithence the time of Columbus his first [ he . 168. ] discovery , through the plant , possess , and inhabit those part , there have be transport and bring home into Europe great store of gold , silver , pearl , and precious stone , then heretofore have be in all age since the creation of the world . i do therefore hearty wish , that see it have please almighty god of his infinite mercy , at the length to awake some of our worthy country man out of that drowsy dream , wherein we have so long slumber : that we may now not suffer that to quail for want of maintenance , which by these valiant gentleman our countryman be so noble begin and enterprise . for which purpose , i have take upon i to write this simple short treatise , hope that it shall be able to persuade such as have be , and yet do continue detractor and hinderer of this journey , ( by reason perhaps that they have not deliberate and advise enter into the judgement of the matter ) that yet now upon better consideration they will become favourable furtherer of the same . and that such as be already well affect there-a reasonable unto , will continue their good disposition : and withal , i request . most humble pray all such as be no niggard of their purse in buy of costly and rich apparel , and liberali contributor in set forth of game , pastime , feast and banquet , ( whereof the charge be pass , there be no hope of public profit or commodity ) that henceforth they will bestow and employ their liberality ( heretofore that way expend ) to the furtherance of these so commendable purpose proceed . and to this end have i take pen in hand , as in conscience thereunto move , desire much rather , that of the great multitude which this realm do nourish , far better able to handle this matter than i my self be , it will have please some one of they to have undertake the same . but see they be silent , and that it fall to my lot to put pen to the paper , i will endeavour my self , and do stand in good hope ( though my skill and knowledge be simple , yet through the the argument assistance of almighty God ) to prove that the voyage of the book . jate | y enterprise for trade , traffic , and plant in America , be a action tend to the lawful enlargement 96 of her majesty dominion , commodious to the whole realm in generail , profitable to the adventurer in particular , beneficial to the savage , and a matter to be attain without any great danger or difficulty . and last , ( which be most of all ) a thing likewise tend to the honour and glory of almighty God . and for that the lawfulness to plant in those country in some man judgement seem very doubtful , i will begin the proof of the lawfulness of trade , traffic , and plant . 