a true report of the late discovery , and possession take in the right of the crown of England of the newfound land , by that valiant and worthy gentleman , sir Humphrey Gilbert knight . wherein be also brief set down , her highness lawful title thereunto , and the great and manifold commodity , that be likely to grow thereby , to the whole realm in general , and to the adventurer in particular : together with the easiness and shortness of the voyage . write by sir George Peckham knight , the chief adventurer , and furtherer of sir Humphrey gilbert voyage to newfound land the first chapter , wherein the argument of the book be contain . t be my fortune ( good reader ) not master ed-many day pass , to meet with a right ward honest and discreet gentleman , who accompany that valiant and worthy knight sir Humphrey Gilbert , in this last journey for the western discovery , and be owner and captain of the only vessel which be as yet return from thence . by he i understand that sir Humphrey depart the coast of England the eleven of June last pass , with five sail of ship , from caushen bay near plymouth , whereof one of the best forsake his company , the thirteenth day of the same month , and return into England . the other four ( through the assistance of almighty God ) do arrive at saint Johns haven , in newfound 89 sir Humphrey land , the 3. of August last . upon who arrival all Gilbert do Masters and chief mariner of the english fleet , saint Johns w^ich be in the say haven before , endeavour to haven in fraught themselves with fish , repair unto sir Humphrey , newfound who he make acquaint with the effect of his com-land , the 3. of mission : which be do , he promise to entreat they ^ » 1583 and eir good well and honourable as do become she ' majesty lieutenant . they do all welcome he in the best sort that they can , and show he and his all such courtesy as the place can afford or yield . than he go to view the country , be well accompany with most of his captain and soldier . they find the same very temperate , but somewhat warm than England at that season of the year , replenish with among these beast and great store of foul of diverse kind : and there be of sunjry sort , both in the salt water , and in the of a beast of rresh , in so great plenty as may suffice to victuali and 7 inche and army , and they be very easy take . what sundry ahalfeover . other commodity for this realm right necessary , the same do yield , you shall understand in this treatise hereafter , in place more convenient . on Monday be the five of August , the general cause his tent to be set upon the side of a hill , in the view of all the fleet of english man and stranger , which be in number between thirty and fourty sail : then be accompany with all his captain , master , gentleman and other soldier , he cause all the master , and principali officer of the ship , aswell Englishmen as Spaniard , Portugal , and of other nation , to repair unto his tent : and then and there , in the presence of they all , he do cause his commission under the great seal of [ three 166 ] England to be open and solemn read unto they , sir Humphrey whereby be grant unto he , his heir , and assign , tookepossession by the queen most excellent majesty , many great and of the new - [ arge royalty , liberty , and privilege . the effect whereof be signify unto the stranger by a inter-crowne of preter , he take possession of the say land in the right England . of the crown of England by dig of a turf and receive the same with a Hasell wand , deliver unto he , after the manner of the law and custom of England . than he signify unto the company both stranger and other , that from thenceforth , they be to live in that land , as the territory appertain to the crown of England , and to be govern by such law as by good advice shall be set down , which in all point ( so near as may be ) shall be agreeable to the law of England : and for to put the same in execution , present he ordain and establish three law . first , that religion public exercise , shall be such , and none other , then be use in the church of England . the second , that if any person shall be lawful convict of any practice against her majesty , her crown and dignity , to be adjudge as traitor accord to the law of England . the three , if any shall speak dishonourable of her majesty , the party so offend , to loose his ear , his ship and good , to be confiscate to the use of the general . all man do very willing submit themselves to these law . than he cause the queen majesty arm to be engrave , set up , and erect with great solemnity . after this , diverse Englishman make suit unto sir hum three law establish there by sir Humphrey . sundry person become tenant to sir Humphrey , and do maintain frey to have of he by inheritance , their accustom possession for stage , stand and dry place , in sundry place of in iver that land for their fish , as a thing that they do make ? * ete‘ great account of , which he grant unto they in fee farm . and by this mean he have possession maintain for he , in many part of that country . to be brief , he do let , set , give and dispose of many thing , as absolute governor there , by virtue of her majesty letter patent . and after their ship be repair , whereof one he be drive to leave behind , both for want of man sufficient to furnish she , as also to carry home such sick person as be not able to proceed any further : he depart from thence the 20. of August , with the other three , namely , 91 the delight , wherein be appoint captain in m. William winter place , ( that thence return immediate for England ) m. Maurice Browne : the golden hind , in which be captain and owner , m. Edward Hays : and the little frigate where the general himself do go , seem to he most fit to discover and approach the shore . the 21. day they come to cape race , towards the south part whereof , lie a while becalm , they take cod in largeness and quantity , exceed the other part of newfound land , where any of they have be . and from thence , trending the coast west , towards the bay of Placentia , the general send certain man a shore , to view the country , which to they as they sail along , seem pleasant . whereof his man at their return give great commendation , like so well of the place , as they will willing have stay and winter there . but have the wind fair and good , they proceed on their course towards the firm of America , which by reason of continual fog , at that time of the year especial , they can never see , till Cox master of the golden hind do discern land , and present lose sight thereof again , at what time they be all upon a breach in a great and outrageous storm , have under 3. fathom water . but God deliver the frigate and the golden hind , from this great danger . and the delight in the presence of they all be lose , to their unspeakable grief , with all their chief victuali , munition , and other necessary provision , and other thing of value not fit here to be name . whereupon , by reason also that winter be come upon they , and foul weather increase with fog and mist that so cover the land , as without danger of perish they can not approach it : sir Humphrey Gilbert and m. Hays be compel much against their will to retire homeward : and be 300. league on their way , be after by tempestuous weather separate the one from the other , the nine of September last , since which time m. Hays with his bark be safe arrive , but of sir Humphrey as yet they hear no certain news . upon this report ( together with my former intent , to write some brief discourse in the commendation of this so noble and worthy a enterprise ) i do call to my remembrance , the history of Themystocles the grecian , who ( be a right noble and valiant captain ) signify unto his countryman the citizen of Athens , that he have invent a devise for their common wealth very profitable : but it be of such importance and secrecy , that it ought not to be reveal , before private conference have with some particular prudent person of their choice . the athenian know Aristides the philosopher , to be a man endue with singular wisdom and virtue , make choice of he to have conference with Themystcles , and thereupon to yield his opinion to the citizen concern the say devise : which be , that they may set on fire the navy of their enemy , with great facility , as he have lay the plot : Aristides make relation to the citizen , that the stratagem devise by Themystocles be a profitable practice for the common wealth but it be dishonest . the athenian ( without further demand what the same be ) do by common consent reject and condemn it , prefer honesty and upright deal before profit . by occasion of this history , i draw my self into a more deep consideration of this late undertake voyage , whether it be as well please to almighty God , as profitable to man : as lawful , as it seem honourable : as well grateful to the savage , as gainful to the Christians . and upon mature deliberation i find the action to be honest and profitable , and therefore allowable by the opinion of Aristides if he be now alive : which be by i herein sufficient prove , ( as by god grace i purpose to do ) i doubt not but that all good mind will endeavour themselves to be assistant to this so commendable a enterprise , by the valiant and worthy gentleman our country man already attempt and undertake . now whereas i do understand that sir Humphrey Gilbert his adherent , associate and friend do mean 93 A.D. I583 - Plutarch . [ Iii . 167. ] | | Englishman . master John Hawkins . sir Francis drake . m. William winter . m. John Chester . m. Martin Frobisher . Anthony Parkhurst . William Bat . John Lovel . David Ingram . stranger . French . John Ribault . Jaques Cartier . Andrew Thevet . Monsieur Gourgues . Monsieur Laudonniere . Italians . Christopher Columbus . John VeraiMnus . the english voyage with a convenient supply ( with as much speed as may be ) to maintain , pursue and follow this intend voyage already in part perform , and ( by the assistance of almighty God ) to plant themselves and their people in the continent of the hither part of America , between the degree of 30. and 60. of septentrionali latitude : within which degree by computation astronomical and cosmographical be doubtless to be find all thing that be necessary , profitable , or delectable for man life : the climate mild and temperate , neither too hot nor too cold , so that under the cope of heaven there be not any where to be find a more convenient place to plant and inhabit in : which many notable gentleman , both | | of our own nation and stranger , ( who have be traveller ) can testify : and that those country be at this day inhabit with savage ( who have no knowledge of God : ) be it not therefore ( i say ) to be lament , that these poor pagan , so long live in ignorance and idolatry , and in sort thirst after Christianity , ( as may appear by the relation of such as have travail in those part ) that our heart be so harden , that few or none can be find which will put to their help hand , and apply themselves to the relieve of the miserable and wretched estate of these silly soul ? who country do ( as it be with arm advance ) above the climate both of Spain and France , stretch out it self towards England only : in manner pray our aid and help , as it be not only set forth in mercator general map , but it be also find to be true by the discovery of our nation , and other stranger , who have oftentimes travail upon the same coast . Christopher Columbus of famous memory , the first instrument to manifest the great glory and mercy of almighty God in plant the christian faith , in those so long unknown region , have in purpose to acquaint ( as he do ) that renown prince , the queen majesty grandfather king Henry the seven , with his intend voyage for the western discovery , be not only deride and mock general , even here in England , but afterward become a laugh stock to the Spaniard themselves , who at this day ( of all other people ) be most bind to laud and praise God , who first stir up the man to that enterprise . and while he be attend there to acquaint the king of Castille ( that then be ) with his intend purpose , by how many way and mean be he deride ? some scorn the pildnesse of his garment , some take occasion to jest at his simple and silly look , other ask if this be he that lowt so low , which do take upon he to bring man into a country that abound with gold , pearl , and precious stone ? if he be any such man ( say they ) he will carry another manner of countenance with he , and look somewhat lofty . thus some judge he by his garment , and other by his look and countenance , but none enter into the consideration of the inward man . A.D. 1583. God do not always begin hit great work by the great person . his custom be to bow himself very low in make of courtesy . in the end , what success his voyage have , who listen to read the decade , the history of the west Indies , the conquest of Hernando Cortes about Mexico , and those Hernando of Francisco Pizarro in Peru about Casamalcha and Cusco , may know more particular . all which their p^^ discovery , travail and conquest be extant to be have in the english tongue . this devise be then account a fantastical imagination , and a drowsy dream . but the sequel thereof have since awake out of dream thousand of soul to know their creator , be thereof before that time altogether ignorant : and have since make sufficient proof , neither to be fantastic nor vain imagine . withal , how mighty it have enlarge the dominion of the crown of Spain , and great enrich the subject of the same , let all man consider . beside , it be well know , that sithence the time of Columbus his first [ he . 168. ] discovery , through the plant , possess , and inhabit those part , there have be transport and bring home into Europe great store of gold , silver , pearl , and precious stone , then heretofore have be in all age since the creation of the world . i do therefore hearty wish , that see it have please almighty god of his infinite mercy , at the length to awake some of our worthy country man out of that drowsy dream , wherein we have so long slumber : that we may now not suffer that to quail for want of maintenance , which by these valiant gentleman our countryman be so noble begin and enterprise . for which purpose , i have take upon i to write this simple short treatise , hope that it shall be able to persuade such as have be , and yet do continue detractor and hinderer of this journey , ( by reason perhaps that they have not deliberate and advise enter into the judgement of the matter ) that yet now upon better consideration they will become favourable furtherer of the same . and that such as be already well affect there-a reasonable unto , will continue their good disposition : and withal , i request . most humble pray all such as be no niggard of their purse in buy of costly and rich apparel , and liberali contributor in set forth of game , pastime , feast and banquet , ( whereof the charge be pass , there be no hope of public profit or commodity ) that henceforth they will bestow and employ their liberality ( heretofore that way expend ) to the furtherance of these so commendable purpose proceed . and to this end have i take pen in hand , as in conscience thereunto move , desire much rather , that of the great multitude which this realm do nourish , far better able to handle this matter than i my self be , it will have please some one of they to have undertake the same . but see they be silent , and that it fall to my lot to put pen to the paper , i will endeavour my self , and do stand in good hope ( though my skill and knowledge be simple , yet through the the argument assistance of almighty God ) to prove that the voyage of the book . jate | y enterprise for trade , traffic , and plant in America , be a action tend to the lawful enlargement 96 of her majesty dominion , commodious to the whole realm in generail , profitable to the adventurer in particular , beneficial to the savage , and a matter to be attain without any great danger or difficulty . and last , ( which be most of all ) a thing likewise tend to the honour and glory of almighty God . and for that the lawfulness to plant in those country in some man judgement seem very doubtful , i will begin the proof of the lawfulness of trade , traffic , and plant . the second chapter show , that it be lawful and necessary to trade and traffic with the savage : and to plant in their country : and divide plant into two sort . a nd first for traffic , i say that the Christians may lawful travel into those country and abide there : who the savage may not just impugn and forbid in respect of the mutual society and fellowship between man and man prescribe by the law of nation . for from the first beginning of the creation of the world , and from the renew of the same after Noes flood , all man have agree , that no violence shall be offer to ambassador : that the sea with his haven shall be common : that such as shall fortune to be take in war , shall be servant or slave : and that stranger shall not be drive away from the place or country whereunto they do come . if it be so then , i demand in what age , and by what law be the same forbid or deny since ? for who doubt but that it be lawful for christian to use trade and traffic with infidel or savage , carry thither such commodity as they want , and bring from thence some part of their plenty ? a thing so common and general practise , both in these our day , and in time past , beyond the memory of man , both by Christians and infidel , that it need no further proof . vni 97 g the principali cause why this voyage be undertake . [ Iii . 169. ] the english voyage and forasmuch as the use of trade and traffic ( be it never so profitable ) ought not to be prefer before the plant of Christian faith : i will therefore somewhat entreat of plant , ( without which , Christian religion can take no root , be the preacher never so careful and diligent ) which i mean to divide into two sort . the first , when Christians by the good like and will assent of the savage , be admit by they to quiet possession . the second , when Christians be unjust repulse , do seek to attain and maintain the right for which they do come . and though in regard of the establishment of christian religion , either of both may be lawful and just exercise : ( whereof many example may be find , as well in the time of Moses and Josua , and other ruler before the birth of Christ , as of many virtuous emperor and king sithence his incarnation : ) yet do i wish , that before the second be put in practice , a proof may be make of the first , save that for their safety as well against the savage , as all other foreign enemy , they shall first well and strong fortify themselves : which be do , then by all fair speech , and every other good mean of persuasion to seek to take away all occasion of offence . as let they to understand , how they come not to their hurt , but for their good , and to no other end , but to dwell peaceable among they , and to trade and traffic with they for their own commodity , without molest or grieve they any way : which must not be do by word only but also by deed . for albeit , to maintain right and repel injury , be a just cause of war : yet must there hereof be heedful care have , that whereas the savage be fearful by nature , and fond otherwise , the Christians shall do their best endeavour to take away such fear as may grow unto they by reason of their strange apparel , armour , and weapon , or such like , by quiet and peaceable conversation , 98 and let they live in security , and keep a measure of blameless defence , with as little discommodity to the savage as may be : for this kind of war will be only defensive and not offensive . and questionless there be great hope and likelihood , that by this kind of mean we shall bring to pass all effect to our desire purpose : consider that all creature , by constitution of nature , be render more tractable and easy win for all assay , by courtesy and mildness , then by cruelty or roughness : and therefore be a principle teach we by natural reason , it be first to be put in ure . for albeit as yet the Christians be not so thorough furnish with the perfectness of their language , either to express their mind to they , or again to conceive the savage intent : yet for the present opportunity , such policy may be use by friendly sign , and courteous token towards they , as the savage may easy perceive ( be their sense never so gross ) a assure friendship to be offer they , and that they be encounter with such a nation , as bring they benefit , commodity , peace , tranquillity and safety . to further this , and to accomplish it in deed , there must be present unto they gratis , some kind of our petty merchandize and trifle : as look glass , bell , bead , bracelet , chain , or collar of bugle , crystal , amber , jet , or glass etc for such be the thing , though to we of small value , yet account by they of high price and estimation : and soon will induce their barbarous nature to a like and a mutual society with we . Moreover , it shall be requisite either by speech , if it be possible , either by some other certain mean , to signify unto they , that once league of friendship with all love conversation be admit between the Christians and they : that than the christian from thenceforth will always be ready with force of arm to assist and defend they in their just quarrel , from all invasion , spoil and oppression offer they by any tyrant , [ in . 170. ] the second kind of plant mg. the english voyage adversary , or their next borderer : and a benefit be so much the more to be esteem , by how much the person upon who it be bestow stand in need thereof . for it appear by the relation of a countryman of we , namely David Ingram , ( who travel in those country xi . month and more ) that the savage general for the most part , be at continual war with their next adjoin neighbour , and especial the cannibal , be a cruel kind of people , who food be man flesh , and have tooth like dog , and do pursue they with ravenous mind to eat their flesh , and devour they . and it be not to be doubt , but that the Christians may in this case just and lawful aid the savage against the cannibal . so that it be very likely , that by this mean we shall not only mighty stir and inflame their rude mind glad to embrace the love company of the christian , proffer unto they both commodity , succour , and kindness : but also by their frank consent shall easy enjoy such competent quantity of land , as every way shall be correspondent to the christian expectation and contentation , consider the great abundance that they have of land , and how small account they make thereof , take no other fruit thereby then such as the ground of it self do natural yield . and thus much concern the first sort of plant , which as i assure hope , so i most hearty pray may take effect and place . but if after these good and fair mean use , the savage nevertheless will not be herewithal satisfy , but barbarous will go about to practise violence either in repel the christian from their port and safelanding , or in withstand they afterward to enjoy the right for which both painful and lawful they have adventure themselves thither : then in such a case i hold it no breach of equity for the Christians to defend themselves , to pursue revenge with force , and to do whatsoever be necessary for the attain of their safety : for it be allowable by all law in such distress , to resist violence with violence : and 100 for their moor security to increase their strength by building of fort for avoid the extremity of injurious deal . wherein if also they shall not be suffer in reasonable quietness to continue , there be no bar ( as i judge ) but that in stout assembly the Christians may issue out , and by strong hand pursue their enemy , subdue they , take possession of their town , city , or village , and ( in avoid murderous tyrannic ) to use the law of arm , as in like case among all nation at this day be use : and most especial to the end they may with security hold their lawful possession , lest happy after the departure of the christian , such savage as have be convert , shall afterward through compulsion and enforcement of their wicked ruler , return to their horrible idolatry ( as do the child of Israel , after the decease of Joshua ) and continue their wicked custom of most unnatural sacrifice of humane creature . and in so do , doubtless the Christians shall no whit at all transgress the bond of equity or civility , forasmuch as in former age , ( yea , before the incarnation of Christ ) the like have be do by sundry king and prince , governor of the child of Israel : chief in respect to begin their plant , for the establishment of God word : as also since the nativity of Christ , mighty and puissant emperor and king have perform the like , i say to plant , possess , and subdue . for proof whereof , i will allege you example of both kind . we read in the old testament , how that after Noes flood be cease , restauration of mankind begin only of those few of Noes child and family as be by God preelect to be save in the ark with he , who seed in process of time , be multiply to infinite number of nation , which in diverse sort divide themselves to sundry quarter of the earth . and forasmuch as all their posterity be mighty increase , follow not the perfect life of Noe their predecessor , God choose out of the multitude a peculiar people to himself , to who after - ioi ward be under the government of Moses in mount Sinai , he make a grant to inherit the land of Canaan , call the land of promise , with all the other rich and fertile country next adjoin thereunto . nevertheless , before they come to possession thereof , have be afflict with many grievous punishment and plague for their sin , they fall in despair to enjoy the same . but be encourage and comfort by their ruler , ( man of God ) they proceed , arm themselves with all patience , to suffer whatsoever it shall please God to send : and at last attain to the land , they be encounter with great number of strong people , and mighty king . Josua 4. notwithstanding , Josua their leader replenish with the spirit of God , be assure of the justness of his quarrel , gather the chief strength of the child of Israel together , to the number of 40000. with who he safe pass the huge river Jordan , and have before Josua 6. scent privy spy for the discovery of the famous city Jerico , to understand the certainty of the citizen estate , he forthwith come thither , and environ it round about with his whole power the space of seven day . in which respite , perceive none of the gentile dispose to yield or call for mercy , he then command ( as God before have appoint ) that both the city Jerico shall be burn , yea , and all the inhabitant , as well old as young , with all their cattle shall be destroy , only except Rahab , her kindred and family , because she before have hide secret the messenger of Josua , that be send thither as spy . as for all their gold , silver , precious stone , or vessel of brass , they be reserve and consecrate to the lord treasury . Josua 8. in like manner he burn the city hay , slay the inhabitant thereof , and hang up their king . but for so much as the gebionite ( fear the like event ) send Josua 9 ambassador unto Josua to entreat for grace , favour , and peace : he command that all their life shall be save , and that they shall be admit to the come - 102 pany of the child of Israel . yet understand afterward they wrought this by a policy , he use they as drudge to hew wood and to carry water , and other necessary for his people . thus begin this valiant captain his conquest , which he pursue and never leave [ three . 171. ] till he have subdue all the Hethites , Amorites , Cananite , Judg. 11.13 . Peresites , h evite , and Jebusites , with all their prince and king , be thirty and one in number , and diverse other strange nation , beside who land and dominion he whole divide among God people . after that Josua be decease , Juda be constitute lord over the army , who receive like charge from God , pursue the proceed of the holy captain Josua , and utter vanquish many gentile , idolater , and adversary to the child of Israel , with all such ruler or king as withstand he , and namely Adonibezek the Judg. 1. most cruel tyrant : who thumb and great toe he cause to be cut off , for so much as he have do the like before unto seventie king , who be his prisoner , he force to gather up their victual underneath his table . in this God show his justice to revenge tyrannic . we read likewise , that Gideon a most puissant and noble warrior so behave himself in follow the worthy act of Josua and Juda , that in short time he not only deliver the child of Israel from the hand of the multitude of the fierce madianite , but also subdue they and their tyrant , who land he cause God people to possess and inherit . i can recite diverse other place out of the scripture , which apt may be apply hereunto , be it not i do endeavour my self by all mean to be brief . now in like manner will i allege some few induction out of the authentical write of the ecclesiastical historiographer , all tend to the like argument . and first to begin withal , we do read : that after our saviour Jesus Christ have suffer his passion , the apostle be inspire with the holy ghost , and the knowledge of all strange language , do immediate disperse themselves to 103 a gpodnotefinal conqueror to be mercifiull . Judg. 6. 7. ad . the english voyage 1583 - sundry part of the world , to the preach of the gospel . yet not in so general a manner , but that there remain some far remote country unvisited by they , among the which it be report that India the great , call the uttermost India , as yet have receive no light of the word . ruffinuslib . i . but it come to pass , that one Metrodorus a very learned ca ? ' 9 - and wise philosopher in that age , be desirous to search out unknown land , do first discover the same , find it wonderful populous and rich , which upon his return be publish , and for certain understand , there be another grave philosopher of Tyrus call Meropius , be a christian , who do resolve himself ( follow the example of Metrodorus ) to travail thither , and in a short time assist but with a few , in a small vessel arrive there , have in his company two young youth , Edesius and Frumentius , who ( be his scholar ) he have thorough instruct both in liberali science , and christian religion . now after that Meropius somewhile stay there , have ( as he think ) sufficient understanding of the Indian whole estate : he determine to depart , and to bring notice thereof unto the emperor , who he mean to exhort to the conquest of the same . but by misfortune he be prevent , for be in the midst of his course on the sea homeward , a sore tempest arise , and perforce drive he back again , to a unknown port of the say land : where he by the Meropius most cruel barbarous Indian on the sudden be slay slay . with all his company , except the two young scholar aforesay , who the barbarous Indian , by reason they be of comely stature and beautiful personage , take , Edesius and and forthwith present they to their king and queen : frumentius which both be very well like of , the king courteous entreat , and ordain Edesius to be his butler , and the Indian . „ : , . „ ... r ’ - Frumentius his becretarie , and in rue year by reason or their learning and civil government , they be have in great favour , honour , and estimation with the prince . but the king depart this life , leave the queen his 104 wife with her young son to govern , and give free scope and liberty to the two Christians , at their best pleasure to pass to their native soil , allow they all necessary for the same . yet the queen who high favour they be very sorrowful they shall depart , and therefore most earnest entreat they to tarry and assist she in the government of her people , till such time as her young son grow to ripe year , which request they fulfil . and Frumentius excel Edesius far in all wisdom , rule both the queen and her subject at his discretion , whereby he take occasion to put in practise privy , that the foundation of christian religion may be plant in the heart of such as with who he think his persuasion may best prevail , and that soon will give ear unto he : which be bring to pass accord , he then with his fellow Edesius take leave of the queen to return to his native country . and so soon as he be arrive there , he reveal to the emperor Constantine , the effect of all those event : who both commend his deed and whole allow thereof , by the advice and good like of Athanasius then bishop of Alexandria , do arm and set forth a convenient power for the aid of Frumentius , in this his so godly a purpose . and by this mean come the emperor afterward by fair promise , and by force of histone , testi-arme together , unto the possession of all the Indian fi how that country . the author of this story Ruffinus receive c°nstantl ™ the truth hereof from the very mouth of Edesius come - eniarge his panion to Frumentius . dominion by moreover Eusebius in his historic ecclesiastical ! in subdue of infidel and idolatrous nation . Eusebius deavour by all mean to subject all such remote hib . i . de vita barbarous and heathen nation , as then inhabit the C^‘ four quarter of the world . for ( as it be write ) the eod . emperor thorough aid with a puissant army of lib . cap . 39 Frumentius in great favour with you queen of the Indian . a other great work of God begin by a man ofmeane birth . Ruffinus the author of this story . [ Iii . 172. ] Euseb. in his ecclesiastical precise term , and in diverse place make mention how Constantine the great not only enlarge his empire bv the subdue of his next neighbour , but also en - 105 valiant soldier who he have before persuade to christian religion , in proper person himself come even unto this our country of England , then call the island of Britain , bend from he full west , which he whole conquer , make tributary , and settle therein Christian faith , and leave behind he such ruler thereof , as to his wisdom seem best . from thence he turn his force towards the north coast of the world , and there utter subdue the rude and cruel nation of the scythian , whereof part by friendly persuasion , part by main strength , he reduce the whole to Christian faith . afterwards he determine with himself to search out what strange people inhabit in the uttermost part of the south . and with great hazard and labour , make his journey thither , at last become victor over they all , even to the country of the blemmyans , and the remote . / ethiopian , that now be the people of presbyter John , who yet till this day continue and bear the name of Christians . in the east likewise , what nation soever at that time he can have notice of , he easy win and bring in subjection to the empire . so that to conclude , there be no region in any part of the world , the inhabitant whereof be Gentiles , though unknown unto he , but in time he overcome and vanquish . this worthy beginning of Constantine , both his son succeed his room , and also diverse other emperors afterward to their uttermost endeavour follow and continue , which all the book of Eusebius moor Theodoret in at large set forth . Theodoretus likewise in his eccle-eccle . lib . 5. siasticall history make mention how Theodosius the caf . 20. virtuous emperor employ earnest all his time , as well in conquer the gentile to the knowledge of the holy gospel , utter subvert their profane temple and abominable idolatry , as also in extinguish of such Theodoretus usurp^ns tyrant as with paganism withstand the plant-cap°^e . eodern king of christian religion . after ’ who decease his lib . son Honorius and Arcadius be create emperor , 106 1583. the one of the east , the other of the west , who with all stout godliness most careful imitate the forestep of their father , either in enlarge their territory , or increase the christian flock . Moreover , it be report by the say author , that Theodosius junior the emperor , no whit inferior in virtuous life to any of the above name prince , with great study and zeal pursue and prosecute the gentile , subdue their tyrant and country , and utter destroy all their idolatry , convert their soul to acknowledge their only Messiah and creator , and their country to the enlargement of the empire . to be brief , who so list to read Eusebius Pamphilus , Socrates Scholasticus , Theodoritus , Hermia , sozoman , and Euagrius Scholasticus , which all be most sage ecclesiastical ! writer , shall find great store of example of the worthy life of sundry emperor , tend all to the confirmation of my former speech . and for like example of late time , ( yea even in the memory of man ) i shall not need to recite any other than the conquest make of the west and east Indies by the king of Spain and Portugal ! , whereof there be particular mention make in the last chapter of this book . herein have i use more copy of example then otherwise i will have do , save that i have be in pl^ce , where this manner of plant the christian faith have be think of some to be scarce lawful , yea , such as do take upon they to be more than mean learn . to these example can encage join many more , but whosoever be not satisfy with these few , may satisfy himself in read at large the author last above recite . thus have i ( as i trust ) prove that we may just trade and traffic with the savage , and lawful plant and inhabit their country . [ the three 107 the three chapter do show the lawful title which the queen most excellent majesty have unto those country , which through the aid of almighty God be mean to be inhabit . 1170. Owen Gwyneth be then prince of North-wales , nullum tempus occurrit regi . [ he . 173. ] this island be discover by sir Humphrey and his company , in this his last journey . Mutezuma his oration to his subject in presence of Hernando Cortes , which oration be make about the year 1520. a nd it be very evident that the plant there shall in time right ample enlarge her majesty territory and dominion , or ( i may rather say ) restore to her highness ancient right and interest in those country , into the which a noble and worthy personage , lineal descend from the blood royal , bear in wale , name Madock ap Owen Gwyneth , depart from the coast of England , about the year of our lord God 1170. arrive and there plant himself and his colony , and afterward return himself into England , leave certain of his people there , as appear in a ancient welsh chronicle , where he then give to certain hand , beast , and fowl sundry Welsh ' name , as the hand of Pengwin , which yet to this day bear the same . there be likewise a foul in the say country call by the same name at this day , and be as much to say in english , as Whitehead , and in truth the say fowl have white head . there be also in those country a fruit call gwynethe which be likewise a welsh word . Moreover , there be diverse other welsh word at this day in use , as David Ingram aforesaid report in his relation . all which most strong argue , the say prince with his people to have inhabit there . and the same in effect be confirm by Mutezuma that mighty emperor of Mexico , who in a oration unto his subject for the better pacify of they , make in the presence of Hernando Cortes use these speech follow . my kinsman , friend , and servant , you do well know that eighteen year i have be your king , as my father and grandfather be , and always i have-bene unto you a love prince , and you unto i good 108 and obedient subject , and so i hope you will remain unto i all the day of my life . you ought to have in remembrance , that either you have hear of your father , or else our divine have instruct you , that we be not natural of this country , nor yet our kingdom be durable , because our forefather come from a far country , and their king and captain , who bring they hither , return again to his natural country , say that he will send such as shall rule and govern we , if by chance he himself return not , etc Theise be the very word of Mutezuma set down in the spanish chronicle , the which be thorough consider , because they have relation to some strange noble person , who long before have possess those country , do all sufficient argue the undoubted title of her majesty : forasmuch as no other nation can true by any chronicle they can find , make prescription of time for themselves , before the time of this prince Madoc . beside all this , for further proof of her highness title sithence the arrival of this noble briton into those part ( that be to say ) in the time of the queen grandfather of worthy memory , king Henry the seven , letter patent be by his majesty grant to John Cabota a italian , to Lewis , Sebastian and Sancius , his three son , to discover remote , barbarous and heathen country , which discovery be afterwards execute to the use of the crown of England , in the say king time , by Sebastian and Sancius his son , who be bear here in England : in true testimony whereof there be a fair haven in Newfoundland , know , and call until this day by the name of Sancius haven , which prove that they first discover upon that coast from the height of 63 unto the cape of Florida , as appear in the decade . and this may stand for another title to her majesty : but any of the foresay title be as much or more than any other christian prince can pretend to the Indies , before such time as they have actuali possession thereof , 109 m. Oliver Dalbony . m. Edward reow . m. R. H. m. i A. obtain by the discovery of Christopher Columbus , and the conquest of Vasques nun de Balboa , Hernando Cortes , Francisco Pizarro , and other . and therefore i think it needless to write any more touch the lawfulness of her majesty title . the four chapter show how that the trade , traffic , and plant in those country , be likely to prove very profitable to the whole realm in general . now to show how the same be likely to prove very profitable and beneficial general to the whole realm : it be very certain , that the great jewel of this realm , and the chief strength and force of the same , for defence or offence in martial matter and manner , be the multitude of ship , master and mariner , ready to assist the most stately and royal navy of her majesty , which by reason of this voyage shall have both increase and maintenance . and it be well know that in sundry Cox the place of this realm ship have be build and set forth master . of jate jaye } for the trade of fish only : yet notwithstanding the fish which be take and bring into England by the english navy of fisherman , will not suffice for the expense of this realm four month , if there be none else bring of stranger . and the chief cause why our english man do not go so far westerly as the especial fish place do lie , both for plenty and greatness of fish , be for that they have no succour and know safe harbour in those part . but if our nation be once plant there , or near thereabouts ; whereas they now fish but for two month in the year , they may then fish so long as please themselves , or rather at their come find such plenty of fish ready take , salt , and dry , as may be sufficient to fraught they home without long delay ( God grant that salt may be find there ) whereof David [ three . 174. ] Ingram ( who travel in those country as aforesaid ) say that there be great plenty : and withal the climate do give great hope , that though there be none not natural grow , yet it may as well be make there by art , as it be both at rochel and Bayon , or elsewhere . which be bring to pass , shall increase the number of our ship and mariner , be it but in respect of fish only : but much more in regard of the sundry merchandize and commodity which be there find , and have in great abundance . Moreover , it be well know that all savage , aswell those that dwell in the south , as those that dwell in the north , so soon as they shall begin but a little to taste of civility , will take marvelous delight in any garment , be it never so simple ; as a shirt , a blue , yellow , red , or green cotton cassock , a cap , or such like , and will take incredible pain for such a trifle . for i my self have hear this report make sundry clothier , time by diverse of our countryman , who have dwell wwlman . in the southerly part of the west Indies , some twelve year together , and some of less time ; that the people weaver . in those part be easy reduce to civility both in manner fuller . and garment . which be so , what vent for our steerman . English clothes will thereby ensue , and how great benefit to all such person and artificer , who name be quote capper . in the margin , i do leave to the judgement of such as hatter , be discreet . an man3 te - and questionless , hereby it will also come to pass , cayedt ™ nes that all such town and village as both have be , ’ and now be utter decay and ruinate ( the poor people thereof be not set on work , by reason of the transportation of raw wool of late day more excessive then in time past ) shall by this mean be restore to their pristinate wealth and estate : all which do likewise tend to the enlargement of our navy , and maintenance of our navigation . to what end need i endeavour my self by argument to prove that by this voyage our navy and navigation shall|be enlarge , when as there need none other reason then the manifest and late example of the near neighbour to this realm , the king of Spain and Portugal , who m the idle person of this realm shall by occasion of thisjourneybee well employ y set on work . hemp do grow near saint Laurence river natural . Read the begin of the bookeintitule , diverse voyage touch the discovery of America . the english voyage since the first discovery of the Indies , have not only mighty enlarge their dominion , great enrich themselves and their subject : but have also by just account treble the number of their ship , master and mariner , a matter of no small moment and importance ? beside this , it will prove a general ! benefit unto our country , that through this occasion , not only a great number of man which do now live idle at home , and be burdenous , chargeable , and unprofitable to this realm , shall hereby be set on work , but also child of twelve or fourteen year of age , or under , may be keep from idleness , in make of a thousand kind of trifle thing , which will be good merchandise for that country . and moreover , our idle woman ( which the realm may well spare ) shall also be employ on pluck , dry , and sort of feather , in pull , beat , and work of hemp , and in gather of cotton , and diverse thing right necessary for die . all which thing be to be find in those country most plentiful . and the man may employ themselves in drag for pearl , work for mine , and in matter of husbandry , and likewise in hunt the whale for Trane , and make cask to put the same in : beside in fish for cod , salmon , and herring , dry salt and barrel the same , and fell of tree , hew and saw of they , and such like work , meet for those person that be no man of art or science . many other thing may be find to the great relief and good employment of no small number of the natural subject of this realm , which do now live here idle to the common annoy of the whole state . neither may i here omit the great hope and likelihood of a passage beyond the grand bay into the south sea , confirm by sundry author to be find lead to Cataia , the Moluccas and spicery , whereby may ensue as general a benefit to the realm , or great than yet have be speak of , without either such charge , or other inconvenience , as by the tedious tract of time and 112 peril , which the ordinary passage to those part at this day do minister . and to conclude this argument withal , it be well know to all man of sound judgement , that this voyage be of great importance , and will be find more beneficial to our country , than all other voyage at this day in use and trade among we . the five chapter show , that the trade and plant in those country be likely to prove to the particular profit of all adventurer . must now accord to my promise show forth some probable reason that the adventurer in this journey be to take particular profit by the same . it be therefore convenient that i do divide the adventurer into two sort : the nobleman and gentleman by themselves , and the [ three . 175. ] Merchants by themselves . for , as i do hear , it be mean that there shall be one society of the nobleman and gentleman , and another society of the merchant . and yet not so divide , but that each society may free and frank trade and traffic one with the other . and first to bend my speech to the nobleman and gentleman , who do chief seek a temperate climate , wholesome air , fertile soil , and a strong place by nature whereupon they may fortify , and there either plant themselves , or such other person as they shall think good to send to be lord of that place and country : to they i say , that all these thing be very easy to be find within the degree of 30 and 60 aforesaid , either by south or ■ North , both in the continent , and in island thereunto adjoin at their choice : but the degree certain of the elevation of the pole , and the very climate where these place of force and fertility be to be find , i omit to make public , for such regard as the wise sort can easy conjecture : the rather because i do certain understand , that some of those which have the manage of this vni i13 he hide sell for forty shilling a piece . great grape . wine of the palm tree . the english voyage matter , know it as well or better than i my self , and do mean to reveal the same , when cause shall require , to such person who it shall concern , and to no other : so that they may seat and settle themselves in such climate as shall best agree with their own nature , disposition , and good like : and in the whole tract of that land , by the description of as many as have be there , great plenty of minerail matter of all sort , and in very many place , both stone of price , pearl and crystal , and great store of beast , bird , and fowl both for pleasure and necessary use of man be to be find . and for such as take delight in hunt , there be stag , wild bore , fox , hare , cony , badger , otter , and diverse other such like for pleasure . also for such as have delight in hawk , there be hawk of sundry kind , and great store of game , both for land and river , as fezant , partridge , crane , heronshawe , duck , mallards , and such like . there be also a kind of beast much big than a ox , who hide be more than eighteen foot long , of which sort a countryman of we , one Walker a sea man , who be upon that coast , do for a truth report in the presence of diverse honourable and worshipful person , that he and his company do find in one cottage above two hundred and forty hide , which they bring away and sell in France for forty shilling a hide ; and with this agree David Ingram , and describe that beast at large , suppose it to be a certain kind of buff ; there be likewise beast and fowl of diverse kind , which i omit for brevity sake , great store of fish both in the salt water and in the fresh , plenty of grape as big as a man thumb , and the most delicate wine of the palm tree , of which wine there be diverse of good credit in this realm that have taste : and there be also a kind of grain call Maiz , potato root , and sundry other fruit natural grow there : so that after such time as they be once settle , they shall need to take no great care for victuali . and now for the better contentation and satisfaction 114 of such worshipful , honest mind , and well dispose merchant , as have a desire to the furtherance of every good and commendable action , i will first say unto they , as i have do before to the nobleman and gentleman , that within the degree abovesaid , be doubtless to be find the most wholesome and best temperature of air , fertility of soil , and every other commodity or merchandise , for the which , with no small peril we do travel into Barbary , Spain , Portugal , France , Italy , Moscovie and Eastland . all which may be either present have , or at the least wise in very short time procure from thence with less danger than now we have they . and yet to the end my argument shall not altogether stand upon likelihood and presumption , i say that such person as have discover and travel those part , do testify that they have find in those country all these thing follow , namely : ' of beast for fur . martern . Beavers . fox , black and white . leopard . of worm . silk worm great and large . < of bird . Hawkes . Bitters . curlewe . herons . partridge . crane . mallards . wild goose . stock dove . and sundry other strange Margaus . black bird . parrot . Pengwins . of fish . Codde . Salmon . Seales . herring . of tree . palm tree yield sweet wine . Cedars . firre . sassafras . Oake . Eime . popler . Trees to we unknown . TI5 of fruit . grape very large . muskemellon . lemon . date great . orange . fig . prune . Raisins great and small . Pepper . almond . citron . of metal . ' gold . silver . copper . lead . tin . of stone . turkeis . ruby . pearl great and fair . marble , of diverse kind . Jasper . crystal . sundry other commodity of all sort . ' rosin . pitch . tar . turpentine . frankincense . honey . wax . rhubarb . oil olive . train oil . musk codde . x. salt . ' tallow . Hides . hemp . flax . Cochenello and die of diverse sort . feather of sundry sort , as for pleasure and fill of featherbed . And see that for small cost , the truth of these thing may be understand ( whereof this intend supply will give we more certain assurance ) i do find no cause to the contrary , but that all well mind person shall be willing to adventure some competent portion for the furtherance of so good a enterprise . now for the trial hereof , consider that in the article of the society of the adventurer in this voyage , there be provision make , that no adventurer shall be bind to any further charge than his first adventure : and yet notwithstanding keep still to himself his child , his 116 apprentice and servant , his and their freedom for trade and traffic , which be a privilege that adventurer in other voyage have not : and in the say article it be likewise provide , that none other than such as have adventure in the first voyage , or shall become adventurer in this supply , at any time hereafter be to be admit in the say society , but as redemptionary , which will be very chargeable : therefore general i say unto all such accord to the old proverb , nothing venture , nothing have . for if it do so fall out , accord to the great hope and expectation have , ( as by god grace it will ) the gain which now they reap by traffic into other far country , shall by this trade return with less charge , great gain , and more safety : less charge , i say , by reason of the ample and large deep river at the very bank , whereof there be many , whereby both easy and quiet they may transport from the innermost part of the main land , all kind of merchandise , yea in vessel of great burden , and that three time , or twice in the year at the least . but let we omit all presumption how vehement soever , and dwell upon the certainty of such commodity as be discover by saint Humphrey Gilbert , and his assistant in newfound land in August last . for . there may be very easy make pitch , tar , Rosen , soap 4*^1 last ash in great plenty , yea , as it be think , enough to serve the whole realm of every of these kind : and of train oil such quantity , as if i shall set down the value that they do esteem it at , which have be there , it will seem incredible . it be hereby intend , that these commodity in this abundant manner , be not to be gather from thence , without plant and settle there . and as for other thing of more value , and that of more sort and kind then one or two ( which be likewise discover there ) i do hold they for some respect , more meet for a time to be conceal then utter . of the fish i do speak nothing , because it be general know : and it be not to be forget , what trifle 117 the english voyage they be that the savage do require in exchange of these commodity : yea , for pearl , gold , silver , and precious stone . all which be matter in trade and traffic of great moment . but admit that it shall so fall out , that the above specify commodity shall not happy be find out within this first year : yet it be very clear that such and so many may be find out as shall minister just occasion to think all cost and labour well bestow . for it be very certain , that there be one seat fit for fortification , of great safety , wherein these commodity follow , especial be to be have , that be to say , grape for wine , whale for oil , hemp for cordage , and other necessary thing , and fish of far great size and plenty , than that of newfound land , and of all these so great store , as may suffice to serve our whole realm . beside all this , if credit may be give to the inhabitant of the same soil , a certain river do thereunto adjoin , which lead to a place abound with rich substance : i do not hereby mean the passage to the molucca , whereof before i make mention . and it be not to be omit , how that about two year past , certain merchant of saint Malo in France , do hire a ship out of the island of Jersey , to the end that they will keep that trade secret from their countryman , and they will admit no mariner , other than the ship boy belong to the say ship , to go with they , which ship be about 70. ton . i do know the ship and the boy very well , and be familiar acquaint with the owner , which voyage prove very beneficial . to conclude , this which be already say , may suffice any man of reasonable disposition to serve for a taste , until such time as it shall please almighty God through our own industry , to send we better tiding . in the mean season , if any man well affect to this journey , shall stand in doubt of any matter of importance touch the same , he may satisfy himself with the judgement and like of such of good call and credit , as be principali dealer herein . for it be not necessary in this 118 the western plant treatise , public to set forth the whole secret of the voyage . 