the voyage of the ship call the marigold of m. hill of Redrife unto cape Briton and beyond to the latitude of 44 degree and a half , 1593 write by Richard fisher master hill man of redriffe . he ship call the marigold of 70 ton in burden furnish with 20 man , whereof 10 be mariner , the master name be Richard strong of Apsham , the master mate Peter Langworth of Apsham , with 3 cooper , 2 butcher to flay the morss or sea ox ( whereof diverse have tooth above a cubit long and skin far thick than any bull hide ) with other necessary people , depart out of Falmouth the 1 of June 1593 inn consort of another ship of m. drake of Apsham , which upon some occasion be not ready so soon as she shall have be by two month . the place for which these two ship be bind be a island within the straight of saint Peter on the back side of Newfoundland to the southwest in the latitude of forty seven degree , call by the Briton of saint Malo the isle of Ramea , but by the savage and natural of the continent next adjoin , menquit : on which isle be so great abundance of the huge and mighty sea ox with great tooth in the month of April , may and June , that there have be fifteen hundred kill there by one small bark , in the year 1591. the two english ship aforesay , lose company before they come to Newfoundland : and never come after together in all their voyage . the ship of m. George Drake fall first with Newfoundland , and afterward very direct come to the isle 157 the voyage of m. drake of Apsham to Ramea . [ Iii . 192. ] the isle of Ramea , or menquit . Ramea , though too late in the year to make her voyage : where she find a ship of saint Malo three part freight with these fish : the man whereof inquire whence our ship be and who be the master thereof , be answer that she be belong to master George drake of Apsham , fear to be take as good prize be of a leaguer town , and at that time out of league with England , flee so hasty that present night that they leave three and twenty man and three shallop behind they , all which our man seize upon and bring away as good prize home . here our man take certain sea-oxen , but nothing such number as they may have have , if they have come in due season , which they have neglect . the ship call the marigold fall with cape saint Francis in Newfoundland the eleven of Julie , and from thence we go into the bay Rogneuse , and afterward double cape Razo , and sail towards the strait of saint Peter ( which be the entrance between Newfoundland and Cape briton , ) be unacquainted with the place , beat up and down a very long time , and yet miss it , and at length over shot it , and fall with cape Briton . the english here diverse of our man go on land upon the very man land upon Qapej where , at their arrival they find the spit of ape rtton . Savages which have roast meat a little before . and as they view the country they see diverse beast and fowl , as black fox , deer , otter , great fowl with red leg , pengwyn , and certain other . but have find no people here at this our first land we go again on shipboorde , and sail far four league to the west of Cape briton , where we see they go on many seal . and here have need of fresh water tn “ n we go again on shore . And pass somewhat more ? ' into the land , we find certain round pond artificial make by the savage to keep fish in , with certain wear in they make to take fish . to these pond we repair to fill our cask with water . we have not be 158 long here , but there come one savage with black long the people of hair hang about his shoulder who call unto we , tfie trey weave his hand downward towards his belhe , use our man these word , calitogh calitogh : as we draw towards he one of our man musket unaware shoot off : whereupon he fall down , and rise up sudden again he cry thrice with a loud voice Chiogh , chiogh , chiogh . thereupon nine or ten of his fellow run right up over the bush with great agility and swiftness come towards we with white staff in their hand like half pike , and their dog of colour black not so big black dog . as a greyhound follow they at the heal ; but we retire unto our boat without any hurt at all receive . howbeit one of they break a hogshead which we have fill with fresh water , with a great branch of a tree which lie on the ground . upon which occasion we bestow half a dozen musket shoot upon they , which they avoid by fall flat to the earth , and afterward retire themselves to the wood . one of the savage , which seem to be their captain , wear a long mantle of beast skin hang on one of his shoulder . the rest be all naked except their privity , which be cover with a skin tie behind . after they have escape our shot they make a great fire on the shore , belike to give their fellow warn of we . the kind of tree that we note to be here , be goodly oak , fir tree of a great height , a kind of tree call of we quickbeame , and cherry tree , and diverse other kind to we unknown , because we stay not long with diligence to observe they : and there be great show of rosin , pitch , and tarre . we find in both the place where we go on land abundance of raspese , strawberry , hurt , and herb of good smell , and diverse good for the skurvie , and grass very rank and of great length . we see five or six boat sail to the southwestwardes of Cape briton , which we judge to be Christians , which have some trade that way . we see also , while we be on shore , the manner of their * 59 a secret trade to the southwest of Cape briton . a.d. the english voyage J593 ’ .. hang up of their fish and flesh with withe to dry in the air : they also lie they upon raft and hurdle and make a smoke under they , or a soft fire , and so dry they as the savage use to do in Virginia . sounding to while we lie four league south of Cape briton southwest we sound and have sixty fathom black ozy ground . ward of cape sail thence westward nine or ten league off Briton . the shore , we have twenty four fathom red sand , and [ three . 193. ] small whitish stone . we continue our course so far to the southwest , that we bring our self into they they sail 50 latitude of fourty four degree and a half , have sail or 60 league fifty or sixty league to the southwest of Cape briton . to t e out . we foum ( i ( he current between this cape Briton and Cape Rey to set out towards the eastsoutheast . in our west of cape course to the west of cape Briton we see exceed Briton . great store of seal , and abundance of porpoise , whereof seal spor - we kill eleven . we see whale also of all sort pose ' , whale aswell small as great : and here our man take many and cod . beard cod with one teat underneath , which be like to the north-east cod , and better than those of Newfoundland . they continue from our arrival at the haven of saint Francis in new-on the coast foundland , ( which be as be aforesay the eleven of JBriton west we continue beat up and down on the coast ward full of Arambec to the west and southwest of Cape briton eleven week . until the twenty eight of September , full by the space of eleven week : and then by the persuasion of our master and certain other we shape our course homeward by the isle of the azore , and come first to Corvo and Flores , where beat up and down , and miss of expect prey , we sail by Tercera , and from thence to saint Michael , where we seek to board a Portugal ship , which we find too well appoint for we to bring along with we , and so be force to leave they behind and have waste all our victual , we be constrain against our will to hasten home unto our narrow sea : but it be the two and twenty of December before we can 160 get into the down : where for lack of wind we keep our Christmas with dry bread only for drop of our clothes . one thing very strange happen in this voyage : to wit , that a mighty great whale follow our ship by the space of many day as we pass by cape Razo , which by no mean we can chase from our ship , until one of our man fall overboard and be drown , after which time she immediate forsake we , and never afterward appear unto we . A.D. * 593* a huge whale pursue their ship by the space of many day , till one of their man fall overboard . 