the four voyage make to Virginia with three ship , in the year 1587. wherein be transport the second colony . the year of our lord 1587. sir Walter Ralegh intend to persevere in the plant of his country of Virginia , prepare a new colony of one hundred and fifty man to be send thither , under the charge of John white , who he appoint governor , and also appoint unto he twelve assistant , unto who he give a charter , and incorporate they by the name of governor and assistant of the city of Ralegh in Virginia . April . our fleet be in number three sail , viz. the admiral a ship of one hundred and twenty ton , a flyboat , and a pinnace , depart the six and twenty of April from Portesmouth , and the same day come to a anchor at the cow in the isle of wight , where we stay eight day . 386 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. 1587. May . [ in . 281. ] the five of May , at nine of the clock at night we come to Plymouth , where we remain the space of two day . the 8 we weigh anchor at Plymouth , and depart thence for Virginia . the 16 Simon Ferdinando , master of our admiral , lewd forsake our flyboat , leave her distress in the bay of Portugal . June . the 19 we fall with “ Dominica , and the same evening we sail between it , and Guadalupe : the 21 the flyboat also fall with Dominica . the 22 we come to a anchor at a island call Santa Cruz , where all the planter be set on land , stay there till the 25 of the same month . at our first land on this island , some of our woman , and man , by eat a small fruit like green apple , be fearful trouble with a sudden burn in their mouth , and swell of their tongue so big , that some of they can not speak . also a child by suck one of those woman breast , have at that instant his mouth set on such a burn , that it be strange to see how the infant be torment for the time : but after 24 hour , it wear away of it self . also the first night of our be on this island , we take five great Torteses , some of they of such bigness , that sixteen of our strong man be tire with carrying of one of they but from the sea side to our cabin . in this island we find no water place , but a stand pond , the water whereof be so evil , that many of our company fall sick with drink thereof : and as many as do but wash their face with that water , in the morning before the sun have draw away the corruption , their face do so burn and swell , that their eye be shut up , and can not see in five or six day , or long . 387 “ one of the isle of the Indies inhabit with savage . circumspection to be use in strange place . the second day of our abode there , we send forth some of our man to search the island for fresh water , three one way , and two another way . the governor also , with six other , go up to the top of a high hill , to view the island , but can perceive no sign of any man , or beast , nor any goodness , but parrot , and tree of Guiacum . return back to our cabin another way , he find in the descent of a hill , certain potsherd of savage make , make of the earth of that island : whereupon it be judge , that this island be inhabit with savage , though Fernando have tell we for certain the contrary . the same day at night , the rest of our company very late return to the governor . the one company affirm , that they have scene in a valley eleven Savages , and diverse house half a mile distant from the steep , or top of the hill where they stay . the other company have find run out of a high rock a very fair spring of water , whereof they bring three bottle to the company : for before that time , we drink the stink water of the pond . the same second day at night captain Stafford , with the pinnace , depart from our fleet , ride at Santa Cruz , to a island , call beak , lie near saint John , be so direct by Ferdinando , who assure he he shall there find great plenty of sheep . the next day at night , our planter leave Santa Cruz , and come all aboard , and the next morning after , be the 25 of June we weigh anchor , and depart from Santa Cruz. the seven and twenty we come to anchor at Cottea , where we find the pinnace ride at our come . the 28 we weigh anchor at Cottea , and present come to anchor at saint Johns in Musketos bay , where we spend three day unprofitable in take in fresh water , spend in the mean time more beer than the quantity of the water come unto . 388 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. 1587. Julie . the first day we weigh anchor at “ Musketoes bay , “ Musketos where be leave behind two irish man of our come - pany , Derby Glaven , and Denice Carrell , bear along fa soot ] i the coast of saint Johns till evening , at which time we fall of . Johns with Rosse bay at this place Ferdinando have promise island , where we shall take in salt , and have cause we before , to t % e ™ make and provide as many sack for that purpose , as i we can . the governor also , for that he understand there be a town in the bottom of the bay , not far from the salt hill , appoint thirty shot , ten pike , and ten target , to man the pinnace , and to go aland for salt . Ferdinando perceive they in a readiness , send to the governor , use great persuasion with he , not to take in salt there , say that he know not well whether the same be the place or not : also , that if the pinnace [ three . 282. ] go into the bay , she can not without great danger come back , till the next day at night , and that if in the mean time any storm shall rise , the admiral be in danger to be cast away . while he be thus persuading , he cause the lead to be cast , and have crafty bring the ship in three fathom and a half water , he sudden begin to swear , and tear God in piece , dissemble great danger , cry to he at the helm , bear up hard , bear up hard : so we go off , and be disappoint of our salt , by his mean . the next day sail along the west end of saint John , the governor determine to go aland in saint german “ bay , to gather young plant of orange , pine , Mameas , and Plantanos , to set at Virginia , which we know might easy be have , for that they grow near the shore , and the place where they grow , well know to the governor , and some of the planter : but our Simon deny it , say : he will come to a anchor at Hispaniola , and there land the governor , and some other of the assistant , with the pinnace , to see if he can speak with his friend Alanson , of who he hope to be furnish both “ a pleasant andfruitfull country , lie on the west end of 8. Johns island , where grow plenty of orange , lemon , plantan , y Pines . of cattle , and all such thing as we will have take in at s. John : but he mean nothing less , as it plain do appear to we afterward . the next day after , be the three of July , we see Hispaniola , and bear with the coast all that day , look still when the pinnace shall be prepare to go for the place where Ferdinando his friend Alanson be : but that day pass , and we see no preparation for land in Hispaniola . the 4 of July , sail along the coast of Hispaniola , until the next day at noon , and no preparation yet see for the stay there , we have knowledge that we be past the place where Alanson dwell , and be come with Isabel : hereupon Ferdinando be ask by the governor , whether he mean to speak with Alanson , for the take in of cattle , and other thing , accord to his promise , or not : but he answer that he be now past the place , and that sir Walter Ralegh tell he , the french ambassador certify he , that the king of Spain have send for Alanson into Spain : wherefore he think he dead , and that it be to no purpose to touch there in any place , at this voyage . the next day we leave sight of Hispaniola , and hale oflf for Virginia , about four of the clock in the afternoon . the sixth of July we come to the island Caycos , wherein Ferdinando say be two salt pond , assure we if they be dry , we may find salt to shift with , until the next supply : but it prove as true as find of sheep at Baque . in this island , while Ferdinando solace himself ashore , with one of the company , in part of the island , other spend the latter part of that day in other part of the island , some to seek the salt pond , some fowl , some hunt swan , whereof we catch many . the next day early in the morning we weigh anchor , leave Caycos , with good hope , that the first land that we see next shall be Virginia . about the 16 of July we fall with the main of Virginia , which Simon Ferdinando take to be the island of 390 the four voyage to Virginia a.d. 1587 croatoan , where we come to anchor , and ride there two or three day : but find himself deceive , he weigh , and bear along the coast , where in the night , have not captain Stafford be more careful in look out , than our Simon Ferdinando , we have be all cast away upon the breach , call the cape of fear , for we be come within two cable length upon it : such be the carelessness , and ignorance of our master .. the two and twenty of July we arrive safe at Hatorask , where our ship and pinnace anchor : the governor go aboard the pinnace , accompany with forty of his best man , intend to pass up to Roanoak forthwith , hope there to find those fifteen Englishman , which sir Richard Grinvile have leave there the year before , with who he mean to have conference , concern the state of the country , and savage , mean after he have so do , to return again to the fleet , and pass along the coast , to the bay of chesepiok , where we a intent to intend to make our seat and fort , accord to the charge give we among other direction in writing , under sepi0^ the hand of sir Walter Ralegh : but assoon as we be put with our pinnace from the ship , a gentleman by the mean of Ferdinando , who be appoint to return for England , call to the sailor in the pinnace , charge they not to bring any of the planter back again , but to leave they in the island , except the governor , and two or three such as he approve , say that the summer be far spend , wherefore he will land all the planter in no other place . unto this be all the sailor , both in the pinnace , and ship , persuade by the master , wherefore it boot not the governor to contend with they , but pass to Roanoak , and the same night at sunset go aland on the island , in the place where our fifteen man be leave , but we find none of they , nor any sign that they have be there , save only we find the bone of one of those fifteen , which the savage have slay long before . the three and twenty of July the governor with 391 the english voyage diverse of his company , walk to the north end of the island , where master Ralph lane have his fort , with sundry necessary and decent dwell house , make by his man about it the year before , where we hope to find some sign , or certain knowledge of our fifteen man . when we come thither , we find the fort raze down , but all the house stand unhurt , save that the nether room of they , and also of the fort , be overgrow with melon of diverse sort , and deer within they , feed on those melon : so we return to our company , without hope of ever see any of the fifteen man live . the same day order be give , that every man shall be employ for the repair of those house , which we find stand , and also to make other new cottage , for such as shall need . the 25 our flyboat and the rest of our planter arrive all safe at Hatoraske , to the great joy and comfort of the whole company : but the master of our admiral Ferdinando grieve great at their safe coming : for he purposely leave they in the bay of Portugal , and steal away from they in the night , hope that the master thereof , who name be Edward Spicer , for that he never have be in Virginia , will hardly find the place , or else be leave in so dangerous a place as that be , by mean of so many man of war , as at that time be abroad , they shall sure be take , or slay : but God disappoint his wicked pretence . 