the conclusion . owe i have ( as i hope ) make relation not of so few and small thing , but that the country ( of man that be indifferent and well dispose ) may be sufficient like : if there be no more know than i have mention , which doubtless and in great reason be nothing to that which remain to be discover , neither the soil , nor commodity . as we have reason so to gather by the difference we find in our travail , for although all which i have before speak of , have be discover and experiment not far from the sea coast , where be our abode and most of our travail : yet sometime as we make our journey further into the main and country ; we find the soil to be fat , the tree great and to grow thin , the ground more firm and deep mould , more and large champion , fine grass , and as good as ever we see any in England ; in some place rocky and far more high and hilly ground , more plenty of their fruit , more abundance of beast , the more inhabit with people , and of great policy and large dominion , with great town and house . why may we not then look for in good hope from the inner part of more and great plenty , as well of other thing , as of those which we have already discover ? unto the Spaniard happen the like in discover the main of the west Indies . the main also of this country of Virginia , extend some way so many hundred of league , as otherwise then by the relation of the inhabitant we have most certain knowledge of , where yet no christian prince have 383 any possession or deal , can but yield many kind of excellent commodity , which we in our discovery have not yet see . what hope there be else to be gather of the nature of the climate , be answerable to the hand of Japan , the land of China , Persia , jury , the hand of Cyprus and Candy , the south part of Greece , Italy and Spain , and of many other notable and famous country , because i mean not to be tedious , i leave to your own consideration . whereby also the excellent temperature of the air there at all season , much warm than in England , and never so vehement hot , as sometime be under and between the tropike , or near they , can be know unto you without further relation . for the wholesomeness thereof i need to say but thus [ three . 280. ] much : that for all the want of provision , as first of English victuali , except for twenty day , we live only by drink water , and by the victuali of the country , of which some sort be very strange unto we , and may have be think to have alter our temperature in such sort , as to have bring we into some grievous and dangerous this want be disease : second the want of english mean , f°r take beast , fish and foul , which ' by the help only of the inhabitant and their mean can not be so sudden and easy provide for we , nor in so great number and quantity , nor of that choice as otherwise may have be to our better satisfaction and contentment . some want also we have of clothes . Furthermore in all our travail , which be most special and often in the time of winter , our lodging be in the open air upon the ground . and yet i say for all this , there be but r four of our whole company ( be one hundred and eight ) that die all the year , and that but at the latter end thereof , and upon none of the aforesaid cause . for all four , especial three , be feeble , weak , and 384 sickly person before ever they come thither , and those that know they , much marvel that they live so long be in that case , or have adventure to travail . see therefore the air there be so temperate and wholesome , the soil so fertile , and yield such commodity , as i have before mention , the voyage also thither to and fro be sufficient experiment to be perform twice a year with ease , and at any season thereof : and the deal of sir Walter Ralegh so liberali in large give and grant land there , as be already know , with many help and furtherance else : ( than least that he have grant have be five hundred acre to a man only for the adventure of his person ) i hope there remain no cause whereby the action shall be mislike . if that those which shall thither travail to inhabit and plant be but reasonable provide for the first year , as those be which be transport the last , and be there , do use but that diligence and care , that be requisite , and as they may with ease : there be no doubt , but for the time follow , they may have victual that be excellent good and plenty enough , some more english sort of cattle also hereafter , as some have be before , and be there yet remain , may , and shall be ( god will ) thither transport . so likewise , our kind of fruit , root , and herb , may be there plant and sow , as some have be already , and prove well : and in short time also they may raise so much of those sort of commodity which i have speak of , as shall both enrich themselves , as also other that shall deal with they . and this be all the fruit of our labour , that i have think necessary to advertise you off at this present : what else concern the nature and manner of the inhabitant of Virginia , the number with the particularity of the voyage thither make , and of the action of such as have be by sir Walter Ralegh therein , and there employ , many worthy to be remember , as of Viii 385 2b the first discoverer of the country , of our general for the time sir Richard grinvil , and after his departure of our governor there master Ralph lane , with diverse other direct and employ under their government : of the captain and master of the voyage make since for transportation , of the governor and assistant of those already transport , as of many person , accident , and thing else , i have ready in a discourse by it self in manner of a chronicle , accord to the course of time : which when time shall be think convenient , shall be also publish . thus refer my relation to your favourable construction , expect good success of the action , from he which be to be acknowledge the author and governor , not only of this , but of all thing else , i take my leave of you , this month of February 1587. 