the voyage make by sir Richard Greenvile , for sir Walter Ralegh , to Virginia , in the year 1585. he 9 day of April , in the year abovesaid , we depart from Plymmouth , our fleet consist of the number of seven sail , to wit , the tiger , of the burden of seven score ton , a flyboat call the roebuck , of the like burden , the lion of a hundred ton or thereabouts , the Elizabeth , of fifty ton , and the Dorothy , a small bark : whereunto be also adjoin for speedy service , two small pinnace . the principali gendeman of our company , be these , m. Ralph lane , m. Tomas Candish , m. John Arundel , m. Raymund , m. Stukley , m. Bremige , m. Vincent , and m. John Clarke , and diverse other , whereof some be captain , and other some assistant for counsel , and good direction in the voyage . the 14. day of April we fall with Lancerota and Forteventura , isle of the canary , and from thence 310 we continue our course for Dominica , one of the antiles of the west India , wherewith we fall the 7. day of May , and the 10. day follow we come to a anchor at Cotesa , a little hand situate near to the hand of S. John , where we land , and refresh our self all that day . the 12. day of may we come to a anchor in the bay of moskito , in the hand of S. John , within a falcon shoot of the shore : where our general sir Richard greenevil , and the most part of our company land , and begin to fortify very near to the sea side : the river run by the one side of our fort , and the other two side be environ with wood . the 13. day we begin to build a new pinnace within the fort , with the timber that we then fell in the country , some part whereof we fetch three mile up in the land , and bring it to our fort upon truck , the Spaniard not dare to make or offer resistance . the 16. day there appear unto we out of the wood eight horseman of the Spaniard , about a quarter of a mile from our fort , stay about half a hour in view our force : but assoon as they see ten of our shot march towards they , they present retire into the wood . the 19 day master candish , who have be separate from our fleet in a storm in the bay of Portugal , arrive at Cotesa , within the sight of the tiger : our think he a far off to have be either a Spaniard or Frenchman of war , think it good to weigh anchor , and to go room with he , which the tiger do , and discern he at last to be one of our consort , for joy of who come our ship discharge their ordinance , and salute he accord to the manner of the sea . the 22. day twenty other spanish horseman show themselves to we upon the other side of the river : who be see , our general dispatch 20. footman towards they , and two horseman of we , mount upon spanish horse , which we before have take in the time 311 A.D. I585 - they land upon the hand of . john’de Porto Rico. of our be on the hand : they show to our man a flag of truce , and make sign to have a parley with we : whereupon two of our man go half of the way upon the sand , and two of they come and meet they : the two Spaniard offer very great salutation to our man , but begin accord to their spanish proud humour , to - expostulate with they about their arrival and fortify in their country , who notwithstanding by our man discreet answer be so cool , that ( whereas they be tell , that our principali intention be only to furnish our self with water and victuales , and other necessary , whereof we stand in need , which we crave may be yield we with fair and friendly mean , otherwise our resolution be to practise force , and to relieve ourselves by the sword ) the Spaniard in conclusion see our man so resolute , yield to our request with large promise of all courtesy , and great favour , and so our man and they depart . the 23. day our pinnace be finish , and launch : which be do , our general with his captain and gentleman , march up into the country about the space of 4. mile , where in a plain marsh they stay expect the come of the Spaniard accord to their promise , to furnish we with victual : who keep their old custom for perjury and breach of promise , come not , whereupon our general fire the wood thereabouts , and so retire to our fort , which the same day be fire also , and each man come aboard to be ready to set sail the next morning . the 29. day we set sail from saint Johns , be many of we sting before upon shore with the muskito : but the same night we take a spanish frigate , which be forsake by the Spaniard upon the sight of we , and the next day in the morning very early we take another frigate , with good and rich fraught , and diverse Spaniards of account in she , which afterward we ransom for good round sum , and land they in saint Johns . 312 the 26. day our lieutenant master Ralph lane go in one of the frigate which we have take , to roxo bay upon the southwest side of saint Johns , to fetch salt , be thither conduct by a spanish pilot : as soon as he arrive there , he land with his man to the number of 20. and entrench himself upon the sand immediate , compass one of their salt hill within the trench : who be see of the Spaniard , there come down towards he two or three troop of horseman and footman , who give he the look , and gaze on , but dare not come near he to offer any resistance , so that master lane maugre their troop , carry their salt aboard and jade his frigate , and so return again to our fleet the 29. day , which ride at saint germane bay the same day we all depart , and the next day arrive in the hand of Hispaniola . June . the 1. day of June our anchor at Isabel , on the north side of Hispaniola . the 3. day of June , the governor of Isabel , and captain of the port de plata , be certify by the report of sundry Spaniards , who have be well entertained aboard our ship by our general , that in our fleet be many brave and gallant gentleman , who great desire to see the governor aforesaid , he thereupon send gentle commendation to our general , promise within few day to come to he in person , which he perform accord . the 5. day the aforesaid governor accompany with a lusty friar , and twenty other Spaniard , with their servant , and negro , come down to the sea side , where our ship ride at anchor , who be see , our general man immediate the most part of his boat with the chief man of our fleet , every man appoint , and furnish in the best sort : at the land of our general , the spanish governor receive he very courteous , and the spanish gentleman salute 3X3 our english gentleman , and their inferior sort do also salute our soldier and sea man , like our man , and likewise their quality , although at the first they seem to stand in fear of we , and of so many of our boat , whereof they desire that all may not land their man , yet in the end , the courtesy that pass on both side be so great , that all fear and mistrust on the Spaniard part be abandon . in the mean time while our English general and the spanish governor discourse betwixt they of diverse matter , as of the state of the country , the multitude of the town and people , and the commodity of the hand , our man provide two banquet house cover with green bough , the one for the gentleman , the other for the servant , and a sumptuous banquet be bring in serve by we all in plate , with the sound of trumpet , and consort of music , wherewith the Spaniard be more than delight . which banquet be end , the Spaniard in recompense of our courtesy , cause a great hear of white bull , and cow to be bring together from the mountain , and appointed for every gentleman and captain that will ride , a horse ready saddle , and then single out three of the best of they to be hunt by horseman after their manner , so that the pastime grow very pleasant for the space of three hour , wherein all three of the beast be kill , whereof one take the sea , and there be slay with a musket . after this sport , many rare present and gift be give and bestow on both part , and the next day we play the merchant in bargain with they by way of truck and exchange of diverse of their commodity , as horse , mere , cow , bull , goat , swine , sheep , bullhides , sugar , ginger , pearl , tobacco , and such like commodity of the hand . the 7. day we depart with great good will from the Spaniard from the hand of Hispaniola : but the wise sort do impute this great show of friendship , and courtesy use towards we by the Spaniard rather to the 314 force that we be of , and the vigilancy , and watchful - [ three . 253 ] nes that be among we , then to any hearty good will , or sure friendly entertainment : for doubtless if they have be strong than we , we may have look for no better courtesy at their hand , than master John haukin receive at saint John de ullua , or John Oxnam near the strait of Dariene , and diverse other of our countryman in other place . the 8. day we anchor at a small hand to take seal , which in that place we understand to have be in great quantity , where the general and certain other with he in the pinnace be in very great danger to have be all cast away , but by the help of God they escape the hazard , and return aboard the admiral in safety . the 9 , day we arrive and land in the he of Caycos , they land on in which hand we search for salte-ponde , upon the pes °f advertisement and information of a Portugal : who in aic0 ' deed abuse our general and we , deserve a halter for his hire , if it have so please we . the 12. we anchor at guanima , and land . guanima . the 15. and 16. we anchor and land at Cyguateo . Cyguateo . the 20. we fall with the main of Florida . the 23. we be in great danger of a wrack on a breach call the cape of fear . the 24. we come to anchor in a harbour , where we catch in one tide so much fish as will have yield we twenty pound in London : this be our first land they land in in Florida . Florida . the 26. we come to anchor at Wocokon . the 29. we weigh anchor to bring the tiger into the harbour , where through the unskilfulness of the master who name be Fernando , the admiral strike on ground , and sink . the 3. we send word of our arrive at Wococon , to July . Wingina at Roanoak . the 6. m. John Arundel be send to the main , and Manteo with he : and captain Aubry and captain boniten the same day be send to croatoan , where they 315 find two of our man leave there with 30. other by captain Reymond , some 20. day before . the 8. captain Aubry and captain Boniten return , with two of our man find by they , to we at Wocokon . the 11. day the general accompany in his tilt boat with master John Arundel , master Stukley , and diverse other gentleman , master lane , master candish , master Hariot , and twenty other in the new pinnace , captain Amadas , captain Clarke , with ten other in a shipboat , Francis brook , and John white in another ship-boat , pass over the water from Wococon to the main land victual for eight day , in which voyage we first discover the town of pomejok , Aquascogoc and Secotan , and also the great lake call by the savage paquipe , with diverse other place , and so return with that discovery to our fleet . the 12. we come to the town of pomeiok . the 13. we pass by water to aquascogok . the 15. we come to Secotan , and be well entertain there of the savage . the 16. we return thence , and one of our boat with the admiral be send to aquascogok , to demand a silver cup which one of the savage have steal from we , and not receive it accord to his promise , we burn , and spoil their corn , and town , all the people be flee . the 18. we return from the discovery of Secotan , and the same day come aboard our fleet ride at Wococon . the 21. our fleet anker at Wococon , we weigh anchor for Hatoraske . the 27. our fleet anchor at Hatorask , and there we rest . the 29. Grangino brother to king Wingina come aboard the admiral , and Manteo with he . the 2. the admiral be send to weapomeiok . the 5. m. John Arundel be send for England . 316 the 25. our general weigh anchor , and set sail for England . about the 31. he take a spanish ship of 300 ton rich load , board she with a boat make with board of chest , which fall asunder , and sink at the ship side , assoon as ever he and his man be out of it . the 10. of September , by foul weather the general September . then ship in the prize , lose sight of the tiger . the 6. the tiger fall with the land end , and the October . same day come to anchor at Falmouth . the 18. the general come with the prize to Plymmouth , and be courteous receive by diverse of his worshipful friend . 