the three voyage of the Frenchman make by captain John Ribault unto Florida . the arrival of captain John Ribault at the fort the 28 of August 1565. s i be thus occupy in these conference , the wind and the tide serve well to set sail , which be the eight and twenty of August , at which instant captain Vasseur which command in one of my ship , and captain Verdier which be chief in the other , now ready to go forth , begin to descry certain sail at sea , whereof they advertise i with diligence : whereupon i appoint to arm forth a boat in good order to go to descry and know what they be . 1 send also to the centinel , which i cause to be keep on a little knap , to cause certain man to climb up to the top of the high tree the better to discover they . they descry the great boat of the ship , which as yet they can not perfect discern , which as far as they can judge , seem to chase my boat , which by this time be pass the bar of the river : so that we can not possible judge whether they be enemy which will have carry she away with they : for it be too great a ken to judge the truth thereof . upon this doubt i put my man in order and in such array as though they have be enemy : and indeed i have great occasion to mistrust the same : for my boat come unto their ship about two of the clock in the afternoon , and send i no news all that day long to put i out of doubt who they shall be . the next bay in the morning about eight or nine of the clock encage see seven boat ( among which i own be one ) full of soldier enter into the river , have every man his harquebus and morion on his head , which march all in battle along the cliff where my centinel be , to who they will make no kind of answer , notwithstanding all the demand that be make unto they , insomuch as one of my soldier be constrain to bestow a shot at they without do hurt nevertheless to any of they , by reason of the distance between he and the boat . the report hereof be make unto i , i place each of my man in his quarter , with full deliberation to defend our self , if they have be enemy , as in truth we think they to have be : likewise i cause the two small field-piece which i have leave i , to be trim in such sort , as if in approach to the fort they have not cry that it be captain Ribault , i have not fail to have discharge the same upon they . afterwards i understand that the cause why they enter in this manner , proceed of the false report false report which have be make unto my lord admiral by those which be return into France in the first ship . ofprmce 0 for they have put in his head , that i play the lord and the king , and that i will hardly suffer that any other save my self shall enter in thither to govern there . thus we see how the good name of the most honest be oftentimes assail by such , as have no mean to win themselves credit by virtuous and laudable endeavour , think by debase of other man virtue to augment the feeble force of their faint courage , which nevertheless be one of the most notable danger which the danger of vasif happen in a commonwealth , and chief among man of fbit . war which be place in government . for it be very hard , yea utter unpossible , that in govern of a company of man gather out of diverse place and sundry nation , and namely such as we know they to be in our war , it be , i say , unpossible , but there will be always some of evil condition and hard to be rule , which easy conceive a hatred against he , which by admonition and light correction endeavour to reduce they to the discipline of war . for they seek nothing else , but Alcibiades banish by backbiter . Laudonnieres receive of captain Ribault . the english voyage for a small occasion ground upon a light pretext to sound into the ear of great lord that which mischievous they have contrive against those , who execution of justice be odious unto they . and albeit i will not place my self in the rank of great and renown captain , such as live in time pass , yet we may judge by their example , how hurtful backbiter have be unto commonwealth . i will only take Alcibiades for witness in the commonwealth of the athenian , which by this mean be cast into banishment , whereupon his citizen feel the smart of a infinite number of mischief : insomuch as in the end they be constrain to call he home again , and acknowledge at length the fault they have commit in forget his good service , and rather believe a false report , then have have regard unto so many notable exploit which in former time he have achieve . but that i loose not my self in digress so far in this my justification , i will return again to my first course . be therefore advertise that it be captain Ribault , i go forth of the fort to go to meet he , and to do he all the honour i can by any mean , i cause he to be welcome with the artillery , and a gentle volley of my shot , whereunto he answer with he . afterwards be come on shore and receive honourable with joy , i bring he to my lodging , rejoice not a little because that in this company i know a good number of my friend , which i entreat in the best sort that i be able , with such victual as i can get in the country , and that small store which i have leave i , with that which i have of the english general . howbeit i marveil not a little when as all of they with one voice begin to utter unto i these or the like speech . my captain , we praise God that we have find you alive , and chief because we know , that the report which have be make of you , be false . Theise speech move i in such sort , that i will needs out of hand know more , mistrust some evil . wherefore have accost captain John Ribault , and go both of we aside together out of the fort , he signify unto i the charge which he have , pray i not to return into France , but to stay with he my self and my company , and assure i that he will make it well think of at home . whereupon i reply that out of this place i will do he all service : that for the present i can not nor ought not accept this offer , since he be come for no other intent then to occupy the place which i before possess , that i can have no credit to be there command : that my friend will never like of it , and that he will hardly give i that counsel , if in good earnest i shall demand his advice therein . he make i answer , that he will not command i , that we shall be companion , and that he will build another fortress , and that he will leave my own unto i . this notwithstanding i full advertise he that i can not receive a great comfort than the news which he bring i to return into France : and far that though i shall stay there , yet it must needs be that one of we both be to [ three . 351. ] command with title of the king lieutenant , that this can not well agree together : that i have rather have it cast in my tooth to be the poor beggar in the world , than to be command in that place , where i have endure so much to inhabit and plant there , if it be not by some great lord or knight of the order : and that in these respect i pray he very hearty to deliver i the letter which my lord admiral have write unto i , which he perform . 