 while i thus travail to purchase friend , and to practise one while with one here , a other while with another there , certain soldier of my company be suborn under hand by one name la Roquette of the country la coquette of Perigort , which put in their head that he be a great magician , and that by the secret of art-magicke he have discover a i of gold and silver far up within the river , whereby ( upon the loss of his life , ) every soldier shall receive in ready bullion the value of ten thousand crown , beside and above fifteen hundred thousand which shall be reserve for the king majesty : wherefore they ally themselves with la Roquette and another of his confederate , who name be le Genre , in who notwithstanding i have great affiance . This Genre exceed desirous to enrich monsieur de himself in those part , and seek to be revenge , Genre . because i will not give he the carriage of the Paquet into France , secret inform the soldier that be already suborn by la Roquette , that i will deprive they of this great gain , in that i do set they daily on work , not send they on every side to discover the country : therefore that it be a good deed , after they have make i understand so much , to seek mean to dispatch i out of the way , and to choose another captain in my place , if i will not give they victual accord to their disordinate appetite . he also bring genre mes-mee word hereof himself , make a large discourse unto i of the good affection of the soldier , which all be - soldier seek i that i will conduct they to the country name . where the mine be : i make he answer that all can his answer . not go thither , and that it be necessary before their departure to settle our fortress in such estate , that those which be to stay at home behind shall remain in security against the Indian which may surprise they . Furthermore , that their manner of proceed seem strange unto i , for that they imagine , that the king majesty be at the charge of our voyage for none other end , but only to enrich they at their first arrival , in as much as they show themselves much more give unto covetousness , then unto the service of their prince : but see my answer tend unto none other end but to make our fortress strong and defensible , they determine to travail in the work , and make a ensign of old linen , which ordinary they bear upon the rampart when they go to work , always wear their weapon , which i think they have do to encourage themselves to work the better . but as i perceive afterward , and that by the confession of Genre send i in letter which he write to i of that matter , these gentle soldier do they same for hislieutenant . none other end , but to have kill i , and my lieutenant also , if by chance i have give they any hard speech . about the twenty of September , as i come home from the wood and coppicde to finish the build of my fort , ( and that accord to my usuali manner , i march first to give encouragement unto my soldier ) i chafe my self in such sort , that i fall into a sore and grievous sickness , whereof i think i shall have laudonnier die : during which sickness , i call le Genre often sickness . unto i , as one that i trust above all other , and of who conspiracy i doubt not any whit at all . in this mean while assemble his complice , sometime in his chamber and sometime in the wood to consult with they , he speak unto they to choose another captain beside i , to the intent to put i to death : but be not able by open force to execute his mis-^ “ ot^carie c^^eYous intention , he gate he unto my apothecary [ ih . 333^ ] pray he instant to mingle in my medicine , which ‘ ’ i be to receive one or two day after , some drug that shall make i pitch over the perch , or at the least that he will give he a little Arsenike or quick silver , which he himself will put into my drink . but the apothecary deny he , as do in like manner master saint which be master of the firework . thus the master of whole disappoint of both his mean , he with certain the firework . other resolve to hide a little barrel of gunpowder underneath my bed , and by a train to set it on fire . upon these practise a gentleman which i have dispatch to return into France , be about to take his leave of i , advertise i , that Genre have give he a book full of all kind of lewd invective and slander against i , against monsieur de Ottigny , and against the principal of my company : upon which occasion i assemble all my soldier together , and captain captain Bourdet with all he , which on the four of September Bourdet ar-arrived in the road , and be come into our river . in their presence encage cause the content of the book to ofsepteml£ ' bee read aloud , that they may bear record of the untruth that be write against i . Genre , which have get he into the wood for fear of be take , ( where he live for a while after with the savage by my permission , ) write unto i often , and in many of his letter confess unto i , that he have deserve death , condemn himself so farrefoorth , that he refer all to my mercy and pity . the seven or eight day of November , after i have the 4. voyage cause sufficient provision of such victual as be need - 7 - ofno-full to be make , i send two of my man , to wit , la vember-Roche Ferriere , and a other toward king utina , to discover every day more and more of the country : where he be the space of five or six month , during which he discover many small village , and among other one name Hostaqua , the king whereof be Hostaqua a desirous of my friendship , send unto i a quiver make village . of a lusern skin ne full of arrow , a couple of bow , four or five skin paint after their manner , and a chain of silver weigh about a pound weight . in recompense of which present i send he two whole suit of apparel , with certain cut hook or hatchet . after these thing therefore in this sort pass , about the ten of this month , captain Bourdet determine to leave i and to return into France . than i request he , yea rather be exceed importunate with he , to carry home with he some six or seven soldier , who i can not trust by any mean : which he do for my sake , and will not charge himself with Genre , which offer he a great sum of money , if it will please he to carry he into France : he transport he only to the other side of the river . one of his three day after his departure thirteen mariner which bark steal j bad bring out of France , suborn by certain other “ Mariners* mariner which captain Bourdet have leave i , steal away my bark in manner follow . Theise mariner of captain Bourdet put i in the head , that if they have such bark as i be , they may gain very much in the isle of the Antilles , and make a exceed profitable voyage . hereupon they begin to devise how they may steal away my bark , and consult that when i shall command they to go unto they the village of village of Sarauahi distant about a league and a half Sarauahi . from our fort , and situate upon a arm of the river , ( whither accord to my manner i send they daily to seek clay , to make brick and mortar for our house ) they will return no more , but will furnish themselves with victual as well as they may possible : and then will embark themselves all in one vessel , another of he and will go their way : as indeed they do . and bark steal jbat which be worse , two flemish carpenter , which “ carpenter ? sa^e B°urdet have leave i , steal away the other ’ bark , and before their departure cut the cable of the bark , and of the shipboate , that it may go away with the tide , that i may not pursue they : so that i remain without either bark or boat , which fall out as unlucky for i as be possible . for 1 be ready to embark my self with all speed , to discover as far up our river , as i may by any mean . now my mariner , ( as i understand afterward ) take a bark that be a passenger of the Spaniard near the isle of Cuba , wherein they find a certain quantity of gold and silver , which they seize upon . and of these have this booty they lie a while at sea , until . their victual begin to fail they : which be the betray cause , that oppress with famine they come unto his own counHavana the principali town of the isle of Cuba : trey man to the whereupon proceed that mischief which hereafter i Spaniards , and will declare more at large . when i see my bark return not at their wont hour , and suspect that which fall out in deed , i command my carpenter with all diligence to make a little boat with a flat bottom , to search those river for some news of these mariner . the boat dispatch within a day and a night , by reason that my carpenter find plank and timber ready saw to their hand , as common i cause my Sawyers to provide it , i send man to seek some news of my thief : but all be in vain . therefore i determine to cause two great at Saw-mill bark to be build , each of which may be thirty five , necessary here . or thirty six foot long in the keel . and now the work be very well forward which [ three . 334. ] i set my workman about , when ambition and avarice , the mother of all mischief , take root in the heart of four or five soldier which can not away with the work and pain take : and which from hence forward ( namely one Fourneaux , and one la Croix , and thethirde another call Steven le Geneuois , the three principali sedition . author of the sedition ) begin to practise with the best of my troop , show they that it be a vile thing for man of honest parentage , as they be , to moil themselves thus with abject and base work , see they have the best occasion of the world offer they to make themselves all rich : which be to arm the two bark which be in building , and by Peru the french mean the coast of Carthagena and number de Dios. the captain charge at his set forth . the english voyage to furnish they with good man : and then to sail unto Peru , and the other isle of the Antilles , where every soldier may easy enrich himself with ten thousand crown . and if their enterprise shall be mislike withal in France , they shall be always able , by reason of the great wealth that they shall gain , to retire themselves into Italy , until the heat be overpass , and that in the mean season some war will fall out , which will cause all this to be quite forget . this word of riches sound so well in the ear of my soldier , that in fine , after they have oftentimes consult of their affair , they grow to the number of threescore and six : which to colour their great desire which they have to go on steal , they cause a request to be present unto i by Francis de la caille sergeant of my company , contain in sum a declaration of the small store of victual that be leave to maintain we , until the time that ship may return from France : for remedy whereof they think it necessary to send to new Spain , Peru , and all the isle adjoin , which they beseech i to be content to grant . but i make they answer , that when the bark be finish , i will take such good order in general , that by mean of the king merchandise , without spare my own apparel , we will get victual of the inhabitant of the country : see also that we have enough to serve we for four month to come . for i fear great , that under pretence of search victual , they will enterprise somewhat against the king of Spain subject , which in time to come may just be lay to my charge , consider that at our departure out of France , the queen have charge i very express , to do no kind of wrong to the king of Spain subject , nor any thing whereof he may conceive any jealousy . they make as though they be content with this 40 answer . but eight day after , as i continue in work upon our fort , and on my bark , i fall sick . than my seditious companion forget all honour and duty , suppose that they have find good occasion to execute their rebellious enterprise , begin to practise afresh their former design , handle their business so well , during my sickness , that they open vow that they will seize on the corpse de guard , and on the fort , yea , and force i also , if i will not consent unto their wicked desire . my lieutenant be hereof advertise , come and tell i that he suspect some evil practice : and the next day in the morning i be salute at my gate with man in complete harness , what time my soldier be about to play i a shrewd trick : then i send to seek a couple of gentleman who i most trust , which bring i word that the soldier be determine to come to i to make a request unto i : but i tell they that this be not the fashion to present a request unto a captain in this manner , and therefore they shall send some few unto i to signify unto i what they will have . hereupon the five chief author of the sedition arm with corslet , their pistol in their hand already bend , press into my chamber , say unto i , that they will go to new Spain to seek their adventure . than i warn they to be well advise what they mean to do : but they forthwith reply , that they be full advise already , and that i must grant they this request . see then ( quoth i ) that i be enforce to do it , i will send captain Vasseur and my sergeant , which will make answer and give i a account of every thing that shall be do in this voyage : and to content you , i think it good that you take one man out of every chamber , that they may accompany captain Vasseur and my sergeant . whereupon , blaspheme the name of God , they answer that they must go thither : and that there 41 A.D. [ 564. lack nothing , but that i shall deliver they the armour which i have in my custody , for fear least i may use they to their disadvantage ( be so villan-ously abuse by they : ) wherein notwithstanding i will not yield unto they . but they take all by force , and carry it out of my house , yea and after they have hurt a gentleman in my chamber , which speak against their do , they lay hand on i , and carry i very sick , as i be , prisoner into a ship which ride at anchor in the midst of the Laudonniere river , wherein i be the space of fifteen day , ft " attend upon with one man only without permission owne^uldiers . f°r any my servant to come to visit i : from every one of who , as also from the rest that take my part , they take away their armour . and they send i a passport to sign , tell i plain [ three . 335. ] after i have deny they , that if i make any difficulty , they will all come and cut my throat in the ship . thus be i constrain to sign their passport , and Trenchanta forthwith to grant they certain mariner , with tren-skilfull pilot . c } ! of|it a honest and skilful pilot when the bark be finish , they arm they with the king munition , with powder , with bullet , and artillery , asmuch as they need , and choose one of my sergeant for their captain , name Bertrand conferrent , and for their ensign one name la Croix . they compel captain Vasseur to deliver they the flag of his ship . then have determine to sail unto a place of the Antilles call leauguave , belong unto the king of Spain , and there to go on land on Christmas night , with intention to enter into the church while the mass be say after midnight , and to murder all those that they find there , they set sail the eight of December . but because the great part of they by this time repent they of their enterprise , and that now they begin to fall into mutiny among themselves , when they come forth of the mouth of the river , the two bark divide themselves ; the one keep along the coast unto Cuba , to double the cape more easy , and the other go right forth to pass athwart the isle of Lucaya : by reason whereof they meet not until six week after their departure . during which time the bark that take her way along the coast , wherein one of the chief conspirator name de Orange be captain , and trenchant his pilot , near unto a place call Archaha , take a brigantine lade with a certain quantity of Cassavi , cassavi , bread which be a kind of bread make of root , and yet make of root . nevertheless be very white , and good to eat , and some little wine , which be not without some loss of their man : for in one assault that the inhabitant of Archaha make upon they , two of their man be take , to wit , Steven Gondeau , and one name grand Pr£ , beside two more that be slay in the place , namely Nicolas master and doublet : yet nevertheless they take the brigantine , wherein they put all their stuff that be in their own bark , because it be of great burden and better of sail then their own . afterwards they sail right unto the cape of Santa Maria near to leauguave , where they go on land to calk and bray their ship which have a great leak . in this mean baracouavil-while they resolve to sail to Baracou , which be a vil - luge in the isle lage of the isle of Jamaica : where at their arrival they °f^amaica-found a caravel of fifty or threescore ton burden , which they take without any body in it : and after they have make good cheer in the village the space of five or six day , they embark themselves in it , leave their second ship : than they return to the cape of Tiburon , the cape of where they meet with a patach , which they take by Tiburon . force after a long conflict . in this patach the governor the governor of Jamaica be take , with great store of riches , aswell of of Jamaica gold and silver as of merchandise and wine , and many taken-oth thing ; wherewith our seditious companion not content , determine to seek more in their caravel , and their governor of Jamaica also . after they be come to Jamaica , they miss of another caravel which do save it self in the haven . the governor be fine and subtle , see himself bring unto the place which he desire and where he command , obtain so much by his fair word , that they which have take he let he put two little boy which be take with he into a little cock boat , and send they to his wife into the village , to advertise she that she shall make provision of victual to send unto he . but in stead of write unto his wife , he speak unto the boy secret that with all diligence she shall send the vessel that be in the haven near that place to succour and rescue he . which she do so cunning , that on a morning about the break of the day , as our seditious companion be at the haven mouth ( which reach above two league up malguallre a within the land ) there come out of the haven a malgualire kind of vessel which make sail both forward and backward , and then two great ship , which may be each of they off fourscore or a hundred ton a piece , with good store of ordinance , and well furnish with man : at who come our mutinous fellow be surprise , be not able to see they when they come , aswell because of the darkness of the weather , as also by reason of the length of the haven , consider also they mistrust nothing . true it be that five or six and twenty that be in the brigantine discover these ship when they be near they , which see themselves press for want of leisure to weigh their anchor , cut their cable , and the trumpeter which be in it advertise the rest : whereupon the Spaniard see themselves descry , discharge a volley of canon shoot against the french man , which they follow by the space of three league , and recover their own ship : the brigantine which escape away , pass in the sight of the cape des Aigrettes , and the cape of S. Anthony situate in the isle of Cuba , and from thence pass within the sight of Havana ; but trenchant their pilot , and the trumpeter , and certain other mariner of this brigantine , which be lead away by force in this voyage ( as elsewhere we have declare ) desire nothing 44 the cape of S. Antony in Cuba . Havana . more than to return to i : wherefore these man agree together ( if peradventure the wind serve they well ) to pass the channel of Bahama , while their seditious come - the channel of panion be asleep : which they do accomplish with Bahama . such good success , that in the morning towards the break £111 . 336. ] of the day about the five and twenty of march they arrive upon the coast of Florida : where know the fault which they have commit , in a kind of mockery they counterfeit the judge : but they play not this prank until they have tipple well of the wine which remain yet in their prize . one counterfeit the judge , another present my person : one other after he have hear the matter plead , conclude thus : make you your cause as good as it please you , but if when you come to the fort Caroline the captain cause you not to be hang , i will never take he for a honest man : other think that my choler be pass , i will easy forget this matter . their sail be no soon descry upon our coast , but the king of the place name patica , dwell eight league distant from our fort , and king patica . be one of our good friend , send a Indian to advertise i that he have descry a ship upon the coast , and that he think it be one of our nation . hereupon the the return of brigantine oppress with famine , come to a anchor at the fart oflau-mouth of the river of May , when at the first blush we donnleressedi-thought they have be ship come from France ; which Aous sou iers ' give we occasion of great joy : but after i have cause she to be better view , i be advertise that they be our seditious companion that be return . therefore i send they word by captain Vasseur and my sergeant , that they shall bring up their brigantine before the fortress : which they promise to do . now there be not above two league distance from the mouth of the river where they cast anchor unto the fortress . the next day i send the same captain and sergeant with thirty soldier , because i see they much delay their come . than they bring they : and because certain of they have swear at their departure , that they will never come again within the fort , i be well please they shall keep their oath . for this purpose i wait for they at the river mouth , where i make my bark to be build , and command my sergeant to bring the four chief author of the mutiny on shore ; who i cause immediately to be put in fetter : for my meaning be not to punish the rest , consider that they be suborn , and because my council express assemble for this purpose have conclude that these four only shall die , to serve for a example to the rest . in the same place i make a oration unto they in this manner . Laudonnieres a JY friend , you know the cause why our king send ' muthtw oul we unto country ; you know that he be our jurs ’ natural prince , who we be bind to obey accord to the commandment of God , in such sort , that we ought neither to spare our good nor life to do those thing that concern his service : you know , or at least you can be ignorant , that beside this general and natural obligation , you have this also join thereunto , that in receive of he reasonable pay and wage , you be bind to follow those who he have establish over you to be your governor , and to command you in his name , have for this purpose give he a oath of fidelity , which you can by any mean revoke for any fair appearance which you have to do the contrary : for this be reason , that see you live upon his charge on this condition , ( this be reason i say ) that you shall be faithful unto he . notwithstanding you have have more regard unto your unbridle affection then unto virtue , which invite you to the observance of your oath , in such sort that be become contemners of all honesty , you have pass your bond , and think that all thing be lawful for you . whereupon it be fall out , that while you think to escape the justice of man , you can not avoid the judgement of God , which as a thing by no mean to be avoid have lead you , and in spite of you have make you to arrive in this place , to make you confess 46 how true his judgement be , and that he never suffer so foul a fault to escape unpunished . after that i have use unto they these or the like speech , follow that which we have agree upon in council , in respect of the crime which they have commit , aswell against the king majesty as against i which be their captain , i command that they shall be hang . see therefore that there be no start hole , nor mean at all to save themselves from this arrest , they take themselves unto their prayer : yet one of the four , think to raise a mutiny among my soldier , say thus unto they : what , brethren and companion , will you suffer we to die so shameful ? And take the word out of his mouth , i say unto he , that they be not companion of author of sedition and rebel unto the king service . hereupon the soldier beseech i not to hang they , but rather let they be shoot through , and then afterward , if i think good , their body may be hang upon certain gibbet along the haven mouth : which i cause present to be put in execution . Loe here what be the end of my mutinous soldier , without which i have always live peaceable , and enjoy the good desire which i have to make a happy and quiet voyage . but because 1 have speak of nothing but their accident and adventure which happen unto they after their departure , without make any mention of our fort , i will return to the matter from which i digress , to declare that which fall out after their departure . first i begin to consider to the end i may confirm and make my self more constant in my affliction , that these murmurer can not ground their sedition upon want of victual : for from the time of our arrival , every soldier daily unto this day , and beside until the eight and twenty of February , have a loaf of bread weigh two and twenty ounce . again i recount with my self that all new conquest by sea or by land be ordinary trouble with rebellion , which be A.D. 1565. the sentence of death . execution . [ Iii . 337 - ] the continuation of the history . new conquest subject to re - . , . r „ . r , - - bellionsand easy to be raise , aswell ! in respect or the distance of mutiny . place , as in respect of the hope that the soldier have to make their profit , as we may be well inform both by ancient history and also by the trouble which late happen unto Christopher Columbus , after his first discovery , to Francis Pizarro , and Diego de Almagro in Peru , and to Fernando Cortes . a hundred thousand other thing come unto my mind , to encourage and confirm i . my lieutenant Ottigny , and my sergeant of my band come to seek i in the ship , where i be prisoner , and carry i from thence in a bark assoon Laudonniere as our rebel be depart . after i be come unto set thing the fort , i cause all my company that remain , to be ismurne^ut assemble in the midst of the place before the corpse de of prison to the guard , and declare unto they the fault which they fort . that have forsake we have commit , pray they to bear they in memory , to bear witness thereof when need shall require . forthwith i ordain new captain to command the troop ; and prescribe they a order , accord whereunto they be to govern themselves from thence forward , and to enter into their watch : for the great part of the soldier , of who i have the best opinion , be go away with they . my declaration end , they promise i all with one accord to obey i most humble , and to do whatsoever i shall command they , though it be to die at my foot for the king service ; wherein assure they never after fail : so that i dare say , after the departure of my mutinous companion i be as well obey as ever be captain in place where he command . the next day after my return unto the fort , i assemble my man together again , to declare unto they that our fort be not yet finish , and that it be needful that all of we shall put thereto our help hand , to assure our self against the Indian : wherein have willing agree unto i , they raise 0 it all with turf from the gate unto the river which be the Westside on the west side - this do , i set my carpenter on of the fort . work to make another bark of the same bigness that Fcuiddus mtadcus num Laudzonerus aide s' Florida , repnorunt conprendzc ^dmerica quar nunc ( jduid minimum cvius Francis dirt eat ydbadtumy . ' ferfida quern si non sociorum turpiter ho's'ti cedcdio prodp^ec ( cvius tamen , omnibus vltis , Flapsus maxibus ) quas , qualia . , quantapatraflem t Rene Laudonniere the other be of : i command the Sawyers that they shall prepare plank , the smith to prepare iron and nail , and certain other to make coal : so that the bark be finish in eighteen day . afterwards i make another lesser than the first , the better to discover up the river .