. as each of we be much torment in mind with these or such like cogitation , the three of August dig . 1565. i descry four sail in the sea , as i walk upon a little hill , whereof i be exceed well pay : i send immediate one of they which be with i to advertise those of the fort thereof , which be so glad of those news , that one will have think they to be out of their wit to see they laugh and leap for joy . after these ship have cast anchor , we descry that they send one of their ship boat to land : whereupon i cause one of i to be arm with diligence to send to meet they , and to know who they be . in the mean while , fear lest they be Spaniards , i set my soldier in order and in readiness , attend the return of captain Vasseur and my lieutenant , which where go to meet they , which bring i word that they be Englishman : and in [ three . 348 - ] truth they have in their company one who name be Martine Atinas of diepe , which at that time be in their service , which on the behalf of master John Hawkins their general come to request i that i Hawkins you will suffer they to take fresh water , whereof they Qgnerau . stand in great need , signify unto i that they have be above fifteen day on the coast to get some . he bring unto i from the general two flagon of wine , and bread make of wheat : which great refresh i , forasmuch as for seven month space i never taste a drop of wine : nevertheless it be all divide among the great part of my soldier . This Martine Atinas have guide the Englishman unto our coast , wherewith he be acquaint : for in the year 1562 he come thither with i , and therefore the general scent he to i . therefore after i have grant his request , he signify the same unto the general , which the next day follow cause one of his small ship to enter into the river , and come to see i in a great shipboate , accompany with gentle - man honourable apparel , yet unarm . he send for great store of bread and wine , to distribute thereof to every one : on my part i make he the best cheer sheep and i can possible , and cause certain sheep and poultry ^int^flofida^ to be kill , which until this present i have careful ' preserve hope to store the country withal . for notwithstanding all the necessity and sickness that happen unto i , i will not suffer so much as one chicken to be kill : by which mean in a short time i have gather together above a hundred pullet . now three day pass , while the english general remain with i , during which time the Indian come in from all part to see he , and ask i whether he a advantage be my brother : i tell they he be so , and signify wise take . unto that he be come to see i and aid i with so great store of victual , that from thence forward i shall have no need to take any thing of they . the bruit hereof incontinent be spread over all the country , in such sort as ambassador come unto i from all part , which on the behalf of the king their master desire to make alliance with i : and even they , which before seek to make war against i , come to offer their friendship and service unto i : whereupon i receive they and gratify they with certain present . the general immediate understand the desire and urgent occasion which i have to return into France : whereupon he offer to transport i and all my company home : whereunto notwithstanding i will not agree , be in doubt upon what occasion he make so large a offer . for i know not how the case stand between the french and the english : and although he promise i on his faith to put i on the trench land in France , before he will touch in England , yet mistrust that j stand jn doubt lest he will attempt somewhat in { man will ' Fkrida in the name of his mistress . wherefore i flat plant in refuse his offer : whereupon there arise a great mutiny Florida . among my soldier , which say that i seek to destroy they all , and that the brigandine , whereof i speak before , 78 be not sufficient to transport they , consider the season of the year wherein we be . the bruit and mutiny increase more and more : for after that the general be return to his ship , he tell certain gentleman and soldier which go to see he , partly to make good cheer with he , he declare , i say unto they , that he great doubt that hardly we shall be able to pass safe in those vessel which we have : and that in case we shall enterprise the same , we shall no doubt be in great jeopardy : notwithstanding , if i be so content , he will transport part of my man in his ship , and that he will leave i a small ship to transport the rest . the soldier be no soon come home , but they signify the offer unto their companion , which incontinent consent together that in case i will not accept the same , they will embark themselves with he and forsake i , so that he will receive they accord to his promise . they therefore assemble themselves all together and come to seek i in my chamber , and signify unto i their intention , whereunto i promise to answer within one hour after . in which mean space i gather together the principali member of my company , which after i have break the matter with they , answer i all with one voice , that i ought not to refuse this offer , nor contemn the occasion which present it self , and that they can not think evil of it in France , if be forsake , as we be , we aid our self with such mean as God have send we . after sundry debating of this matter , in conclusion i give my advice , that we ought to deliver he the price of the ship which he be to leave we , and that for my part i be content to give he the best of my stuff , and the silver which i have gather silver find in the country . whereupon notwithstanding it be ™ determine that i shall keep the silver , for fear lest the queen of England see the same , shall the rather note . be encourage to set foot there , as before she have desire : that it be far better to carry it into France the great importance of this enterprise . [ HL 349 - ] the great humanity and bounty of master John Hawkins to the french . the english voyage to give encouragement unto our prince not to leave off a enterprise of so great importance for our commonwealth , and that see we be resolve to depart , it be far better to give he our artillery , which otherwise we shall be constrain to leave behind we , or to hide it in the ground by reason of the weakness of our man , be not able to embark the same . this point be thus conclude and resolve on , i go my self unto the english general , accompany with my lieutenant , and captain Vasseur , captain Verdier , and trenchant the pilot , and my sergeant , all man of experience in such affair and know sufficient how to drive such a bargain . we therefore take a view of the ship which the general will sell , who we draw to such reason , that he be content to stand to my own man judgement , who esteem it to be worth seven hundred crown , whereof we agree very friendly . wherefore i deliver he in earnest of the sum , two bastard , two minion , one thousand of iron , and one thousand of powder . this bargain thus make , he consider the necessity wherein we be , have for all our sustenance but mill and water : whereupon be move with pity , he offer to relieve i with 20 barrel of meal , six pipe of bean , one hogshead of salt , and a hundred of wax to make candle . Moreover forasmuch as he see my soldier go barefoot , he offer i beside fifty pair of shoe , which i accept and agree of a price with he , and give he a bill of my hand for the same , for which until this present i be indebt to he . he do more than this : for particular he bestow upon my self a great jar of oil , a jar of vinegar , a barrel of olive , and a great quantity of rice , and a barrel of white biscuit . beside he give diverse present to the principali officer of my company accord to their quality : so that i may say that we receive as many courtesy of the general , as it be possible to receive of any man live . wherein doubtless he have win the reputation of a good and charitable man , deserve to be esteem asmuch of we all as if he have save all our life . incontinent after his departure i spare the departure no pain to hasten my man to make biscuit of the meal which he have leave i , and to hoop my cask ‘ to take in water needful for the voyage . a man may well think what diligence we use , in respect of the great desire we have to depart , wherein we continue so well , that the fifteen day of August the biscuit , the August it , . great part of our water , and all the soldier stuff be bring aboard : so that from that day forward we do nothing but stay for good wind to drive we into France : which have free we from a infinite number of mischief which afterward we suffer , if they have come as we desire : but it be not God good pleasure , as shall appear hereafter . be thus in a readiness to set sail , we bethink our self that it will do well to bring certain man and woman of the country into France , to the end that if this voyage shall be take in hand again they may declare unto their king the greatness of our king , the excellency of our prince , the goodness of our country , and the manner of live of the Frenchman : and that they may also learn our language , to serve our turn thereby in time to come . wherein i take so good order , that i find mean to bring away with i the goodly person of all the country , if our intention have succeed as i hope they will have do . in the mean season the king my neighbour come often to see and visit i : which , after that they understand that i will return into France , demand of i whether i mean to return again or no , and whether it shall be in short time . i signify unto they that within ten moon ( so they thefloridians call their month ) i will visit they again with measure their such force , that i will be able to make they conquerors over all their enemy . they pray i that the moon . i will leave they my house , that i will forbid my soldier to beat down the fort and their lodge - ix 81 f ing , and that i will leave they a boat to aid they withal in their war against their enemy . which i make as though i will grant unto they , to the end i may always remain their friend until my last departure . 