the voyage make by m. John Hawkins esquire , [ hl 501. ] and afterward knight , captain of the Jesus of Lubek , one of her majesty ship , and generali of the Salomon , and other two bark go in his company , to the coast of Guinea , and the Indies of Nova Hispania , begin in An. Dom. 1564. Aster John Hawkins with the Jesus of Lubek , a ship of 700. and the Salomon a ship of 140. the tiger a bark of 50. and the swallow of 30. ton , be all well furnish with man to the number of one hundred threescore and ten , as also with ordinance and victuali requisite for such a voyage , depart out of Plymmouth the 18. day of October , in the year of our lord 1564. October 18. with a prosperous wind : at which depart , in cut the foresail , a marvelous misfortune happen to one of the officer in the ship , who by the pully of the sheet be slay out of hand , be a sorrowful beginning to they all . and after their set out ten league to the sea , he meet the same day with the minion a ship of the minion , queen majesty , whereof be captain David carlet , and also her consort the John baptist of London , be merune bind bind to Guinea also , who hail one the other after far guinea . the custom of the sea with certain piece of ordinance for joy of their meeting : which do , the minion depart from he to seek her other consort the Merlin of London , which be a stern out of sight , leave in m. Hawkins company the John Baptist her other consort . thus sail forward on their way with a prosperous wind until the 21. of the same month , at that time a great storm arise , the wind be at Northeast about nine a clock in the night , and continue so 23. hour together , in which storm m. Hawkins lose the company 9 good order for a fleet in a long voyage . a dreadful mischance by fire . the english voyage of the John Baptist aforesaid , and of his pinnace call the swallow , his other 3. ship be sore beat with a storm . the 23. day the swallow to his not small rejoice , come to he again in the night , 10. league to the northward of cape Finister , he have put roomer , not be able to double the cape , in that there rise a contrary wind at Southwest . the 25. the wind continue contrary , he put into a place in Galicia , call Ferroll , where he remain five day , and appoint all the master of his ship a order for the keep of good company in this manner : the small ship to be always ahead and aweather of the Jesus , and to speak twice a day with the Jesus at least : if in the day the ensign be over the poop of the Jesus , or in the night two light , then shall all the ship speak with she : if there be three light aboard the Jesus , then do she cast about : if the weather be extreme , that the small ship can keep company with the Jesus , than all to keep company with the Salomon , and forthwith to repair to the hand of Teneriffe , to the northward of the road of sirroes ; if any happen to any misfortune then to show two light , and to shoot off a piece of ordinance . if any lose company , and come in sight again , to make three yaw , and strike the Myson three time : serve God daily , love one another , preserve your victual , beware of fire , and keep good company . the 26. day the minion come in also where he be , for the rejoice whereof he give they certain piece of ordinance , after the courtesy of the sea for their welcome : but the minion man have no mirth , because of their consort the Merline , who at their departure from master Hawkins upon the coast of England they go to seek , and have meet with she , keep company two day together , and at last by misfortune of fire ( through the negligence of one of their gunner ) the powder in the gunner room be set on fire , which with the first blast strike out her poop , and therewithal ! lose three man , beside many sore burn ( which escape by the brigan-io dine be at her stern ) and immediady , to the great loss of the owner , and most horrible sight to the beholder , she sink before their eye . the 20. day of the month m. Hawkins with his consort and company of the minion , have now both the brigandine at her stern , weigh anchor , and set sail on their voyage , have a prosperous wind thereunto . the four of November they have sight of the hand of Madera , and the sixth day of Teneriffe , which they think to have be the canary , in that they suppose themselves to have be to the eastward of Teneriffe , and be not : but the minion be three or four league ahead of we , keep on her course to Teneriffe , have better sight thereof then the other have , and by that mean they part company . for m. Hawkins and his company go more to the west , upon which course have sail a while , he espy another hand , which he think to be Teneriffe , and be not able by mean of the fog upon the hill , to discern the same , nor yet to fetch it by night , go roomer until the morning , be the seven of November , which as yet he can not discern , but sail along the coast the [ m . 502. ] space of two hour , to perceive some certain mark of Teneriffe , and find no likelihood thereof at all , account that to be , as it be in deed , than he of the lie of palm : and so sail forward , espy another hand pflmes-called Gomera , and also Teneriffe , with the which he make , and sail all night , come in the morning the next day to the port of Adecia , where he find his pinnace which have depart from he the sixth of the month , be in the weather of he , and espy the pike of Teneriffe all a high , bear thither . at his arrival somewhat before he come to anchor , he hoist out his ship pinnace row a shore , intend to have send one with a letter to Peter de ponte , one of the governor of the hand , who dwell a league from the shore : but as he pretend to have land , sudden there appear upon the two point of the road , man level of base and harquebus to they , with diverse other to the number of fourscore , with halberd , pike , sword and target , which happen so contrary to his expectation , that it do great amaze he , and the more , because he be now in their danger , not know well how to avoid it without some mischief . wherefore he determine to call to they for the better appease of the matter , declare his name , and profess himself to be a especial friend to Peter de ponte , and that he have sundry thing for he which he great desire . and in the mean time , while he be thus talk with they , whereby he make they to hold their hand , he will the mariner to row away , so that at last he get out of their danger : and then ask for Peter de ponte , one of his son be signior Nicolas de Ponte , come forth , who he perceive , desire to put his man aside , and he himself will leap a shore and common with he , which they do : so that after communication have between they of sundry thing , and of the fear they both have , master Hawkins desire to have certain necessary provide for he . in the mean space , while these thing be provide , he trim the main mast of the Jesus which in the storm aforesaid be spring : here he sojourn 7. day , refresh himself and his man . Santa Cruz. in the which time Peter de ponte dwell at saint Cruz , a city 20. league off , come to he , and give he as gentle a brief de - entertainment as if he have be his own brother . to scription of the speak somewhat of these hand , be call in old commodity of f t , c . , ’ s - , n • . • the Canarie time insulae fortunatae , by the mean of the nourish hand . thereof , the fruitfulness of they do sure exceed far all other that i have hear of : for they make wine better than any in Spain , they have grape of such bigness , that they may be compare to damson , and in taste inferior to none : for sugar , sucket , raisin of the sun , and many other fruit , abundance : for rosine and raw silk , there be great store , they want neither corn , pullet , cattle , nor yet wild foul : they have many camel also , which be young , be eat of the people for victual , and be old , they be use for carriage of necessary : who property be as he be teach to kneel at the take of his load , and unlade again : he nature be to engender backward contrary to other beast : of understanding very good , but of shape very deform , with a little belly , long misshape leg , and foot very broad of flesh , without a hoof , all whole , save the great toe , a back bear up like a molehill , a large and thin neck , with a little head , with a bunch of hard flesh , which nature have give he in his breast to lean upon . this beast live hardly , and be content with straw and stubble , but of force strong , be well able to carry 500 weight . in one of these hand call Fierro , there be by Fierro . the report of the inhabitant , a certain tree that rain continual , by the drop whereof the inhabitant and cattle be satisfy with water , for other water have they none in all the hand . and it rain in such abundance , that it be incredible unto a man to believe such a virtue to be in a tree , but it be know to be a divine matter , and a thing ordain by God , at who power therein we ought not to marvel , see he do by his providence as we read in the scripture , when the child of Israel be go into the land of promise , feed they with manna from heaven , for the space of 40. year . of the tree aforesaid we see in guinie many , be of great tree dropheight , drop continual , but not so abundant as ™ ater tn the other , because the leaf be narrow , and be like mme ' the leaf of a pear tree . about these hand be certain flit hand , which have be oftentimes see , and when man approach near they , they vanish : as the like have be of these hand now know by the report of the inhabitant , which be not find of long time one after the other : and therefore it shall seem he be not yet bear to who God have appoint the find of they . in this hand of Teneriffe there be a hill call the pike , because it be pike , which be in heighth by the pike of their report twenty league , have both winter and teneriffe-summer abundance of snow in the top of it : this pike cape Blanco . the english voyage may be see in a clear day fifty league off , but it show as though it be a black cloud a great heighth in the element . i have hear of none to be compare with this in heighth , but in the India i have see many , and in my judgement not inferior to the pike , and so the Spaniard write . the 15. of November at night we depart from Teneriffe , and the 20. of the same we have sight of ten caravel , that be fish at sea , with who we will have speak , but they fear we , flee into a place of Barbary , call Cape de las barbas . the twenty , the ship pinnace with two man in she , sail by the ship , be overthrow by the oversight of they that go in she , the wind be so great , that before they be espy , and the ship have cast about for they , she be drive half a league to leeward of the pinnace , and have lose sight of she , so that there be small hope of recovery , have not God help and the captain diligence be , who have well mark which way the pinnace be by the sun , appoint 24 of the lusty rower in the great boat , to row to the windward , and so recover , contrary to all man expectation , both the pinnace and the man sit upon the keel of she . the 25 he come to cape Blanco , which be upon the coast of Africa , and a place where the Portugal do ride , that fish there in the month of November especial , and be a very good place of fish , for pargoe , Mullet , and dog fish . in this place the Portugal have no hold for their defence , but have rescue of the barbarian , who they entertain as their soldier , for the time of their be there and for their fish upon that coast of Africa , do pay a certain tribute to the king of the moor . the people of that part of Africa be tawny , have long hair without any apparel , save before their privy member . their weapon in war be bow and arrow . the 26 we depart from saint Avis bay , within cape Blanco , where we refresh our self with fish , 14 and other necessary : and the 29 we come to cape cape Verde Verde , which lie in 14 degree , and a half . Theise in h degree . people be all black , and be call negro , without any apparel , save before their privity : of stature goodly man , and well like by reason of their food , which pass all other guyneans for kine , goat , pullin , rise , fruit , and fish . here we take fish with head like cony , and tooth nothing vary , of a jolly thickness , but not past a foot long , and be not to be eat without flay or cut off his head . to speak somewhat of the sundry sort of these guyneans : the people of cape Verde be call Leophares , and Leophares . count the goodly man of all other , save the congo , which do inhabit on this side the cape de buena esperanza . Theise Leophares have war against the leloffe , which be borderer by they : their weapon be bow and arrow , target , and short dagger , dart also , but vary from other negro : for whereas the other use a long dart to fight with in their hand , they carry five or six small one a piece , which they cast with . Theise man also be more civil than any other , because of their daily traffic with the Frenchman , and be of nature very gentle and love : for ca while we be there , we take in a Frenchman , who be one of the 19 that go to Brasile , in a bark of diepe , of 60 ton , and be a sea board of cape Verde , 200 league , the plank of their bark with a sea break out upon they so sudden , that much a do they have to save themselves in their boat : but by god providence , the wind be westerly , which be rare see there , they get to the shore , to the isle Brava , and in great penury get to cape Verde , where they remain six week , and have meat and drink of the same people . the say Frenchman have forsake his fellow , which be three league off from the shore , and wander with the negro too and fro , fortune to come to the water side : and commune with certain of his countryman , which be 15 the traffic of the french in our ship , by their persuasion come away with we : but his entertainment among they be such , that he desire it not : but through the importunate request of his countryman , consent at the last . here we stay but one night , and part of the day : for the 7 of December we come away , in that pretend to have take negro there perforce , the minion man give they there to understand of our come , and our pretence , wherefore they do avoid the snare we have lay for they . the 8 of December we anchor by a small island alcatrarse or call Alcatrarsa , wherein at our go a shore , we find ganet . nothing but sea-bird , as we call they ganet , but by the Portugal , call Alcatrarses , who for that cause give the say island the same name . herein half of our boat be lade with young and old fowl , who not be use to the sight of man , fly so about we , that we strike they down with pole . in this place the two ship ride , the two bark , with the sapy , their boat , go into a island of the sapy , call la Formio , to see if they can take any of they , and there land to the number of 80 in armour , and espy certain make to they , but they flee in such order into the wood , that it boot they not to follow : so go on their way forward till they come to a river , which they can not pass over , they espy on the otherside two man , who with their bow and arrow shoot terrible at they . whereupon we discharge certain harquebus to they again , but the ignorant people weigh it not , because they know not the danger thereof : but use a marvellous cry in their fight with leap and turn their tail , that it be most strange to see , and give we great pleasure to [ three . 504. ] behold they . at the last , one be hurt with a harquebuz upon the thigh , look upon his wound and wit not how it come , because he can not see the pellet . here master Hawkins perceive no good to be do among they , because we can not 16 find their town , and also not know how to go into Rio grande , for want of a pilot , which be the Rio grande . very occasion of our come thither : and find so many shoal , fear with our great ship to go in , and therefore depart on our pretend way to the idol . the idol . the 10 of December , we have a north-east wind , with rain and storm , which weather continue two day together , be the occasion that the Salomon , and tiger lose our company : for whereas the Jesus , and pinnace anchor at one of the island call Sambula , island the twelve day , the Salomon and tiger come not thither till the 14. in this island we stay certain the cambase . day , go every day on shore to take the inhabitant , with burn and spoil their town , who before be sapy , and be conquer by the sambose , sapy . inhabitant beyond Sierra Leona . Theise Samboses have inhabit there three year before our come thither , and in so short space have so plant the ground , that they have great plenty of Mil , rise , root , pompion , Pullin , goat , of small fry dry , every house full of the country fruit plant by God providence , as Palmito tree , fruit like date , and sundry other in no place in all that country so abundant , whereby they live more delicious than other . Theise inhabitant have diverse of the sapy , which they take in the war as their slave , who only they keep to till the ground , in that they neither have the knowledge thereof , nor yet will work themselves , of who we take many in that place , but of the sambose none at all , for they flee into the main . all the sambose have white tooth as we have , far unlike to the sapy which do inhabit about Rio grande , for their tooth be all file , which they do for a bravery , to set out themselves , and do jag their flesh , both leg , arm , and body , as workemanlike , as a jerkinmaker with we pink a jerkin . Theise sapy be more civil than the sambose : for ten 17 b then Naples bury their dead with glide . the canoas of Africa . the firm of their town . the english voyage whereas the sambose live most by the spoil of their enemy , both in take their victual , and eat they also . the sapy do not eat man flesh , unless in the war they be drive by necessity thereunto , which they have not use but by the example of the sambose , but live only with fruit , and cattle , whereof they have great store . this plenty be the occasion that the sapy desire not war , except they be thereunto provoke by the invasion of the sambose , whereas the sambose for want of food be enforce thereunto , and therefore be not wont only to take they that they kill , but also keep those that they take , until such time as they want meat , and then they kill they . there be also another occasion that provoke the sambose to war against the sapy which be for covetousness of their riches . for whereas the sapy have a order to bury their dead in certain place appoint for that purpose , with their gold about they , the sambose dig up the ground , to have the same treasure : for the sambose have not the like store of gold , that the sapy have . in this island of Sambula we find about 50 boat call almadye , or canoas , which be make of one piece of wood , dig out like a trough but of a good proportion , be about 8 yard long , and one in breadth , have a beakhead and a stern very proportionable make , and on the out side artificial carve , and paint red and blow : they be able to carry twenty or thirty man , but they be about the coast able to carry threescore and upward . in these canoas they row stand upright , with a oar somewhat long than a man , the end whereof be make about the breadth and length of a man hand , of the large sort . they row very swift , and in some of they four rower and one to steer make as much way , as a pair of oar in the Thames of London . their town be pretty divide with a main street at the enter in , that go through their town , and another overthwart street , which make their town across way : their house be build in a rank very orderly in the face of the street , and they be make round , like a dove-cote , with stake set full of Palmito leave , in stead of a wall : they be not much more than a fathom large , and two of heighth , and thatch with Palmito leave very close , other some with reed , and over the roof thereof , for the better garnish of the same , there be a round bundle of reed , pretty contrive like a lover : in the inner part they make a loft of stick , whereupon they lie all their provision of victual : a place they reserve at their entrance for the kitchen , and the place they lie in be divide with certain mat artificial make with the rind of Palmito tree : their bedstead be of small staff lay along , and raise a foot from the ground , upon which be lay a mat , and another upon they when they listen : for other cover they have none . in the middle of the town there be a house large and high than the other , but in form alike , adjoin unto the which there be a place make of four good stancion of wood , and a round roof over it , the ground also raise round with clay a foot high , upon the which floor be straw many fine mat : this be the consultation-house , the like whereof be in all town , as the Portugal affirm : in which place , when they sit in counsel the king or captain sit in the midst , and the elder upon the floor by he : ( for they give reverence to their elder ) and the common sort sit round about they . there the consultation house or towne-howse . [ HL 5O5 - ] they sit to examine matter of theft , which if a man be take with , to steal but a Portugal cloth from another , he be sell to the Portugal for a slave . they consult also , and take order what time they shall go to war : and as it be certain report by the Portugal , they take order in gather of the fruit in the season of the year , and also of Palmito wine , which be gather by a Palmito be a hole cut in the top of a tree , and a gourde set for the mlde datereceive thereof , which fall in by drop , and yield fresh wine again within a month , and this divide part and portion-like to every man , by the judgement of the captain and elder , every man hold himself content : and this sure i judge to be a very good order : for otherwise , whereas scarcity of Palmito be , every man will have the same , which may breed great strife : but of such thing , as every man do plant for himself , the sour thereof reap it to his own use , so that nothing be common , but that which be unset by man hand . in their house there be more common passage of lizards like evat , and other great , of black and blue colour , of near a foot long , beside their tail , than there be with we of Mise in great house . the sapy and sambose also use in their war bow , and arrow make of reed , with head of iron poison a venomous with the juice of a Cucumber , whereof i have many in Cucumber . my hand . in their battle they have target-man , with broad wicker target , and dart with head at both end , of iron , the one in form of a two edge sword , a foot and a half long , and at the other end , the iron long of the same length make to counterpoise it , that in cast it may fly level , rather than for any other purpose as i can judge . and when they espy the enemy , the captain to cheer his man , cry hungry , and they answer heygre , and with that every man place himself in order , for about every target man three bowman will cover themselves , and shoot as they see advantage : and when they give the onset , they make such terrible cry , that they may be hear two mile off . for their belief , i can hear of none that they have , but in such as they themselves imagine to see in their dream , and so i dole like worship the picture , whereof we see some like unto devil . devil . in this island aforesaid we sojourn unto the one and twenty of December , where have take certain negro , and asmuch of their fruit , rise , and mill , as we can well carry away , ( whereof there be such store , that we may have lade one of our bark therewith ) we depart , and at our departure diverse of our man be desirous to go on shore , to fetch pomnion , 20 1 which have prove , they find to be very good , certain of the tiger man go also , among the which there be a carpenter , a young man , who with his fellow have fetch many , and carry they down to their boat , as they be ready to depart , desire his fellow to tarry while he may go up to fetch a few which he have the extreme lay by for he self , who be more liquorous than ne&^gence of circumspect , go up without weapon , and as he go up mfanie . alone , possible be mark of the negro that be upon the tree , espy he what he do , perceive he to be alone , and without weapon , dog he , and find he occupy in bind his pompion together , come behind he , overthrow he and straight cut his throat , as he afterwards be find by his fellow , who come to the place for he , and there find he naked . the two and twenty the captain go into the river , call Callowsa , with the two bark , and the John pinnace , and the Salomons boat , leave at anchor a wsa‘ in the river mouth the two ship , the river be twenty league in , where the Portugal road : he come thither the five and twenty , and dispatch his business , and so return with two caravel , load with negro . the 27. the captain be advertise by the Portugal of a town of the negro call Bymba , be in the way tie town as they return , where be not only great quantity of tm gold , but also that there be not above forty man , and a hundred woman and child in the town , so that if he will give the adventure upon the same , he may get a hundred slave : with the which tiding he be glad , because the Portugal shall not think he to be of so base a courage , but that he dare give they that , and great attempt : and be thereunto also the more provoke with the prosperous success he have in other island adjacent , where he have put they all to flight , and take in one boat twenty together , determine to stay before the town three or four hour , to see what he can do : and thereupon prepare his man in armour and weapon together , to the Portugal not to be trust . want of circumspection in our man . [ Iii . 506. ] m. field captain of the Salomon slay . the english voyage number of forty man well appoint , have to their guide certain Portugal , in a boat , who bring some of they to their death : we land boat after boat , and diverse of our man scatter themselves , contrary to the captain will , by one or two in a company , for the hope that they have to find gold in their house , ransack the same , in the mean time the negro come upon they , and hurt many be thus scatter , whereas if five or six have be together , they have be able , as their companion do , to give the overthrow to 40 of they , and be drive down to take their boat , be follow so hardly by a route of negro , who by that take courage to pursue they to their boat , that not only some of they , but other stand on shore , not look for any such matter by mean that the negro do flee at the first , and our company remain in the town , be sudden so set upon that some with great hurt recover their boat ; othersome not able to recover the same , take the water , and perish by mean of the oaze . while this be do , the captain who with a dozen man , go through the town , return , find 200 negro at the water side , shoot at they in the boat , and cut they in piece which be drown in the water , at who come , they run all away : so he enter his boat , and before he can put off from the shore , they return again , and shoot very fierce and hurt diverse of they . thus we return back some what discomfort , although the captain in a singular wise manner carry himself , with countenance very cheerful outward , as though he do little weigh the death of his man , nor yet the great hurt of the rest , although his heart1 inward be break in piece for it ; do to this end , that the Portugal be with he , shall not presume to resist against he , nor take occasion to put he to further displeasure or hindrance for the death of our man : have get by our go ten negro , and lose seven of our best man , whereof m. field captain of the Salomon , be one , and we have 27 of our man hurt . in the same hour while this be do , there happen at the same instant , a marvelous miracle to they in the ship , who ride ten league to seaward , by many shark or tiburon , who come about the ship : among which , one be take by the Jesus , and four by the Salomon , and one very sore hurt escape : and so it fall out of our man , whereof one of the Jesus man , and four of the Salomons be kill , and the five have twenty wound be rescue , and escape with much ado . the 28 they come to their ship , the Jesus , and the Salomon , and the 30 depart from thence to Taggarin . Taggarin . the first of January the two bark , and both the boat forsake the ship , and go into a river call river of the Casserroes , and the 6 have dispatch their busi - asserroe . ness , the two bark return , and come to Taggarin , where the two ship be at anchor . not two day after the come of the two ship thither , they put their water cask a shore , and fill it with water , to season the same , think to have fill it with fresh water afterward : and while their man be some on shore , and some at their boat , the negro set upon they in the boat , and hurt diverse of they , and come to the cask , and cut of the hoop of twelve butt , which lose we 4 or 5 day time , beside great want we have of the same : sojourn at Taggarin , the swallow go up the river about her traffic , where they see great town of the negro , and canoas , that have threescore man in a piece : there they understand by the Portugal , of a great battle between they of Sierra Leona side , and they of Taggarin : they of Sierra Leona , have prepare three hundred canoas to invade the other . the time be appoint not past six day after our departure from thence , which we will have see , to the intent we may have take some of a new assault by the negro . great town . very great canoas . the contagion they , have it not be for the death and sickness ofthecou-t of our man , which come by the contagiousness of the Jof Sierra place , which make we to make haste away . Leona . the english voyage the 18 of Januarie at night , we depart from Taggarin , be bind for the west Indies , before which departure certain of the Salomons man go on shore to fill water in the night , and as they come on shore with their boat be ready to leap on land , one of they espy a negro in a white coat , stand upon a rock , be ready to have receive they when they come on shore , have in sight of his fellow also eight or nine , some in one place leap out , and some in another , but they hide themselves straight again : whereupon our man doubt they have be a great company , and seek to have take they at more advantage , as God will , depart to their ship , not think there have be such a mischief pretend towards they , as then be in deed . which the next day we understand of a Portugal that come down to we , who have traffic with the negro , by who he understand , that the king of Sierra Leona have make all the power he can , to take some of we , partly for the desire he have to see what kind of people we be , that have spoil his people at the idol , whereof he have news before our come , and as i judge also , upon other occasion provoke by the Tangomangos , but sure we be that the army be come down , by mean that in the evening we see such a monstrous fire , make by the water place , that before be not see , which fire be the only mark for the Tangomangos to know where their army be always . if these man have come down in the evening , they have do we great displeasure , for that we be on shore fill water : but God , who work all thing for the best , will not have it so , and by he we escape without danger , his name be praise for it . the 29 of this same month we depart with all our ship from Sierra Leona , towards the west Indies , and for the space of eighteen day , we be becalm , have now and then contrary wind , and 24 some ternado , among the same calm , which happen to we very ill , be but reasonable water , for so great a company of negro , and our self , which pinch we all , and that which be worst , put we in such fear that many never think to have reach to the Indies , without great death of negro , and of themselves : but the almighty God , who never suffer his elect to perish , send we the sixteenth of February , the ordinary brise , which be the northwest wind , which never leave we , till we come to a island of the canybal , call Dominica , where we arrive Dominica the nine of march , upon a Saturday : and because it be the most desolate place in all the island , we can see no canybal , but some of their house where they dwell , and as it shall seem forsake the place for want of fresh water , for we can find none there but rain water , and such as fall from the hill , and remain as a puddle in the dale , whereof we fill for our negro . the canybal of that island , and also other adjacent be the most desperate warrior that be in the Indies , by the Spaniard canybal exreport , who be never able to conquer they , and they be molest by they not a little , when they be drive that to water there in any of those island : of very late , not two month past , in the say island , a caravel be drive to water , be in the night set upon by the inhabitant , who cut their cable in the hals , whereby they be drive a shore , and so take by they , and eat . the green dragon of Newhaven , whereof be captain one Bontemps , in march also , come to one of those island , call Granada , and be drive to water , can not do the same for the canybal , who fight with he very desperate two day . for our part also , if we have not light upon the desert place in all that island , we can not have miss , but shall have be great trouble by they , by all the Spaniard report , who make they devil in respect of i . the testigps island . Margarita island . Cumana . the english voyage the ten day at night , we depart from thence , and the fifteen have sight of nine island , call the testigo : and the sixteenth of a island , call Margarita , where we be entertain by the Alcalde , and have both beef and sheep give we , for the refresh of our man : but the governor of the island , will neither come to speak with our captain , neither yet give he any licence to traffic : and to displease we the more , whereas we have hire a pilot to have go with we , they will not only not suffer he to go with we , but also send word by a caravel out of hand , to Santo Domingo , to the viceroy , who do represent the king person , of our arrival in those part , which have like to have turn we to great displeasure , by the mean that the same viceroy do send word to cape de la Vela , and to other place along the coast , command they that by the virtue of his authority , and by the obedience that they owe to their prince , no man shall traffic with we , but shall resist we with all the force they can . in this island , notwithstanding that we be not within four league of the town , yet be they so afraid , that not only the governor himself , but also all the inhabitant forsake their town , assemble all the Indians to they and flee into the mountain , as we be partly certify , and also see the experience our self , by some of the Indians come to see we who by three Spaniards a horseback pass hard by we , go unto the Indians , have every one of they their bow , and arrow , procure they away , who before be conversant with we . here perceive no traffic to be have with they , nor yet water for the refresh of our man , we be drive to depart the twenty day , and the 2 and twenty we come to a place in the main call Cumana , whither the captain go in his pinnisse , speak with certain Spaniards , of who he demand traffic , but they make he answer , they be but 26 sir John Hawkins soldier new come thither , and be not able to by one negro : whereupon he ask for a water place , and they point he a place two league off , call Santa F^ , where we find marvelous goodly water , and commodious for the take in thereof : for that the fresh water come into the sea , and so our ship have aboard the shore twenty fathom water . near about this place , inhabit certain Indians , who the next day after we come thither , come down to we , present mill and cake of bread , which they have make of a kind of corn call Maiz , in bigness of a pease , the ear whereof be much like to a teasell , but a span in length , have thereon a number of grane . also they bring down to we hen , potato and pine , which we buy for bead , pewter whistle , glass , knife , and other trifle . Theise potato be the most delicate root that may be eat , and do far exceed our passenep or carat . their pine be of the bigness of two fist , the outside whereof be of the make of a pineapple , but it be soft like the rind of a Cucomber , and the inside eat like a apple , but it be more delicious than any sweet apple sugar . Theise Indians be of colour tawny like a olive , have every one of they both man and woman , hair all black , and no other colour , the woman wear the same hang down to their shoulder , and the man round , and without beard , neither man nor woman suffer any hair to grow in any part of their body , but daily pull it off as it grow . they go all naked , the man cover no part of their body but their yard , upon the which they wear a gourd or piece of cane , make fast with a third about their loin , leave the other part of their member uncover , whereof they take no shame . the woman also be uncover , save with a cloth which they wear a hand-breath , wherewith they cover their privity both before and behind . Theise people be very small feeder , for travel they carry but two 27 Santa Fe. [ Iii . 508. ] the description of the Indians of terra firma . small bottle of gourd , wherein they put in one then the use of juice of Sorrell whereof they have great store , and in sorrel . the o^er flower of their Maiz , which be moist , they eat , take sometime of the other . Theise man carry every man his bow and arrow , whereof some arrow be poison for war , which they keep in a cane together , which cane be of the bigness of a man arm , other some with broad head of iron wherewith they strike fish in the water : the experience whereof we see not once nor twice , but daily for the time we tarry there , for they be so good archer that armour of the Spaniard for fear thereof arm themselves and two^nche^ horse with quilt canvas of two inche thick , thick . and leave no place of their body open to their enemy , save their eye which they may not hide , and yet oftentimes be they hit in that so small a the make of scantling : their poison be of such a force , that a their poison . man be strike therewith die within four and twenty hour , as the Spaniard do affirm , and in my judgement it be like there can be no strong poison as they make it , use thereunto apple which be very fair and red of colour , but be a strong poison , with the which together with venomous bat , viper , adder and other serpent , they make a medley , and therewith anoint the same . the manner of the young woman . the indian woman delight not when they be young in bear of child , because it make they have hang breast which they account to be great deform in they , and upon that occasion while they be young , they destroy their seed , say , that it be fit for old woman . Moreover , when they be deliver of child , they go straight to wash themselves , without make any further ceremony for it , not lie in bed as our woman do . the bed which they have be make of gossopine cotton , and wrought artificial of diverse colour , which they carry about with they when they travel , and make the same fast to two tree , lie therein they and their woman . the people 28 1565. be sure gentle and tractable , and such as desire to live peaceable , or else have it be unpossible for the Spaniard to have conquer they as they do , and the more to live now peaceable , they be so many in number , and the Spaniard so few . from hence we depart the eight and twenty , and the next day we pass between the main land , and the island call Tortuga , a very low island , in the the of year of our lord God one thousand five hundred tortusa-sixty five aforesaid , and sail along the coast until the first of April , at which time the captain sail along in the Jesus pinnace to discern the coast , and see many caribe on shore , and some also in their canoas , which make token unto he of friendship , and show he gold , mean thereby that they will traffic for ware . whereupon he stay to see the manner of they , and so for two or three trifle they give such thing as they have about they , and depart : but the caribe be very importunate to have they come on shore , which if it have not be for want of ware to traffic with they , he will not have deny they , because the Indians which we see before be very gentle people , and such as do no man hurt . but as God will have it , he want that thing , which if he have have , will have be his confusion : for these be no such kind of people as we take they to be , but more devilish a thousand part and be eater and devourer of any man they can catch , as it be afterward declare unto we at Burboroata , by a caravel come out of Spain with certain soldier , and a captain generail send by the king for those eastward part of the Indians , who sail along in his pinnace , as our captain do to descry the coast , be by the caribe call a shore with sundry token make to he of friendship , and gold show as though they desire traffic , with the which the Spaniard be move , suspect no deceit at all , go ashore among they : who be no soon ashore , but with four or five Burbonata . the english voyage moor be take , the rest of his company be invade by they , save themselves by flight , but they that be take , pay their ransom with their life , and be present eat . and this be their practice to toll with their gold the ignorant to their snare : they be bloodsucker both of Spaniards , Indians , and all that light in their lap , not spare their own countryman if they can convenient come by they . their policy in fight with the Spaniards be marvelous : for they choose for their refuge the mountain and wood where the Spaniard with their horse can follow they , and if they fortune to be meet in the plain where one horseman may overrun 100 of they , they have a devise of late practise by they to pitch stake of wood in the ground , and also small iron pike to mischief their horse , wherein they show themselves politic warrior . they have more abundance of gold then all the Spaniard have , and live upon the mountain where the mine be in such number , that the Spaniard have much ado to get any of they from they , and yet sometime by assemble a great number of they , which happen once in two year , they get a piece from they , which afterward they keep sure enough . thus have escape the danger of they , we keep our course along the coast , and come the three of April to a town call Burboroata , where his ship come to a anchor , and he himself go a shore to speak with the Spaniard , to who he declare himself to be a Englishman , and come thither to trade with they by the way of merchandise , and therefore require licence for the same . unto who they make answer , that they be forbid by the king to traffic with any foreign nation , upon penalty to forfeit their good , therefore they desire he not to molest they any further , but to depart as he come , for other comfort he may not look for at their hand , because they be subject and may not go beyond the law . but he reply that his necessity be such , as he may not so do : for be in one of the queen armada of England , and have many soldier in they , he have need both of some refresh for they , and of victual , and of money also , without the which he can not depart , and with much other talk persuade they not to fear any dishonest part of his behalf towards they , for neither will he commit any such thing to the dishonour of his prince , not yet for his honest reputation and estimation , unless he be too rigorous deal withal , which he hope not to find at their hand , in that it shall as well redound to their profit as his own , and also he think they may do it without danger , because their prince be in amity one with another , and for our part we have free traffic in Spain and Flanders , which be in his dominion , and therefore he know no reason why he shall not have the like in all his dominion . to the which the Spaniard make answer , that it lie not in they to give any licence , for that they have a governor to who the government of those part be commit , but if they will stay ten day , they will send to their governor who be threescore league off , and will return answer within the space appoint , of his mind . in the mean time they be content he shall bring his ship into harbour , and there they will deliver he any victual he will require . whereupon the four day we go in , where be one day and receive all thing accord to promise , the captain advise himself , that to remain there ten day idle , spend victual and man wage , and perhaps in the end receive no good answer from the governor , it be mere folly , and therefore determine to make request to have licence for the sale of certain lean and sick negro which he have in his ship like to die upon his hand if he keep they ten day , have little or no refresh for they , whereas other man have they , they will be recover well enough . and 31 A.D. I565 . this request he be force to make , because he have not otherwise wherewith to pay for victual and for necessary which he shall take : which request be put in writing and present , the officer and town-dweller assemble together , and find his request so reasonable , grant he licence for thirty negro , which afterward they cause the officer to view , to the intent they shall grant to nothing but that be very reasonable , for fear of answer thereunto afterward . This be pass , our captain accord to their licence , think to have make sale , but the day past and none come to buy , who before make show that they have great need of they , and therefore wit not what to surmise of they , whether they go about to prolong the time of the governor his answer because they will keep themselves blameless , or for any other policy he know not , and for that purpose send they word , marvel what the matter be that none come to buy they . they answer , because they have grant licence only to the poor to buy those negro of small price , and their money be not so ready as other man of more wealth . more than that , as soon as ever they see the ship , they convey away their money by their wife that go into the mountain for fear , and be not yet return , and yet ask two day to seek their wife and fetch their money . notwithstanding , the next day diverse of they come to cheapen , but can not agree of price , because they think the price too high . whereupon the captain perceive they go about to bring down the price , and mean to buy , and will not confess if he have licence , that he may sell at any reasonable rate , as they be worth in other place , do send for the principal of the town , and make a show he will depart , declare himself to be very sorry that he have so much trouble they , and also that he have send for the governor to come down , see now his pretence be to depart , whereat they marveil much , and ask he what cause move he thereunto , see by their work he be in possibility to have his licence . to the which he reply , that it be not only a [ three . 510. ] licence that he seek , but profit , which he perceive be not there to be have , and therefore will seek further , and withal show he his write what he pay for his negro , declare also the great charge he be at in his ship , and man wage , and therefore to countervail his charge , he must sell his negro for a great price than they offer . so they doubt his departure , put he in comfort to sell better there then in any other place . and if it fall out that he have no licence that he shall not loose his labour in tarry , for they will buy without licence . whereupon , the captain be put in comfort , promise they to stay , so that he may make sale of his lean negro , which they grant unto . and the next day do sell some of they , who have buy and pay for they , think to have have a discharge of the customer , for the custom of the negro , be the king duty , they give it away to the poor for God sake , and do refuse to give the discharge in write , and the poor not trust their word , for fear , lest hereafter it may be demand of they , do refrain from buy any more , so that nothing else be do until the governor come down , which be the fourteenth day , and then the captain make petition , declare that he be come thither in a ship of the queen majesty of England , be bind to guinie , and thither drive by wind and weather , so that be come thither , he have need of sundry necessary for the reparation of the say navy , and also great need of money for the payment of his soldier , unto who he have promise payment , and therefore although he will , yet will not they depart without it , and for that purpose he request licence for the sale of certain of his negro , declare that although they be forbid to traffic with stranger , yet for that there ten 33 c be a great amity between their prince , and that the thing pertain to our queen highness , he think he may do their prince great service , and that it will be well take at his hand , to do it in this cause . the which allegation with diverse other put in request , be present unto the governor , who sit in counsel for that matter , grant unto his request for licence . but yet there fall out another thing which be the abate of the king custom , be upon every slave 30. ducat , which will not be grant unto . whereupon the captain perceive that they will neither come near his price he look for by a great deal , nor yet will abate the king custom of that they offer , so that either he must be a great loser by his ware , or else compel the officer to abate the same king custom which be too unreasonable , for to a high price he can not bring the buyer : therefore the sixteenth of April he prepare one hundred man well arm with bow , arrow , harquebus and pike , with the which he march to the townewards , and be perceive by the governor , he straight with all expedition send messenger to know his request , desire he to march no further forward until he have answer again , which incontinent he shall have . so our captain declare how unreasonable a thing the king custom be , request to have the same abate , and to pay seven and a half per centum , which be the ordinary custom for ware through his dominion there , and unto this if they will not grant , he will displease they . and this word be carry to the governor , answer be return that all thing shall be to his content , and thereupon he determine to depart , but the soldier and mariner find so little credit in their promise , demand gage for the performance of the premise , or else they will not depart . and thus they be constrain to send gage , we depart , begin our traffic , and end the same without disturbance . thus have make traffic in the harbour until the 28. our captain with his ship intend to go out of the road , and purpose to make show of his departure , because now the common sort have employed their money , the rich man be come to town , who make no show that they be come to buy , so that they go about to bring down the price , and by this policy the captain know they will be make the more eager , for fear lest we depart , and they shall go without any at all . the nine and twenty we be at anchor without the road , a french ship call the green dragon of Newhaven , whereof be captain one Bon temps come in , who salute we after the manner of the sea , with certain piece of ordinance , and we resalute he with the like again : with who have communication , he declare that he have be at the mine in guinie , and 2% report off be beat off by the Portugal galley , and enforce to , . 1 ' , i 0 1 j the Minton tn come thither to make sale or such ware as he have : and further that the like be happen unto the minion : beside the captain Davie carlet and a merchant , with a dozen mariner betray by the negro at their first arrival thither , and remain prisoner with the Portugal ; and beside other misadventure of the loss of their man , happen through the great lack of fresh water , with great doubt of bring home the ship : which be most sorrowful for we to understand . thus have end our traffic here the 4. of may , [ three . 51 i . i we depart , leave the Frenchman behind we , the night before the which the caribe , whereof i have make mention before , be to the number of 200. come in their canoas to Burboroata , intend by night to have burn the town , and take the Spaniard , who be more vigilant because of our be there , than their custom be , perceive they come , raise the town , who in a moment be a horseback , by mean their custom be for all doubt to keep their horse horse keep ready saddle , in the night set upon they , and take one , read ? saddle - but the rest make shift for themselves , escape away . but this one , because he be their guide , and be the occasion that diverse time they have make invasion upon they , have for his travel a stake thrust through his fundament , and so out at his neck . the sixth of May aforesaid , we come to a island call Cura$ao , where we have think to have ancker , but can not find ground , and have let fall a anchor with two cable , be fain to weigh it again : and the seven sail along the coast to seek a harbour , and find none , we come to a anchor where we ride open in the sea in this place we have traffic for hide , and find great refresh both of beef , mutton and lamb , whereof there be such plenty , that save the skin , we have the flesh give we for nothing , the exceed plenty whereof be so abundant , that the worst in the ship think scorn not only of mutton , but also of ’ sodden lamb , which they disdain to eat unroast . the increase of cattle in this island be marvelous , which from a dozen of each sort bring thither by the governor , in 25. year he have a hundred thousand at the least , and of other cattle be able to kill without spoil of the increase 1500. yearly , which he kill for the skin , and of the flesh save only the tongue , the rest he leave to the foul to devour . and this i be able to affirm , not only upon the governor own report , who be the first that bring the increase thither , which so remain unto this day , but also by that i see my self in one field , where a hundred ox lie one by another all whole , save the skin and tongue take away . and it be not so marvelous a thing why they do thus cast away the flesh in all the island of the west Indies , see the land be great , and more than they be able to inhabit , the people few , have delicate fruit and meat enough beside to feed upon , which they rather desire , and the increase which pass man reason to believe , when they come to a great number : for in saint Domingo a island call by the 36 finder thereof Hispaniola , be so great quantity of cattle , and such increase thereof , that notwithstanding the daily kill of they for their hide , it be not possible to assuage the number of they , but they be devour by wild dog , who number be such by suffer they qreat first to range the wood and mountain , that they eat number of and destroy 60000. a year , and yet small lack find wme d » and - of they . and no marveile , for the say island be almost as big as all England , and be the first place that be find of all the Indies , and of long time inhabit before the rest , it ought therefore of reason to be most populous : and to this hour the viceroy and counsel royal abide there as in the chief place of all the Indies , to prescribe order to the rest for the king behalf , yet have they but one city and 13. village in all the same island , whereby the spoil of they in respect of the increase be nothing . the 15. of the foresay month we depart from Curasao , be not a little to the rejoice of our captain and we , that we have there end our traffic : but notwithstanding our sweet meat , we have sour sauce , for by reason of our ride so open at sea , what with blast whereby our anchor be a ground , three at once come home , and also with contrary wind blow , whereby for fear of the shore we be fain to hale off to have anchorhold , sometime a whole day and a night we turn up and down ; and this happen not once , but half a dozen time in the space of our be there . the 16. we pass by a island call Aruba , and Aruba . the 17. at night ancker six hour at the west end of Cabo de la vela , and in the morning be the 18. weigh again , keep our course , in the which time the captain sail by the shore in the pinnace , come to the Rancheria , a place where the Spaniard use to LaRanchena . fish for pearl , and there speak with a Spaniard , who tell he how far off he be from Rio de la Hacha , which 7 ? » de la because he will not overshoot , he anchor that night hac , in - m. Hawkins his letter to the treasurer of Rio de la Hacha . the english voyage again , and the 19 come thither ; where have talk with the king treasurer of the Indies resident there , he declare his quiet traffic in Burboroata , and show a certificate of the same , make by the governor thereof , and therefore he desire to have the like there also : but the treasurer make answer that they be forbid by the viceroy and council of saint Domingo , who have intelligence of our be on the coast , do send express commission to resist we , with all the force they can , insomuch that they dare not traffic with we in no case , allege that if they do , they shall loose all that they do traffic for , beside their body at the magistrate commandment . our captain reply , that he be in a armada of the queen majesty of England , and send about other her affair , but drive beside his pretend voyage , be enforce by contrary wind to come into those part , where he hope to find such friendship as he shall do in Spain , to the contrary whereof he know no reason , in that there be amity betwixt their prince . but see they will contrary to all reason go about to withstand his traffic , he will it shall not be say by he , that have the force he have , to be drive from his traffic perforce , but he will rather put it in adventure to try whether he or they shall have the better , and therefore will they to determine either to give he licence to trade , or else to stand to their own harm : so upon this it be determine he shall have licence to trade , but they will give he such a price as be the one half less than he have sell for before , and thus they send word they will do , and none otherwise , and if it like he not , he may do what he will , for they be not determine to deal otherwise with he . whereupon , the captain weigh their unconscionable request , write to they a letter , that they deal too rigorous with he , to go about to cut his throat in the price of his commodity , which be so reasonable rate , as they can not by a great deal have the like at any other man hand . but see they have send he this to his supper , he will in the morning bring they as good a breakfast . and therefore in the morning be the 21. of may , he shoot off a whole culverin to summon the town , and prepare one hundred man in armour , go a shore , have in his great boat two falcon of brass , and in the other boat double base in their nose , which be perceive by the townsman , they incontinent in battle array with their drum and ensign display , march from the town to the sand , of footman to the number of a hundred and fifty , make great brag with their cry , and weave we a shore , whereby they make a semblance to have fight with we in deed . but our captain perceive they so brag , command the two falcon to be discharge at they , which put they in no small fear to see , ( as they afterward declare ) such great piece in a boat . at every shot they fall flat to the ground , and as we approach near unto they , they break their array , and disperse themselves so much for fear of the ordinance , that at last they go all away with their ensign . the horseman also be about thirty , make as brave a show as may be , course up and down with their horse , their brave white leather target in the one hand , and their javelin in the other , as though they will have receive we at our land . but when we land , they give ground , and consult what they shall do , for little they think we will have land so bold : and therefore as the captain be put his man in array , and march forward to have encounter with they , they send a messenger on horseback with a flag of truce to the captain , who declare that the treasurer marveil what he mean to do to come a shore in that order , in consideration that they have grant to every reasonable request that he do demand : but the captain not well content with this messenger , march forward . the messenger pray he to stay his man , and say , if he will come apart from his man , the treasurer will come and speak with he , whereunto he do agree to commune together . the captain only with his armour without weapon , and the treasurer on horseback with his javelin , be afraid to come near he for fear of his armour , which he say be worse than his weapon , and so keep aloof commune together , grant in fine to all his request . which be declare by the captain to the company , they desire to have pledge for the performance of all thing , doubt that otherwise when they have make themselves strong , they will have be at defiance with we : and see that now they may have what they will request , they judge it to be more wisdom to be in assurance then to be force to make any more labour about it . so upon this , gage be send , and we make our traffic quiet with they . in the mean time while we stay here , we water a good breadth off from the shore , where by the strength of the fresh water run into the sea , the salt water be make fresh . in this river we see many crocodile of sundry bigness , but some as big as a boat , with 4. foot , a long broad mouth , and a long tail , who skin be so hard , that a sword will not pierce it . his nature be to live out of the water as a frog do , but he be a great devourer , and spare neither fish , which be his common food , nor beast , nor man , if he take they , as the proof thereof be know by a negro , who as he be fill water in the river be by one of they carry clean away , and never see after . his nature be ever when he will have his prey , to cry and sob like a christian body , to provoke they to come to he , and then he snatch at they , and thereupon come this proverb that be apply unto woman when they weep , lachrymae Crocodili , the meaning whereof be , that as the crocodile when he cry , go then about most to deceive , so do a woman most common when she weep . of these the master of the Jesus watch one , and by the bank side strike he with a pike of a bill in the side , and after three or four time turn in sight , he sink down , and be not afterward see . in the time of our be in the river guinie , we see many of a monstrous bigness , among the which the captain [ three . 513. ] be in one of the bark come down the same , shoot a falcon at one , which very narrow he miss , and with a fear he plunge into the water , make a stream like the way of a boat . now while we be here , whether it be of a fear that the Spaniard doubt we will have do they some harm before we depart , or for any treason that they intend towards we , i be not able to say ; but then come thither a captain from some of the other town , with a dozen soldier upon a time when our captain and the treasurer clear all thing between they , and be in a communication of a debt of the governor of Burboroata , which be to be pay by the say treasurer , who will not answer the same by any mean . whereupon certain word of displeasure pass betwixt the captain and he , and part the one from the other , the treasurer possible doubt that our captain will perforce have seek the same , do immediate command his man to arm , both horseman and footman : but because the captain be in the river on the back side of the town with his other boat , and all his man unarm and without weapon , it be to be judge he mean he little good , have that advantage of he , that come upon the sudden , he may have mischieve many of his man : but the captain have understanding thereof , not trust to their gentleness , if they may have the advantage , depart aboard his ship , and at night return again , and demand among other talk , what they mean by assemble their man in that order , and they answer , that their captain be come to town do muster his man accord to his accustom manner . but it be to be judge to be a cloak , in that come for that purpose he may have do it soon , but the truth be , they be not of force until then , whereby to enterprise any matter against we , by mean of pike and harquebus , whereof they have want , and be now furnish by our captain , and also 3. falcon , which have get in other place , they have secret convey thither , which make they the bold , and also for that they see now a convenient place to do such a feat , and time also serve thereunto , by the mean that our man be not only unarm and unprovide , as at no time before the like , but also be occupy in hew of wood , and least think of any harm : these be occasion to provoke they thereunto . and i suppose they go about to bring it to effect , in that * 1 with another gentleman be in the town , think of no harm towards we , and see man assemble in armour to the treasurer house , whereof i marveil , and revoke to mind the former talk between the captain and he , and the unreadiness of our man , of who advantage may have be take , depart out of the town immediate to give knowledge thereof , but before we come to our man by a flightshot , two horseman ride a gallop be come near we , be send , as we do guess , to stay we lest we shall carry news to our captain , but see we so near our man they stay their horse , come together , and suffer we to pass , belike because we be so near , that if they have go about the same , they have be espy by some of our man which then immediate will have depart , whereby they shall have be frustrate of their pretence : and so the two horseman rid about the bush to espy what we do , and see we go , to the intent they may shadow their come down in post , whereof suspicion may be have , feign a simple excuse in ask whether he can sell any wine , but that seem so simple to the captain , that stand in doubt of their courtesy , he return in the morning with his three boat , appoint with base in their nose , and his man with weapon accord , where as before he carry none : and thus dissemble all injury conceive of both part , the captain go ashore , leave pledge in the boat for himself , and clear all thing between the treasurer and he , save for the governors debt , which the one 1565. by no mean will answer , and the other , because it be not his due debt , will not molest he for it , but be content to remit it until another time , and therefore depart , cause the two bark which ride near the shore to weigh and go under sail , which be do because that our captain demand a testimoniali of his good behaviour there , can not have the same until he be under sail ready to depart : and therefore at night he go for the same again , and receive it at the treasurer hand , of who very courteous he take his leave and depart , shoot off the base of his boat for his farewell , and the townsman also shoot off four falcon and 30. harquebus , and this be the first time that he know of the conveyance of their falcon . the 31. of may we depart , keep our course to Hispaniola , and the four of June we have sight of a island , which we make to be Jamaica , marvel that by the vehement course of the sea we shall be drive so far to leeward : for set our course to the west end of Hispaniola we fall with the middle of Jamaica , notwithstanding that to all man sight it show a headland , but they be all deceive by the cloud that lie upon the land two day together , in such sort that we think it to be the head land of the say island . and a Spaniard be in the ship , who be a merchant , and inhabitant in Jamaica , have [ three . 514. ] occasion to go to guinie , and be by treason take of the negro , and afterward buy by the Tangomangos , be by our captain bring from thence , and have his passage to go into his country , who perceive the land , make as though he know every place thereof and point to certain place which he name to be such a place , and such a man ground , and that behind such a point be the harbour , but in the end he point so from one point to another , that we be a leeboord of all place , and find our self at the west end of Jamaica before we be aware of it , and be once to leeward , there be no get up again , the deceitful ! force of the current . the english voyage so that by trust of the Spaniard knowledge , our captain seek not to speak with any of the inhabitant , which if he have not make himself sure of , he will have do as his custom be in other place : but this man be a plague not only to our captain , who make he loose by overshoot the place 2000 pound by hide , which he may have get , but also to himself , who be three year out of his country , and in great misery in guinie , both among the negro and Tangomangos , and in hope to come to his wife and friend , as he make sure account , in that at his go into the pinnace , when he go to shore he put on his new clothes , and for joy fling away his old , can not afterward find any habitation , neither there nor in all Cuba , which we sail all along , but it fall out ever by one occasion or other , that we be put beside the same , so that he be fame to be bring into England , and it happen to he as it do to a duke of Samaria , when the Israelite be besiege , and be in great misery with hunger , and be tell by the prophet Elizaeus , that a bushel ! of flower shall be sell for a sickle , will not believe he , but think it unpossible : and for that cause Elizaeus prophesy he shall see the same do , but he shall not eat thereof : so this man be absent three year , and not ever think to have see his own country , do see the same , go upon it , and yet be it not his fortune to come to it , or to any habitation , whereby to remain with his friend accord to his desire . thus have sail along the coast two day , we depart the seven of June , be make to believe by the Spaniard that it be not Jamaica , but rather Hispaniola , of which opinion the captain also be , because that which he make Jamaica seem to be but a piece of the land , and thereby take it rather to be Hispaniola , by the lie of the coast , and also for that be ignorant of the force of the current , he can not believe he be so far drive to leeward , and therefore set his course to Jamaica , and after certain day not find the same , perceive then certain that the island which he be at before be Jamaica , and that the cloud do deceive he , whereof he marvel not a little : and this mistake of the place come to as ill a pass as the overshoot of Jamaica : for by this do he also overpass a place in Cuba , call Santa Cruz , where , as he be inform , be great store of hide to be have : and thus be disappoint of two of his port , where he think to have raise great profit by his traffic , and also to have find great refresh of victual and water for his man , he be now disappoint great , and such want he have of fresh water , that he be force to seek the shore to obtain the same , which he have sight of after certain day overpass with storm and contrary wind , but yet not of the main of Cuba , but of certain island in number two hundred , whereof the most part be desolate of inhabitant : by the which island the captain pass in his pinnace , can find no fresh water until he come to a island big than all the rest , call the isle of pina , where we ancker with our ship the 16. of June , and find water , which although it be neither so toothsome as run water , by the mean it be stand , and but the water of rain , and also be near the sea be brackish , yet do we not refuse it , but be more glad thereof , as the time then require , than we shall have be another time with fine conduit water . thus be reasonable water we be desirous to depart , because the place be not very convenient for such ship of charge as they be , because there be many shoal to leeward , which also lie open to the sea for any wind that shall blow : and therefore the captain make the more haste away , which be not unneedful : for little soon be their anchor weigh , and foresail set , but there arise such a storm , that they have not much to spare for double out of the shoal : for one of the bark not be full ready as the rest , be fain for haste to cut the cable in 45 two hundred island for the most part not inhabit . the hawse , and loose both anchor and cable to save her self . the cape of thus the 17. of June , we depart and on the 20. we ^cuba^^ ' in west end of Cuba , call cape S. Antony , of where for the space of three day we double along , till we come beyond the shoal , which be 20. league beyond saint Anthony . and the ordinary brise take we , which be the north-east wind , put we the 24. from the shore , and therefore we go to the northwest to fetch Florida . wind , and also to the coast of Florida to have the help of the current , which be judge to have set to the eastward : so the 29. we found our self in 27. degree , and in the sounding of Florida , where we keep our self the space of four day , sail along the coast as near as we can , in ten or twelve fathom water , have all the while no sight of land . [ Iii . 515. ] the five of July we have sight of certain island of the isle of sanj3 call the Tortugas ( which be low land ) where great store of the captain go in with his pinnace , and find such bird . a number of bird , that in half a hour he jade she with they ; and if they have be ten boat more , they may have do the like . Theise island bear the name of tortoise , because of the number of they , which there do breed , who nature be to live both in the water and upon land also , but breed only upon the shore , in make a great pit wherein they lie egg , to the number of three or four hundred , and cover they with sand , they be hatch by the heat of the sun ; and by this mean come the great increase . of these we take very great one , which have both back and belly all of bone , of the thickness of a inch : the fish whereof we prove , eat much like veil ; and find a number of egg in they , taste also of they , but they do eat very sweet . here we anchor six hour , and then a fair gale of wind spring , we weigh anchor , and make sail towards Cuba , whither we come the sixth a hill call day , and weather as far as the table , be a hill the table . so call , because of the form thereof : here we lay off and on all night , to keep that we have get to windward , intend to have water in the morning , if we can have do it , or else if the wind have come large , to have ply to windward to Havana , the port of which be a harbour whereunto all the fleet of they ha ™ 1 ™ - Spaniard come , and do there tarry to have one the company of another . this hill we think to have be the table , make account ( as it be indeed ) that Havana be but eight league to windward , but by the persuasion of a french man , who make the captain believe he know the table very well , and have be at Havana , say that it be not the table , and that the table be much high , and near to the sea side , and that there be no plain ground to the eastward , nor hill to the westward , but all be contrary , and that behind the hill to the westward be Havana . to which persuasion credit be give by some , and they not of the worst , the captain be persuade to go to leeward , and so sail along the seven and eight day , find no habitation , nor no other table ; and then perceive his folly to give ear to such prater , be not a little sorry , both because he do consider what time he shall spend year he can get so far to windward again , which will have be , with the weather which we have , ten or twelve day work , and what it will have be long he know not , and ( that which be worst ) he have not above a day water and therefore know not what shift to make : but in fine , because the want be such , that his man can not live with it , he determine to seek water , and to go further to leeward , to a place ( as it be set in the card ) call Rio de los puercos , which he be in doubt of , both whether it be inhabit , and whether there be water or not , and whether for the shoald he may have such access with his ship , that he may convenient take in the same . and while we be in these trouble , and keep our way to the place aforesaid , almighty God our guide ( who will not suffer 47 we to run into any further danger , which we have be like to have incur , if we have range the coast of Florida along as we do before , which be so dangerous ( by report ) that no ship escape which come thither , ( as the Spaniard have very well prove the same ) send we the eight day at night a fair westerly wind , whereupon the captain and company consult , determine not to refuse God gift , but every man be content to pinch his own belly , whatsoever have happen ; and take the say wind , the nine day of July get to the table , and sail the same night , unaware overshoot Havana ; at which place we think to have water : but the next day , not know that we have overshoot the same , sail along the coast , seek it , and the eleven day in the morning , by certain know mark , we understand that we have overshoot it 20 league : in which coast range , we find no convenient water place , whereby there be no remedy but to disemboque , and to water upon the coast of Florida : for , to go further to the eastward , we can not for the shoald , which be very dangerous ; and because the current shoot to the north-east , we doubt by the force thereof to be set upon they , and therefore dare not approach they : so make but reasonable way the day aforesaid , and all the night , the twelve day in the morning we fall with the island upon the cape of Florida , which we can scant double by the mean that fear the shoald to the eastwards , the state of and doubt the current come out of the west , the current of which be not of that force we make account of ; for 011 of our feel little or none till our fell with the cape , and then feel such a current , that bear all sail against the same , yet be drive back again a great pace : the experience whereof we have by the Jesus pinnace , and the Salomons boat , which be send the same day in the afternoon , while the ship be becalm , to see if they can find any water upon the island aforesaid ; who spend a great part of the day in row thither , be further offend than they deem it to be , and in the mean time a fair gale of wind spring at sea , the ship depart , make a sign to they to come away , who although they see they depart , because they be so near the shore , will not lose all the labour they have take , but determine to keep their way , and see if there be any water to be have , make no account but to find the ship well enough : but they spend so much time in fill the water which they have find , that the night be come before they can make a end . and have lose the sight of the ship , they row what they can , but be whole ignorant which way they shall seek they again ; as indeed there be a more doubt than they know of : for when they depart , the ship be in no current ; and sail but a mile further , they find one so strong , that bear all sail , it can not prevail against the same , but be drive back : whereupon the captain send the Salomon , with the other two bark , to bear near the shore all night , because the current be less there a great deal , and to bear light , with shoot off a piece now and then , to the intent the boat may better know how to come to they . the Jesus also bear a light in her top gallant , and shoot off a piece also now and then , but the night pass , and the morning be come , be the thirteenth day , and no news can be hear of they , but the ship and bark cease not to look still for they , yet they think it be all in vain , by the mean they hear not of they all the night past ; and therefore determine to tarry no long , seek for they till noon , and if they hear no news , than they will depart to the Jesus , who perforce ( by the vehemency of the current ) be carry almost out of sight ; but as God will have it , now time be come , and they have tack about in the pinnace top , have sight of they , and take they up : they in the boat , be to the number of one and twenty , have sight of the ship , ten 49 d [ three . 516. ] and see they tack about ; whereas before at the first sight of they they do great rejoice , be now in a great perplexity than ever they be : for by this they think themselves utter forsake , whereas before they be in some hope to have find they . Truly God wrought marvellous for they , for they themselves have no victual but water , and be sore oppress with hunger , be not of opinion to bestow any further time in seek the ship then that present noon time ; so that if they have not at that instant espy they , they have go to the shore to have make provision for victual , and with such thing as they can have get , either to have go for that part of Florida where the french man be plant ( which will have be very hard for they to have do , because they want victual to bring they thither , be a hundred and twenty league off7 ) or else to have remain among the floridians ; at who hand they be put in comfort by a french man , who be with they , that have remain in Florida at the first find thereof , a whole year together , to receive victual sufficient , and gentle entertainment , if need be , for a year or two , until which time God may have provide for they . but how contrary this will have fall out to their expectation , it be hard to judge , see those people of the cape of Florida be off more savage and fierce nature , and more valiant than any of the rest ; which the Spaniard well prove , who be five hundred man , who intend there to land , return few or none of they , but be enforce to forsake the same : and of their cruelty mention be make in the book of the decade , of a friar , who take upon he to persuade the people to subjection , be by they take , and his skin cruel pull over his ear , and his flesh eat . in these island they be a shore , find a dead man , dry in a manner whole , with other head and body of man : so that these sort of man be eater of the flesh of man , aswell as the cannibal . but to return to our purpose . the fourteen day the ship and bark come to the Jesus , bring they news of the recovery of the man , which be not a little to the rejoice of the captain , and the whole company : and so then altogether they keep on their way along the coast of Florida , and the fifteen day come to a anchor , and so from six and twenty degree to thirty degree and a half , where the french man abide , range all the coast along , seek for fresh water , anker every night , because we will overshoot no place of fresh water , and in the day time the captain in the ship pinnace sail along the shore , go into every creek , speak with diverse of the floridians , because he will understand where the french man inhabit ; and not find they in eight and twenty degree , as it be declare unto he , marvel thereat , and never leave sail along the coast till he find they , who inhabit in a river , by they call the river of May , and stand in thirty degree and better . in range this coast along , the captain find it to be all a island , and therefore it be all low land , and very scant of fresh water , but the country be marvellous sweet , with both marsh and meadow ground , and goodly wood among . there they find sorel to grow as abundant as grass , and where their house be , great store of maiz and mill , and grape of great bigness , but of taste much like our english grape . also deer great plenty , which come upon the sand before they . their house be not many together , for in one house a hundred of they do lodge ; they be make much like a great barne , and in strength not inferior to we , for they have stanchion and rafter of whole tree , and be cover with palmito-leaves , have no place divide , but one small room for their king and queen . in the midst of this house be a hearth , where they make great fire all night , and they sleep upon certain piece of wood m. Hawkins range all the coast of Florida . the river of May . Florida find to be cut into island . Sorell . the commodity of Florida . the house of Florida . [ HL 5I7 - ] hew in for the bow of their back , and another place make high for their head , which they put one by another all along the wall on both side . in their house they remain only in the night , and in the day they desire the field , where they dress their meat , and make provision for victual , which they provide only for a meal from hand to mouth . there be one the\ manner of thing to be marvel at , for the make of their fire , ^in^lorida ™ and not one^7 ^7 ^ut a^so negro do the same , ” m a‘ which be make only by two stick , rub they one against another : and this they may do in any place they come , where they find stick sufficient for the purpose . in their apparel the man only use dear skin , wherewith some only cover their privy member , othersome use the same as garment to cover they before and behind ; which skin be paint , some yellow and red , some black and russet , and every man accord to his own fancy . they do not omit to paint their body also with curious knot , or antic work , as every man in his own fancy devise , which paint , to make it continue the better , they use with a thorn to prick their flesh , and dent in the same , whereby the paint may have better hold . in their war they use a slight colour of paint their face , thereby to make themselves show the more fierce ; which after their war end , they wash away again . in their war they use bow and arrow , whereof their bow be make of a kind of yew , but black then we , and for the most part pass the strength of the negro or Indians , for it be not great inferior to we : their arrow be also of a great length , but yet of reed like other Indians , but vary in two point , both in length and also for nock and feather , which the other lack , whereby they shoot very steady : the head of the same be viper tooth , bone of fish , flint stone , pike point of knife , which they have get of the french man , break the same , and put the point of they in their arrow head : some of they have their head of silver , othersome that have want of these , put in a kind of hard wood , notch , which pierce as far as any of the rest . in their fight , be in the wood , they use a marvellous policy for their own safeguard , which be by clasp a tree in their arm , and yet shoot notwithstanding : this policy they use with the french man in their fight , whereby it appear that they be people of some policy : and although they be call by the Spaniard Gente triste , that be to say , bad people , mean thereby , that they be not man of capacity : yet have the french man find they so witty in their answer , that by the captain own report , a counseller with we can not give a more profound reason . the woman also for their apparel use paint skin , but most of they gown of moss , somewhat long than our moss , which they sow together artificial , and make the same surplesse wise , wear their hair down to their shoulder , like the Indians . in this river of may aforesaid , the captain enter with his pinnace , find a french ship of fourscore tun , and two pinnace of fifteen tun a piece , by she , and speak with the keeper thereof , they tell he of a fort the french two league up , which they have build , in which their fa ? - . captain monsieur Laudonniere be , with certain soul - £aujmnierei diers therein . to who our captain send to understand of a watering-place , where he may convenient take it in , and to have licence for the same , he straight , because there be no convenient place but up the river five league , where the water be fresh , do send he a pilot for the more expedition thereof , to bring in one of his bark , which go in with other boat provide for the same purpose , anchor before the fort , into the which our captain go ; where he be by the generali , with other captain and soldier , very gentle entertained , who declare unto he the time of their be there , which be fourteen month , with the extremity they be drive to for want of victual , have bring very little with they ; in which place they be two hundred man at their first come , have in short space eat all the maiz they can buy of the inhabitant about they , and therefore be drive certain of they to serve a king of the floridians against other his enemy , for mill and other victual : which have get , can not serve they , be so many , so long bread make a time : but want come upon they in such sort , that ofakorn . be fajne to gather acorn , which be stamp small , and often wash , to take away the bitterness of they , they do use for bread , eat withal sundry time , root , whereof they find many good and wholesome , and such as serve rather for medicine then for meat alone . but this hardness not content some of they , who will not take the pain so much as to fish in the river before their door , but will have all thing put in their mouth , they do rebel against the captain , take away first his armour , and afterward imprison he : and so to the number of fourscore of they , depart with a bark and a pinnace , spoil their store of victuali , and take away a great part thereof with they , and so go to the island of Hispaniola and Jamaica a rove , where they spoil and peel the Spaniard ; and have take two caravel [ three . 518. ] lade with wine and casavi , which be a bread make of root , and much other victual and treasure , have not the grace to depart therewith , but be of such haughty stomach , that they think their force to be such that no man dare meddle with they , and so keep harbour in Jamaica , go daily ashore at their pleasure . but God which will not suffer such evil doer unpunished , do indurate their heart in such sort , that they linger the time so long , that a ship and galliass be make out of Santa Domingo come thither into the harbour , and take twenty of they , whereof the most part be hang , and the rest carry into Spain , and some ( to the number of five and twenty ) escape in the pinnace , and come to Florida ; where at their land they be put in prison , and incontinent four of the chief being condemn , at the request of the soldier , do pass the harquebusier , and then be hang upon a gibbet . this lack of threescore man be a great discourage and weaken to the rest , for they be the best soldier that they have : for they have now make the inhabitant weary of they by their daily crave of maiz , have no ware leave to content they withal , and therefore be enforce to rob they , and to take away their victual perforce , which be the occasion that the floridians ( not well content therewith ) do take certain of their company in the wood , and slay they ; whereby there grow great war betwixt they and the Frenchman : and therefore they be but a few in number dare not venture abroad , but at such time as they be enforce thereunto for want of food to do the same : and go twenty harquebusier in a company , be set upon by eighteen king , have seven or eight hundred man , which with one of their bow slay one of their man , and hurt a dozen , and drive they all down to their boat ; who policy in fight be to be marvel at : for have shoot at diverse of their body which be arm , and perceive that their arrow do not prevail against the same , they shoot at their face and leg , which be the place that the Frenchman be hurt in . thus the Frenchman return , be in ill case by the hurt of their man , have not above forty soldier leave unhurt , whereby they may ill make any more invasion upon the floridians , and keep their fort withal : which they must have be drive unto , have not God send we thither for their succour ; for they have not above ten day victuali leave before we come . in which perplexity our captain see they , spare they out of his ship twenty barrel of meal , and four pipe of bean , with diverse other victual and necessary which he may convenient spare : and to help they the better homeward , whither they be bind before our come , at their request 55 the occasion of the fall out with the floridians . the french great relieve by m. Hawkins . we spare they one of our bark of fifty tun . notwithstanding the great want that the Frenchman have , the ground do yield victual sufficient , if they will have take pain to get the same ; but they be soldier , desire to live by the sweat of other man brow : for while they have peace with the floridians , they have fish sufficient , by wear which they make to catch the same : but when they grow to war , the floridians take away the same again , and then will not the Frenchman take the pain to make any more . the ground yield natural grape in great store , for in twenty the time that the Frenchman be there , they make 20 hogshead of it hogshead of wine . also it yield root pass good , Florida like dear marvellous store , with diverse other beast , and to the wine of fowl , serviceable to the use of man . Theise be thing Orleans . wherewith a man may live , have corn or maiz wherewith to make bread : for maiz make good savoury bread , and cake as fine as flower . also it make good meal , beat and sodden with water , and eat like pap wherewith we feed child . it make also good beverage , sodden in water , and nourishable ; which the Frenchman do use to drink of in the morning , and it assuage their thirst , so that they have no need to drink all the day after . and this maiz be the great lack they have , because they have no labourer to sow the same , labourer and therefore to they that shall inhabit the land it be “ inhabit new to have labourer to till and sow the ground : for country . they have victual of their own , whereby they neither rob nor spoil the inhabitant , may live not only quiet with they , who natural be more desirous of peace then of war , but also shall have abundance of victual proffer they for nothing : for it be with they as it be with one of we , when we see another man ever take away from we , although we have enough beside , yet than we think all too little for our self : for sure we have hear the Frenchman report , and i know it by the Indians , that a very little content they : for the indian with the head of maiz roast , will travel a whole 56 day , and when they be at the Spaniard find , they give they nothing but sodden herb and maiz : and in this order i see threescore of they feed , who be lade with ware , and come fifty league off . the floridians when they travel , have a kind of herb tobacco and the dry , who with a cane and a earthen cup in the end , at virtue with fire , and the dry herb put together , do suck * through the cane the smoke thereof , which smoke satisfi their hunger , and therewith they live four or five day without meat or drink , and this all the Frenchman use for this purpose : yet do they hold opinion withal , that it cause water and flame to void from their stomach . the commodity of this land be more than be yet know to any man : for beside the land it self , whereof there be more than any king Christian be able to inhabit , it flourish with meadow , pasture ground , with wood of cedar and cypress , and other sort , as better can not be in the world . they have for apothecary herb , tree , root and gum great store , as storax liquida , turpintine , gum , myrrh , and frankincense , with many other , whereof i know not the name . colour both red , black , yellow , and russet , very perfect , wherewith they so paint their body , and dear skin which they wear about they , that with water it neither fade away , nor alter colour . gold and silver they want not : for at the frenchmens first come thither they have the same offer they for little or nothing , for they receive for a hatchet two pound weight of gold , because they know not the estimation thereof : but the soldier be greedy of the same , do take it from they , give they nothing for it : the which they perceive , that both the Frenchman do great esteem it , and also do rigorous deal with they , by take the same away from they , at last will not be know they have any more , neither dare they be the same for fear of be take away : so that save at their first come , they can get none of they : and how they come by this gold and silver the 57 [ three . 519. ] the variety of commodity in Florida . colour . gold and silver . this copper be find perfect gold , call by the savage , a.d. the english voyage 1565. French man know not as yet , but by guess , who have travel to the southwest of the cape , have find the same dangerous , by mean of sundry bank , as we also have find the same : and there find mast which be wrack of Spaniard come from Mexico , judge that they have get treasure by they . for it be most true that diverse wrack have be make of Spaniard , have much treasure : for the Frenchman have travel to the capeward a hundred and fifty two span - mile , do find two Spaniard with the floridians , which yard live they bring afterward to their fort , whereof one be floiidaans . '^ in a caravel come from the Indies , which be cast away fourteen year ago , and the other twelve year ; of who fellow some escape , othersome be slay by the inhabitant . it seem they have estimation of piece of gold their gold and silver , for it be wrought flat and grave , gr^en which they wear about their neck ; othersome make you on tan . rounj a pancake , with a hole in the midst , to bolster up their breast withal , because they think it a deformity to have great breast . as for mine either of gold or silver , the Frenchman can hear of none they have upon the island , but of copper , whereof as yet also they have not make the proof , because they be but few man : but it be not unlike , but that in the main where be high hill , may be gold and silver aswell as in Mexico , because it be all one main . the Frenchman obtain pearl of they of great bigness , but they be black , by mean of roast of they , Sycroa phyra . for they do not fish for they as the Spaniard doe , but for their meat : for the Spaniard use to keep daily afish some two or three hundred Indians , some of they that be of choice a thousand : and their order be to go in canoas , or rather great pinnace , with thirty man in a piece , whereof the one half , or most part pearl . be diverse , the rest do open the same for the pearl : for it be not suffer that they shall use drag , for that will bring they out of estimation , and mar the bed of they . the oyster which have the small 58 sort of pearl be find in seven or eight fathom water , but the great in eleven or twelve fathom . the floridians have piece of unicorn home which unicorn they wear about their neck , whereof the Frenchman obtain many piece . of those unicorn they have many ; for that they do affirm it to be a beast with ma . one horn , which come to the river to drink , put the same into the water before he drink . of this unicorns horn there be of our company , that have get the same of the Frenchman , bring home thereof to show . it be therefore to be presuppose that there be more commodity aswell as that , which for want of time , and people sufficient to inhabit the same , can not yet come to light : but i trust God will reveal the same before it be long , to the great profit of they that shall take it in hand . of beast in this country beside beast . dear , fox , hare , polecat , cony , ounce , and leopard , i be not able certain to say : but it be think that there be lion and tiger as well as unicorn ; lion especial ; if it be true that be say , of the enmity between they and the unicorn : for there be no beast but have his enemy , as the cony the polecat , a sheep the wolf , the elephant the rinoceros ; and so of other beast the like : insomuch , that whereas the one be , the other can not be miss . And see i have make mention of the beast of this country , it shall not be from my purpose to speak also of the venomous beast , as crocodile , whereof there be great abundance , adder of great bigness , whereof our man kill some of a yard and a half long . also i hear a miracle of one of these adder , upon the which a falcon seize , the say adder falcon in do clasp her tail about she ; which the french captain flori^a-seeing , come to the rescue of the falcon , and take she slay the adder ; and this falcon be wild , he do reclaim she , and keep she for the space of two month , at which time for very want of meat he be fain to cast she off . on these adder the Frenchman do feed , to no little admiration of we , and affirm they the english voyage same to be a delicate meat . and the captain of the Frenchman see also a serpent with three head and four foot , of the bigness of a great spaniel , which for want of a harquebuz he dare not attempt to slay . of fish also they have in the river , pike , roch , salmon , trout , and diverse other small fish , and of great fish , some of the length of a man and long , be of bigness accord , have a snout much like a sword of a yard long . there be also of sea fish , which we see come along the coast fly , which be of the bigness of a smell , the big sort whereof have four wing , but the other have but two : of these we see come out of Guinea a hundred in a company , which be chase by the gilt-head , otherwise call the bonito , do to avoid they the better , take their flight out of the water , but yet be they not able to fly far , because of the dry of their wing , which serve they not to fly but when they be moist , and therefore when they can fly no further they fall into the water , and have wet their wing , take a new flight again . Theise bonito be of bigness like a carp , and in colour like a makarell , but it be the swift fish in swim that be , and follow her prey very fierce , not only in the water , but also out of the water : for as the fly fish take her flight , so do this bonito leap after they , and take they sometime above the water . there be some of those bonito , which be gall by a fisgig , do follow our ship come out of Guinea 500 league . there be a sea-foul also that chase this fly fish aswell as the bonito : for as the fly fish take her flight , so do this foul pursue to take she , which to behold be a great pleasure than hawk , for both the flight be as pleasant , and also more often than a hundred time : for the fowl can fly no way , but one or other light in her paw , the number of they be so abundant . there be a innumerable young fry of these fly fish , which common keep about the ship , and be not so big as butterfly , and yet by fly do avoid the unsatiableness of the bonito . of the big sort of these fish we take many , which both night and day fly into the sail of our ship , and there be not one of they which be not worth a bonito : for be put upon a hook drable in the water , the bonito will leap thereat , and so be take . also , we take many with a white cloth make fast to a hook , which be tie so short in the water , that it may leap out and in , the greedy bonito think it to be a fly fish leap thereat , and so be deceive . we take also dolphin dolphin . which be of very goodly colour and proportion to behold , and no less delicate in taste . fowl also there be many , both upon land and upon sea : but concern they on the land i be not able to name they , because my abode be there so short . but for the fowl of the fresh river , these two i note to be the chief , whereof the Flemengo be one , have all Flemings . red feather , and long red leg like a herne , a neck accord to the bill , red , whereof the upper neb hang a inch over the nether ; and a egript , which the egript . be all white as the swan , with leg like to a hearn-shaw , and of bigness accord , but it have in her tail feather of so fine a plume , that it pass the ostrich his feather . of the sea-foul above all other not common in England , i note the pellicane , which the pellicane . be feign to be the love bird that be ; which rather than her young shall want , will spare her heart blood out of her belly : but for all this lovingness she be very deform to behold ; for she be of colour russet : notwithstanding in guinea i have see of they as white as a swan , have leg like the same , and a body like a hearne , with a long neck , and a thick long beak , from the nether jaw whereof down to the breast pass a skin of such a bigness , as be able to receive a fish as big as one thigh , and this her big throat and long bill do make she seem so ugly . here i have declare the estate of Florida , and the commodity therein to this day know , which although it may seem unto some , by the mean that the plenty of gold and silver , be not so abundant as in other place , that the cost bestow upon the same mean to will not be aye to quit the charge : yet be i of the °p’ni°n > that by that which i have see in other Florida and island of the Indians , where such increase of cattle Virginia . have be , that of twelve head of beast in five and twenty year , do in the hide of they raise a thousand pound profit yearly , that the increase of cattle only will raise profit sufficient for the same : for we may consider , if so small a portion do raise so much gain in such short time , what will a great do in many year ? and sure i may this affirm , that the ground of the indian for the breed of cattle , be not in any point to be compare to this of Florida , which all the year long be so green , as any time in the summer with we : which sure be not to be marvel at , see the country stand in so watery a climate : for once a day without fail they have a shower of rain ; which by mean of the country it self , which be dry , and more fervent hot than we , do make all thing to flourish therein . and because there be not the thing we all seek for , be rather desirous of present gain , i do therefore affirm the attempt thereof to be more requisite for a prince , who be of power able to go through with the same , rather than for any subject . from thence we depart the 28 of July , upon our [ three . 521. ] voyage homeward , have there all thing as may be most convenient for our purpose : and take leave of the Frenchman that there still remain , who with diligence determine to make as great speed after , as they can . thus by mean of contrary wind oftentimes , we prolong our voyage in such manner that victual scant with we , so that we be diverse time ( or rather the most part ) in despair of ever come home , have not God of his goodness better 62 provide for we , than our deserve . in which state of great misery , we be provoke to call upon he by fervent prayer , which move he to hear we , so that we have a prosperous wind , which do set we so far shoot , as to be upon the bank of newfound land , on saint bartholomews eve , and we sound thereupon , find ground at a hundred and thirty fathom , be that day somewhat becalm , and take a great number of fresh codfish , which great relieve we : and be very glad thereof , the next day we depart , and have linger little gale for the space of four or five day , at the end of which we see a couple of french ship , and have of they so much fish as will serve we plentiful for all the rest of the way , the captain pay for the same both gold and silver , to the just value thereof , unto the chief owner of the say ship , but they not look for any thing at all , be glad in themselves to meet with such good entertainment at sea , as they have at our hand . after which departure from they , with a good large wind the twenty of September we come to Padstow in Cornwall , God be thank , ThuirarrwaU in safety , with the loss of twenty person in all the tn p^5*0 ™ ™ voyage , and with great profit to the venture or the say eptemi , er^ voyage , as also to the whole realm , in bring home 1565. both gold , silver , pearl and other jewel great store . his name therefore be praise for evermore . amen . the name of certain gentleman that be in this voyage . ' m. John Hawkins . m. John Chester , { sir William Chesters son . m. Anthony Parkhurst . " m. Fitzwilliam . m. Thomas Woorley . m. Edward Lacie , { with diverse other . the register and true account of all herein express have be approve by i John spark the young , who go upon the same voyage , and write the same . 