certain spanish letter intercept by ship of the worshipful master John Wattes write from diverse place of the island and of the main land as well of Nueva Espanna , as of Tierra Firma and Peru , contain many secret touch the aforesaid country , and the state of the south sea , and the trade to the philippinas . a letter send from Havana in Cuba from the general of the fleet John de orimo to the king of Spain the 18 of October 1590 , touch the build of certain excellent frigate , etc t may please your majesty that at the date hereof one of the frigate be launch : and three more will be ready against the fleet depart from hence . they be very big and excellent of sail , which will carry 150 man a piece with soldier and mariner . and have good ordinance , there be few or none of our enemy that can ofiend we . for we shall both leave and take at all [ three . 558. ] time when we listen . but it behoove your majesty to send both soldier and mariner to man the frigate . for we have great want of soldier and mariner , with tackle , anchor , powder , shot , caliver , and all kind of furniture for they . for these thing be not here to be have for money : and likewise to send some great ordinance for the zabra . for the merchant ship be so weak and so unprovide , that they have almost none to defend themselves . also we shall be constrain to give the carena again unto all the ship ; for they be very weak by reason of the long voyage : and the mariner and soldier be weary with their long travel and keep of they here . thus if it will please your majesty to 158 command with all expedition that these soldier and mariner with all kind of other furniture may be send we , than the fleet may set forward and so proceed on their voyage . God preserve your catholic royal majesty . from Havana the 20 of October 1590. your majesty servant , who royal foot i kiss . John de orimo general of your fleet . a letter send from the governor of Havana John de Trexeda , to the king of Spain , the twenty of October 1590 , touch the want of that place . y three ship which depart from this harbour since the fleet arrival here , i have give your majesty at large to understand , what have happen as much as i can , and what thing be here to be do in this city , and what your majesty must provide . and now once again i will return to put your majesty in mind thereof . i beseech your majesty to command to be provide and to . be send hither two hundred negro , if you will have this ™ fortification to go forwards : because your majesty be here at great charge with the master workman and the officer . and for want of pioner the work go not forwards . for as the work go daily forward and increase far and far , so we want man to work , and to guard it , and likewise to keep it . we dare not meddle with those of the galy . and likewise it may please your majesty to send new work tool of iron , accord to a remembrance which i have send to your majesty of late , which do signify our want more at large . likewise it be needful that your majesty shall send powder and match to furnish these fort . and likewise soldier send to send money to pay those soldier which be new * havana-come hither , and for that company of soldier which be 159 five frigate make at Havana , John de orimo general of the fleet . the excellency of the great Frygates build in Cuba . copper mine new find in Cuba . the english voyage send from Mexico to this place . for it behoove your majesty not to have they as yet leave , till such time as the defence about the fort be finish , and that which be in build upon the hill , which will be end very short if you send the negro and iron tool . likewise i have certify your majesty , that with all speed i be make ready of the five frigate , that they may carry all the treasure . also John de orimo see that it be of so great importance to have they dispatch , do furnish i with some money , although somewhat scant , until such time as your majesty do send he some order therefore . i beseech you to command it to be do ; consider the great charge and expense that we be at here , as by the account your majesty shall more at large perceive , what have be spend . Theise frigate will be make a end of without all doubt by the month of February : but as yet their tackle and sail be not here arrive : but i do stay the come thereof every day , accord as the duke of Medina and John de Ibarra have write unto i , that those ship which shall bring the same be ready to depart from thence . all these thing it behoove your majesty to send in time : for i can assure your majesty that you shall not have upon the sea such good ship as these be . for as touch the other ship of the fleet , which be in this harbour , it be not convenient to venture the silver in they . this counsel your majesty shall not take of i , for i be a soldier , and have but small skill in navigation . but every day it be tell i open and in secret by many of the pilot , captain , master and mariner . as touch the copper , 1 have put it in practice twice more , and have make proof thereof : wherein there have be more spend , then encage be willing there shall have be , because i have get no fruit thereof : i know not the cause , but that it be not do effectual by those that have the work thereof . therefore i beseech your majesty to send i that same founder which i write to 160 reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv , “ woa®^^^^ on 30 at ™ 2021 * “ °'24 ' " ‘ ° h‘‘ps : / / doi . org / 10.1017 / CBO97'11072'6337 . 014 your majesty heretofore of . our lord keep your majesty many year . from Havana the 20 of October , 1590. your majesty servant , who royal foot i kiss , John de Trexeda governor of Havana . a letter send to don Petro de Xibar one of his [ ill . 559. ] majesty privy counsel of the west Indies , from don Diego Mendez de Valdes governor of S. Juan de Puerto Rico the 20 of November 1590 , touch the state of that city and island . receive your honour letter the 20 of February , whereby i receive great content , to hear that your honour be in good health . as touch the imprisonment of our cousin don Pedro de Valdes , it do grieve i to the very soul . i beseech God to send he his liberty : and likewise the imprisonment of Diego flores de Valdes grieve i very much : i pray God to send good justice . the m. of the field Juan de Texela , and the m. workman Juan Baptista Antonio arrive here in safety , and have view this city with all the circuit round about and the situation as i have inform his majesty thereof . they have mark a place to build a strong fort , whereat the country remain very well content . and it stand in a good situation , and in a convenient place on a high mount which do lie upon the enter in of the harbour , and so cut over to a point of land , leave in the fort as much space as will contain 3000 person , without join thereunto any part of the coast . So the m. deal campo have name the fort Citadella . he leave i great store of iron work , tool eight workman , and 200 negro , which be the king . and the island do find 400 pioner which be continual at work . his majesty have send i a ten i6t i* Pedro de Valdes , prisoner in England . John Baptista Antonio the generail inge-nour of the west Indies . a strong fort new build in saint Juan de Puerto Rico. warrant to spend the provision of the island , and to take those rent which his majesty have here , and to certify his majesty what there be want for the maintain of the workman and that they may have all thing necessary . so i have send to Nueva Espanna , for such thing as be here want . i have write to the m. of the field , which be go to Havana , inform he that it do great import that the work with all expedition shall go forward , see that it be begin for the defence of the island . and we do defend it as well as we can from the enemy , in respect of the great danger which otherwise may happen , if the enemy shall come and find it begin , and not end . and likewise that his majesty will send i that which i do request . and the most principal thing of all be , to send more negro . And send i all these thing which be needful , i trust in God i shall in short time build up the fort , to defend Thisfirt be we from the enemy . the fort must be build triangle t^en by the wjse . for reach infO the bay : and we shall be able berland to plant in the same 40 piece of good ordinance , canon , 1598. demi-canon , and culverin . the m. of the field , have promise to send i some from Havana . for that he be determine to cast some there , by reason of the great copper mine store of copper , which now of late be find in Havana : ^H^vana ™ f°r ere we have as yet but small store of ordinance to ’ defend we . i look for 5 canon which his majesty shall send from Spain , with shot and powder and all kind of weapon , because that here be great want in the island . his majesty have send the whole number of 200 soldier 200 soldier , and in the company there come two SdePuertoRico captain . the corpse de guard be keep in the market 1500fight place : and twice in a month i muster all the man in man inn . Juan the hand , and find very near 1500 fight man , and depuerto Rico go horseman . the fort when it be end will be the san ' strong that his majesty have in all the Indies . and now the people of the country sleep in security . for the boldness of common before , the Englishman will come and beard the english . we t0 haven mouth . God keep your honour , and 162 send you long health . from Puerto Rico the 20 of November 1590. the governor Diego Mendez de Valdes . a letter to John Lopez canavate , alderman in the town of canavate in Spain write from his servant Juan de Porva canavate , from Havana the seventeenth of October 1590 , touch the state of the say place . he be to give you to understand , that since my departure from saint Lucar i have write unto you twice of my arrival here , and what success i have have . and now you shall understand that i be determine to go for Nueva Espanna . for i stay but opportunity of time . for here be great watch daily keep and great look to the soldier in keep of they together , for run away . but nevertheless i hope in God , to find some friend to convey i away from hence . this country be so close and narrow , that if a man steal not away hide in some ship , it be not possible for he to escape , nor to go a league out of the town , no way but by sea . and because the harbour be so close , it be the best harbour and the sure in the world . the harbour be make in this order . the entry in toward the land be by a narrow strait chanel , which continue as long as a caliver shoot , and from that place the river open broad and broad : there be in the enter in , two point which make with the land , whereupon be new build two strong fort , which be fortify with very great store of ordinance : beside another strong and famous fort which be in the city , so that it be impossible to take it . there be in these three fort , a thousand soldier in garrison . and likewise here be two galy to keep the coast . yet for all this , the audacious Englishman be without all shame be 163 the soldier run away from Havana . [ Iii . 560. ] the boldness of the english . 18 ship build in Cuba against England . Acapulco the harbour where the ship lie that go for China . the english voyage not afraid to come and dare we at our own door . our journey to go for England be most certain in the year 1592. here be make with great expedition 18 ship , which be call frigate for that effect . they be very strong ship , and will draw but very little water , whereby they may enter among the should on the bank of Flanders : they be build the high because here be great store of timber and excellent good and incorruptible . it be report that the fleet will depart from hence in February , by reason that at that time the Englishman be not depart out of their own country . and thus i rest , from this island of S. Christopher in Havana this present day on saint Luke even ; the 17 of October 1590. your worship servant , John de Porva canavate . a letter from Mexico , of Sebastian Biscaino to his father Antonio Biscaino in Corchio in Spain , touch the great profit of the trade to China , and somewhat of m. Thomas Candish . write the 20 of June 1590. ave write to your worship by a friend of i at large , now i will be somewhat short . and this be only to give you to understand , that four month past , i come from China , and land in Acapulco , 70 league from Mexico , which be the harbour where the ship that go down to China lie : and all the merchant of Mexico bring all their spanish commodity down to this harbour , to ship they for that country . it be one of the best harbour in all Nueva Espanna ; and where the ship may ride most safe without all kind of danger . for it lie under a neck of land , and behind a great point . and in this harbour here be four great ship of Mexico of 600 and 800 ton a piece , which 164 only serve to carry our commodity to China , and so to return back again . the order be thus . from hence to China be above two thousand league , far than from hence to Spain . and from hence their two first ship depart at one time to China : and be 13 or 14 month return back again . and when those two ship be return , than the other twain two month after depart from hence . they go now from hence very strong with soldier . i can certify you of one thing ; that 200 ducat in spanish commodity , and some flemish ware which i carry with i thither , i make worth 1400 ducat there in the country . so i make account that with those silk , and other commodity which i bring with i from thence to Mexico , i get 2500 ducat by the voyage : and have get more , if one pack of fine silk have not be spoil with salt water . so as i say , there be great gain to be get if that a man return in safety . but the year 1588 i have great mischance , come in a ship from China to Nueva Espanna : which be lade with rich commodity , be take by a Englishman which rob we and afterward m - Thomas burn our ship , wherein i lose a great deal of treasure c^ish . and commodity . A.D. 1590. FromAcapulco , to China above 2000 league . Flemish ware good in China . a wonderful gain . if i shall write to you of the state of this country of China , and of the strange thing which be there , and of the wealth of the country , i be not able to do it , in a whole quire of paper . only i may certify you , that it be the goodly country , and the rich , and most plentiful in all the world . for here be great store of gold mine , silver mine , and pearl , great store of cotton cloth : for the country people wear nothing else but fine cotton cloth , which be more accept than silk . for here be great store of silk , and they be good cheap . all kind of victual , as bread , flesh , wine and hen and all kind of fowl , be very plentiful . here be great store of fresh river . the people be very love . here be very fair city and town with costly building , better than those in Spain . and 165 gold mine , silver mine , and pearl , in China . fine linen cloth great esteem in China . the country people go very rich apparel both in silk and gold . but here we have order from the king of Spain , that a Spaniard may not dwell in China , above 3 year , and afterward they must return again into Nueva Espanna , and other soldier must come in their place . the country be very unwholesome for we Spaniard . for within these 20 year of 14000 , which have go to the philippinas , there be 13000 of they not above one dead , and not past 1000 of they leave alive . there be ^iart^t^ a p^ace in China which be a harbour , call Macaran , P^pp^ , which the king have give to the Spaniard free : which shall be the place where the ship shall come and traffic . for in this harbour there be a great river which go up into the main land , unto diverse town and city , which be near to this river . and thus trouble you no far i rest . from Mexico the 20 of June 1590. your obedient son , Sebastian Biscaino . [ ill . 561. ] a letter of Bartholomew canon to Peter de Tapia in Seville , from Mexico the 30 of May 1590 , touch the state of Nueva Espanna , and the fleet of that year . ecause i have answer your letter which i have receive in the last fleet , as touch that matter i have no more to say . the occasion of my write unto you at this time , be to give you to understand , that those commodity which come in the last fleet , be sell at the first good cheap , and those that buy they , get much by they . for now at this instant white roan cloth be sell for 8 or 9 real a vare . the cause of this be , by reason there come a caravel of advise from Havana ; which bring we news , how the army that his majesty do send for England , be all spoil and cast away : and therefore they of Spain do write that there will come no fleet from Spain hither this year : and this be the cause that 166 all linen cloth be very dear in these part . Wines also be very dear : for they be sell for 90 and 100 demina a pipe . when the frigate depart from hence in August last 1589. Cochinilia be sell at that instant for 50 peso the quintail ; and now it be sell for 55 pesoe . and since that news come from Spain in a caravel of saint Lucar , that it be sell there for 72 ducat the quintail , there be lade in this fleet 14000 Arovas of Cochinilia , and 7000 Arovas moor be lade in the frigate which depart before the fleet. there be lade in the fleet great quantity of treasure , more than have be send to Spain these many year , both for the king and the viceroys account . and the merchant and gentleman of all these province do send great quantity to supply the king want : for that his majesty have write to the viceroy and to the gentleman of these country to aid he with much money towards the maintenance of his war against France and other place , and therefore they have send good store : God send it well to Spain . there be likewise lade aboard the fleet to the number of 100000. hide , and great store of other kind of this country commodity . so that the fleet go very rich lade . quick silver be here very dear , for here be almost none to be have for any money to work in the gold mine : for without quick silver we can refine our gold . and no man upon pain of death may bring any from Spain hither ; but all must come for the king account : and so the king do sell it here : there be exceed great gain therein . and thus i rest : from Mexico , the 30 of May 1590. Bartholomew canon . 167 [ a letter a letter of Frier Alonso new elect bishop of mechuacan , to the king of Spain , write in Peru in the city de los Reyes the first of march 1590 , touch the state of Arica a chief haven in Peru. the people of the river of plate . 100 man want . Pon Christmas even the year 1589 , i receive your majesty commission in Potossi . for which i be and shall be continual bind to pray for your majesty long health , for the great benefit which your majesty have bestow upon i , in send i to mechuacan : whereby my great travel and pain may be recompense , which i have take with that ungrateful and desperate people of the river of plate , which they have be the occasion of , in deal so bad with i their pastor , which have counsel they , that they shall have a great care to serve God , and be dutiful to your majesty , accord as every good and true subject aught to do . now for this gift which your majesty have bestow on i , i most humble kiss your majesty hand a thousand time . thus present i depart from Potossi somewhat sickly , to accomplish that which your majesty have command i . so i arrive at Lima in safety the first of February by the way of Arica , which be a haven town , where they embark all the bar of silver . and there i have see what be do , 8c what they have provide against the Englishman in that haven : which be ; that there be a little fort make hard by the water side , with certain small piece of ordinance in the say fort to offend the enemy , if occasion shall serve that they shall offer to come into the harbour and offer any violence . but the principali thing of all that we want be to have soldier , foot man , and horseman . for accord as i be inform , here want 100 man which shall keep the coast , if they shall offer to land and march up into the 168 country . and likewise the people of this country have tell i , that if upon a high mount which be here in the harbour near to the haven mouth , on the southside of the harbour where the sea do beat , there be two or three great canon plant on the top of the hill , ( where very good watch be continual keep ) from that place they good watch may reach to do the enemy great hurt , a league into the c^nua^ sea . the new viceroy don Garcia Urtado de Mendosa , ‘ worthy of that dignity , be in great favour with all those of these realm : for that he be a great solliciter both by [ three . 562. ] sea and land in all kind of diligence , not loose one hour in your service , and that which he have in charge . with as much speed as may be i will depart from hence to mechuacan , to serve that church and your majesty : and there i will remain accord to your majesty commandment , with the bull or indulgence . our lord keep your majesty many year in his holy service . from the city de los Reyes the first of march 1590. Frier Alonso bishop of mechuacan . a letter of don John de Miramontes suasola to don John Garcias de Penalosa from Arica on the coast of Peru the ten of march 1590. Fter my long travel and bid success , my fortune bring i to the Indies ; where be void of all hope , and full of grief , i be become a soldier : a thing in this country which be most hate of all other thing , not only of man , but of the wild beast : and be a occupation which be choose of idle person . the occasion of this be , that there have be in these sea , and yet be certain English rover : and in seek of they i have travel these three year : the one of the year a soldier , and the other two year i have go for captain and ensign-bearer . and at this time here be arrive don Garcias english man in the south sea seek 3 year . Urtado de Mendosa viceroy of these realm : who have 169 this be m. Chidleys fleet , whereof the delight be in the strait ofMagelan in January and Feb. 1589. the english voyage choose i to be chief ensign-bearer of a army which depart from hence to scour the coast . for here we have news of the enemy , which be come upon the coast : for we have stay for their come these four month the same way which they must come , in a haven call Arica , which be the first entry of Peru. so i have 90 pezo a month , beside other profit , at nine real the pezo ; and four share at nine real the pezo . so that i have 1800 pezo every year of pay : for the viceroy be my dear friend , and make great account of i . and i have always 400 ducat in my chest to go like a man . i beseech God send we quietness . but yet it be the part of a gentleman to serve the king his master in these action . and thus i rest . from the harbour of Arica the ten of march 1590. i kiss your worship hand , and be at your commandment don John de Miramontes suasola . there be four great galleon of 350 ton a piece , which be in Arica man of war , with a general , admiral , vice-admiral , with great store of soldier which keep this haven : for the viceroy have intelligence this be m. that there be certain Englishman of war come fleet thither . this haven of Arica be the best harbour in all ' the south sea : for all the silver which come from the mine of Potossi , be ship in this harbour , and so bring to Lima. and likewise all the commodity which come from Spain , and all the king quicksilver , be unlade in this harbour , and so carry to the city of Lima and other place , where the mine of silver be . 170 a letter of the licentiate Christopher Uslano to Gonsalvo de Solana in the city of Encisa in Spain , write from the city of Potossi in Peru the 20. of July 1590 , touch a great plague in Peru , and the shortness of the passage from the river of plate into Potossi in Peru. he last year 1588 i receive letter from your worship and from my sister : and since that time i have receive none , nor in the fleet which come to Cartagena 1589. and this year 1590 there have famine . bene great want of corn in this kingdom of Potossi : for that there have be no rain in this kingdom of long time . for in march the husbandman use to sow their corn : and in April winter do begin . and if in April there be no rain , the corn which be sow will consume away : and so for want of rain we have have two bid year of corn . and likewise here have be in these country of Potossi , and in the city de la paz , great sickness among the plague . Indian , Mullatos , and mestizo , call the small pock , and a certain plague , which have destroy all this country . and there have no old people die , nor Spaniard , but only this country people , from one year to 30 year of age : so for want of Indian we can not work in the mine . this sickness run all along the coast of Peru , and have pass into the strait of magalane , whence we have news that those soldier which be send from Spain thither to build those fort be most of they dead , and especial the workman which come to make the fort . the general don Diego de abolos have write to his majesty to send more soldier and more workman , whereby these three fort may be build accord to the king commandment . this sickness come first from Carta - 171 gena to this country , which be 1000 league distant : [ three . 563. ] and , as i say , it have go all Peru over , to the utter Peru utter undo of this country : i pray God to cease it . i the^plame pray you w^en you write any letter to i , send they in those ship which come to saint Thome , and take in negro . and there be great store of ship which go to saint Thome for negro , and it be but 15. day sail over a gulf to Brasill . and from Brasill their ship bring their negro to a haven call a short pas - the haven of Buenos Aeres , which be within the entrance ^buenos1 Aeres mig^tie river of plate . and from this harbour in the river of kind of spanish and Portugal commodity be carry plate to Peru , to this city of Potossi in cart and on horse : for it be but 10. or 12. day journey , and the country be very plain for cart to travail . and from Potossi to this harbour be great store of treasure bring to buy that country commodity , and so they be ship for 172 spanish letter intercept a.d. . i59° - Portugal : and the ship go and come again in short time . if his majesty will consent that we may have traffic from Spain to this harbour , it will be very profitable : and in five or six month i shall hear from you , and you shall do the like from i . and by the way of Cartagena it be sometime 2. year before 2% tedlous-we can receive your letter from Spain . by this way t my brother may write , and so by this mean the letter p^ may speedy come to my hand . and thus i rest . from this city of Potossi the 20. of July 1590. the licenciate Christopher Uslano . a letter of Steven de Tresio to Alonso Martin Vaca in Sivil from Panama the 21. of August 1590. touch the king desire to borrow money upon privy seal , and the want of the country . t may please your worship to understand , that i have receive a packet of letter from you , wherein you write unto i of the great misery and the calamity of Spain . and i promise you that these country be in no less . for here be great want of corn and other kind of provision : for here be almost none to be have for any money , by reason that from Lima there be no ship come with maiz . here we have have news from Spain of the great provision which be make ready for those great war which his majesty be in prepare , and of the great sum of money that his majesty stand in need of : so that it do put we all that be dweller here in such a perplexity and confusion , that we know not what we shall do . i pray God his majesty take not away our money which we have send to Spain in the fleet . for here be merchant that have send some 200000. pezo , some 100000. pezo , some 60000. some more some less , to have it employ in commodity of that 173 privy seal to borrow money send into Peru. abundance of money to come from Lima and from the valle . the english voyage country . although the king have send hither his schedule or bill of assignment sign and seal by his majesty , which have be proclaim here : the content whereof be , that what man soever merchant or other will send their money into Spain in that fleet , his majesty will not take away any part or portion thereof , ( which in so do will be a great comfort unto we all ) yet here we be in doubt that he will take it from we all . news from the city of Lima as yet we have none : but i can certify your worship , that all thing be very dear here , and that we stand in great extremity for want of victual ; and likewise we have great want of money . also here be order come from the king with certain privy seal for to lend his majesty money , for that he have great need thereof . this country at this instant be very poor , and there be none that can lend the king at this time any money at all , by reason that this land be leave so provide of money : but we be look for great store of money , which be to come from Lima and from the valle . from Panama the 12. of August 1590. Steven de Tresio . a letter of the licentiate John de labera to the licentiate Alonso Sapata de Henao in Castille in Calamea de la Sorengo , write from saint fee de Bogota in the new kingdom of Granada , the 10. of May 1590. touch the rich silver mine of marequita new find out , and the long way thither by the river of Magdalena . in|the other letter which i dispatch from hence in August 1589. i write unto your worship by 2. or 3. way : but i know not whether you have receive they or not . present after i depart to the government of Popayan , which join with the city of Quito in the coast of Peru , in company of the governor lieutenant don Diego Ordonez the 174 Lara of Salamanca . but i be fain to forsake his [ three . 564. ] company , by reason i fall sick in the city of marequita , where they have discover the great silver mine : which city be above 200. league from Cartagena : where i remain a certain time very sick . and because this country be extreme hot , and i every day grow worse and worse , i be fain to travail 30. league further up into the main land to a city call the atu of saint fee in the new kingdom of Granada , be on the ta fee in coast of Peru : which be a cold country : where i be off admit a procurator , for that the royal audience be Granada . keep in this city . so i find my self very healthy of body , by reason this country be full of all kind of victual , very good and very plentiful , as bread , cheese , bacon , beef , great store of hen , and great store of comfeiture . only here be want of gold : so that this country will be utter undo , if the mine of marequita help not to restore the same again : whereof there be good hope : for here be great store of metal already great store of find , and the workman be in hand to refine the say metal : so that we be in good hope that great store of silver will be find in these mine of great value and profit to his majesty . this river be call the great river of Magdalena . there be a fish in the river call the great cayman , which follow after the canoas : and if it can °fmag-reach any man in the canoa , it will hail he out and a of devour he . all night they lie in the sand on shore . in this river as we be go up , there be at certain season great store of lightning and thunder , with such abundance of rain , as though the sky will fall down : and so it do continue from midnight until morning : so that we be fain to go aboard the canoas , and with certain broad leaf which grow in the country , the mariner make a cover to cast over the ware which be lade in the canoas : and it do keep both the rain and sun from we which be passenger . the canoas be draw up this river of Magdalena by main force of the mariner in row and hale they with 175 rope . there be 7. or 8. Indian common which guide these canoas , beside the master which keep the helm , and the passenger . we be common two month in go up this river . it be 150. league to the land place . and there the merchant unlade their merchandise , which serve for all the city and town which be in this new kingdom e of Granada . and the merchant lade the canoas back again from thence with great store of silver and gold which be get out of the mine for Cartagena , and there it be ship for Spain . and likewise here be great quantity of treasure lade in the say canoas which be for the king custom and other duty which be pay : but they be but a month or three week go down the river to Cartagena . these be the rich mine in all Peru. and thus i rest . from Santa Fee de Bogota in the new kingdom of Granada in Peru the 10. of May 1590. the licentiate John de labera . a letter of Hieronymo de Nabares to the licenciat John Alonso dwell in Valladolid , write from Panama to Sivil the 24. day of August 1590. touch the gainefulnes of the trade to the philippinas , and the extreme fear they have of the Englishman . ot long ago i write to your worship from Panama by the way of Havana : give you to understand of my be here , and of the state of these country . \ HC1 cj oc ul lhc oLdLv oi Lil CSC COU . i i after i depart from Spain , in 37. day we arrive at Cartagena : ' . Cartagena : and from thence i take ship to go to number de dios , which be 80. league from Cartagena : and in 4. day we get thither . and from thence i go to Panama : where i have remain these 20. day , till the ship go for the philippinas . 176 my meaning be to carry my commodity thither : for it be constant report , that for every hundred ducat a the great man shall get 600. ducat clear . we must stay here °f in Panama from August till it be Christmas . for in August , September , October and November it be winter here , and extreme foul weather upon this coast of Peru , and not navigable to go to the philippinas , nor to any place else in the south sea . so that at Christmas the ship begin to set on their voyage for those place : and then in these part the summer begin with very fair weather , and always we shall have the wind with we . for in July until October here be terrible thunder and lighten with extreme rain , so that it be not possible to go any way in this country . here be in Panama 10. great ship of 500 , 400 , 300 , and 200. tun apiece , and some 15. bark which use common to sail in the south sea to Lima , to the valle , to Arica , and to the philippinas . this country in the summer be so extreme hot , that it be not possible to travel in the day time : [ three . 565. ] it stand in 8. deg . and and all this coast be in 9 and 10. deg . here be great store of adder , snake and toad , which be in the house , but they do but small hurt . here bread , wine , and bacon be very dear , by reason the country do not yield it : for it be bring from Peru. a livre . of bread be worth here 2. rial of plate : a quart of wine be sell for 4. rial : for none grow here . here be very few sheep , and those extreme dear . the only food here for flesh , be ox , cow , bull and heffker : you may buy 20. livre . Twenty li . off of beef for one rial of plate . their small money beefi may be of silver be a rial of plate , and very few of they , but all piece or 4. a 8. ror the silver mine which daily be find in Peru be wonderful to be speak of . if a man do not see the silver make , he will never believe it : for the very earth which come out of the mine , and be afterward wash , be but 3. or 4. year on a mount , yield great store of ten 177 m silver afterward again . but as here we get much , so our charge in meat , drink and apparel do cost very much . as for fruit here be none that be good , but only musk melon , and they be sell for 6. or 8. rial apiece . i can certify your worship of no news , but only , that all this country be in such extreme the english - fear of the Englishman our enemy , that the like be man extreme never see or hear of : for in see a sail , present fear earn Peru , . - . „ . • / here be alarm in all the country . 1 pray you to write unto i as touch the war that his majesty have with our enemy , and how his majesty do prevail . and thus i rest . from Panama in the firm land the 28. of Aug. 1590. Hieronymo de Nabares . 