it the discovery of Guiana . n Thursday the 6. of February in the year 1595. we depart England , and the Sunday follow have sight of the north cape of Spain , the wind for the most part continue prosperous : we pass in sight of the burling , and the rock , and so onward for the canary , and fall with Fuerte ventura the 17 of the same month , where we spend two or three day , and relieve our com-348 pany with some fresh meat . from thence we coast by the grand Canaria , and so to tenerif , and stay there for the lion whelp your lordship ship , and for captain Amy as Preston and the rest . but when after 7. or 8. day we find they not , we depart and direct our course for Trinidad with my own ship , and a small theyleof bark of captain cross only ( for we have before lose Trinitia , i-sight of a small Galego on the coast of Spain , which come with we from Plymouth : ) we arrive at Trinidad the 22. of march , cast anchor at point Curiapan , which the Spaniard call punta de Gallo , which be situate in 8. degree or there about : we abide there 4. or 5. day , and in all that time we come not to the speech of any Indian or Spaniard : on the coast we see a fire , as we sail from the point Caroa towards Curiapan , but for fear of the Cunapan . Spaniards none dare come to speak with we . i my self coast it in my barge close aboard the shore and land in every cove , the better to know the island , while the ship keep the channel . from Curiapan after a few day we turn up Northeast to recover that place which the Spaniard call Puerto de los espannole , and the inhabitant Conquerabia , and as before ( revictual my barge ) i leave the ship and keep by the shore , the better to come to speech with some of the inhabitant , and also to understand the river , water place , and port of the island , which ( as it be rude do ) my purpose be to send your lordship after a few day . from Curiapan i come to a port and seat of Indian call Parico , where we Parico . find a fresh water river , but see no people . from thence i row to another port , call by the natural Piche , and by the Spaniard Tierra de Brea : in the way Tierra de between both be diverse little brook of fresh water and one salt river that have store of oyster upon the branch of the tree , and be very salt and well taste . all their oyster grow upon those bough and spray , and not on the ground : the like be common see in other place of the west Indies , and else where . this tree be describe by Andrew Thevet in his french 349 antarctic , and the form figure in the book as a plant very strange , and by Pliny in his 12. book of he natural history . but in this island , as also in Guiana there be very many of they . at this point call Tierra de Brea or Piche there be that abundance of stone pitch , that all the ship of the world may be therewith load from thence , and we make trial of it in trim our ship to be most excellent good , and melt not with the sun as the pitch of Norway , and therefore for ship trade the south part [ three . 632. ] very profitable . from thence we go to the mountain foot call anniperima , and so pass the river Carone on which the spanish city be seat , we meet with our ship at Puerto de los Espannolles or Conquerabia . this island of Trinidad have the form of a sheephook , and be but narrow , the north part be very mountainous , the soil be very excellent and will bear sugar , ginger , or any other commodi tie that the Indies yield . it have store of dear , wild pork , fruit , fish and foul : it have also for bread sufficient maiz , cassavi , and of those root and fruit which be common every where in the west Indies . it have diverse beast which the Indies have not : the Spaniard confess that they find grain of gold in some of the river , but they have a purpose to enter Guiana ( the magazin of all rich metal ) care not to spend time in the search thereof any further . this island be call by the people thereof cairi , jand in it be diverse nation : those about Parico be call laio , those at Punta de Carao be of the Arwacas , and between Carao and Curiapan they be call Salvajos , between Carao and Punta de galera be the Nepojos , and those about the spanish city term themselves carinepagote : of the rest of the nation , and of other port and river i leave to speak here , be impertinent to my purpose , and mean to describe they as they be situate in the particular plot and description of the island , three part whereof i coast with my barge , that i may the better describe it . 35° meet with the ship at Puerta de los espannole , we find at the land place a company of Spaniards who keep a guard at the descent , and they offer a sign of peace , i send captain Whiddon to speak with they , who afterward to my great grief i leave bury in the say island after my return from Guiana , the death of be a man most honest and valiant . the Spaniard seem to be desirous to trade with we , and to enter into term of peace , more for doubt of their own strength then for aught else , and in the end upon pledge , some of they come aboard : the same evening there stale also aboard we in a small Canoa two Indian , the one of they be a cacique or lord of the people call Cantyman , who have the year before bene with captain Whiddon , and be of his acquaintance . by this Cantyman we understand what strength the Spaniard have , how far it be to their city , and of don Antonio de Berreo the governor , who be say to be slay in his second attempt of Guiana , but be not . while we remain at Puerto de los espannole some Spaniards come aboard we to buy linen of the company , and such other thing as they want , and also to view our ship and company , all which i entertain kind and feast after our manner : by mean whereof i learn of one and another as much of the estate of Guiana as i can , or as they know , for those poor soldier have be many year without wine , a few draught make they merry , in which mood they vaunt of Guiana and of the riches thereof , and all what they know of the way and passage , my self seem to purpose nothing less than the entrance or discovery thereof , but breed in they a opinion that i be bind only for the relief of those English which i have plant in Virginia , whereof the bruit be come among they ; which i have perform in my return , if extremity of weather have not force i from the say coast . 351 8 Englishman betray by Antony Berreo . the english voyage i find occasion of stay in this place for two cause : the one be to be revenge of Berreo , who the year before 1594. have betray eight of captain Whiddons man , and take they while he depart from they to seek the Edward Bonaventure , which arrive at Trinidad the day before from the east Indies : in who absence Berreo send a Canoa aboard the pinnace only with Indian and dog invite the company to go with they into the wood to kill a dear , who like wise man in the absence of their captain follow the Indian , but be no soon one harquebus shoot from the shore , but berreos soldier lie in ambush have they all , notwithstanding that he have give his word to captain Whiddon that they shall take water and wood safe : the other cause of my stay be , for that by discourse with the Spaniard i daily learn more and more of Guiana , of the river and passage , and of the enterprise of Berreo , by what mean or fault he fail , and how he mean to prosecute the same . while we thus spend the time i be assure by another cacique of the north side of the island , that Berreo have send to Margarita and Cumana for soldier , mean to have give i a cassado at part , if it have be possible . for although he have give order through all the island that no Indian shall come aboard to trade with i upon pain of hang and quarter , ( have execute two of they for the same , which i afterward find ) yet every night there come some with most lamentable complaint of his cruelty , how he have divide the island and give to every soldier a part , that he make the ancient cacique which be lord of the country to be their slave , that he keep they in chain , and drop their naked body with burn bacon , and such other torment , which i find afterward to be true : for in the city after i enter the same there be 5. of you lord or little king ( which they call cacique in the west Indies ) in one chain 352 1595-almost dead of famine , and waste with torment : these [ he . 633. ] be call in their own language Acarewana , and now of late since english , french and spanish be come among they , they call themselves captain , because they perceive that the chief of every ship be call by that name . those five captain in the chain be call wannawanare , Carroaori , maquarima , tarroo-panama , and aterima . so as both to be revenge of the former wrong , as also consider that to enter Guiana by small boat , to depart 400. or 500 mile from my ship , and to leave a garrison in my back interest in the same enterprise , who also daily expect supply out of Spain , i shall have savour very much of the ass : and therefore take a time of most advantage i set upon the corpse du guard in the evening , and have put they to the sword , send captain calfield onward with 60. soldier , and my self follow with 40. more and so take their new city which they call S. Joseph by break of day : they abide the city of not any fight after a few shot , and all be dismiss \'a^e^ntm but only Berreo and his companion , i bring they Berreo with i aboard , and at the instance of the Indian , i prisoner . set their new city of saint Joseph on fire . the same day arrive captain George Gifford with your lordship ship , and captain Keymis who i lose on the coast of Spain , with the Galego , and in they diverse gentleman and other , which to our little army be a great comfort and supply . we then haste away towards our purpose discovery , and first i call all the captain of the island together that be enemy to the Spaniard ; for there be some which Berreo have bring out of other country , and plant there to eat out and waste those that be natural of the place , and by my Indian interpreter , which i carry out of England , i make they understand that i be the servant of a queen , who be the great cacique of the north , and a virgin , and have more cacique under she then there be tree in ten 353 z sir W. Ralegh pass 400. mile towards Guiana . the english voyage that island : that she be a enemy to the Castellani in respect of their tyrannic and oppression , and that she deliver all such nation about she , as be by they oppress , and have free all the coast of the northern world from their servitude , have send i to free they also , and withal to defend the country of Guiana from their invasion and conquest . i show they her majesty picture which they so admire and honour , as it have be easy to have bring they idolatrous thereof . the like and a more large discourse i make to the rest of the nation both in my pass to Guiana , and to those of the border , so as in that part of the world her majesty be very famous and admirable , who they now call Ezrabeta Cassipuna Aquerewana , which be as much as Elizabeth , the great princess or great commander . this do we leave Puerto de los espannole , and return to Curiapan , and have Berreo my prisoner i gather from he as much of Guiana as he know . This Berreo be a gentleman well descend , and have long serve the spanish king in Milan , Naples , the low country and elsewhere , very valiant and liberali , and a gentleman of great assuredness , and of a great heart : i use he accord to his estate and worth in all thing i can , accord to the small mean i have . i send captain Whiddon the year before to get what knowledge he can of Guiana , and the end of my journey at this time be to discover and enter the same , but my intelligence be far from truth , for the country be situate above 600. English mile further from the sea , than i be make believe it have be , which afterward understand to be true by Berreo , i keep it from the knowledge of my company , who else will never have be bring to attempt the same : of which 600. mile i pass 400. leave my ship so far from i at anchor in the sea , which be more of desire to perform that discovery , then of reason , especial have 354 * 595-such poor and weak vessel to transport our self in ; for in the bottom of a old Galego which i cause to be fashion like a galley , and in one barge , two whirry , and a shipboat of the lion whelp , we carry 100 person and their victual for a month in the same , be all drive to lie in the rain and weather , in the open air , in the burn sun , and upon the hard board , and to dress our meat , and to carry all manner of furniture in they , wherewith they be so pester and unsavoury , that what with victual be most fish , with wet clothes of so many man thrust together , and the heat of the sun , i will undertake there be never any prison in England , that can be find more unsavoury and loathsome , especial to my self , who have for many year before be diet and care for in a sort far more differ . if captain Preston have not be persuade that he shall have come too late to Trinidad to have find we there ( for the month be expire which i promise to tarry for he there ere he can recover the coast of Spain ) but that it have please God he may have join with we , and that we have enter the country but some ten day soon ere the river be overflow , we have adventure either to have go to the great city of Manoa , or at least take so many of the other city [ in . 634. i and town near at hand , as will have make a royal return : but it please not God so much to favour i at this time : if it shall be my lot to prosecute the same , i shall willing spend my life therein , and if any else shall enable thereunto , and conquer the same , i assure he thus much , he shall perform more than ever be do in Mexico by Cortes , or in Peru by Pizarro , whereof the one conquer the empire of Mutezuma , the other of Guascar , and Atabalipa , and whatsoever prince shall possess it , that prince shall be lord of more gold , and of a more beautiful empire , and of more city and people , then either the king of Spain , or the great Turk . 3S5 but because there may arise many doubt , and how this empire of Guiana be become so populous , and adorn with so many great city , town , temple , and treasure , i think good to make it know , that the emperor now reign be descend from those magnificent prince of Peru , of who large territory , of who policy , conquest , edifice , and riches Pedro de Cieza , Francisco Lopez , and other have write large discourse : for when Francisco Pizarro , Diego Almagro and other conquer the say empire of Peru , and have put to death Atabalipa son to Guaynacapa , which Atabalipa have former cause his elder brother Guascar to be slay , one of the young son of Guaynacapa flee out of Peru , and take with he many thousand of those soldier of the empire call Orejones , and with those and many other which follow he , he vanquish all that tract and valley of America which be situate between the great river of Amazones , and Baraquan , otherwise call Orenoque and Marannon . the empire of Guiana be direct east from Peru towards the sea , and lie under the equinoctial line , and it have more abundance of gold then any part of Peru , and as many or more great city than ever Peru have when it flourish most : it be govern by the same law , and the emperor and people observe the same religion , and the same form and policy in government as be use in Peru , not differ in any part : and i have be the stateliness assure by such of the Spaniard as have see Manoa the of Manoa . Imperial city of Guiana , which the Spaniard call el Dorado , that for the greatness , for the riches , and for the excellent seat , it far exceed any of the world , at least of so much of the world as be know to the spanish nation : it be found upon a lake of salt water of 200. league long like unto mare Caspium . and if we compare Fran. Lopez , it to that of Peru , and but read the report of Francisco LoPez and othersj iter will seem more than credible : and 120* ’ ? because we may judge of the one by the other , i think good to insert part of the 120. chapter of 356 Lopez in his generail history of the Indies , wherein he describe the court and magnificence of Guaynacapa , ancestor to the emperor of Guiana , who very word be these . todo el servicio de sum casa , mesa , y cozina , era de oro , y de piata , y quando menos de plata , y cobre por mass rezio . Tenia en sum recamara estatuas huecas de oro , que parecian gigantes , y las figuras all propio , you tamanno the quanto animales , ave , arbole , y yerva produze la tierra , y de quanto piece cria la mar y aguas de sus reynos . Tenia assi mesmo sogas , costale , cestas , y trox de oro y plata , rimeros de palos de oro , que pareciessen lenna raiada para quemar . en fin no avia cosa en sum tierra , que no la tuviesse de oro contrahecha : in an dizen , que tenian los Ingas un vergel en una Isla cerca de la Puna , donde se yuan a holgar , quando querian mar , que tenia la ortaliza , las flores , y arbole de oro y plata , invention y grandeza hasta entonce nunca vista . Allende de todo esto tenia infinitissima cantitad de plata , y oro por labrar en el Cuzco , que se perdio por la muerte de Guascar , ca los indios lo escondieron , viendo que los espannole se lo tomavan , y embiavan a espanna . that be , all the vessel of his house , table and kitchen be of gold and silver , and the mean of silver and copper for strength and hardness of metal . he have in his wardrobe hollow statue of gold which seem giant , and the figure in proportion and bigness of all the beast , bird , tree , and herb , that the earth bring forth : and of all the fish that the sea or water of his kingdom breed . he have also rope , budget , chest and trough of gold and silver , heap of billet of gold , that seem wood mark out to burn . final , there be nothing in his country , whereof he have not the counterfeit in gold : yea and they say , the Ingas have a garden of pleasure in a island near Puna , where they go to recreate themselves , when they will take the air of the sea , which have all kind of garden-herb , flower and tree of gold and silver , a invention , and magnificence till then never see . beside all this , he have a infinite quantity 357 of silver and gold unwrought in Cuzco which be lose by the death of Guascar , for the Indian hide it , see that the Spaniard take it , and send it into Spain . and in the 117. chapter Francisco Pizarro cause the gold and silver of Atabalipa to be weigh after he have take it , which Lopez set down in these word follow . hallaron cinquenta y do will marcos de bvena plata , y un millon y trezientos y veinte y sey will , y quinientos pesos de oro , which be : they find fifty and [ three . 635. ] two thousand mark of good silver , and one million , and three hundred twenty and six thousand and five hundred pezo of gold . now although these report may seem strange , yet if we consider the many million which be daily bring out of Peru into Spain , we may easy believe the same : for we find that by the abundant treasure of that country the spanish king vex all the prince of Europe , and be become , in a few year , from a poor king of Castille , the great monarch of this part of the world , and likely every day to increase , if other prince forslow the good occasion offer , and suffer he to add this empire to the rest , which by far exceed all the rest : if his gold now endanger we , he will then be unresistable . such of the Spaniard as afterward endeavour the conquest thereof ( whereof there have be many , as shall be declare hereafter ) think that this Inga ( of who this emperor now live be descend ) take his way by the river of Amazones , by that branch which be call papamene : for by that way follow Orellana ( by the commandment of Gonzalo Pizarro , in the year 1542 ) who name the river also bear this day , which be also by other call Marannon , although Andrew Thevet do affirm that between Marannon and Amazones there be 120 league : but sure it be that those river have one head and beginning , and the Marannon , which Thevet describe , be but a branch of Amazones or Orellana , of which i will speak more in another place . it be attempt by Ordas ; but it be now little less than 70 358 year since that Diego Ordas , a knight of the order of saint Iago attempt the same : and it be in the year 1542 that Orellana discover the river of Amazones ; but the first that ever see Manoa be Juan Martinez master of the munition to Ordas . at a port call morequito in Guiana there lie at this day a great anchor of Ordas his ship ; and this port be some 300 mile within the land , upon the great river of Orenoque . i rest at this port four day : twenty day after i leave the ship at Curiapan . the relation of this Martinez ( who be the first that discover Manoa ) his success and end be to be see in the chancery of saint Juan de Puerto rico , whereof Berreo have a copy , which appear to be the great encouragement aswell to Berreo as to other that former attempt the discovery and conquest . Orellana after he fail of the discovery of Guiana by the say river of Amazones , pass into Spain , and there obtain a patent of the king for the invasion and conquest , but die by sea about the island , and his fleet sever by tempest , the action for that time proceed not . Diego Ordas follow the enterprise , and depart Spain with 600 soldier , and 30 horse , who arrive on the coast of Guiana , be slay in a mutiny , with the most part of such as favour he , as also of the rebellious part , insomuch as his ship perish , and few or none return , neither be it certain know what become of the say Orgas , until Berreo find the anchor of his ship in the river of Orenoque ; but it be suppose , and so it be write by Lopez , that he perish on the sea , and of other writer diverse conceive and report . and hereof it come that Martin enter so far within the land , and arrive at that city of Inga the emperor ; for it chance that while Ordas with his army rest at the port of morequito ( who be either the first or second that attempt Guiana ) by some negligence , the whole store of powder provide for the service be set on fire ; and Martinez have the chief charge , be condemn by the general Ordas to be execute forthwith : 359 1595 - Juan Martinez the first that ever see Manoa . Fran. Lopez hist . gen . de las Ind. cap . 87 - diego de Ordas go forth with 600 soldier 1531. Martinez be much favour by the soldier , have all the mean possible procure for his life ; but it can not be obtain in other sort then this : that he shall be set into a canoa alone without any victuali , only with his arm , and so turn loose into the great river : but it please God that the canoa be carry down the stream , and that certain of the guianians meet it the same evening : and have not at any time see any christian , nor any man of that colour , they carry Martinez into the land to be wonder at , and so from the great city town to town , until he come to the great city of of Manoa or Manoa ? the seat and residence of Inga the emperor . °ra ° ' the emperor after he have behold he , know he to be a christian ( for it be not long before that his brethren Guascar and Atabalipa be vanquish by the Spaniard in Peru ) and cause he to be lodge in his palace , and well entertain . he live seven month in Manoa , but be not suffer to wander into the country any where . he be also bring thither all the way blindfold , lead by the Indian , until he come to the entrance of Manoa it self , and be fourteen or fifteen day in the passage . he avow at his death that he enter the city at noon , and then they uncover his face , and that he travel all that day till night through the city , and the next day from sun rise to sun set year he come to the palace of Inga . after that Martinez have live seven month in Manoa , and begin to understand the language of the country , Inga ask he whether he desire to return into his own country , or will willing abide with he . but Martinez not desirous to stay , obtain the favour of Inga to depart : with who he send diverse guianians to conduct he to the river of Orenoque , all load with as much gold as they can carry , which he give to Martinez at his departure : but when he be [ three . 636. ] arrive near the river side , the borderer which be call Orenoqueponi rob he and his Guianians of all the treasure ( the borderer be at that time at war , which Inga have not conquer ) save only of two 360 great bottle of gourd , which be fill with bead of gold curious wrought , which those Orenoqueponi thought have be no other thing than his drink or meat , or grain for food , with which Martinez have liberty to pass : and so in canoas he fall down from the river of Orenoque to Trinidad , and from thence to Margarita , and also to saint Juan de puerto rico , where remain a long time for passage into Spain , he die . in the time of his extreme sickness , and when he be without hope of life , receive the sacrament at the hand of his confessor , he deliver these thing , with the relation of his travel , and also call for his calabaza or gourd of the gold bead which he give to the church and friar to be pray for . This Martinez be he that christen the city of Manoa by the name of el Dorado , and as Berreo inform i , upon this occasion : those Guianians , and also the borderer , and all other in that tract which i have see , be marvellous great drunkard ; in which vice , i think no nation can compare with they : and at the time of their solemn feast , when the emperor carowse with his captain , tributary , and governor , the manner be thus : all those that pledge he be first strip naked , and their body anoint all over with a kind of white balsamum ( by they call curca ) of which there be great plenty , and yet very dear among they , and it be of all other the most precious , whereof we have have good experience : when they be anoint all over , certain servant of the emperor , have prepare gold make into fine powder , blow it through hollow cane upon their naked body , until they be all shine from the foot to the head : and in this sort they sit drink by twenty , and hundred , and continue in drunkenness sometime six or seven day together . the same be also confirm by a letter write into Spain , which be intercept , which m. Robert Duddeley tell i he have see . upon this sight , and for the abundance of gold which he see in the city , the image of gold in their temple , the plate , armour , and shield of gold 361 the author of the name of el Dorado . the substance of this report be in the end of the navigation of the great river of Marannon , write by Gonzalo Fernando de Oviedo to cardinali bembo . Ramusio . fol. ^ . fol . 416. sir Robert Duddeley . which they use in the war , he call it el Dorado . after the death of Ordas and Martinez , and after Orellana , who be employ by Gonzalo Pizarro , one Pedro de Osua a knight of Navarre attempt Guiana , take his way from Peru , and build his brigandine upon a river call Oia , which rise to the southward of Quito , and be very great . this river fall into Amazones , by which Osua with his company descend , and come out of that province which be call Mutylonez : and it seem to i that this empire be reserve for her majesty and the english nation , by reason of the hard success which all these and other Spaniard find in attempt the same , whereof i will speak brief , though impertinent in some read sort to my purpose . This Pedro de Osua have among ^An^ta h*s troop a Biscain , call Agiri , a man mean bear , ' who bear no other office than a sergeant or alferez : but after certain month , when the soldier be grieve with travel , and consume with famine , and that no entrance can be find by the branch or body of Amazones , this Agiri raise a mutiny , of which he make himself the head , and so prevail , as he put Osua to the sword , and all his follower , take on he the whole charge and commandment , with a purpose not only to make himself emperor of Guiana , but also of Peru , and of all that side of the west Indies : he have of his party seven hundred soldier , and of those many promise to draw in other captain and company , to deliver up town and fort in Peru : but neither find by you say river any passage into Guiana , nor any possibility to return towards Peru by the same Amazon , by reason that you descent of the river make so great a current , he be enforce to disemboque at the mouth of the say Amazones , which can not be less than a thousand league from the place where they embark : from thence he coast the land till he arrive at Margarita to the north of Mompatar , which be at this day call Puerto de Tyranno , for that he there slay don Juan de villa Andreda , governor of Margarita , who be father to don 362 Juan Sarmiento , governor of Margarita when sir John Burgh land there , and attempt the island . Agiri put to the sword all other in the island that refuse to be of his party , and take with he certain Simerones , and other desperate companion . from thence he go to Cumana , and there slay the governor , and deal in all as at Margarita : he spoil all the coast of Caracas , and the province of Venezuela , and of Rio de la hacha ; and as i remember , it be the same year that sir John Hawkins sail to saint Juan de ullua in the Jesus of Lubeck : for himself tell i that he meet with such a one upon the coast that rebel , and have sail down all the river of Amazones . Agiri from thence land about sancta Marta , and sack it also , put to death so many as refuse to be his follower , purpose to invade Nuevo reyno de Granada , and to sack Pamplon , Merida , Lagrita , Tunxa , and the rest of the city of Nuevo reyno , and from thence again to enter Peru : but in a fight in the say Nuevo reyno he be overthrow , and find no way to escape , he first put to the sword his own child , foretell they that they shall not live to be defame or upbraid by the Spaniard after his death , who will have term they the child of a traitor or tyrant ; and that sithence he can not make they prince , he will yet deliver they from shame and reproach . Theise be the end and tragedy of Ordas , Martinez , Orellana ; Ozua , and Agiri . also soon after Ordas follow Jeronimo Ortal de Saragossa with 130 soldier , who fail his entrance by sea , be cast with the current on the coast of Paria , and people about saint Miguel de Neveri . it be then attempt by don Pedro de Silva , a portague of the family of Ruigomes de Silva , and by the favour which ruigome have with the king , he be set out , but he also shoot wide of the mark ; for be depart from Spain with his fleet , he enter by Marannon and Amazones , where by the nation of the river , and by the Amazon he be utter overthrow , and himself and all his 363 A.D. 1595-the voyage of sirlohnDurgh to the west Indies . [ HL 637. ] 1534-gomar . cap . 84. in 86. don Pedro de Silva . don Gonzales Xlmenes de Casada . army defeat , only seven escape , and of those but two return . after he come Pedro Hernandez de Serpa , and land at Cumana in the west Indies , take his journey by land towards Orenoque , which may be some 120 league : but year he come to the border of the say river , he be set upon by a nation of the Indian call Wikiri , and overthrow in such sort , that of 300 soldier , horseman , many Indian , and negro , there return but 18. other affirm , that he be defeat in the very entrance of Guiana , at the first civil town of the empire call Macureguarai . captain Preston in take saint Iago de Leon ( which be by he and his company very resolute perform , be a great town , and far within the land ) hold a gentleman prisoner , who die in his ship , that be one of the company of Hernandez de Serpa , and save among those that escape , who witness what opinion be hold among the Spaniard thereabouts of the great riches of Guiana , and el Dorado the city of Inga . another Spaniard be bring aboard i by captain Preston , who tell i in the hear of himself and diverse other gentleman , that he meet with berreos campmaster at Caracas , when he come from the border of Guiana , and that he see with he forty of most pure plate of gold curious wrought , and sword of Guiana deck and inlay with gold , feather garnish with gold , and diverse rarity which he carry to the spanish king . after Hernandez de Serpa , it be undertake by the adolantado , don Gonzales Ximenes de Casada , who be one of the chief in the conquest of Nuevo reino , who daughter and heir don Antonio de Berreo marry . Gonzales seek the passage also by the river call Papamene , which rise by Quito in Peru , and run southeast 100 league , and then fall into Amazones , but he also fail the entrance , return with the loss of much labour and cost . i take one captain George a Spaniard that follow Gonzales in this enterprise . 364 1595-Gonzales give his daughter to Berreo , take his oath Antonio and honour to follow the enterprise to the last of his berreo-substance and life , who since , as he have swear to i , have spend 300000 ducat in the same , and yet never can enter so far into the land as my self with that poor troop or rather a handful of man , be in all about 100 gentleman , soldier , rower , boat-keeper , boy , and of all sort : neither can any of the forepass undertaker , nor Berreo himself , discover the country , till now late by conference with a ancient king call Carapana , he get the true light thereof : for Berreo come about 1500 mile year he understand aught , or can find any passage or entrance into any part thereof , yet he have experience of all these forename , and diverse other , and be persuade of their error and mistake . Berreo seek it by the river Cassamar , which fall into a great river call Pato : Pato fall into Meta , and Meta into Baraquan , which be also call Orenoque . he take his journey from Nuevo reyno de Granada where he dwell , have the inheritance of Gonzales Ximenes in those part : he be follow with 700 horse , he drive with he 1000 head of cattle , he have also many woman , Indian , and slave . how all these river cross and encounter , how the country lie and be border , the passage of Ximines and Berreo , my own discovery , and the way that i enter , with all the rest of the nation and river , your lordship shall receive in a large chart or map , which i have not yet finish , and which i shall most humble pray your lordship to secret , and not to suffer it to pass your own hand ; for by a draught thereof all may be prevent by other nation : for i know it be this very year seek by the french , although by the way that they now take , i fear it not much . it be also tell i year i depart England , that Villiers a new wrick the admiral be in preparation for the plant of Amazones , to which river the french have make diverse ^v^ofAm voyage , and return much gold , and other rarity . i m “ 0 365 ’ speak with a captain of a french ship that come from thence , his ship ride in Falmouth the same year that my ship come first from Virginia . there be another this year in Helford that also come from thence , and have be fourteen month at a anchor in Amazones , which be both very rich . [ Iii . 638. ] although , as i be persuade , Guiana can be enter that way , yet no doubt the trade of gold from thence pass by branch of river into the river of Amazones , and so it do on every hand far from the country it self ; for those Indian of Trinidad have plate of gold from Guiana , and those cannibal of Dominica which dwell in the island by which our ship pass yearly to the west Indies , also the Indian of Paria , those Indian call Tuearis , Chochi , apotomio , Cumanagotos , and all those other nation inhabit near about the mountain that run from Paria through the province of Venesuela , and in Maracapana , and the cannibal of Guanipa , the Indian call Assawai , Coaca , aiai , and the rest ( all which shall be describe in my description as they be situate ) have plate of gold of Guiana . and upon the river of Amazones , Thevet write that the people wear croissant of gold , for of that form the guianians most common make they : so as from Dominica to Amazones , which be above 250 league , all the chief Indian in all part wear of those plate of Guiana . undoubted those that trade Amazones return much gold , which ( as be aforesaid ) come by trade from Guiana , by some branch of a river that fall from the country into Amazones , and either it be by the river which pass by the nation call tisnado , or by Carepuna . i make inquiry among the most ancient and best travel of the Orenoqueponi , and i have knowledge of all the river between Orenoque and Amazones , and be very desirous to understand the truth of those warlike woman , because of some it be believe , of other not . and though i digress from my purpose , yet i will set down that which have be 366 deliver i for truth of those woman , and i speak with a cacique or lord of people , that tell i he have be in the river , and beyond it also . the nation of the seat of the these woman be on the south side of the river in - Amazon , the province of Topago , and their chief strength and retract be in the island situate on the south side of the entrance some 60 league within the mouth of the say river . the memory of the like woman be very ancient aswell in Africa as in Asia : in Africa those that have Medusa for queen : other in Scythia near the river of Tanais and Thermodon : we find also that Lampedo and marthesia be queen of the Amazon : in many history they be verify to have be , and in diverse age and province : but they which be not far from Guiana do accompany with man but once in a year , and for the time of one month , which i gather by their relation , to be in April : and that time all king of the border assemble , and queen of the Amazon ; and after the queen have choose , the rest cast lot for their Valentines . this one month , they feast , dance , and drink of their wine in abundance ; and the moon be do , they all depart to their own province . if they conceive , and be deliver of a son , they return he to the father ; if of a daughter they nourish it , and retain it : and as many as have daughter send unto the begetter a present ; all be desirous to increase their own sex and kind : but that they cut off the right dug of the breast , i do not find to be true . it be far tell i , that if in these war they take any prisoner that they use to accompany with those also at what time soever , but in the end for certain they put they to death : for they be say to be very cruel and bloodthirsty , especial to such as offer to invade their territory . Theise Amazones have likewise great store of these plate of gold , which they recover by exchange chief for a kind of green stone , which the Spaniard call Piedras hijada , and we use for spleen 367 stone : and for the disease of the stone we also esteem they . of these i see diverse in Guiana : and common every king or cacique have one , which their wife for the most part wear ; and they esteem they as great jewel . but to return to the enterprise of Bereo , who ( as i have say ) depart from Nuevo reyno with 700 horse , beside the provision above rehearse , he descend by the river call Cassanar , which rise in Nuevo reyno out of the mountain by the city of Tuvia , from which mountain also spring Pato ; both which fall into the great river of Meta : and Meta rise from a mountain join to Pamplon in the same Nuevo reyno de Granada . Theise , as also [ he - 639. i guaiare , which issue out of the mountain by Timana , fall all into Baraquan , and be but of his head ; for at their come together they lose their name ; and Baraquan far down be also rebaptize by the name of Orenoque . on the other side of the city and hill of Timana rise Rio grande , which fall in the sea by sancta Marta . by Cassonar first , and so into Meta , Berreo pass , keep his horseman on the bank , where the country serve they for to march , and where otherwise , he be drive to embark they in boat which he build for the purpose , and so come with the current down the river of Meta , and so into Baraquan . after he enter that great and mighty river , he begin daily to lose of his company both man and horse ; for it be in many place violent swift , and have forcible eddy , many sand , and diverse island sharp point with rock : but after one whole year , journey for the most part by river , and the rest by land , he grow daily to few number ; for both by sickness , and by encounter with the people of those region , through which he travel , his company be much waste , especial by diverse encounter with the amapaians : and in all this time he never can learn of any passage into 368 Guiana , nor any news or fame thereof , until he come to a further border of the say Amapaia , eight day journey from the river Caroli , which be the further river that he enter . among those of Amapaia , Guiana be famous , but few of these people accost Berreo , or will trade with he the first three month of the six , which he sojourn there . This Amapaia be also marvellous rich in gold ( as both Berreo confess and those of Guiana with who i have most conference ) and be situate upon Orenoque also . in this country Berreo lose 60 of his best soldier , and most of all his horse that remain in his former year travel : but in the end , after diverse encounter with those nation , they grow to peace ; and they present Berreo with ten image of fine gold among diverse other plate and croissant , which , as he swear to i and diverse other gentleman , be so curious wrought , as he have not see the like either in Italy , Spain , or the low-countreys : and he be resolve , that when they come to the hand of the spanish king , to who he have send they by his campmaster , they will appear very admirable , especial be wrought by such a nation as have no iron instrument at all nor any of those help which our goldsmith have to work withal . the particular name of the people in Amapaia which give he these piece , be call anebas , and the river of Orenoque at that place be above 12 english mile broad , which may be from his out fall into the sea 700 or 800 mile . this province of Amapaia be a very low and a mar-ish ground near the river ; and by reason of the red water which issue out in small branch through the fenny and boggy ground , there breed diverse poisonful worm and serpent ; and the Spaniard not suspect , nor in any sort foreknow the danger , be infect with a grievous kind of flux by drink thereof ; and even the very horse poison therewith : insomuch as at the end of the 6 month , that they abide there , ten 369 2 A A.D. ’595 - of all their troop , there be not leave above 120 soldier , and neither horse nor cattle : for Berreo hope to have find Guiana by 1000 mile near than it fall out to be in the end : by mean whereof they sustain much want and much hunger , oppress with grievous disease , and all the misery that can be imagine . i demand of those in Guiana that have travel Amapaia , how they live with that tawny or red water when they travel thither : and they tell i that after the sun be near the middle of the sky , they use to fill their pot and pitcher with that water , but either before that time , or towards the set of the sun it be dangerous to drink of , and in the night strong poison . i learn also of diverse other river of that nature among they , which be also ( while the sun be in the meridian ) very safe to drink , and in the morning , evening , and night wondered dangerous and infective . from this province Berreo haste away assoon as the spring and beginning of summer appear , and seek his entrance on the border of Orenoque on the south side ; but there run a ledge of so high and impassable mountain , as he be not able by any mean to march over they , continue from the east sea into which Orenoque fall , even to Quito in Peru : neither have he mean to carry victuali or munition over those craggy , high , and fast hill , be all woody , and those so thick and spiny , and so full of prickle , thorn , and brier , as it be impossible to creep through they : he have also neither friendship among the people , nor any interpreter to persuade or treat with they : and more , to his disadvantage , the cacique and king of Amapaia have give knowledge of his purpose to the guianians , and that he seek to sack and conquer the empire , for the hope of their so great abundance and quantity of gold : he pass by the mouth of many great river , which fall into Orenoque both from the north and south , which i forbear to name for tediousness , and 370 .. IS95 " because they be more please in describe then read . Berreo affirm that there fall a hundred river many into Orenoque from the north and south , whereof the least be as big as Rio grande , that pass in° > en°iue ' between Popayan and Nuevo reyno de Granada ( Rio grande being esteem one of the renown river in all the west Indies , and number among the great river of the world : ) but he know not the name of any of these , but Caroli only ; neither from what nation they descend , neither to what province they lead ; for he have no mean to discourse with the inhabitant at any time : neither be he curious in these thing , be utter unlearned , and not know the east from the west . but of all these i get some knowledge , and of many more , partly by my own travel , and the rest by conference : of some one i learn one , of other the rest , have with i a Indian that speak many language , and that of Guiana natural . i seek out all the age man , and such as be great traveller , and by the one and the other i come to understand the situation , the river , the kingdom from the east sea to the border of Peru , and from Orenoque southward as far as Amazones or Marannon , and the religion of Maria Tamball , and of all the king of province , and captains of town and village , how they stand in term of peace or war , and which be friend or [ in . 640. ] enemy the one with the other , without which there can be neither entrance nor conquest in those part , nor elsewhere : for by the dissension between Guascar and Atabalipa , Pizarro conquer Peru , and by the hatred that the tlaxcallians bear to Mutezuma , Cortes be victorious over Mexico ; without which both the one and the other have fail of their enterprise , and of the great honour and riches which they attain unto . now Berreo begin to grow into despair , and look for no other success than his predecessor in this enter-37 i 1595-the province of Emeria inhabit by gentle Indian . Carapana . the english voyage prize , until such time as he arrive at the province of Emeria towards the east sea and mouth of the river , where he find a nation of people very favourable , and the country full of all manner of victuali . the king of this land be call Carapana , a man very wise , subtle , and of great experience , be little less than a hundred year old : in his youth he be send by his father into the island of Trinidad , by reason of civil war among themselves , and be breed at a village in that island , call Parico ; at that place in his youth he have see many Christians , both french and spanish , and go diverse time with the Indian of Trinidad to Margarita and Cumana in the west Indies ( for both those place have ever be relieve with victuali from Trinidad ) by reason whereof he grow of more understanding , and note the difference of the nation , compare the strength and arm of his country with those of the christian , and ever after temporize so , as whosoever else do amiss , or be waste by contention , Carapana keep himself and his country in quiet and plenty : he also hold peace with the caribe or cannibal his neighbour , and bid free trade with all nation , whosoever else have war . Berreo sojourn and rest his weak troop in the town of Carapana six week , and from he learn the way and passage to Guiana , and the riches and magnificence thereof ; but be then utter disable to proceed , he determine to try his fortune another year , when he have renew his provision , and regathered more force , which he hope for as well out of Spain as from Nueva reyno , where he have leave his son , don Antonio Ximenes to second he upon the first notice give of his entrance , and so for the present embark himself in canoas , and by the branch of Orenoque arrive at Trinidad , have from Carapana sufficient pilot to conduct he . from Trinidad he coast Paria , and so recover Mar - 372 garita : and have make relation to don Juan ser-miento the governor , of his proceed , and persuade he of the riches of Guiana , he obtain from thence fifty soldier , promise present to return to carapana , and so into Guiana . but Berreo mean nothing less at that time ; for he want many provision necessary for such a enterprise , and therefore depart from Margarita , seat himself in Trinidad , and from thence send his campmaster , and his sergeantmajor back to the border to discover the near passage into the empire , as also to treat with the borderer , and to draw they to his party and love ; without which , he know he can neither pass safe , nor in any sort be relieve with victuali or ought else . Carapana direct his company to a king call more - morequito . quito , assure they that no man can deliver so much of Guiana as morequito can , and that his dwelling be but five day journey from macureguarai , the first civil town of Guiana . now your lordship shall understand , that this morequito , one of the great lord or king of the border of Guiana , have two or three year before be at Cumana and at Margarita , in the west Indies , with great store of plate of gold , which he carry to exchange for such other thing as he want in his own country , and be daily feast , and present by the governor of those place , and hold among they some two month , in which time one vides governor vides the goof Cumana win he to be his conductor into ™ ' nou_r_ °f Guiana , be allure by those croissant and image pe^tor " of gold which he bring with he to trade , as also Berreo in the by the ancient fame and magnificence of el Dorado : conquest of whereupon vides send into Spain for a patent to this - Guiana . cover and conquer Guiana , not know of the precedence of berreos patent , which , as Berreo affirm , be sign before that of vides : so as when vides understand of Berreo , and that he have make entrance into that territory , and forgo his desire and hope , it 373 be very think that vides practise with morequito to hinder and disturb Berreo in all he can , and not to suffer he to enter through his signory , nor any of his company ; neither to victuali , nor guide they in any sort ; for vides governor of Cumana , and Berreo , be become mortali enemy , aswell for that Berreo have get Trinidad into his patent with Guiana , as also in that he be by Berreo prevent in the journey of Guiana it self : howsoever it be , i know not , but morequito for a time dissemble his disposition , suffer Spaniard , and a friar ( which Berreo have send to discover Manoa ) to travel through his country , mature - give they a guide for Macureguaray , the first town g^ray . civq [ anj apparel people , from whence they have other guide to bring they to Manoa the great city of Inga : and be furnish with those thing which they have learn of Carapana be of most price in ten span - Guiana , go onward , and in eleven day arrive at at Maiea1 Manoa , as Berreo affirm for certain ; although i [ three . 641 ' ] can not be assure thereof by the lord which now govern the province of morequito , for he tell i that they get all the gold they have , in other town on this side Manoa , there be many very great and rich , and ( as he say ) build like the town of Christians , with many room . when these ten Spaniard be return , and ready Aromaia . to put out of the border of Aromaia , the people of morequito set upon they , and slay they all but one that swim the river , and take from they to the value of forty thousand pezo of gold : and one of they only live to bring the news to Berreo , that both his nine soldier and holy father be benight in the say province . i my self speak with the captain of morequito that slay they , and be at the place where it be execute . Berreo enrage herewithal , send all the strength he can make into Aromaia , to be revenge of he , his people , and country . but morequito suspect the same , flee over Orenoque , 374 * 595-and through the territory of the saima , and wikiri , Salma and recover Cumana , where he think himself very safe , with vides the governor . but Berreo send for he in the king name , and his messenger find he in the house of one Fashardo on the sudden year he be suspect , so as he can not then be convey away , vides dare not deny he , aswell to avoid the suspicion of the practice , as also for that a holy father be slay by he and his people . morequito offer Fashardo the weight of three quintal in gold , to let he escape : but the poor guianian , betray on all side , be deliver to the campmaster of Berreo , and be present execute . morequito after the death of this morequito , the soldier of execute • Berreo spoil his territory , and take diverse prisoner , among other they take the uncle of morequito , call Topiawari , who be now king of Aromaia ( who son i bring with i into England ) and be a man of great understanding and policy : he be above a hundred year old , and yet of a very able body . the Spaniard lead he in a chain seventeen day , and make he their guide from place to place between his country and Emeria , the province of Carapana aforesaid , and he be at last redeem for a hundred plate of gold , and diverse stone call Piedras hijada , or spleen-stone . now Berreo for execute of morequito , and other cruelty , spoil , and slaughter do in Aromaia , have lose the love of the Orenoqueponi , and of all the borderer , and dare not send any of his soldier any further into the land then to Carapana , town °f which he call the port of Guiana : but from thence by the help of Carapana he have trade further into the G^ana , i country , and always appoint ten Spaniard to reside in carapanas town , by who favour , and by be conduct by his people , those ten search the country thereabouts , aswell for mine , as for other trade and commodity . they also have get a nephew of Morequito* who 375 some feme Spaniards be now seat in Dissequebe . they have christen , and name don Juan , of who they have great hope , endeavour by all mean to establish he in the say province . among many other trade , those Spaniard use canoas to pass to the river of Barema , Pawroma , and Dissequebe , which be on the south side of the mouth of Orenoque , and there buy woman and child from the cannibal , which be of that barbarous nature , as they will for three or four hatchet sell the son and daughter of their own brethren and sister , and for somewhat more , even their own daughter . hereof the Spaniard make great profit : for buy a maid of twelve or thirteen year for three or four hatchet , they sell they again at Margarita in the west Indies for fifty and a hundred pezo , which be so many crown . the master of my ship , John Dowglas , take one of the canoas which come lade from thence with people to be sell , and the most of they escape ; yet of those he bring , there be one as well favour , and as well shape as ever i see any in England , and afterward i see many of they , which but for their tawny colour may be compare to any of Europe . they also trade in those river for bread of Cassavi , of which they buy a hundred pound weight for a knife , and sell it at Margarita for ten pezo . they also recover great store of cotton , Brasill wood , and those bed which they call Hamacas or Brasill bed , wherein in hot country all the Spaniard use to lie common , and in no other , neither do we our self while we be there . by mean of which trade , for ransom of diverse of the guianians , and for exchange of hatchet and knife , Berreo recover some store of gold plate , eagle of gold , and image of man and diverse bird , and dispatch his campmaster for Spain , with all that he have gather , therewith to levy soldier , and by the show thereof to draw other to the love of the enterprise . and have send diverse image aswell of man as beast , bird and fish , so curious wrought 376 in gold , he doubt not but to persuade the king to yield to he some further help , especial for that this land have never be sack , the mine never wrought , and in the Indies their work be well spend , and the gold draw out with great labour and charge . he also dispatch messenger to his son in Nuevo reyno to levy all the force he can , 8c to come down the river Orenoque to Emeria , the province of Carapana , [ three . 642. ] to meet he : he have also send to saint Iago de Leon on the coast of the Caracas , to buy horse and mule . after i have thus learn of his proceed past and purpose , i tell he that i have resolve to see Guiana , and that it be the end of my journey , and the cause of my come to Trinidad , as it be indeed , ( and for that purpose i send Jacob Whiddon the year before to get intelligence with who Berreo himself have speech at that time , and remember how inquisitive Jacob Whiddon be of his proceed , and of the country of Guiana ) Berreo be strike into a great melancholy and sadness , and use all the argument he can to dissuade i , and also assure the gentleman of my company that it will be labour lose , and that they shall suffer many misery if they proceed . and first he deliver that i can not enter any of the river with any bark or pinnace , or hardly with any ship boat , it be so low , sandy , and full of flat , and that his company be daily ground in their canoas , which draw but twelve inch water . he further say , that none of the country will come to speak with we , but will all fly ; and if we follow they to their dwelling , they will burn their own town : and beside that , the way be long , the winter at hand , and that the river begin once to swell , it be impossible to stem the current , and that we can not in those small boat by any mean carry victuali for half the time , and that ( which indeed most discourage my company ) the king and lord of all the border of Guiana have decree that none of 377 they shall trade with any Christians for gold , because the same will be their own overthrow , and that for the love of gold the Christians mean to conquer and dispossess they of all together . many and the most of these i find to be true , but yet i resolve to make trial of all whatsoever happen , direct captain George Gifford my viceadmiral to take the lion whelp , and captain Calfield his bark the fwer of to turn to the eastward , against the mouth of a river Capuri . call Capuri , who entrance i have before send captain Whiddon , and John Dowglas the master , to discover , who find some nine foot water or better upon the flood , and five at low water , to who i have give instruction that they shall anchor at the edge of they shall , and upon the best of the flood to thrust over , which shall John Dowglas bwoy and beckon for they before : but they labour in vain ; for neither can they turn it up altogether so far to the east , neither do the flood continue so long , but the water fall year they can have pass the sand ; as we after find by a second experience : so as now we must either give over our enterprise , or leave our ship at adventure four hundred mile behind we , must run up in our ship boat , one barge , and two whery . but be doubtful how to carry victual for so long a time in such baby , or any strength of man , especial for that Berreo assure we that his son must be by that time come down with many soldier , i send away one king , master of the lion whelp , with his shipboat , to try another branch of a river in the bottom of the bay of Guanipa , which be call Amana , to prove if there be water to be find for either of the small ship to enter . but when he come to the mouth of Amana , he find it as the rest , but stay not to discover it thorough , because he be assure by a Indian , his guide , that the cannibal of Guanipa will assail they with many canoas , and that they shoot poison arrow ; so as if he haste not back , they shall all be lose . 378 in the mean time , fear the worst , i cause all the carpenter we have , to cut down a Galego boat , which we mean to cast off , and to fit she with bank to row on , and in all thing to prepare she the best they can , so as she may be bring to draw but five foot , for so much we have on the bar of Capuri at low water . And doubt of king return , i send John Dowglas again in my long barge , aswell to relieve he , as also to make a perfect search in the bottom of that bay : for it have be hold for infallible , that whatsoever ship or boat shall fall therein , can never disemboque again , by reason of the violent current which set into the say bay , as also for that the breeze and easterly wind blow direct into the same . of which opinion i have hear John Hampton of Plymmouth , one of the great experience of England , and diverse other beside that have trade to Trinidad . i send with John Dowglas a old cacique of Trinidad for a pilot , who tell we that we can not return again by the bay or gulf , but that he know a by-branch which run within the land to the eastward , and that he think by it we may fall into Capuri , and so return in four day . John Dowglas search those river , and find four goodly entrance , whereof the least be as big as the Thames at Wolwich ; but in the bay thitherward it be shall , and but six foot water : so as we be now without hope of any ship or bark to pass over , and therefore resolve to go on with the boat , and the bottom of the Galego , in which we thrust 60 man . in the lion whelp boat and whery we carry 20. captain Calfield in his whery carry ten more , and in my barge other ten , which make up a hundred : we have no other mean but to carry victuali for a month in the same , and also to lodge therein as we can , and to boil and dress our meat . captain Gifford have with he master Edward porter , captain Eynos , and eight more in his whery , with all their victuali , weapon , and provision . captain Calfield have with he my 379 John Hampton captain of the minion under sir John Hawkins in his voyage to saint Juan de ullua . [ he . 643. ] cousin Butshead Gorges , and eight more . in the galley , of gentleman and officer my self have captain thin , my cousin John Greenvile , my nephew John Gilbert , captain Whiddon , captain Keymis , Edward handcocke , captain Clarke , lieutenant Hewes , Thomas Upton , captain fancy , Jerome Ferrar , Anthony Welles , William connocke , and above fifty more . we can not learn of Berreo any other way to enter but in branch , so far to windward , as it be impossible for we to recover : for we have as much sea to cross over in our whery , as between Dover and Calais , and in a great billow , the wind and current be both very strong , so as we be drive to go in those small boat the bay of direct before the wind into the bottom of the bay Guanipa . of Guanipa , anJ from thence to enter the mouth of some one of those river which John Dowglas have last discover , and have with we for pilot a Indian of Barema , a river to the south of Orenoque , between that and Amazones , who canoas we have former take as he Barema . be go from the say Barema , lade with cassavi-bread , to sell at Margarita . this arwacan promise to bring i into the great river of Orenoque , but indeed of that which he enter he be utter ignorant , for he have not see it in twelve year before ; at which time he be very young , and of no judgement : and if God have not send we another help , we may have wander a whole year in that labyrinth of river , year we have find any way , either out or in , especial after we be pass ebb and flow , which be in four day , for i know a wonder ap the earth do not yield the like confluence of ‘ stream stream and branch , the one cross the other so many ' time , and all so fair and large , and so like one to another , as no man can tell which to take : and if we go by the sun or compass , hope thereby to go direct one way or other , yet that way we be also carry in a circle among multitude of island , and every island so border with high tree , as no man can see any further than the breadth of the river , or length of the breach . 380 but this it chance , that enter into a river , ( which because it have no name , we call the river of the red cross , our self be the first Christians that ever come therein ) the two and twenty of May , as we be row up the same , we espy a small canoa with three Indian , which ( by the swiftness of my barge , row with eight oar ) i overtake year they can cross the river , the rest of the people on the bank shadow under the thick wood , gaze on with a doubtful conceit what may befall those three which we have take . but when they perceive that we offer they no violence , neither enter their canoa with any of we , nor take out of the canoa any of they , they then begin to show themselves on the bank side , and offer to traffic with we for such thing as they have . and as we draw near , they all stay , and we come with our barge to the mouth of a little creek which come from their town into the great river . as we abide there a while , our Indian pilot , call Ferdinando , will needs go ashore to their village to fetch some fruit , and to drink of their artificiali wine , and also to see the place , and know the lord of it against another time , and take with he a brother of he , which he have with he in the journey : when they come to the village of these people , the lord of the island offer to lay hand on they , purpose to have slay they both , yield for reason that this Indian of we have bring a strange nation into their territory , to spoil and destroy they . but the pilot be quick , and of a dispose body , slip their finger , and run into the wood , and his brother be the better footman of the two , recover the creek mouth , where we stay in our barge , cry out that his brother be slay : with that we set hand on one of they that be next we , a very old man , and bring he into the barge , assure he that if we have not our pilot again , we will present cut off his head . this old man be resolve that he shall pay the loss of the other , cry out to those in the wood to save Ferdinando 381 the river of the red cross . [ Iii . 644. ] two nation of the Tivitivas , call ciawani , and waraweete . a description of the mighty river of Orenoque or Baraquan . what manner of people the Tivitivas be . the english voyage our pilot ; but they follow he notwithstanding , and hunt after he upon the foot with the dear-dog , and with so main a cry , that all the wood echo with the shout they make : but at the last this poor chase Indian recover the river side , and get upon a tree , and as we be coast , leap down and swim to the barge half dead with fear . but our good hap be , that we keep the other old Indian which we handfasted to redeem our pilot withal ; for be natural of those river , we assure our self he know the way better than any stranger can . and indeed , but for this chance , i think we have never find the way either to Guiana , or back to our ship : for Ferdinando after a few day know nothing at all , nor which way to turn , yea and many time the old man himself be in great doubt which river to take . those people which dwell in these break island and drown land , be general call Tivitivas ; there be of they two sort , the one call Ciawani , and the other waraweete . the great river of Orenoque or Baraquan have nine branch which fall out on the north side of his own main mouth : on the south side it have seven other fall into the sea , so it disemboqu by sixteen arm in all , between hand and break ground , but the hand be very great , many of they as big as the isle of wight , and big , and many less . from the first branch on the north to the last of the south , it be at least 100 league , so as the river mouth be 300 mile wide at his entrance into the sea , which i take to be far big than that of Amazones . all those that inhabit in the mouth of this river upon the several north branch , be these Tivitivas , of which there be two chief lord which have continual war one with the other . the hand which lie on the right hand , be call Pallamos , and the land on the left , Horotomaka , and the river by which John Dowglas return within the land from Amana to Capuri , they call Macuri . Theise Tivitivas be a very goodly people and very 382 valiant , and have the most manly speech and most deliberate that ever i hear , of what nation soever . in the summer they have house on the ground , as in other place : in the winter they dwell upon the tree , where they build very artificiali town and village , as it be write in the spanish story of the west Indies , that those people do in the low land near the gulf of Uraba : for between may and September the river of Orenoque rise thirty foot upright , and then be those island overflow twenty foot high above the level of the ground , save some few raise ground in the middle of they : and for this cause they be enforce to live in this manner . they never eat of any thing that be set or so wen : and as at home they use neither plant nor other manurance , so when they come abroad , they refuse to feed of aught , but of that which nature without labour bring forth . they use the top of palmito for bread , and kill dear , fish , and pork , for the rest of their sustenance . they have also many sort of fruit that grow in the wood , and great variety of bird and foul . and if to speak of they be not tedious , and vulgar , sure we see in those passage of very rare colour and form , not elsewhere to be find , for as much as i have either see or read . of these people those that dwell upon the branch of Orenoque , call Capuri and Macureo , be for the most part carpenter of canoas , for they make the most and fair canoas , and sei they into Guiana for gold , and into Trinidad for tobacco , in the excessive take whereof , they exceed all nation ; and notwithstanding the moistness of the air in which they live , the hardness of their diet , and the great labour they suffer to hunt , fish and foul for their live ; in all my life , either in the Indies or in Europe , do i never behold a more goodly or better favour people or a more manly . they be wont to make war upon all nation , and especial on the cannibal , so as none 383 than Arwacas on the south side of Orenoque . the port of the Ciatvani . a river call the great Amana . the english voyage dare without a good strength trade by those river : but of late they be at peace with their neighbour , all hold the Spaniard for a common enemy . when their commander die , they use great lamentation , and when they think the flesh of their body be putrify , and fall from the bone , than they take up the carcase again , and hang it in the cacique house that die , and deck his scull with feather of all colour , and hang all his gold plate , about the bone of his arm , thigh , and leg . those nation which be call Arwacas , which dwell on the south of Orenoque , ( of which place and nation our Indian pilot be ) be disperse in many other place , and do use to beat the bone of their lord into powder , and their wife and friend drink it all in their several sort of drink . after we depart from the port of these Ciawani , we pass up the river with the flood , and anchor the ebb , and in this sort we go onward . the three day that we enter the river , our galley come on ground , and stick so fast , as we think that even there our discovery have end , and that we must have leave fourscore and ten of our man to have inhabit like rook upon tree with those nation : but the next morning , after we have cast out all her ballast , with tug and hail to and fro , we get her aflote , and go on . at four day end we fall into as goodly a river as ever i behold , which be call the great Amana , which run more direct without wind and turn then the other : but soon after the flood of the sea leave we ; and be enforce either by main strength to row against a violent current , or to return as wise as we go out , we have then no shift but to persuade the company that it be but two or three day work , and therefore desire they to take pain , every gentleman 8c other take their turn to row , and to spell one the other at the hour end . Every day we pass by goodly branch of 384 river , some fall from the west , other from the east into Amana , but those i leave to the description in the cart of discovery , where every one shall name with his rise and descent . when three day more be overgo , our company begin to despair , the [ three . 645. ] weather be extreme hot , the river border with very high tree , that keep away the air , and the current against we every day strong than other : but we evermore command our pilot to promise a end the next day , and use it so long , as we be drive to assure they from four reach of the river to three , and so to two , and so to the next reach : but so long we labour , that many day be spend , and we drive to draw our self to hard allowance , our bread even at the last , and no drink at all ; and our man and our self so weary and scorch , and doubtful withal , whether we shall ever perform it or no , the heat increase as we draw towards the line ; for we be now in five degree . they be in the further we go on ( our victuali decrease and degree . the air breed great faintness ) we grow weak and weak , when we have m●st need of strength and ability ; for hourly the river run more violent than other against we , and the barge , whery , and ship boat of captain Gifford and captain Calfield , have spend all their provision ; so as we be bring into despair and discomfort , have we not persuade all the company that it be but only one day work more to attain the land where we shall be relieve of all we want , and if we return , that we be sure to starve by the way , and that the world will also laugh we to scorn . on the bank of these river be diverse sort of fruit good to eat , flower and tree of such variety , as be sufficient to make ten volume of herbal : we relieve our self many time with the fruit of the country , and sometime with foul and fish . we see bird of all colour , some carnation , some crimson , orenge-tawny , purple , watchet , and of ten 385 2 b all other sort both simple and mix , and it be unto we a great good pass of the time to behold they , beside the relief we find by kill some store of they with our fowl piece ; without which , have little or no bread , and less drink , but only the thick and trouble water of the river , we have be in a very hard case . our old pilot of the Ciawani ( who , as i say before , we take to redeem Ferdinando ) tell we , that if we will enter a branch of a river on the right hand with our barge and whery , and leave the galley at anchor the while in the great river , he will bring we to a town of the Arwacas , where we shall find store of bread , hen , fish , and of the country wine ; and persuade we , that depart from the galley at noon , we may return year night . i be very glad to hear this speech , and present take my bark , with eight musketeer , captain giffords whery , with himself and four musketeer , and captain Calfield with his whery , and as many ; and so we enter the mouth of this river : and because we be persuade that it be so near , we take no victuali with we at all . when we have row three hour , we marvel we see no sign of any dwell , and ask the pilot where the town be : he tell we a little further . after three hour more , the sun be almost set , we begin to suspect that he lead we that way to betray we : for he confess that those Spaniard which flee from Trinidad , and also those that remain with Carapana in Emeria , be join together in some village upon that river . but when it grow towards night ; and we demand where the place be ; he tell we but four reach more . when we have row four and four ; we see no sign ; and our poor watermen , even heartbroken , and tire , be ready to give up the ghost : for we have now come from the galley near forty mile . at the last we determine to hang the pilot ; and 386 if we have well know the way back again by night , he have sure go ; but our own necessity plead sufficient for his safety : for it be as dark as pitch , and the river begin so to narrow it self , and the tree to hang over from side to side , as we be drive with arm sword to cut a passage through those branch that cover the water . we be very desirous to find this town , hope of a feast , because we make but a short breakfast aboard the galley in the morning and it be now eight a clock at night , and our stomach begin to gnaw apace : but whether it be best to return or go on , we begin to doubt , suspect treason in the pilot more and more : but the poor old Indian ever assure we that it be but a little further , but this one turn and that turn : and at the last about one a clock after midnight we see a light ; and row towards it , we hear the dog of the village . when we land we find few people ; for the lord of that place be go with diverse canoas above four hundred mile off , upon a journey towards the head of Orenoque to trade for gold , and to buy woman of the cannibal , who afterward unfortunate pass by we as we ride at a anchor in the port of morequito in the dark of the night , and yet come so near we , as his canoas grate against our barge : he leave one of his company at the port of morequito , by who we understand that he have bring thirty young woman , diverse plate of gold , and have great store of fine piece of cotton cloth , and cotton bed . in his house we have good store of bread , fish , hen , and Indian drink , and so rest that night , and in the morning after we have trade with such of his people as come down , we return [ three . 646. ] towards our gay , and bring with we some quantity of bread , fish , and hen . on both side of this river , we pass the most beauty - a most beautiful country that ever my eye behold : and whereas all countrey^ that we have see before be nothing but wood , prickle , 387 the river of Lagartos , or crocodile . two canoas take . three Spaniard escape . the english voyage bush , and thorn , here we behold plain of twenty mile in length , the grass short and green , and in diverse part grove of tree by themselves , as if they have be by all the art and labour in the world so make of purpose : and still as we row , the dear come down feed by the water side , as if they have be use to a keeper call . upon this river there be great store of fowl , and of many sort : we see in it diverse sort of strange fish , and of marvellous bigness : but for lagartos iter exceed , for there be thousand of those ugly serpent ; and the people call it for the abundance of they , the river of Lagartos , in their language . i have a negro a very proper young fellow , who leap out of the galley to swim in the mouth of this river , be in all our sight take and devour with one of those lagartos . in the mean while our company in the gay thought we have be all lose , ( for we promise to return before night ) and send the lion whelp ship boat with captain Whiddon to follow we up the river ; but the next day , after we have row up and down some fourscore mile , we return , and go on our way , up the great river ; and when we be even at the last cast for want of victual , captain Gifford be before the galley and the rest of the boat , seek out some place to land upon the bank to make fire , espy four canoas come down the river ; and with no small joy cause his man to try the uttermost of their strength , and after a while two of the four give over , and run themselves ashore , every man betake himself to the fastness of the wood , the two other lesser get away , while he land to lay hold on these ; and so turn into some by-creeke , we know not whither . those canoas that be take , be load with bread , and be bind for Margarita in the west Indies , which those Indian ( call Arwacas ) purpose to carry thither for exchange : but in the lesser there be three Spaniard , who have hear of the defeat of their goyernour in Trinidad , and that we purpose to enter Guiana , come away in those canoas : one of they be a 388 * 595-cavallero , as the captain of the Arwacas after tell we , another a soldier , and the three a refiner . in the mean time , nothing on the earth can have be more welcome to we , next unto gold , than the great store of very excellent bread which we find in these canoas ; for now our man cry , let we go on , we care not how far . after that captain Gifford have bring the two canoas to the galley , i take my barge , and go to the bank side with a dozen shot , where the canoas first run themselves ashore , and land there , send out captain Gifford , and captain thy on one hand , and captain Calfield on the other , to follow those that be flee into the wood : and as i be creep through the bush , i see a Indian basket hide , which be the spanish refiner basket ; for i find in it his quicksilver , saltpeter , and diverse thing for the trial of metal , and also aing ta^en the dust of such ore as he have refine , but in those canoas which escape there be a good quantity of ore and gold . i then land more man , and offer five hundred pound to what soldier soever can take one of those three Spaniard that we think be land . but our labour be in vain in that behalf ; for they put themselves into one of the small canoas : and so while the great canoas be in take they escape . but seek after the Spaniard , we find the Arwacas hide in the wood , which be pilot for the Spaniard , and row their canoas ; of which i keep the chief for a pilot , and carry he with i to Guiana , by who i understand where and in what country the Spaniard have labour for gold , though i make not the same know to all : for when the spring begin to break , and the river to raise themselves so sudden , as by no mean we can abide the dig of any i , especial for that the rich be defend with rock of hard stone , which we r'lch call the white spar , and that it require both time , man , and instrument fit for such a work , i think it best not ew to hover thereabouts , lest if the same have be perceive by the company , there will have be by this 389 * 595 ' .. , , time many bark and ship set out , and perchance other nation will also have get of we for pilot ; so as both our self may have be prevent , and all our care take for good usage of the people be utter lose , by those that only respect present profit , and such violence or insolence offer , as the nation which be borderer will have change their desire of our love and defence into hatred and violence . and for any long stay to have bring a more quantity ( which i hear have be often object ) whosoever have see or prove the fury of that river after it begin to arise , and have be a month and odd day , as we be , from hear aught from our ship , leave they mean man 400 mile off , will perchance have turn somewhat soon than we do , if all the mountain have be gold , or rich stone . and to say the truth , all the branch and small river which fall into Orenoque be raise with such [ three . 647. ] speed , as if we wade they over the shoe in the morning outward , we be cover to the shoulder homeward the very same day : and to stay to dig out gold with our nail , have be opus laboris but not Ingenii : such a quantity as will have serve our turn we can not have have , but a discovery of the mine to our infinite disadvantage we have make , and that can have be the best profit of far search or stay : for those mine be not easy break , nor open in haste , and i can have return a good quantity of gold ready cast , if i have not shoot at another mark , then present profit . this arwacan pilot with the rest , fear that we will have eat they , or otherwise have put they to some the Spaniard cruel death ( for the Spaniard , to the end that none of the dtvehsh hes . peop [ e jn the passage towards Guiana or in Guiana it self may come to speech with we , persuade all the nation , that we be men-eater , and cannibal ) but when the poor man and woman have see we , and that we give they meat , and to every one something or other , which be rare and strange to they , they begin to conceive the deceit and purpose of the Spaniard , who indeed ( as 39° they confess ) take from they both their wife and daughter daily , and use they for the satisfy of their own lust , especial such as they take in this manner by strength . but i protest before the majesty of the live God , that i neither know nor believe , that any of our company one or other , by violence or otherwise , ever know any of their woman , and yet we see many hundred , and have many in our power , and of those very young , and excellent favour , which come among we without deceit , stark naked . Nothing get we more love among they then this usage : for i suffer not any man to take from any of the nation so much as a Pina , or a potato root , without give they contentment , nor any man so much as to offer to touch any of their wife or daughter : which course so contrary to the Spaniard ( who tyrannize over they in all thing ) draw they to admire her majesty , who commandment i tell they it be , and also wonderful to honour our nation . but i confess it be a very impatient work to keep the mean sort from spoil and steal , when we come to their house : which because in all i can not prevent , i cause my Indian interpreter at every place when we depart , to know of the loss or wrong do , and if aught be steal or take by violence , either the same be restore , and the party punish in their sight , or else be pay for to their uttermost demand . they also much wonder at we , after they hear that we have slay the Spaniard at Trinidad , for they be before resolve , that no nation of Christians dare abide their presence , and they wonder moor when i have make they know of the great overthrow that her majesty army and fleet have give they of late year in their own country . after we have take in this supply of bread , with diverse basket of root which be excellent meat , i give one of the canoas to the Arwacas , which belong to the Spaniard that be escape , and when i have dismiss all 391 A.D. 1595 - a notable course of justice . but the captain ( who by the Spaniard be christen Martin ) i send back in the same Canoa the old ciawan , and Ferdinando my first pilot , and give they both such thing as they desire , with sufficient victuali to carry they back , and by they write a letter to the ship , which they promise to deliver , and perform it , and then i go on , with my new hire pilot Martin the arwacan : but they come on the next or second day after , we come aground again ground with w^h our galley , and be like to cast she away , with all etr ga y . our victuali and provision , and so lie on the sand one whole night and be far more in despair at this time to free she then before , because we have no tide of flood to help we , and therefore fear that all our hope will have end in mishap : but we fasten a anchor upon the land , and with main strength draw she off : and so the fifteen day we discover afar off the mountain of Guiana to our great joy , and towards the evening have a slent of a northerly wind that blow very strong , which bring we in sight of the great river Orenoque ; out of which this river descend wherein we be : we descry afar off three other canoas as far as we can discern they , after who we hasten with our barge and wherry , but two of they pass out of sight , and the third enter up the great river , on the right hand to the westward , and there stay out of sight , think that we mean to take the way eastward towards the province of Carapana , for that way the Spaniard keep , not dare to go upward to Guiana , the people in those part be all their enemy , and those in the canoas think we to have be those Spaniards that be flee from Trinidad , and have escape kill : and when we come so far down as the open of that branch into which they slip , be near they with our barge and wherry , we make after they , and ere they can land , come within call , and by our interpreter tell they what we be , wherewith they come back [ three . 648. ] will aboard we : and of such fish and Tortugas egg 392 * 595-as they have gather , they give we , and promise in the morning to bring the lord of that part with they , and to do we all other service they can . that night we come to a anchor at the part of the three goodly river ( the one be the river of Amana by which we come from the north , and run athwart towards the south , the other two be of Orenoque twa branch which cross from the west and run to the sea towards the east ) and land upon a fair sand , where ’ we find thousand of Tortugas egg , which be very wholesome meat , and great restore , so as our man be now well fill and high content both with the fare , and nearness of the land of Guiana which appear in sight . in the morning there come down accord to promise the lord of that border call Toparimaca , with some thirty or fourty follower , and bring we diverse sort of fruit , and of his wine , bread , fish , and flesh , who we also feast as we can , at least we drink good spanish wine ( whereof we have a small quantity in bottle ) which above all thing they love . i confer with this toparimaca of the next way to Guiana , who Toparimaca . conduct our galley and boat to his own port , and carry we from thence some mile and a half to his town , where some of our captain karouse of his wine till they be reasonable pleasant , for it be very strong with pepper , and the juice of diverse herb , and fruit digest and purge , they keep it in great earthen pot of ten or twelve galon very clean and sweet , and be themselves at their meeting and feast the great karouser and drunkard of the world : when we come to his town we find two cacique , whereof one be a stranger that have be up the river in trade , and his boat , people , and wife encamp at the port where we ancker , and the other be of that country a follower of Toparimaca : they lie each of they in a cotton Hamaca , which we call brazil bed , and two woman attend they with six cup and a little 393 ladle to fill they , out of a earthen pitcher of wine , and so they drink each of they three of those cup at a time one to the other , and in this sort they drink drink at their feast and meeting . that cacique that be a stranger have his wife stay at the port where we ancker , and in all my life i have seidome see a better favour woman : she be of good stature , with black eye , fat of body , of a excellent countenance , her hair almost as long as her self , tie up again in pretty knot , and it seem she stand not in that awe of her husband , as the rest , for she speak and discourse , and drink among the gentleman and captain , and be very pleasant , know her own comeliness , and take great pride therein . i have see a lady in England so like to she , as but for the difference of colour , i will have swear may have be the same . the seat of this town of Toparimaca be very pleasant , stand on a little hill , in a excellent prospect , with goodly garden a mile compass round about it , and two very fair and large pond of exedra town of Lent fish adjoin . this town be call Arowocai : the arowocay . people be of the nation call Nepoios , and be follower of Carapana . in that place i see very age people , that we may perceive all their sinew and vein without any flesh , and but even as a case cover only with the great skin . the lord of this place give i a old man ^er^ore^ or ot ’ who be great experience and travel , and we know the river most perfect both by day and night : and it shall be requisite for any man that pass it , to have such a pilot , for it be four , five , and six mile over in many place , and twenty mile in other place , with wonderful eddy , and strong current , many great island , and diverse shold , and many dangerous rock , and beside upon any increase of wind so great a bilowe , as we be sometime in great peril of drown in the galley , for the small boat dare not come from the shore , but when it be very fair . 394 the next day we haste thence , and have a easterly wind to help we , we spare our arm from row : for after we enter Orenoque , the river lie for the most part east and west , even from the sea unto Quito in Peru. this river be navigable with bark , little less than a thousand mile , and from the place where we enter , it may be sail up in small pinnace to many of the best part of Nuevo reyno de Granada , and of Popayan : and from no place may the city of these part of the Indies be so easy take and invade as from hence . all that day we sail up a branch of that river , have on the left hand a great island which they call Assapana which may contain some five and twenty mile in length , and six mile in breadth , the great body of the river run on the other side of this island . beyond that middle branch there be also another island in the river call Iwana , which be twice as big as the isle of wight , and beyond it , and between it and the main of Guiana , run a third branch of Orenoque call Arraroopana : all three be goodly branch , and all navigable for great ship . i judge the river in this place to be at least thirty mile broad , reckon the island which divide the branch in it , for afterward i seek also both the other branch . after we reach to the head of the island , call Assapana , a little to the westward on the right hand there open a river which come from the north , call Europa , and fall into the great river , and beyond it on the same side , we ancker for that night , by another island six mile long , and two mile broad , which they call Ocaywita : from hence in the morning we land two guianians , which we find in the town of Toparimaca , that come with we , who go to give notice of our come to the lord of that country call Putyma , a follower of Topiawari , chief lord of Aromaia , who succeed morequito , who ( as you have hear before ) Berreo put to death : but his town be far within the land , he come not unto we that day , so as we anchor 395 A.D. 1595-they enter the river Orenoque which run east and west . the isle of Assapana . the island of Iwana . [ Iii . 649. ] the isle of Ocaywita . again that night near the bank of another island , the isle of of bigness much like the other , which they call puta-putapayma . payma > over against which island , on the main land , be a very high mountain call oecope : we covet to anchor rather by these island in the river , then by the main , because of the Tortugas egg , which our people find on they in great abundance , and also because the ground serve better for we to cast our net for fish , the main bank be for the most part stony and high , and the rock of a blue metalline steele-ore . colour , like unto the best steele-ore , which i assure take it to be : of the same blue stone be also diverse great mountain , which border this river in many place . the next morning towards nine of the clock , we weigh anchor , and the breeze increase , we sail always west up the river , and after a while open the land on the right side , the country appear to be champain , and the bank show very perfect red . i therefore send two of the little barge with captain Gifford , and with he captain thou , captain Calfield , my cousin Greenvile , my nephew John Gilbert , captain Eynus , master Edward porter , and my cousin butshead Gorges , with some few soldier , to march over the bank of that red land , and to discover what manner of country it be on the other side , who at their return find it all a plain level , as far as they go or can discern , from the high tree they can get upon : and my old pilot , a man of great travel , brother to the cacique Toparimica tell i , that those be call the plain of the plain of the Sayma , and that the same level cu-h reac^ed to Cumana , and Caracas in the west Indies , " mana , and the which be a hundred and twenty league to the north , Caracas . and that there inhabit four principali nation . the first be the Sayma , the next Assawai , the third and great the Wikiri , by who Pedro Hernandez de Serpa before mention be overthrow , as he pass with three hundred horse from Cumani towards oren-396 oque , in his enterprise of Guiana : the four be call Aroras , and be as black as negro , but have smooth hair , and these be very valiant , or rather desperate people , and have the most strong poison on their arrow , and most dangerous of all nation , of which poison i will speak somewhat be a digression not unnecessary . there be nothing whereof i be more curious , than to find out the true remedy of these poison arrow : for beside the mortality of the wound they make , the par tie shot endure the most insufferable torment in the world , and abide a most ugly and lamentable death , sometime die stark mad , sometime their bowel break out of their belly : which be present discolour as black as pitch , and so unsavoury , as no man can endure to cure , or to attend they . and it be more strange to know , that in all this time there be never Spaniard either by gift or torment that can attain to the true knowledge of the cure , although they have martyr and put to invent torture i know not how many of they . but every one of these Indian know it not , no not one among thousand , but their soothsayer and priest , who do conceal it , and only teach it but from the father to the son . those medicine which be vulgar , and serve for the ordinary poison , be make of the juice of a root call Tupara : the same also quench marvellous the heat of burn fever , and heal inward wound , and break vein , that bleed within the body . but i be more behold to the guianians then any other : for Anthonio de Berreo tell i that he can never attain to the knowledge thereof , and yet they teach i the best way of heal as well thereof , as of all other poison . some of the Spaniard have be cure in ordinary wound , of the common poison arrow with the juice of garlic : but this be a generail rule for all man that shall hereafter travel the Indies where poison arrow be use , that they must abstain from 397 A.D. I595 - Aroras a black people use venomous arrow . the juice of garlic good against ordinary poison . speedy drink to be avoid of such as be wound with poison arrow . the province Aromaia . the pie of Murrecotima . the english voyage drink , for if they take any liquour into their body , as they shall be marvelous provoke thereunto by drought , i say , if they drink before the wound be dress , or soon upon it , there be no way with they but present death . and so i will return again to our journey which for this third day we finish , and cast anchor again near the continent or the left hand between two mountain , the one call Aroami , and the other aio : i make no stay here but till midnight , for i fear hourly lest any rain shall fall , and then it have be impossible to have go any further up , notwithstanding that there be every day a very strong breeze , and easterly wind . i defer the search of the country on guiana-side , till my return down the river . the next day we sail by a great island in the middle of the river call Manoripano , and as we walk a while on the island , while the galley get a head of we , there come for we from the main a small Canoa with seven or eight guianians , to invite we to anchor at their port , but i defer till my return ; it be that cacique to who those nepoio go , which come with we from the town of Toparimaca : and so the five day we reach as high up as the province of Aromaia the country of morequito who Berreo execute , and anchor to the west of a island call Murrecotima , ten mile long and five broad : and that night the cacique Aramiary , ( to who town we make our long and hungry voyage out of the river of Amana ) pass by we . the next day we arrive at the port of morequito , and ancker there , send away one of our pilot to seek the king of Aromaia , uncle to morequito slay by Berreo as aforesaid . the next day follow before noon he come to we on foot from his house , which be fourteen English mile ( himself be a hundred and ten year old ) and return on foot 398 the same day , and with he many of the borderer , with many woman and child , that come to wonder at our nation , and to bring we down victuali , which they do in great plenty , as venison , pork , hen , chicken , foul , fish , with diverse sort of excellent fruit and root , and great abundance of pina , the prince of fruit , that grow under the sun , especial those of Guiana . they bring we also store of bread , and of their wine , and a sort of paraquito , no big than wrennes , and of all other sort both small and great ; one of they give i a beast call by the Spaniard Armadilla , which they call Cassacam , which seem to be all bar over with small plate somewhat like to a rinoceros , with a white horn grow in his hinder part , as big as a great hunt horn , which they use to wind in stead of a trumpet . Monardus write that a little of the powder of that horn put into the ear , cure deafness . after this old king have rest a while in a little tent , that i cause to be set up , i begin by my interpreter to discourse with he of the death of morequito his predecessor , and afterward of the Spaniard , and ere i go any far i make he know the cause of my come thither , who servant i be , and that the queen pleasure be , i shall undertake the voyage for their defence , and to deliver they from the tyrannic of the Spaniard , dilate at large ( as i have do before to those of Trinidad ) her majesty greatness , her justice , her charity to all oppress nation , with as many of the rest of her beauty and virtue , as either i can express , or they conceive : all which be with great admiration attentive hear , and marvelously admire , i begin to sound the old man as touch Guiana , and the state thereof , what sort of common wealth it be , how govern , of what strength and policy , how far it extend , and what nation be friend or enemy adjoin , and final of the distance and way to enter the same : he tell i that 399 Orejones be the gentleman of Peru. Lop. de Gomar . Hist. gen . cap . 119. the english voyage himself and his people with all those down the river towards the sea , as far as Emeria , the province of Carapana , be of Guiana , but that they call themselves Orenoqueponi , and that all the nation between the river and those mountain in sight call wacarima , be of the same cast and appellation : and that on the other side of those mountain of Wacarima there be a large plain ( which after i discover in my return ) call the valley of Amariocapana , in all that valley the people be also of the ancient guianians . i ask what nation those be which inhabit on the far side of those mountain , beyond the valley of Amariocapana : he answer with a great sigh ( as a man which have inward feel of the loss of his country and liberty , especial for that his elder son be slay in a battle on that side of the mountain , who he most entire love ) that he remembered in his father life time when he be very old , and himself a young man , that there come down into that large valley of Guiana , a nation from so far off as the sun sleep , ( for such be his own word ) with so great a multitude as they can not be numbered nor resist , and that they wear large coat , and hat of crimson colour , which colour he express , by show a piece of red wood , wherewith my tent be support , and that they be call Orejones , and Epuremei , those that have slay and root out so many of the ancient people , as there be leaf in the wood upon all the tree , and have now make themselves lord of all , even to that mountain foot call Curaa , save only of two nation , the one call awarawaqueri , and the other Cassipagotos , and that in the last battle fight between the Epuremei , and the iwarawaqueri , his elder son be choose to carry to the aid of the iwarawaqueri , a great troop of the Orenoqueponi , and be there slay with all his people and friend , and that he have now remain but one son : and far tell i that those Epuremei have build a great town 400 call Macureguarai at the say mountain foot , at the begin of the great plain of Guiana , which have no end : and that their house have many room , one over the other , and that therein the great king of the Orejones and Epuremei keep three thousand man to defend the border against they , and withal daily to invade and slay they : but that of late year since the christian offer to invade his territory , and those frontier , they be all at peace , and trade one with another , save only the iwarawaqueri , and those other nation upon the head of the river of Caroli , call Cassipagotos , which we afterward discover , each one hold the Spaniard for a common enemy . after he have answer thus far , he desire leave to depart , say that he have far to go , that he be old , and weak , and be every day call for by death , which be also his own phrase : i desire he to rest with we that night , but i can not entreat he , but he tell i that at my return from the country above , he will again come to we , and in the mean time provide for we the best he can , of all that his country yield ; the same night he return to oroco-tona his own town , so as he go that day eight and twenty mile , the weather be very hot , the country be situate between four and five degree of the equinoctial . This Topiawari be hold for the proud , and wise of all the Orenoqueponi , and so he behave himself towards i in all his answer at my return , as i marveil to finde1 a man of that gravity and judgement , and of so good discourse , that have no help of learning nor breed . the next morning we also leave the port , and sail westward up to the river , to view the famous river call Caroli , as well because it be marvelous of it self , as also for that i understand it lead to the strong nation of all the frontier , that be enemy to the Epuremei , which be subject to Inga , emperor of ten 401 2 c A.D. * 595 - [ three . 651. ] the town of Macureguarai . Orotona between 4. and 5. degree of northerly latitude . Guiana , and Manoa , and that night our ancker at the isle of another island call Caiama , of some five or six mile ^ama - jn length } anj the next day arrive at the mouth of atth^mouth Caroli . when we be short of it as low or further of the river down as the port of morequito we hear the great roar Caroli . and fall of the river , but when we come to enter with our barge and whirry think to have go up some fburtie mile to the nation of the Cassipagotos , we be not able with a barge of eight oar to row one stone cast in a hour , and yet the river be as broad as the Thames at Wolwich , and we try both side , and the middle , and every part of the river , so as we encamp upon the bank adjoin , and send off our orenoque-pone ( which come with we from morequito ) to give knowledge to the nation upon the river of our be there , and that we desire to see the lord of Canuria , which dwell within the province upon that river , make they know that we be enemy to the Spaniard , ( for it be on this river side that morequito slay the friar , and those nine Spaniard which come from Manoa , the city of Inga , and take from they fourty thousand pezo of gold ) so as the next day there come down a Wanuretona . lord or cacique call Wanuretona with many people with he , and bring all store of provision to entertain we , as the rest have do . and as i have before make my come know to Topiawari , so do i acquaint this cacique therewith , and how i be send by her majesty for the purpose aforesaid , and gather also what i can of he touch the estate of Guiana , and i find that those also of Caroli be not only enemy to the Spaniard , but most of all to the Epuremei , which abound in gold , and by this Wanuretona , i have and Arana - knowledge that on the head of this river be three goto three mighty nation , which be seat on a great lake , from mighty nation whence this river descend , and be call Cassipagotos , lake^the EP^ragotos , and Arawagotos , and that all those either head of they against the Spaniard , or the Epuremei will join with river Caroli , we , and that if we enter the land over the mountain 402 of Curaa , we shall satisfy our self with gold and all other good thing : he tell we far of a nation call iwarawaqueri before speak off , that hold daily war with the Epuremei that inhabit Macureguarai the first civil town of Guiana , of the subject of Inga the emperor . upon this river one captain George , that i take with Berreo tell i there be a great silver i , and that a great silver it be near the bank of the say river . but by this time as well Orenoque , Caroli , as all the rest of the river be rise four or five foot in height , so as it be not possible by the strength of any man , or with any boat whatsoever to row into the river against the stream . i therefore send captain thy , captain green vile , my nephew John Gylbert , my cousin butshead Gorges , captain Clarke , and some thirty shot more to coast the river by land , and to go to a town some twenty mile over the valley call Amnatapoi , and they Amnatapol , a find guide there , to go far towards the mountain iowne-foote to another great town call Capurepana , belong to a cacique call Haharacoa ( that be a nephew to old Topiawari king of Arromaia our chief friend ) because this town and province of Capurepana adjoin to Macureguarai , which be a frontier town of the [ three . 652. ] empire : and the mean while my self with captain Gifford , captain Calfield , Edward Hancocke , and some half a dozen shot march over land to view the strange overfal of the river of Caroli which roar so far off , and also to see the plain adjoin , and the rest of the province of Canuri : i send also captain Whiddon , William connocke , and some eight shot with they , to see if they can find any minerail stone alongst the river side . when we be come to the top of the first the strange hill of the plain adjoin to the river , we behold werfal‘ °f that wonderful breach of water , which run down Canl1 " Caroli : and may from that mountain see the river how it run in three part , above twenty mile off , and there appear some ten or twelve overfal in sight , 403 every one as high over the other as a church-tower , which fall with that fury , that the rebound of water make it seem , as if it have be all cover over with a great shower of rain : and in some place we take it at the first for a smoke that have rise over some great town . for my own part i be well persuade from thence to have return , be a very ill footman , but the rest be all so desirous to go near the say strange thunder of water , as they draw i on by little and little , till we come into the next valley where we may better discern a mostbeauti - the same . i never see a more beautiful country , nor full country . more lively prospect , hill so raise here and there over the valley , the river wind into diverse branch , the plain adjoin without bush or stubble , all fair green grass , the ground of hard sand easy to march on , either for horse or foot , the dear cross in every path , the bird towards the evening sing on every tree with a thousand several tune , crane and herons of white , crimson , and carnation perch in the river side , the air fresh with a gentle easterly wind , and every stone that we stoop to take up , promise either gold or silver by his complexion . your lordship shall see of many sort , and i hope some of they can be better under the sun , and yet we have no mean but with our dagger and finger to tear they out here and there , the abundance of rock be most hard of that minerali spar afore-^sparre say , which be like a flint , and be altogether as hard or it hard , and beside the vein lie a fathom or two deep in the rock . but we want all thing requisite save only our desire and good will to have perform more if it have please God . to be short , when both our company return , each of they bring also several sort of stone that appear very fair , but be such as they find loose on the ground , and be for the most part but colour , and have not any gold fix in they , yet such as have no judgement or experience keep all that glister , and will not be persuade but it be rich because of the lustre , and bring of those , and of mar-404 1595-quesite with all , from Trinidad , and have deliver of those stone to be try in many place , and have thereby breed a opinion that all the rest be of the same : yet some of these stone i show afterward to a Spaniard of the Caracas , who tell i that it be el Madre del oro , that be the mother of gold , and that the mine be far in the ground . but it shall be find a weak policy in i , either to betray my self , or my country with imagination , neither be i so far in love with that lodging , watch , care , peril , disease , ill savour , bad fare , and many other mischiefs that accompany these voyage , as to woo my self again into any of they , be i not assure that the sun cover not so much riches in any part of the earth . captain Whiddon , and our chirurgeon Nicholas millechap bring i a kind of stone like saphire , what they may prove i know not . i show they to some of the Orenoqueponi , and they promise to bring i to a mountain , that have of they very large piece grow diamond wise : whether it be crystal of the mountain , bristol-diamond , or saphire i do not yet know , but i hope the best , sure i be that the place be as likely as those from whence all the rich stone be bring , and in the same height or very near . on the left hand of this river Caroli be seat those nation which be call Iwarawakeri before remember , which be enemy to the Epuremei : and on the head of it adjoin to the great lake Cassipa , be situate those other nation which also resist Inga , and the Epuremei , call Cassepagotos , Eparegotos , and Arrawagotos . i far understand that this lake of Cassipa be so large , Cassipa a as it be above one day journey for one of their canoas gnat lake . to cross , which may be some fourty mile , and that thereinto fall diverse river , and that great store of grain of gold be find in the summer time when the lake fall by the bank , in those branch . there be also another goodly river beyond Caroli which the nver of be call arui , which also run through the lake Cassipa , arui - 405 Ewaipanomaa strange headless nation . [ he . 653. ] the english voyage and fall into Orenoque far west , make all that land between Caroli and arui a island , which be likewise a most beautiful country . next unto arui there be two river Atoica and Caora , and on that branch which be call Caora , be a nation of people , who head appear not above their shoulder ; which though it may be think a mere fable , yet for my own part i be resolve it be true , because every child in the province of Arromaia and Canuri affirm the same : they be call Ewaipanoma : they be report to have their eye in their shoulder , and their mouth in the middle of their breast , and that a long train of hair grow backward between their shoulder . the son of Topiawari , which i bring with i into England tell i that they be the most mighty man of all the land , and use bow , arrow , and club thrice as big as any of Guiana , or of the Orenoqueponi , and that one of the Iwarawakeri take a prisoner of they the year before our arrival there , and bring he into the border of Aromaia his father country . and far when i seem to doubt of it , he tell i that it be no wonder among they , but that they be as great a nation , and as common as any other in all the province , and have of late year slay many hundred of his father people , and of other nation their neighbour , but it be not my chance to hear of they till i be come away , and if i have but speak one word of it while i be there , i may have bring one of they with i to put the matter out of doubt . such a nation be write of by Mandevile , who report be hold for fable many year , and yet since the east Indies be discover , we find his relation true of such thing as heretofore be hold incredible : whether it be true or no , the matter be not great , neither can there be any profit in the imagination ; for my own part i see they not , but i be resolve that so many people do not all combine , or forethink to make the report . when i come to Cumana in the west Indies afterward by chance i speak with a Spaniard dwell not far from 406 1595-thence , a man of great travel , and after he know that i have be in Guiana , and so far direct west as Caroli , the first question he ask i be , whether i have see any of the Ewaipanoma , which be those without head : who be esteem a most honest man of his word , and in all thing else , tell i that he have see many of they : i may not name he , because it may be for his disadvantage , but he be well know to monsieur mucherons son of London , and to Peter Mucheron merchant of the flemish ship that be there in trade , who also hear what he avow to be true of those people . the four river to the west of Caroli be Casnero the river of which fall into Orenoque on this side of Amapaia , casnen ' and that river be great than Danubius , or any of Europe : it rise on the south of Guiana from the mountain which divide Guiana from Amazones , and i think it to be navigable many hundred mile : but we have no time , mean , nor season of the year , to search those river for the cause aforesaid , the winter the winter be come upon we , although the winter and summer °fgu'lana-as touch cold and heat differ not , neither do the tree ever sensible lose their leaf , but have always fruit either ripe or green , and most of they both blossom , leaf , ripe fruit , and green at one time : but their winter only consist of terrible rain , and overflow of the river , with many great storm and gust , thunder and lightning , of which we have our fill , ere we return . on the north side , the first river that fall into Orenoque be Cari , beyond it on the same side be the river of Limo , between these two be a great nation of cannibal , and their chief town bear the name of the river , and be call Acamacari : at this town be a continual market of woman for three or four hatchet a piece , they be buy by the Arwacas , and by they sell into the west Indies . to the west of Limo be the river Pao , beyond it Caturi , beyond that Voari and Capuri which fall out of the great river of Meta , by 4°7 which Berreo descend from Nuevo reyno de Granada . to the westward of Capuri be the province of Amapaia , where Berreo winter , and have so many of his people poison with the tawny water of the marsh of the anebas . above Amapaia towards Nuevo reyno fall in Meta , Pato , Meta , Pato , and Cassanar . to the west of those to-cassanar . ward the province of the ashaguas and Catetios be the river of Beta , Dawney , and Ubarro , and towards the frontier of Peru be the province of Thomebamba , and Caxamalca . adjoin to Quito in the north side of Peru be the river of Guiacar and Goauar : and on the other side of the say mountain the river of Papamene . Papamene which descend into Marannon or Amazones pass through the province Mutylones where don Pedro de Osua who be slay by the traitor Agiri before rehearse , build his brigandine , when he seek Guiana by the way of Amazones . the isle of between dawney and Beta lie a famous island in Baraquan . Orenoque now call Baraquan ( for above Meta it be not know by the name of Orenoque ) which be call Athule , beyond which , ship of burden can pass by reason of a most forcible overfall , and current of water : but in the eddy all small vessel may be draw even to Peru it self : but to speak of moor of these river without the description be but tedious , and therefore Orenoque a i with leave the rest to the description . this river of Orenoque be navigable for ship little less than 1000 Peru , Nuevo mile , and for lesser vessel near 2000 by it ( as afore-reyno , and say ) Peru , Nuevo reyno , and Popaian , may be invade : Popaian may it also lead to the great empire of Inga , and to the province of Amapaia , and Anebas which abound in gold : l ' ’J he branch of Cosnero , manta , Caora descend from the middle land and valley , which lie between the easter province of Peru and Guiana ; and it fall into the sea between Marannon and Trinidad in two degree and a half : all which your honour shall better perceive in the general description of Guiana , Peru , Nuevo reyno , the kingdom of Popayan , and Roidas , with the 408 province of Venezuela , to the bay of Uraba , behind Cartagena westward ; and to Amazones southward . while we lay at anchor on the coast of Canuri , and have Canuri . take knowledge of all the nation upon the head and branch of this river , and have find out so many several people , which be enemy to the Epuremei , and the new conqueror : i think it time lose to linger any long in that place , especial for that the fury of Orenoque begin daily to threaten we with danger in our return : for no half day pass , but the river begin to rage and overflow very fearful , and the rain come down in terrible shower , and gust in great abundance : and withal , our man begin to cry out for want of shift , for no man have place to bestow any other apparel then that which he wear on his back , and that be thorough wash on his body for the most part ten time in one day : and we have now be well near a month , every day pass to the westward far and far from our ship . we therefore turn towards the east , and spend the rest they return . of the time in discover the river towards the sea , which we have not view , and which be most materiali . the next day follow we leave the mouth of Caroli , and arrive again at the port of morequito where we be before : for pass down the stream we go without labour , and against the wind , little less than a hundred mile a day . assoon as i come to anchor , i send away one for old Topiawari , with who i much desire to have further conference , and also to deal with he for some one of his country , to bring with we into England , as well to learn the language , as to confer withal by the way , the time be now spend of any long stay there . within three hour after my messenger come to he , he arrive also , and with he such a rabble of all sort of people , and every one load with somewhat , as if it have be a great market or fair in England : and our hungry company cluster thick and threefold among their basket , every one lay hand on 409 1595-the last conference of sir Walter Ralegh with Topiawari . who son he bring into England . counsel to be follow in other conquest . Macureguarai the first town of Guiana , and of rich and apparel people . the english voyage what he like . after he have rest a while in my tent , i shut out all but our self , and my interpreter , and tell he that i know that both the Epuremei and the Spaniard be enemy to he , his country and nation : that the one have conquer Guiana already , and the other seek to regain the same from they both : and therefore i desire he to instruct i what he can , both of the passage into the golden part of Guiana , and to the civil town and apparel people of Inga . he give i a answer to this effect : first that he can not perceive that i mean to go onward towards the city of Manoa , for neither the time of the year serve , neither can he perceive any sufficient number for such a enterprise : and if i do , i be sure with all my company to be bury there , for the emperor be of that strength , as that many time so many man more be too few : beside he give i this good counsel and advise i to hold it in mind ( as for himself he know , he can not live till my return ) that i shall not offer by any mean hereafter to invade the strong part of Guiana without the help of all those nation which be also their enemy : for that it be impossible without those , either to be conduct , to be victual , or to have aught carry with we , our people not be able to endure the march in so great heat , and travel , unless the borderer give they help , to carry with they both their meat and furniture : for he remember that in the plain of Macureguarai three hundred Spaniard be overthrow , who be tire out , and have none of the borderer to their friend : but meet their enemy as they pass the frontier , be environ on all side , and the people set the long dry grass on fire , smother they , so as they have no breath to fight , nor can discern their enemy for the great smoke . he tell i far that 4 day journey from his town be Macureguarai , and that those be the next and near of the subject of Inga , and of the 410 Epuremei , and the first town of apparel and rich people , and that all those plate of gold which be scatter among the borderer and carry to other nation far and near , come from the say Macureguarai and be there make , but that those of the land within be far fine , and be fashion after the image of man , beast , bird , and fish . i ask he whether he think that those company that i have there with i , be sufficient to take that town or no ? he tell i that he think they be . i then ask he , whether he will assist i with guide , and some company of his people to joy ne with we ? he answer that he will go himself with all the borderer , if the river do remain fordable , upon this condition that i will leave with he till my return again fifty soldier , which he undertake to victuali : i answer that i have not above fifty good man in all there , the rest be labourer and rower , and that i have not pro - . vision to leave with they of powder , shot , apparel , or [ three . 655. ] aught else , and that without those thing necessary for their defence , they shall be in danger of the Spaniard in my absence , who i know will use the same measure towards i , that i offer they at Trinidad : and although upon the motion captain Calfield , captain green vile , my nephew John Gilbert and diverse other be desirous to stay , yet i be resolve that they must needs have perish , for Berreo expect daily a supply out of Spain , and look also hourly for his son to come down from Nuevo reyno de Granada , with many horse and foot , and have also in Valencia in the Caracas , two hundred horse ready to march , and i can not have spare above forty , and have not any store at all of powder , lead , or match to have leave with they , nor any other provision , either spade , pickeaxe , or ought else to have fortify withal . when i have give he reason that i can not at this time leave he such a company , he then desire i to forbear he and his country for that time , for he 411 assure i that i shall be no soon three day from the coast , but those Epuremei will invade he , and destroy all the remain of his people and friend , if he shall any way either guide we or assist we against they . he further allege , that the Spaniard seek his death , and as they have already murder his nephew morequito lord of that province , so they have he seventeen day in a chain before he be king of the country , and lead he like a dog from place to place , until he have pay a hundred plate of gold , and diverse chain of spleen-stone for his ransom : and now since he become owner of that province , that they have many time lay wait to take he , and that they will be now more vehement , when they shall understand of his conference with the english , and because , say he , they will the better displant i , if they can lay hand on i , they have get a nephew of i call Eparacano , who they have christen don Juan , and his son don Pedro , who they have also apparel and arm , by who they seek to make a party against i in my own country : he also have take to wife one Loviana of a strong family , which be borderer and neighbour , and my self now be old and in the hand of death be not able to travel nor to shift , as when i be of young year : he therefore pray we to defer it till the next year , when he will undertake to draw in all the borderer to serve we , and then also it will be more seasonable to travel , for at this time of the year , we shall not be able to pass any river , the water be and will be so grow ere our return . he far tell i , that i can not desire so much to invade Macureguari , and the rest of Guiana , but that the borderer will be more vehement than i , for he yield for a chief cause that in the war with the Epuremei , they be spoil of their woman , and that their wife and daughter be take from they , so as for their own part they desire nothing of the gold 412 or treasure , for their labour , but only to recover woman from the Epuremei : for he far complain very sad ( as it have be a matter of great consequence ) that whereas they be wont to have ten or twelve wife , they be now enforce to content themselves with three or four , and that the lord of the Epuremei have fifty or a hundred : and in truth they war more for woman then either for gold or dominion : for the lord of country desire many child of their own body , to increase their race and kindred , for in those consist their great trust and strength . diverse of his follower afterward desire i to make haste again , that they may sack the Epuremei , and i ask they of what ? they answer , of their woman for we , and their gold for you : for the hope of those many of woman they moor desire the war , then either for gold , or for the recovery of their ancient territory . for what between the subject of Inga , and the Spaniard , those frontier be grow thin of people , and also great number be flee to other nation far off for fear of the Spaniard . after i receive this answer of the old man , we fall into consideration , whether it have be of better advice to have enter Macureguarai , and to have begin a war upon Inga at this time , yea or no , if the time of the year , and all thing else have sort . for my own part ( as we be not able to march it for the river , neither have any such strength as be requisite , and dare not abide the come of the winter , or to tarry any long from our ship ) i think it be evil counsel to have attempt it at that time , although the desire of gold will answer many objection : but it will have be in my opinion a utter overthrow to the enterprise , if the same shall be hereafter by her majesty attempt : for than ( whereas now they have hear we be enemy to the Spaniard and be send by her majesty to relieve they ) they will as good cheap have join with the Spaniard at our 413 15951 , , , return , as to have yield unto we , when they have prove that we come both for one errant , and that both seek but to sack and spoil they , but as yet [ three . 656. ] our desire of gold , or our purpose of invasion be not know to they of the empire : and it be likely that if her majesty undertake the enterprise , they will rather submit themselves to her obedience then to the Spaniard , of who cruelty both themselves and the borderer have already taste : and therefore till i have know her majesty pleasure , i will rather have lose the sack of one or two town ( although they may have be very profitable ) then to have deface or endanger the future hope of so many million , and the great good , and rich trade which England may be possess of thereby . i be assure now that they will all die even to the last man against the Spaniard in hope of our succour and return : whereas otherwise if i have either lay hand on the borderer , or ransom the lord , as Berreo do , or invade the subject of Inga , i know all have be lose for hereafter . after that i have resolve Topiawari lord of Aromaia , that i can not at this time leave with he the company he desire , and that i be content to forbear the enterprise against the Epuremei till the next year , he free give i his only son to take with i into England , and hope , that though he himself have but a short time to live , yet that by our mean his son shall be establish after his death : and i leave with he one Francis Francis sparrow , a servant of captain Gifford , ( who be sparrow . desirous to tarry , and can describe a country with his pen ) and a boy of i call Hugh Goodwin , to learn the language . i after ask the manner how the Epuremei wrought those plate of gold , and how they can melt it out of the stone ; he tell i that the most of the gold which they make in plate and image , the lake off be not sever from the stone , but that on the lake of Manoa . Manoa , and in a multitude of other river they gather it in grain of perfect gold and in piece as big as small 414 stone , and that they put it to a part of copper , otherwise they can not work it , and that they use a great earthen pot with hole round about it , and when they have mingle the gold and copper together , they fasten cane to the hole , and so with the breath of man they increase the fire till the metal run , and then they cast it into mould of stone and clay , and so make those plate and image . i have send your honour of two sort such as i can by chance recover , more to show the manner of they , then for the value : for i do not in any sort make my desire of gold know , because i have neither time , nor power to have a great quantity . i give among they many more piece ot gold , than i receive , of the new money of 20 shilling with her majesty picture to wear , with promise that they will become her servant thenceforth . i have also send your honour of the ore , whereof i know some be as rich as the earth yield any , of s^-ore . most rich which i know there be sufficient , if nothing else be to be hope for . but beside that we be not able to tarry and search the hill , so we have neither pioner , bar , ledge , nor wedge of iron to break the ground , without which there be no work in mine : but we see all the hill with stone of the colour of gold and silver , and we try they to be no marquesite , and therefore such as the Spaniard call el madre del oro , or , the mother of gold , which be a undoubted assurance of the general abundance : and my self see the outside of many mine of the spar , which i know to be the same that all covet in this world , and of those , more than i will speak of . have learn what i can in Canuri and Aromaia , and receive a faithful promise of the principall of those province to become servant to her majesty , and to resist the Spaniard , if they make any attempt in our absence , and that they will draw in the nation about the lake of Cassipa , and those iwarawaqueri , i the lake of then part from old Topiawari , and receive his son c ™ 1 ? 0 - 415 for a pledge between we , and leave with he two of we as aforesaid . to Francis sparrow i give instruction to travel to Marcureguarai , with such merchandize as i leave with they , thereby to learn the place , and if it be possible , to go on to the great city of Manoa : which be do , we weigh anchor , and coast the Guiana on the river on Guiana side , because we come upon the north Southside . side , by the lane of the saima and wikiri . there come with we from Aromaia a cacique call Putijma , that command the province of Warapana , ( which Putijma slay the nine Spaniard upon Caroli before speak of ) who desire we to rest in the porte of his country , promise to bring we unto a mountain adjoin to his town that have stone of the colour of gold , which he perform . and after we have rest there one night , i go my self in the morning with most of the gentleman of my company , over land towards the say mountain , march by a river Mana . side call Mana , leave on the right hand a town call Tuteritona , stand in the province of Tarracoa , of the which Wariaaremagoto be principali . beyond it lie another town towards the south , in the valley of Amariocapana , which bear the name of the say valley , who plain stretch themselves some sixty mile in length , east and west , as fair ground , and as beautiful [ three . 657. ] field , as any man have ever see , with diverse copse scatter here and there by the river side , and all as full of dear as any forest or park in England , and in every lake and river the like abundance of fish and foul , of which Irraparragota be lord . from the river of Mana , we cross another river in Diana . the say beautiful valley call Oiana , and rest our self by a clear lake , which lie in the middle of the say Oiana , and one of our guide kindle we fire with two stick , we stay a while to dry our shirt , which with the heat hang very wet and heavy on our shoulder . afterwards we seek the ford to pass over towards the mountain call Iconuri , where 416 Putijma foretell we of the mine . in this lake we see one of the great fish , as big as a wine pipe , which they call Manati , be most excellent and wholesome meat . but after i perceive , that to pass the say river will require half a day march more , i be not able my self to endure it , and therefore i send captain Keymis with six shot to go on , and give he order not to return to the port of Putijma , which be call chiparepare , but to take leisure , and to march down the say valley , as far as a river call Cumaca , where i promise to meet he again , Putijma himself promise also to be his guide : and as they march , they leave the town of Emparepana , and Capurepana , on the right hand , and march from Putijmas house down the say valley of Amariocapana , and we return the same day to the river side , see by the way many rock , like unto gold over , and on the left hand , a round mountain which consist of minerali stone . from hence we row down the stream , coast the province of Parino : as for the branch of river which i overpass in this discourse , those shall be better express in the description with the mountain of Ajo , Ara , and the rest , which be situate in the province of Parino and Carricurrina . when we be come as far down as the land call Ariacoa , ( where Orenoque divide it self into three great branch , each of they be most goodly river ) i send away captain Henry thin , and captain greenevile with the galley , the near way , and take with i captain Gifford , captain calfield , Edward porter , and captain Eynos with my own barge , and the two wherry , and go down that branch of Orenoque , which be call Cararoopana , which lead towards Emeria the province of Carapana , and towards the east sea , as well to find out captain Keymis , who i have send over land , as also to acquaint my self with Carapana , who be one of the great of all the lord of the Orenoqueponi : and when i come to the ten 417 2d A.D. * 595 - great fish call Manati most excellent meat . river of Cumaca ( to which Putijma promise to conduct captain Keymis ) i leave captain Eynos and master porter in the say river to expect his come , and the Emeria . rest of we row down the stream towards Emeria . in this branch call Cararoopana be also many goodly island , some of six mile long , some of ten , and some of twenty . when it grow towards sunset , we enter a branch of a river that fall into Orenoque winicapora . call winicapora : where i be en form of the mountain of crystal , to which in truth for the length of the way , and the evil season of the year , i be not able to march , nor abide any long upon the journey : we see it afar off and it appear like a white church-a mighty cata - tower of a exceed height . there fall over it a rack or overfall mjghty river which touch no part of the side of the ojviaer . mountain , but rush over the top of it , and fall to the ground with so terrible a noise and clamour , as if a thousand great bell be knock one against another . i think there be not in the world so strange a overfall , nor so wonderful to behold : Berreo tell i that there diamond and be diamond and other precious stone on it , and that other precious shine very far off : but what it have i know ' not , neither dare he or any of his man ascend to the top of the say mountain , those people adjoin be his enemy ( as they be ) and the way to it so impassable . upon this river of Winicapora we rest a while , and from thence march into the country to a town call after the name of the river , whereof the captain be one Timitwara , who also offer to conduct i Wacarima . to the top of the say mountain call Wacarima : but when we come in first to the house of the say Timitwara , be upon one of their say feast day , we find they all as drink as beggar , and the pot walk from one to another without rest : we that be weary , and hight with march , be glad of the plenty though a small quantity satisfy we , their drink be very strong and heady , and so rest our self 418 a while ; after we have feed , we draw our self back to our boat , upon the river and there come to we all the lord of the country , with all such kind of victuali as the place yield , and with their delicate wine of pina , and with abundance of hen , and other provision , and of those stone which we call spleen-stone . we understand by the chieftain of Winicapora , that their lord Carapana be depart from Emeria which be now in sight , and that he be flee to Cairamo , adjoin to the mountain of Guiana , over [ three . 658. ] the valley call Amariocapana , be persuade by those ten Spaniard which lie at his house , that we will destroy he , and his country . but after these cacique of Winicapora and sapora-tona his follower perceive our purpose , and see that we come as enemy to the Spaniard only , and have not so much as harm any of those nation , no though we find they to be of the Spaniard own servant , they assure we that Carapana will be as ready to serve we , as any of the lord of the province , which we have pass ; and that he dare doe no other till this day but entertain the Spaniard , his country lie so direct in their way , and next of all other to any entrance that shall be make in Guiana on that side . and they far assure we , that it be not for fear of our come that he be remove , but to be acquit of the Spaniard or any other that shall come hereafter . for the province of Cairoma be situate at the mountain foot , which divide the plain of Guiana from the country of the Orenoqueponi : by mean whereof if any shall come in . our absence into his town , he will slip over the mountain into the plain of Guiana among the Epuremei , where the Spaniard dare not follow he without great force . but in my opinion , or rather i assure my self , that Carapana ( be a notable wise and subtle fellow , a man 419 of one hundred year of age , and therefore of great experience ) be remove , to look on , and if he find that we return strong he will be we , if not , he will excuse his departure to the Spaniard , and say it be for fear of our come . we therefore think it bootless to row so far down the stream , or to seek any far of this old fox : and therefore from the river of Waricapana ( which lie at the entrance of Emeria ) we return again , and leave to the eastward those four river which fall from the mountain of Emeria into Orenoque , which be waracayari , Coirama , akaniri , and Iparoma : below those four be also these branch and mouth of Orenoque , which fall into the east sea , whereof the first be araturi , the next Amacura , the three Barima , the four Wana , the five Morooca , the sixth paroma , the last Wijmi : beyond they there fall out of the land between Orenoque and Amazones 14 river which i forbear to name , inhabit by the Arwacas and cannibal . it be now time to return towards the north , and we find it a wearisome way back from the border of Emeria , to recover up again to the head of the river Carerupana , by which we descend , and where we part from the galley , which i direct to take the next way to the port of Toparimaca , by which we enter first . all the night it be stormy and dark , and full of thunder and great shower , so as we be drive to keep close by the bank in our small boat , be all hearty afraid both of the billow and terrible curent of the river . by the next morning we recover the mouth of the river of Cumaca , where we leave captain Eynos and Edward porter to attend the come of captain Keymis over land : but when we enter the same , they have hear no news of his arrival , which breed in we a great doubt what may become of he : i row up a league or two far into the river , shoot off piece all the way , that he may know of our be there . 420 1595-and the next morning we hear they answer we also with a piece : we take they aboard we , and take our leave of Putima their guide , who of all other most lament our departure , and offer to send his son with we into England , if we can have stay till he have send back to his town : but our heart be cold to behold the great rage and increase of Orenoque , and therefore depart , and turn towards the west , till we have recover the part of the three branch aforesaid , that we may put down the stream after the galley . the next day we land on the island of Assapano ( which divide the river from that branch by which we send down to Emeria ) and there feast our self with that beast which be call Armadilla present unto we before at Winicapora , and the day follow we recover the galley at anchor at the port of Topari - the port of maca , and the same evening depart with very foul Toparimaca . weather and terrible thunder , and shower , for the winter be come on very far : the best be , we go no less than 100 mile a day , down the river ; but by the way we enter , it be impossible to return , for that the river of Amana , be in the bottom of the bay of Guanipa , can be sail back by any mean , both the breeze and current of the sea be so forcible : and therefore we follow a branch of Orenoque call Capuri , which enter into the sea eastward of our ship , to the end we may bear with they before the wind , and it be not without need , for we have by that way as much to cross of the main sea after we come to the river mouth , as between Gravelyn and Dover , in such boat as your Hon. have hear . to speak of what pass homeward be tedious , either to describe or name any of the river , island , or village of the Tivitivas which dwell on tree : we will leave all those to the generail map : and to be short , [ three . 659. ] when we be arrive at the sea side , then grow our great doubt , and the bitter of all our journey before - 421 pass , for i protest before God , that we be in a most desperate estate : for the same night which we ankor in the mouth of the river of Capun , where it fall into the sea , there arise a mighty storm , and the river mouth be at least a league broad , so as we run before night close under the land with our small boat , and bring the galley as near as we can , but she have as much a do to live as can be , and there want little of her sink , and all those in she ; for my own part i confess , i be very doubtful which way to take , either to go over in the pester galley , there be but six foot water over the sand , for two league together , and that also in the channel , and she draw five : or to adventure in so great a billow , and in so doubtful weather , to cross the sea in my barge . the long we tarry the worse it be , and therefore i take captain Gifford , captain Calfield , and my cousin greenevile into my barge ; and after it clear up , about midnight we put our self to god keep , and thrust out into the sea , leave the galley at anchor , who dare not adventure but by daylight : and so be all very sober , and melancholy , one faint cheat another to show courage , it please God that the next day about nine of the clock , we descry the island of Trinidad , and steer for the near part of it , we keep the shore till we come to Curiapan , where we find our ship at anchor , than which there be never to we a more joyful sight . now that it have please God to send we safe to our ship , it be time to leave Guiana to the sun , who they worship , and steer away towards the north : i will therefore in a few word finish the discovery a rehearsal thereof . of the several nation which we find upon y description this discovery i will once again make repetition , and timsandiivers ^°ye be affect - at our first entrance into Amana , find in this which be one of the outlet of Orenoque , we leave on the discovery . right hand of we in the bottom of the bay , lie direct against Trinidad , a nation of inhuman cannibal , which 422 inhabit the river of Guanipa and Berbeese ; in the same bay there be also a three river which be call Areo , which rise on Paria side towards Cumana , and that river be inhabit with the wikiri , who chief town upon the say river be Sayma ; in this bay there be no more river , but these three before rehearse , and the four branch of Amana , all which in the winter thrust so great abundance of water into the sea , as the same be take up fresh , two or three league from the land . in the passage towards Guiana ( that be , in all those land which the eight branch of Orenoque fashion into hand ) there be but one sort of people call Tivitivas , but of two cast as they term they , the one call Ciawani , the other waraweeti , and those war one with another . on the hithermost part of Orenoque , as at Toparimaca , and winicapora , those be of a nation call Nepoios , and be of the follower of Carapana , lord of Emeria . between Winicapora and the port of morequito which stand in Aromaia , and all those in the valley of Amariocapana be call Orenoqueponi , and do obey morequito , and be now follower of Topiawari . upon the river of Caroli , be the canuri , which be govern by a woman ( who be inheritrix of that province ) who come far off to see our nation , and ask i diverse question of her majesty , be much delight with the discourse of her majesty greatness , and wonder at such report as we true make of her highness many virtue : and upon the head of Caroli , and on the lake of Cassipa , be the three strong nation of the Cassipagotos . right south into the land be the capure-pani , and emparepani , and beyond those adjoin to Macureguarai ( the first city of Inga ) be the iwarawakeri : all these be profess enemy to the Spaniard , and to the rich Epuremei also . to the west of Caroli be diverse nation of cannibal , and of those Ewaipanoma without head . direct west be the amapaias and Anebas , which be also marvelous rich in gold . the rest towards Peru we will omit . on the north of 423 the english voyage Orenoque , between it and the west Indies be the wikiri , Saymi , and the rest before speak of , all mortali enemy to the Spaniard . on the south side of the main mouth of Orenoque , be the Arwacas ; and beyond they the cannibal and to the south of they the Amazones . to make mention of the several beast , bird , fish , fruit , flower , gum , sweet wood , and of their several religion and custom , will for the first require as many volume as those of Gesnerus , and for the rest another bundle of Decades . the religion of the Epuremei be the same which the Ingas , emperor of Peru use , which may be read in Cieza , and other spanish story , how they believe the immortality of the soul , worship the sun , and bury with they alive their best belove wife and treasure , as they likewise do in Pegu in the east Indies , and other place . the Orenoqueponi bury not their wife with they , but their jewel , hope to enjoy they again . the Arwacas dry the bone of their lord , and their wife and friend drink they in powder . in the grave of the peruvians the Spaniard find their great abundance of treasure : the like also be to be find among these people in every province . they have all many wife , and the lord fivefold to the common sort : their wife never eat with their husband , nor among the man , but serve their husband at meal , and afterwards feed by themselves . those that be past their young year , make all their bread and drink , and work their cotton bed , and do all else of service and labour , for the man do nothing but hunt , fish , play , and drink , when they be out of the war . i will enter no further into discourse of their manner , law and custom : and because i have not my self see the city of Inga , i can avow on my credit what i have hear , although it be very likely , that the emperor Inga have build and erect as magnificent palace in Guiana , as his ancestor do in Peru , which be for their 424 riches and rareness most marvellous and exceed all in Europe , and i think of the world , China except , which also the Spaniard ( which i have ) assure i to be true , as also the nation of the borderer , who be but savage to those of the inland , do cause much treasure to be bury with they : for i be inform of one of the cacique of the valley of Amariocapana which have bury with he a little before our arrival , a chair of gold most curious wrought , which be make either in macureguaray adjoin , or in Manoa : but if we shall have grieve they in their religion at the first , before they have be teach better , and have dig up their grave , we have lose they all : and therefore i hold my first resolution , that her majesty shall either accept or refuse the enterprise , ere any thing shall be do that might in any sort hinder the same . and if Peru have so many heap of gold , whereof those Ingas be prince , and that they delight so much therein ; no doubt but this which now live and reign in Manoa , have the same honour , and i be assure have more abundance of gold , within his territory , than all Peru and the west Indies . for the rest , which my self have see , i will promise these thing that follow , which i know to be true . those that be desirous to discover and to see many nation , may be satisfy within this river , which bring forth so many arm and branch lead to several country and province , above 2000 mile east and west , and 800 mile south and north , and of these , the most either rich in gold , or in other merchandize . the common soldier shall here fight for gold , and pay himself in steed of penny , with plate of half a foot broad , whereas he break his bone in other war for provant and penury . those commander and chieftain that shoot at honour and abundance , shall find there more rich and beautiful city , more temple adorn with golden image , more sepulchre fill with treasure , then either Cortes find in Mexico , 425 great riches . exceed commendation of the river of Orenoque . the holsome-nesse of the country . gold . Brasil wood . excellent die . the english voyage or Pizarro in Peru : and the shine glory of this conquest will eclipse all those so far extend beam of the spanish nation . there be no country which yield more pleasure to the inhabitant , either for those common delight of hunt , hawk , fish , fowl , or the rest , than Guiana do . it have so many plain , clear river , abundance of pheasant , partridge , quail , rail , crane , herons , and all other fowl : deer of all sort , pork , hare , lion , tiger , leopard , and diverse other sort of beast , either for chase , or food . it have a kind of beast call Cama , or Anta , as big as a english beef , and in great plenty . to speak of the several sort of every kind , i fear will be troublesome to the reader , and therefore i will omit they , and conclude that both for health , good air , pleasure , and riches i be resolve it can be equal by any region either in the east or west . Moreover the country be so healthful , as of a hundred person and more ( which lie without shift most sluttish , and be every day almost melt with heat in row and march , and sudden wet again with great shower , and do eat of all sort of corrupt fruit , and make meal of fresh fish without season , of Tortugas , of Lagartos or crocodile , and of all sort good and bad , without either order or measure , and beside lodge in the open air every night ) we lose not any one , nor have one ill dispose to my knowledge , nor find any Calentura , or other of those pestilent disease which dwell in all hot region , and so near the equinoctial line . where there be store of gold , it be in effect needless to remember other commodity for trade : but it have towards the south part of the river , great quantity of brasil-wood , and diverse berry that die a most perfect crimson and carnation : and for paint , all France , Italy , or the east Indies yield none such : for the more the skin be wash , the fair the colour appear , and 426 the short , easy , and commodious navigation to Guiana . the discovery of Guiana a.d. ... * 595 - with which , even those brown and tawny woman spot themselves , and colour their cheek . all place yield abundance of cotton , of silk , of balsamum , and of those cotton , silk , kind most excellent , and never know in Europe , of all sort of gum , of Indian pepper : and what else an the country may afford within the land we know not , neither have we time to abide the trial , and search . the soil beside be so excellent and so full of river , as it will carry sugar , ginger , and all those other commodity , which the west Indies have . the navigation be short , for it may be sail with a ordinary wind in six week , and in the like time back again , and by the way neither lee shore , enemy coast , rock , nor sand , all which in the voyage to the west Indies , and all other place we be subject unto , as the channel of Bahama , come from the west Indies , can well be pass in the winter , and when it be at the best , it be a perilous and a fearful place . the rest of the Indies for calm , and disease very troublesome , and the sea about the Bermuda a hellish sea for thunder , lightning , and storm . this very yeere* there be seventeen sail of Spanish 1595. ship lose in the channel of Bahama , and the great fillip like to have sink at the Bermuda be put back to saint Juan de Puerto rico . and so it fall out in that navigation every year for the most part , which in this voyage be not to be fear : for the time of year to leave England be best in July , and the summer in Guiana be in October , November , December , Januarie , February , and march , and then the ship may depart thence in April , and so return again into England in June , so as they shall never be subject to winter-weather , either come , go , or stay there : which for my part , i take to be one of the great comfort and encouragements that can be think on , have ( as i have do ) taste in this voyage by the west Indies so many calm , so much heat , such outrageous gust , foul weather , and contrary wind . 427 to conclude , Guiana be a country that have yet her maidenhead , never sack , turn , nor wrought , the face of the earth have not be tear , nor the virtue and salt of the soil spend by manurance , the grave have not be open for gold , the mine not break with sledge , nor their image pull down out of their temple . it have never be enter by any army of strength , and never conquer or possess by any christian prince . it be beside so defensible , that if two fort be build in one of the province which i have see , the flood set in so near the bank , where the channel also lie , that no ship can pass up but within a pike length of the artillery , first of the one , and afterward of the other : which two fort will be a sufficient guard both to the empire of Inga , and to a hundred other several kingdom , lie within the say river , even to the city of Quito in Peru. there be therefore great difference between the easiness of the conquest of Guiana , and the defence of it be conquer , and the west or east Indies : Guiana have but one entrance by the sea ( if it have that ) for any vessel of burden : so as whosoever shall first possess it , it shall be find unaccessible for any enemy , except he come in wherry , barge , or canoas , or else in flat bottomed boat , and if he do offer to enter it in that manner , the wood be so thick two hundred mile together upon the river of such entrance , as a mouse can sit in a boat unhit from the bank . by land it be more impossible to approach , for it have the strong situation of any region under the sun , and be so environ with impassable mountain on every side , as it be impossible to victuali any company in the passage : which have be well prove by the spanish nation , who since the conquest of Peru have never leave five year free from attempt this empire , or discover some way into it , and yet of three and twenty several gentleman , knight , and noble man , there be never any that know which way to lead a army by land , or to con - 428 ... I595* dust ship by sea , any thing near the say country . Orellana , of who the river of Amazones take name , be the first , and don Antonio de Berreo ( who we displant ) the last : and i doubt much , whether he himself or any of he yet know the best way into the say empire . tt can therefore hardly be regain , if any strength be former set down , but in one or two place , and but two or three crumster or galley build , and furnish upon the river within : the west Indies have many port , water place , and landing , and near than three hundred mile to Guiana , no man can harbour a ship , except he know one only place , which be not learned in haste , and which i will undertake there be not any one of my company that know , whosoever hearken most after it . beside by keep one good fort , or build one town of strength , the whole empire be guard , and whatsoever company shall be afterwards plant within the land , although in twenty several province , those shall be able all to reunite themselves upon any occasion either by the way of one river , or be able to march by land without either wood , bog , or mountain : whereas in the west Indies there be few town or province that can succour or relieve one the other , either by land or sea : by land the country be either desert , mountainous , or strong enemy : by sea , if any man invade to the eastward , those to the west can in many month turn against the breeze and eastern wind , beside the Spaniard be therein so disperse , as they be no where strong , but in Nueva Espanna only : the sharp mountain , the thorn , and poison [ three . 662. ] prickle , the sandy and deep way in the valley , the smother heat and air , and want of water in other place be their only and best defence , which ( because those nation that invade they be not victual or provide to stay , neither have any place to friend adjoin ) do serve they in steed of good arm and great multitude . 429 the west Indies be first offer her majesty grandfather by Columbus a stranger , in who there may be doubt of deceit , and beside it be then think incredible that there be such and so many land and region never write of before . this empire be make know to her majesty by her own vassal , and by he that owe to her more duty than a ordinary subject , so that it shall ill sort with the many grace and benefit which i have receive to abuse her highness , either with fable or imagination . the country be already discover , many nation win to her majesty love and obedience , and those Spaniard which have late and long labour about the conquest , beat out , discourage and disgrace , which among these nation be think invincible . her majesty may in this enterprise employ all those soldier and gentleman that be young brethren , and all captain and chieftain that want employment , and the charge will be only the first set out in victual and arm they : for after the first or second year i doubt not but to see in London a contractation house of more receipt for Guiana , than there be now in Seville for the west Indies . and i be resolve that if there be but a small army a foot in Guiana , march towards Manoa the chief city of Inga , he will yield to her majesty by composition so many hundred thousand pound yearly , as shall both defend all enemy abroad , and defray all expense at home , and that he will beside pay a garrison of three or four thousand soldier very royal to defend he against other nation : for he can but know , how his predecessor , yea how his own great uncle Guascar and Atabalipa son to Guainacapa emperor of Peru , be ( while they contend for the empire ) beat out by the Spaniard , and that both of late year and ever since the say conquest , the Spaniard have seek the passage and entrey of his country : and of their cruelty use to the 43° * 595-borderer he can be ignorant . in which respect no doubt but he will be bring to tribute with great gladness , if not , he have neither shot nor iron weapon in all his empire , and therefore may easy be conquer . and i far remember that Berreo confess to i and other ( which i protest before the majesty of God to be true ) that there be find among prophecy in Peru ( at such time as the empire be reduce to the spanish obedience ) in their chief temple , among diverse other which foreshow the loss of the say empire , that from Inglatierra those Ingas shall be again in time to come restore , and deliver from the servitude of the say conqueror . and i hope , as we with these few hand have displant the first garrison , and drive they out of the say country , so her majesty will give order for the rest , and either defend it , and hold it as tributary , or conquer and keep it as empress of the same . for whatsoever prince shall possess it , shall be great , and if the king , of Spain enjoy it , he will become unresistable . her majesty hereby shall confirm and strengthen the opinion of all nation , as touch her great and princely action . and where the south border of Guiana reach to the dominion and empire of the Amazon , those woman shall hereby hear the name of a virgin , which be not only able to defend she own territory and her neighbour , but also to invade and conquer so great empire and so far remove . to speak more at this time , i fear will be but troublesome : i trust in God , this be true , will suffice , and that he which be king of all king and lord of lord , will put it into her heart which be lady of lady to possess it , if not , i will judge those man worthy to be king thereof , that by her grace and leave will undertake it of themselves . 