the discovery of the large , rich , and beautiful empire of Guiana , with a relation of the great and golden city of Manoa ( which the Spaniard call el Dorado ) and the province of Emeria , Aromaia , Amapaia , and other country , with their river adjoining . perform in the year 1595 by sir Walter Ralegh knight , captain of her majesty guard , lord warden of the stannery , and her highness Leiutenant general of the county of cornwall . to the right honourable my singular good lord and kinsman Charles Howard , knight of the garter , baron and counseller , and of the admiral of England the most renown : and to the right honourable sir Robert Cecyll knight , counseller in her highness privy counsel . or your honour many honourable and friendly part , i have hitherto only return promise , and now for answer of both your adventure , i have send you a bundle of paper , which i have divide between your lordship , and sir Robert Cecyll in these two respect chief : first for that it be reason , that wasteful factor , when they have consume such stock as they have in trust , do yield some colour for the same in their account ; second for that i be assure , that whatsoever shall be do , or write by i , shall need a double protection and defence . the trial that i have of both your love , when i be leave of all , but of malice and revenge , make i still presume , that you will be please ( know what little power i have to perform aught , and the great advantage of forewarn enemy ) to answer that out of knowledge , which other shall but object out of 338 malice . in my more happy time as i do especial Hon. you both , so i find that your love seek i out in the dark shadow of adversity , and the same affection which accompany my better fortune , sored not away from i in my many misery : all which though i can not requite , yet i shall ever acknowledge : and the great debt which i have no power to pay , i can do no more for a time but confess to be due . it be true that as my error be great , so they have yield very grievous effect , and if aught may have be deserve in former time to have counterpoise any part of offence , the fruit thereof ( as it seem ) be long before fall from the tree , and the dead stock only remain . i do therefore even in the winter of my life , undertake these travel , fit for body less blast with misfortune , for man of great ability , and for mind of better encouragement , that thereby , if it be possible , i may recover but the moderation of excess , and the least taste of the great plenty former possess . if i have know other way to win , if i have imagine how great adventure may have regain , if i can conceive what far mean i may yet use , but even to appease so powreful displeasure , i will not doubt but for one year more to hold fast my soul in my tooth , till it be perform . of that title remain i have , i have waste in effect all herein . i have undergo many construction . i [ three . 628. ] have be accompany with many sorrow , with labour , hunger , heat , sickness , and peril : it appear notwithstanding that i make no other bravado of go to the sea , then be mean , and that i be never hide in Cornwall , or else where , as be suppose . they have gross belie i , that forejudge , that i will rather become a servant to the spanish king , than return , and the rest be much mistake , who will have persuade , that i be too easeful and sensuali to undertake a journey of so great travel . but , if what i have do , receive the gracious construction of a 339 painful pilgrimage , and purchase the least remission , i shall think all too little , and that there be want to the rest many misery . but if both the time past , the present , and what may be in the future , do all by one grain of gall continue in eternal distaste ; i do not then know whether i shall bewail my self , either for my too much travel and expense , or condemn my self for do less than that , which can deserve nothing . from my self i have deserve no thanks , for i be return a beggar , and wither , but that i may have better my poor estate , it shall appear by the follow discourse , if i have not only respect her majesty future honour , and riches . it become not the former fortune in which i once live , to go journey of picory , it have sort ill with the office of honour , which by her majesty grace i hold this day in England , to run from cape to cape , and from place to place , for the pillage of ordinary prize . many year since , i have knowledge by relation , of that mighty , rich and beautiful empire of Guiana , and of that great and golden city , which the Spaniard call el Dorado , and the natural Manoa , which city be conquer , reedify , and enlarge by a young son of Guainacapa emperor of Peru , at such time as Francisco Pizarro and other conquer the say empire , from his two elder brethren , Guascar , and Atabalipa , both then contend for the same , the one be favour by the Orejones of Cuzco , the other by the people of Caxamalca . i send my servant Jacob Whiddon the year before , to get knowledge of the passage , and i have some light from captain Parker , sometime my servant , and now attend on your lordship , that such a place there be to the southward of the great bay of charuas , or Guanipa : but i find that it be 600 mile far offend than they suppose , and many other impediment to they unknown and unheard . after i have displant don Antonio de Berreo , who be upon the same enterprise , leave my 340 ship at Trinidad , at the port call Curiapan , i wander 400 mile into the say country by land and river : the particular i will leave to the follow discourse . the country have more quantity of gold by manifold , than the best part or the Indies , or Peru : all the most of the king of the border be already become her majesty vassal : and seem to desire nothing more than her majesty protection and the return of the english nation . it have another ground and assurance of riches and glory , than the voyage of the west Indies , a easy way to invade the best part thereof , then by the common course . the king of Spain be not so impoverish , by take three or four port town in America , as we suppose , neither be the riches of Peru , or Nueva Espanna so leave by the sea side , as it can be easy wash away with a great flood , or springtide , or leave dry upon the sand on a low ebb . the port town be few and poor in respect of the rest within the land , and be of little defence , and be only rich , when the fleet be to receive the treasure for Spain : and we$might think the Spaniard very simple , have so many horse and slave , if they can not upon two day warning carry all the gold they have into the land , and far enough from the reach of our footman , especial the Indies be ( as they be for the most part ) so mountainous , so full of wood , river , and marsh . in the port town of the province of Venezuela , as Cumana , Coro and S. Iago ( whereof Coro and S. Iago be take by captain Preston , and Cumana and S. Josepho by we ) we find not the value of one rial of plate in either : but the city of Barquasimeta , Valencia , saint Sebastian , Cororo , s. Lucia , Laguna , Maracaiba , and Truxillo , be not so easy invade : neither do the burn of those on the coast impoverish the king of Spain , any one ducat : and if we sack the river of Hacha , saint Marta , and Cartagena , which be the port of Nuevo reyno , and Popayan ; there be beside within the land , which be indeed rich and 341 populous , the town and city of Merida , Lagrita , saint Christophero , the great city of Pamplon S. fe de Bogota , Tunxa and Mozo where the esmerald be find , the town and city of marequita , Velez , la villa de Leva , Palma , Unda , Angustura , the great city of Timana , tocaima , s. Aguila , Pasto , Juago , the great city of Popaian it self , los Remedios , and the rest . if we take the port and village within the bay of Uraba , in the kingdom or river of Dariene , and Caribana , the city and town of saint Juan de Roydas , of Cassaris , of Antiocha , Caramanta , Cali , and Anserma have gold enough to pay the king part , and be not easy invade by the way of the ocean : or if number de dios and Panama be take in the province of Castilia del oro , and [ three . 629. ] the village upon the river of Cenu and Chagre ; Peru have beside those and beside the magnificent city of Quito and Lima so many island , port , city , and mine , as if i shall name they with the rest , it will seem incredible to the reader : of all which , because i have a treatise write a particular treatise of the west Indies , i will omit of the west repetition at this time , see that in the say treatise i ’ have anatomize the rest of the seatown aswell of Nicaragua , lucatan , nueva espanna , and the island , as those of the inland , 8c by what mean they may be best invade , as far as any mean judgement can comprehend . but i hope it shall appear that there be a way find to answer every man longing , a better Indies for her majesty then the king of Spain have any : which if it shall please her highness to undertake , i shall most willing end the rest of my day in follow the same : if it be leave to the spoil and sackage of common person , if the love 8c service of so many nation be despise , so great riches , 8c so mighty a empire refuse , i hope her majesty will yet take my humble desire and my labour therein in gracious part , which , if it have not be in respect of her highness future honour 8c riches , can have lay hand on 8c ransom many of the king 8c cacique of the country , 8c have have a reasonable proportion of gold for their 342 