the voyage of m. John winter into the south sea by the strait of Magellan , in consort with m. Francis Drake , begin in the year 1577. by which straight also he return safe into England the second of June 1579. contrary to the false report of the Spaniard which give out , that the say passage be not repasseable : write by Edward Cliffe mariner . they set forward from Plymouth the 13. of December . n the year of our lord i^Tl ' the r9* of September there go out of the river of Thamis over the land end one good and new ship call the Elizabeth , of 80 ton in burden : in company whereof go also a small pinnace be 12 ton in burden call the Benedict . the say ship with her pinnace arrive at Plymouth : in which haven be three ship more , one call the pelican in burden 120 ton , be admiral of the fleet : a bark call the marigold in burden thirty ton , with a flyboat of 50 ton . Theise ship have in they 164 man , and be victual and furnish with all kind of necessary provision to make a voyage into the south sea . we set sail the 15 of November , but be put into Falmouth by contrary wind : and afterward be constrain to put back again to Plymouth to repair the great hurt which diverse of our fleet have sustain in that tempest : and at length the 13 of December we set forward from thence upon our voyage . the five and twenty of December we have sight of cape Cantin : this cape lie in the latitude of 32. cape Cantin . degree and 30. minute upon the coast of Barbary , Asaphi , near to a town call Asaphi . the land all along this coast be high and great mountain . sail from the say cape Southsouthwest about 18 league , we find 148 a little island call mogador a english mile distant from the main , we send our boat to sound the depth , and at the return thereof we understand by our man that the haven be without danger , have five fathom of water fist by the rock enter in upon the point of the island : wherefore we enter in with our whole 1577-mogador a island on the coast of Barbary . fleet the 27 of December . the moor that be on the main see our ship ride there , come from the mountain to behold we : who our general , m. Francis Drake espy , show to they a white flag in token of friendship , and send his boat to shore with one of our man , which not long before have be captive in the country , and partly understand their language , to talk with they . when the boat come to shore , the say man go on land to they : to who they show many token of friendship , cast up their eye to heaven , and after look down upon the ground , as though they have swear by heaven and earth , promise peace . that do two of they come aboard to our general , and our man stay on shore for a pledge . Theise two moor , after they have make good cheer , and receive certain gift of our general go to shore again , and our man come aboard also . but the crafty slave have devise to betray we , come the next day along the sea side with certain camel as though they have bring some merchandise to traffic with we : to who our general send certain of our man in the boat to learn what they have bring , give charge that none of they shall go on land . but the boat [ three . 749. ] be near the shore one of our man more hasty than wise leap to shore ; who the moor immediate take by force , and set he on horseback carry he away into the mountain , so that we see he no more after that time . in the mean time we set up a pinnace in the island , whereof we bring 4 loose out ^re . lmse of England : which be finish , the last of December out we weigh , and come out of the north part of the England . 149 island , the same way that we come in : for the south chanel be dangerous , have but 8 foot at low water , Mogadorin^i and be full of rock . this island stand in 31 m degree 2 of latitude , be one league in circuit , not ‘ inhabit ; and have infinite number of dove upon it . at sea we meet with a contrary wind , so that we beat oflf and on , till the 4 of Januarie 1578 , at which time a more favourable wind begin to blow at Northeast , and then we set our course Southsouthwest , till cape de Guer on the 7 of Januarie we come as high as cape de Guer , m 30 degree , stand in 30 degree of latitude . here our new pinnace take 3 spanish fisherboat , call cantars . from thence we run Southwest and Southsouthwest , carry the say cantars along with we , till the 10 of the say month , at which time we find our self in 27 degree 4 min. be 10 league westcape bojador southwest from cape bojador , which lie on the main in Africa . from thence we run south and by 4. min. ‘ west , until the 13 day at noon , at which time we have sight of Rio del oro , where our pinnace take a Portugal caravel . the 15 , the marigold take a caravel de las about cape de las barbas . and thence we run along CateBlanco coast be low sandy land , till we arrive at cape in 20 degree . Blanco . this cape show it self like the corner of a 30 min. wall upright from the water , to they which come from the northward : where the north pole be elevate 20 degree 30 min. and the crocier be the guard of the south pole , be raise 9 degree 30 min. the say crocier be 4 star , represent the form of a cross , and be 30 degree in latitude from the south pole : and the low star of the say crocier be to be take , when it be direct under the uppermost ; and be so take as many degree as it want of 30 , so many you be to the northward of the equinoctial : and as many degree as be more than 30 , so many degree you be to the southward of the equinoctial . and if you find it to be just 30 then you be direct under the line . 150 within the say cape Blanco we take one ship more , all the man be flee away , save two . we bring this ship with all the rest which we have take before , into our harbour , 5 league within the cape , where we wash and trim our ship , and go to sea again the 22 of Januarie , leave all the Spaniard there with their ship , save one Cantar , for which our general give they the Benedict . in which course we run continual to the southwest , until the 26 day , when we find the north pole raise 15 degree 15 min. have the wind Northeast or Eastnortheast , which be common on that coast . for it do blow for the most part continual from the shore : and we keep the say course , until we come near the island Bonavista , within 2 league off the shore ; so that we hale off again northwest , the space of one hour , and then run Southwest again , till day light the 27 of Januarie : from which time we run southsouthwest , until 3 of the clock in the afternoon , at which time we approach near the island of Mayo , be high and hilly land , the isle of save that the north part of the island stretch out mat0-it self , a league into the sea very low . we come to anchor under the west part of this island the 28 day of Januarie , and stay there until the 30 of the same . during which time , our general appoint m. John winter and m. Thomas Doughtie , to go over to the east part of the island with 70 man , to get some fresh victual . and as we march through the island , about the midst thereof , we find one house have a garden belong to it , in which we find ripe grape , also ripe grape in ripe gourd , and melon , in the most dead time of our i ™ ™ ™ - winter . we find also a tree which bear the fruit Cocos , which be big than a man head , have within the coco the utter coat , which be about 3 inch thick , a certain nut as big as two fist , and have within a white substance , clean fast to the shell , which be half a inch thick , very pleasant to taste , and within that a certain hollowness or void place , wherein be contain a pure 151 Brava . nonnez de Silva . the english voyage and pleasant water in taste , and as some think , marvellous comfortable . as we pass through this island the inhabitant flee into the mountain , so that we can have no talk with they . but we understand by the Portugal which come with we , that they be but servant to those of saint Iago , to keep their cattle and goat , which be very plentiful in this island : but we find they so wild , that we can take none save some young kid : wherefore we return back again to our ship . the Portugal have salt their well near to the sea , so that we can , not water . than our general command every man aboard : afterward we weigh , and run over to Sant Iago the same night , be io league distant from thence : which seem to be a fruitful island and well people . for we see 3 town on the shore : two of which shoot at we , as we pass along . our general make a shot at one of they again . And sail along the shore , at the south part of the island , we take a Portugal ship lade with wine and other commodity . this island have 15 degree in latitude . from hence we run southsouth west to the isle of Fogo , so call , because it cast continual flame of fire and smoke out of the top thereof , all the whole island be one high mountain . two league west from the isle of Fogo , be another island call Brava , where the sea be above 120 fathom deep near to the shore , so that we can not anchor for the depth of the sea , by reason whereof we be constrain to depart without water . here the general discharge the Portugal , give unto they our pinnace which we build at mogador : with wine , bread , and fish , and so dismiss they the first of February , take one of their company along with he , call nonnez de Silva . the 2 of February we set off from Brava , and direct our course southsoutheast , run so until the 9 of February , be within 4 degree of the equinoctial : at ! 52 which time , we have the air trouble with thunder and lightning , notwithstanding calm with extreme heat , and diverse time great shower of rain . the 17 day we be right under the line , which be the most fervent place of the burn zone : where in the midst of February we sustain such heat , with often thunder and lightning , that we do sweat for the most part continual , as though we have be in a stove , or hothouse . here we see fly fish in flyingfish . great abundance , some a foot long , some less . their fynne wherewith they fly be as long as their body . they be great pursue by the dolphin and bonito , who as soon as the fly fish espy , immediate they mount out of the sea in great number , and fly as long as their fynne continue moist : and when they be dry , they fall down into the sea again . and here be to be note , that after we come within 4 degree of the equi - cmtmuall noctial , until we be so much past it , no day do pass , aineat without great store of rain . sm near ihe from hence we direct our course towards the equinoctial . Southsouthwest until the 5 of April ; at which time , we have a very sweet smell from the land . the same day at noon we sound , and find the sea to be 32 fathom deep , the ground be soft oaze : and short after we have but 28 fathom , be 31 degree Landin 31 and 30 min. beyond the equinoctial , toward the south de&rees - 3° pole : and we have sight of the land about 3 of the clock in the afternoon the same day . this land be equinoctial . very low near the sea ; and high mountain up within the country . from hence we run towards the southsouthwest , until the 14 of April ; when we find a little island , lie near the main land of cape Sant marie , by which be the entrance into the river of plate , be in 35 degree of southerly latitude . from this island we run 7 or 8 league along the main , where we come to a anchor under a cape , which our general call cape joy . here every ship take in fresh water . than we cape sant marry at the mouth of the river of plate . 153 depart , and run about 15 league towards the westsouthwest , where we find a deep bay . in the bottom of this bay be a long rock , not far from the main : which rock so break the force of the sea , that ship may ride commodious under the same for southerly wind . hither come all our fleet to anchor , the 19 of April , and ride there until the 20 day at night . here we kill some seal . And . from thence we run about 20 league , where we find the water very much trouble and fresh , and we run in so far that " we have but 3 fathom water . here we take in fresh water , and run over to the southward , and fall with the land which lie on the south part of the river of plate , the 27 day . this land lie southsouthwest and Northnortheast , and be shall 3 or 4 league into the sea . here our flyboat lose our company in the night . from hence we run towards the southwest , have much foul weather and contrary wind , until the 12 of may : and then we sound and have 28 fethome , with black sand and small stone , and have sight of the land the same morning about 10 of the clock . this land be 47 degree in latitude . Oure general name this land , cape hope . we come to anchor there , about 3 league from the shore the same night . the next morning our general , go to the main in a boat : by mean whereof he have be in great danger , if the marigold have not weigh , and run in with the shore , and so take up the boat and man : for there arise such foul weather , with a thick mist and a southeast wind , that they be not able to recover their ship again which ride without : which be force to weigh and run to sea . the prize weigh the 13 at night , and run to the southward : the other stay until the 14 in the morning and then run to sea , not be able to ride . in the mean time while the marigold ride under the shore , our general with certain of his man go 154 on land , where they see two naked man , save that they have a certain skin ne wrap about their shoulder and roll upon their head . to who our general show a white cloth , in sign of friendship , who with [ three . 751. ] certain gesture of their body and hand , show the like to he again , speak likewise and make a noise , which our man can not understand , but they will in no case come near our man . Oure general go the next day to the same place again : but he have no sight of the foresay man or any other . howbeit he find certain fowl , as ostrich , and other ostrich and sea fowl , which the say man have new kill , and seafoules-laid they on a heap together , as though they have do that for our man of purpose . there be also a certain bag with little stone of diverse colour , which together with the victual our general bring aboard , and then weigh , and come to sea the 15 of the say month : where all the rest of the fleet meet with he , save the prize , and the flyboat . the 16 day we run into a bay to the southward of cape hope , where we ride all that night . the next morning our general weigh , and run without the cape to the northward , and send the Elizabeth towards the south to look for the prize : leave the marigold and the canter to search if in the bay they can find any fit harbour for our ship . the same day be the 14 of may , our general meet with the flyboat ( which lose we the 27 of April ) and bring she into say bay . the 18 in the morning we have word from the ship , that they have find a safe harbour and we weigh and run in , the same day be Whitsunday . the Elizabeth weigh and put forth again to sea , the 20 day , to look for the prize , and not find she come in the next day . in the mean time our general discharge the flyboat , and run she upon the main , where we break she up for firewood .