in this bay we anchor , and the people of the description country have their house close by the water side , of the people show themselves unto we , and send a present to our andpountrty generali . when they come unto we , they great wonder at the thing that we bring , but our generali ( accord to his naturali and accustom humanity ) courteous entreat they , and liberal bestow on they necessarything to cover their nakedness , whereupon they suppose we to be god , and will not be persuade to the contrary : the present which they send to our generali , be feather , and call of network . their house be dig round about with earth , and have from the uttermost brim of the circle , cliff of wood set upon they , join close together at the top like a spire steeple , which by reason of that closeness be very warm . their bed be the ground with rush strew on it , and lie about the house , have the fire in the midst . the man go naked , the woman take bulrush , and kemb they after the manner of hemp , and thereof make their loose garment , which be knit about their middle , hang down about their hip , have also about their shoulder a skin of deer , with the hair upon it . Theise woman be very obedient and serviceable to their husband . after they be depart from we , they come and visit we the second time , and bring with they feather and bag of tobacco for present : and when they come to the top of the hill ( at the bottom whereof we have pitch our tent ) they stay they - 119 the english voyage self : where one appoint for speaker weary himself with make a long oration , which do , they leave their bow upon the hill , and come down with their present . in the mean time the woman remain on the hill , torment themselves lamentable , tear their flesh from their cheek , whereby we perceive that they be about a sacrifice . in the mean time our generali with his company go to prayer , and to read of the scripture , at which exercise they be attentive , and seem great to be affect with it : but when they be come unto we , they restore again unto we those thing which before we bestow upon they . the news of our be there be spread through the country , the people that inhabit round about come down , and among they the king himself , a man of a goodly stature , and comely personage , with many other tall and warlike man : before who come be send two ambassador to our generali , to signify that their king be come , in do of which message , their speech be continue about half a hour . This end , they by sign request our generali to send some thing by their hand to their king , as a token that his come may be in peace : wherein our generali have satisfy they , they return with glad tiding to their king , who march to we with a princely majesty , the people cry continual after their manner , and as they draw near unto we , so do they strive to behave themselves in their action with comeliness . in the forefront be a man of a goodly personage , who bear the sceptre or mace before the king , whereupon hang two crown , a less and a big , with three chain of a marvellous length : the crown be make of knit work wrought artificial with feather of diverse colour : the chain be make of a bony substance , and few be the person among they that be admit to wear they : and of that number also the person be 120 stint , as some ten , some 12. etc next unto he which bear the sceptre , be the king himself , with his guard about his person , clad with conie skin , and other skin : after they follow the naked common sort of people , every one have his face paint , some with white , some with black , and other colour , and have in their hand one thing or another for a present , not so much as their child , but they also bring their present . in the mean time our generali gather his man together , and march within his fence place , make against their approach a very warlike show . they be troop together in their order , and a generail salutation be make , there be present a generali silence . than he that bear the sceptre before the king , be inform by another , who they assign to that office , with a manly and lofty voice proclaim that which the other speak to he in secret , continue half [ three . 738. ] a hour : which end , and a generali amen as it be give , the king with the whole number of man and woman ( the child except ) come down without any weapon , who descend to the foot of the hill , set themselves in order . in come towards our bulwark and tent , the scepter-bearer begin a song , observe his measure in a dance , and that with a stately countenance , who the king with his guard , and every degree of person follow , do in like manner sing and dance , save only the woman , which dance and keep silence . the general permit they to enter within our bulwark , where they continue their song and dance a reasonable time . when they have satisfy themselves , they make sign to our general to sit down , to who the king , and diverse other make several oration , or rather supplication , that he will take their province and kingdom into his hand , and become their king , make sign that they will resign unto he their right and title of the whole land , and become his subject . in which , to persuade we the better , the king and the rest , with one 121 the king consent , and with great reverence , joyful sing a reside hu song , do set the crown upon his head , enrich his kingdom* to neck with all their chain , and offer unto he many sir Francis other thing , honour he by the name of Hioh , drake . add thereunto as it seem , a sign of triumph : which thing our generali thought not meet to reject , because he know not what honour and profit it may be to our country . wherefore in the name , and to the use of her majesty he take the sceptre , crown , and dignity of the say country into his hand , wish that the riches and treasure thereof may so convenient be transport to the enrich of her kingdom at home , as it abound in you same . the common sort of people leave the king and his guard with our generali , scatter themselves together with their sacrifice among our people , take a diligent view of every person : and - such as please their fancy , ( which be the young ) they enclose they about offer their sacrifice unto they with lamentable weep , scratch , and tear the flesh from their face with their nail , whereof issue abundance of blood . but we use sign to they of dislike this , and stay their hand from force , and direct they upward to the live God , the like they who only they ought to worship . they show unto do in Hoche - we their wound , and crave help of they at our hand , whereupon we give they lotion , plaster , and ointments , agree to the state of their grief , beseech God to cure their disease . Every three day they bring their sacrifice unto we , until they understand our meaning , that we have no pleasure in they : yet they can not be long absent from we , but daily frequent our company to the hour of our departure , which departure seem so grievous unto they , that their joy be turn into sorrow . they entreat we , that be absent we will remember they , and by stealth provide a sacrifice , which we mislike . our necessary business be end , our generali with his company travail up into the country to their 122 village , where we find herd of deer by 1000 in great herd a company , be most large , and fat of body . of deer . we find the whole country to be a warren of a abundance of strange kind of cony , their body in bigness as be stran& continue ™ 5-the Barbary cony , their head as the head of we , the foot of a want , and the tail of a rat be of great length : under her chin be on either side a bag , into the which she gather her meat , when she have fill her belly abroad . the people eat their body , and make great account of their skin , for their king coat be make of they . Oure generali call this country Nova Albion , and Nova Albion . that for two cause : the one in respect of the white bank and cliff , which lie towards the sea : and the other , because it may have some affinity with our country in name , which sometime be so call . there be no part of earth here to be take up , gold and wherein there be not some probable show of gold or r ° earth of Nova S11V5 - , , „ Albion . at our departure hence our generali set up a monument of our be there , as also of her majesty right and title to the same , namely a plate , nail upon a fair great post , whereupon be engrave her majesty name , the day and year of our arrival there , with the free give up of the province and people into her majesty hand , together with her highness picture and arm , in a piece of six penny of current english money under the plate , whereunder be also write the name of our generali . it seem that the Spaniard hitherto have never be their deparin this part of the country , neither do ever discover ture-the land by many degree , to the southward of this place .. October . after we have set sail from hence , we continue certain without sight of land till the 13. day of October island in % , follow , which day in the morning we fall with certain island 8. degree to the northward of the line , qanoas > i^e from which island come a great number of canoas , those of Java . 123 have in some of they 4. in some 6. and in some also 14. man , bring with they coco , and other fruit . [ Iii . 739. ] their canoas be hollow within , and cut with great art and cunning , be very smooth within and without , and bear a glass as if it be a horn dainty burnish , have a prow , and a stern of one sort , yield inward circlewise , be of a great height , and full of certain white shell for a bravery , and on each side of they lie out two piece of timber about a yard and a half long , more or less , accord to the smallness , or bigness of the boat . this people have the nether part of their ear cut into a round circle , hang down very low upon their cheek , whereon they hang thing of a reasonable weight . the nail of their hand be a inch long , their tooth be as black as pitch , and they renew they often , by eat of a herb with a kind of powder , which they always carry about they in a cane for the same purpose . Islands . leave this island the night after we fall with it , the 18. of October , we light upon diverse other , some whereof make a great show of inhabitant . we continue our course by the island of Tagulada , Zelon , and Zewarra , be friend to the Portugal , the first whereof have grow in it great store of cinnamom . November . the 14. of November we fall with the island of Maluco , which day at night ( have direct our course to run with Tydore ) in coast along the island of mutyr , belong to the king of ternate , his deputy or vice-king see we at sea , come with his Canoa to we without all fear , and come aboard , and after some conference with our generali , will he in any wise to the isle of run in with ternate , and not with Tydore , assure ternate . hjm tjiat the king will be glad of his come , and will be ready to do what he will require , for which purpose he himself will that night be with the king , and tell he the news , with who if he once deal , he 124 shall find that as he be a king , so his word shall stand : add further , that if he go to Tydore before he come to ternate , the king will have nothing to do with we , because he hold the Portugal as his enemy : whereupon our general resolve to run with ternate , where the next morning early we come to anchor , at which time our generali send a messenger to the king with a velvet cloak for a present , and token of his come to be in peace , and that he require nothing but traffic and exchange of merchandise , whereof he have good store , in such thing as he want . in the mean time the vice-king have be with the king accord to his promise , signify unto he what good thing he may receive from we by traffic : whereby the king be move with great like towards we , and send to our generali with speciali message , that he shall have what thing he need , and will require with peace and friendship , and moreover that he will yield himself , and the right of his island to be at the pleasure and commandment of so famous a prince as we serve . in token whereof he send to our generali a signet , and within short time after come in his own person , with boat , and canoas to our ship , to bring she into a better and safe road than she be in at present . in the mean time , our general messenger be come to the court , be meet by certain noble personage with great solemnity , and bring to the king , at who hand he be most friendly and gracious entertain . the king purpose to come to our ship , send before 4. great and large canoas , in every one whereof be certain of his great state that be about he , attire in white lawn of cloth of Calicut , have over their head from the one end of the Canoa to the other , a cover of thin perfume mat , bear up with a frame make of reed for the same use , under which every one do sit in his order accord to his 125 A.D. » 579 - the king of ternate offer himself and his kingdom to the service of the queen of England . the great and strange canoas of the king of ternate . the king of ternate come to visit sir Francis . Drake . [ Iii . 740. ] saga a kind of meal . the english voyage dignity , to keep he from the heat of the sun , diverse of who be of good age and gravity , do make a ancient and fatherly show . there be also diverse young and comely man attire in white , as be the other : the rest be soldier , which stand in comely order round about on both side , without who sit the rower in certain gallery , which be three on a side all along the canoas , do lie off from the side thereof three or four yard , one be orderly build low than another , in every of which gallery be the number of 4. score rower . Theise canoas be furnish with warlike munition , every man for the most part have his sword and target , with his dagger , beside other weapon , as lance , caliver , dart , bow and arrow : also every Canoa have a small cast base mount at the least one full yard upon a stock set upright . thus come near our ship , in order they row about we , one after another , and pass by , do their homage with great solemnity , the great personage begin with great gravity and fatherly countenance , signify that the king have send they to conduct our ship into a better road . soon after the king himself repair , accompany with 6. grave and ancient person , who do their obeisance with marvellous humility . the king be a man of tall stature , and seem to be much delight with the sound of our music , to who as also to his nobility , our generali give present , wherewith they be pass well content . at length the king crave leave of our generali to depart , promise the next day to come aboard , and in the mean time to send we such victual , as be necessary for our provision : so that the same night we receive of they meal , which they call Sagu , make of the top of certain tree , taste in the mouth like sour curd , but melt like sugar , whereof they make certain cake , which may be keep the space of ten 126 1579-yeere , and yet then good to be eat . we have of they store of rice , hen , unperfect and liquid sugar , sugar cane , and a fruit which they call figo , with store of clove . the king have promise to come aboard , break his promise , but send his brother to make his excuse , and to entreat our generali to come on shore , offer himself pawn aboard for his safe return . whereunto our generali consent not , upon mislike conceive of the breach of his promise , the whole company also utter refuse it . but to satisfy he , our general send certain of his gentleman to the court , to accompany the king’s brother , reserve the vice-king for their safe return . they be receive of another brother of the king , and other state , and be conduct with great honour to the castle . the place a ** that they be bring unto , be a large and fair ternatehouse , where be at the least 1000 person assemble . the king be yet absent , there sit in their place 60. grave personage , all which be say to be of the king counsel . there be beside 4. grave person , apparel all in red , down to the ground , and attire on their head like the Turk , and these be say to be roman , and Ligiers there to keep continual traf - romana and fike with the people of ternate . there be also 2. Turks Ligiers in this place , and one Italian . the king majesty at last come in guard with 12. lance cover over of the king . with a rich canopy , with emboss gold . our man accompany with one of their captain call Moro , rise to meet he , he gracious do welcome , and entertain they . he be attire after the manner of the country , but more sumptuous than the rest . from his waste down to the ground , be all cloth of gold , and the same very rich : he leg be bare , but on his foot be a pair of shoe , make of Cordovan skin . in the attire of his head be fine wreathe hoop ring of gold , and about his neck he have a chai ne of perfect gold , the link whereof 127 be great , and one fold double . on his finger he have six very fair jewel , and sit in his chair of estate , at his right hand stand a page with a fan in his hand , breathe and gather the air to the king . the fan be in length two foot , and in breadth one foot , set with 8. sapphire , rich embroider , and knit to a staff 3. foot in length , by the which the page do hold , and move it . our gentleman have deliver their message , and receive order accord , be license to depart , be safe conduct back again by one of the king counsel . Temate the this island be the chief of all the island of Maluco , and the king hereof be king of 70. Islands auco-ts shilling . bgsidg the king with his people be moor in religion , observe certain new moon , with fast : during which fast , they neither eat nor drink in the day , but in the night . after that our gentleman be return , and that we have here by the favour of the king receive all necessary thing that the place can yield we : our general consider the great distance , and how far he be yet off from his country , think it not best here to linger the time any long , but weigh his anchor , set a utle island out of the island , and sail to a certain little island ard^f^ ' to southward of celebe , where we grave our celebe . ship , and continue there in that and other business 26. day . this island be thorough grow with wood of a large and high growth , very straight and without bough , save only in the head or top , who leaf be not much differ from our broom in England . among these tree night by night , through the whole tiery worm , land , do show themselves a infinite swarm of fiery worm fly in the air , who body be no big than our common english fly , make such a show and light , as if every twig or tree have be a burn candle . in this place breed also wonderful store of bat . Bats , as big as large hen : of crayfish also here Cravlshes . want no plenty , and they of exceed bigness , one 128 1580. whereof be sufficient for 4. hungry stomach at a dinner , be also very good , and restore meat , whereof we have experience : and they dig themselves hole in the earth like cony . when we have end our business here , we weigh , and set sail to run for the Malucos : but have at that time a bad wind , and be among the island , with much difficulty we recover to the northward of the island of celebe , where by reason of contrary wind not able to continue our course to run westwards , we be enforce to alter the same to the southward again , find that course also to be very hard and dangerous for we , by reason of infinite shoald which lie off , and among the island : whereof we have too much trial to the hazard and danger of our ship and life . for of all other day upon the 9 of Januarie , in the Januarie in year 1579. we run sudden upon a rock , where ’579-we stick fast from 8. of the clock at night , till 4. ' 741 of the clock in the afternoon the next day , be indeed out of all hope to escape the danger : but our their danger generali as he have always hitherto show himself 0 reck ’ courageous , and of a good confidence in the mercy and protection of God : so now he continue in the same , and lest he shall seem to perish wilful , both he , and we do our best endeavour to save our self , which it please God so to bless , that in the end we clear our self most happy of the danger . we light our ship upon the rock of 3. ton of clove . clove , 8. piece of ordinance , and certain meal and bean : and then the wind ( as it be in a moment the klfe of11 by the speciali grace of God ) change from the star - the board to the larboard of the ship , we hoist our sail , " and the happy gale drive our ship off the rock into the sea again , to the no little comfort of all our heart , for which we give God such praise and thank , as so great a benefit require . p , . the 8. of February follow , we fall with the fruitful island of Barateve , have in the mean time suffer island . xi 129 1 nutmeg and long pepper grow in Barateve . commendation of the island of Barateve . Java major . the english voyage many danger by wind and shoald . the people of this island be comely in body and stature , and of a civil behaviour , just in deal , and courteous to stranger , whereof we have the experience sundry way , they be most glad of our presence , and very ready to relieve our want in those thing which their country do yield . the man go naked , save their head and privity , every man have something or other hang at their ear . their woman be cover from the middle down to the foot , wear a great number of bracelet upon their arm , for some have 8. upon each arm , be make some of bone , some of horn , and some of brass , the light whereof by our estimation weigh two ounce apiece . with this people linen-cloth be good merchandise , and of good request , whereof they make roll for their head , and girdle to wear about they . their island be both rich and fruitful : rich in gold , silver , copper , and sulphur , wherein they seem skilful ! and expert , not only to try the same , but in work it also artificial into any form and fashion that please they . their fruit be diverse and plentiful , as nutmeg , ginger , long pepper , lemon , cucumber , coco , figu , sagum , with diverse other sort : and among all the rest , we have one fruit , in bigness , form , and husk , like a bay berry , hard of substance , and pleasant of taste , which be sodden , become soft , and be a most good and wholesome victuali , whereof we take reasonable store , as we do also of the other fruit and spice : so that to confess a truth , since the time that we first set out of our own country of England , we happen upon no place ( ternate only except ) wherein we find more comfort and better mean of refresh . at our departure from Barateve , we set our course for Java major , where arrive , we find great coiirtesie , and honourable entertainment . this island be govern by 5. king , who they call Rajah : as Rajah Donaw , and 130 1580. Rajah Mang bange , and Rajah Cabuccapollo , which live as have one spirit , and one mind . of these five we have four a shipboard at once , and two or three often . they be wonderful delight in red and green colour clothes , as red and green : their upper part cl°^1 of their body be naked , save their head , where - eseeme • upon they wear a turkish roll , as do the maluccians : from the middle downward they wear a pintado of silk , trail upon the ground , in colour as they best like . the maluccians hate that their woman shall be manner see of stranger : but these offer they of high peo^e courtesy , yea the king themselves . the people be of goodly stature , and warlike , well provide of sword and target , with dagger , all be of their own work , and most artificial do , both in temper their mettle , as also in the form , whereof we buy reasonable store . they have a house in every village for their common assembly : every day they meet twice , man , woman , and child , bring with they such victual as they think good , some fruit , some rice boil , some hen roast , some sagum , have a table make 3. foot from the ground , whereon they set their meat , that every person sit at the table may eat , one rejoice in the company of another . they boil their rice in a earthen pot , make in form of a sugar loaf , be full of hole , as our pot which we water our garden withal , and it be open at the great end , wherein they put their rice dry , without any moisture . in the mean time they have ready another great earthen pot , set fast in a furnace , boil full of water , whereinto they put their pot with rice , by such measure , that they swell become soft at the first , and by their swell stop the hole of the pot , admit no more water to enter , but the more they be boil , the hard and more firm substance they become , so that in the end they be a firm and good bread , of the which with oil , butter , 131 a strange fashion of boy ling rice . the cape of buena esperanza not so dangerous as the Portugal have give out . Sierra Leona . oyster-tree . the english voyage sugar , and other spice , they make diverse sort of meat very pleasant of taste , and nourish to nature . the french pock be here very common to all , and they help themselves , sit naked from ten to two in the sun , whereby the venomous humour be draw out . not long before our departure , they tell we , that not far off there be such great ship as we , wish we to beware : upon this our captain will stay no long . from Java Major we sail for the cape of good hope , which be the first land we fall withal : neither do we touch with it , or any other land , until we come to Sierra Leona , upon the coast of Guinea : notwithstanding we run hard aboard the cape , find the report of the Portugal to be most false , who affirm , that it be the most dangerous cape of the world , never without intolerable storm and present danger to traveller , which come near the same . this cape be a most stately thing , and the fair cape we see in the whole circumference of the earth , and we pass by it the 18. of June . from thence we continue our course to Sierra Leona , on the coast of Guinea , where we arrive the 22. of July , and find necessary provision , great store of elephant , oyster upon tree of one kind , spawn and increase infinite , the oyster suffer no bud to grow . we depart thence the 24. day . we arrive in England the three of November 1580. be the three year of our departure . 