happy perform round about the world , by sir Francis Drake , and m. Thomas candish esquire , together with the rest of our english voyage intend for the south sea , the kingdom of Chili , Peru , the back side of Nueva Espanna , the Malucos , the philippinas , the mighty empire of China , though not so happy perform as the two former : whereunto be annex certain rare observation touch the present state of China , and the kingdom of Coray , late invade by quabacondono the last monarch of the 66. princedom of Japan . the famous voyage of sir Francis drake into the south sea , and therehence about the whole globe of the earth , begin in the year of our lord , 1577. 15. day of November , in the year of our i 1577. m. Francis Drake , with a fleet of s^ips and bark , and to the number of 164. man , gentleman and sailor , depart from plymouth , give out his pretend voyage for Alexandria : but the wind fall contrary , he be force the ioi A.D. ’577 - the ci tie of Assumption , or ascension 60. league from the mouth of Paraguai . 200. league from Assumption subject to the Spaniard , to the ci tie of xaraes . next morning to put into Falmouth haven in cornwall , where such and so terrible a tempest take we , as few man have see the like , and be in deed so vehement , that all our ship be like to have go to wrack : but it please God to preserve we from that extremity , and to afflict we only for that present with these two particular : the mast of our admiral which be the pelican , be cut over board for the safeguard of the ship , and the marigold be drive ashore , and somewhat bruise : for the repair of which damage we return again to Plymouth , and have recover those harm , and bring the ship again to good state , we set forth the second time from Plymouth , and set sail the 13. day of December follow . the 25. day of the same month we fall with the cape Cantin , upon the coast of Barbary , and coast the isle of along , the 27. day we find a island call mogador , mogador on lie one mile distant from the main , between which arbarie^ island and the main , we find a very good and safe harbour for our ship to ride in , as also very good entrance , and void of any danger . on this island our general erect a pinnace , whereof he bring out of England with he four already frame . while these thing be in do , there come to the water side some of the inhabitant of the country , show forth their flag of truce , which be see of our general , he send his ship boat to the shore , to know what they will : they be willing to come aboard , our man leave there one man of our company for a pledge , and bring two of they aboard our ship , which by sign show our general , that the next day they will bring some provision , as sheep , capon and hen , and such like : whereupon our general bestow among they some linen cloth and shoe , and a javelin , which they very joyful receive , and depart for that time . the next morning they fail not to come again to the water side , and our general again set out 102 our boat , one of our man leap over rash ashore , and offer friendly to embrace they , they set violent hand on he , offer a dagger to his throat if he have make any resistance , and so lay he on a horse , carry he away : so that a man can be too circumspect and wary of himself among such miscreant . our pinnace be finish , we depart from this place the 30. and last day of December , and coast [ three . 731. ] along the shore , we do descry , not contrary to our expectation , certain canter which be spanish fisherman , to who we give chase and take three of they , and proceed further we meet with 3. caravel and take they also . the 17. day of January we arrive at cape Blanco , Januarie . where we find a ship ride at anchor , within the cape , and but two simple mariner in she , which ship we take and carry she further into the harbour , where we remain 4. day , and in that space our general muster , and train his man on land in warlike manner , to make they fit for all occasion . in this place we take of the fisherman such necessary as we want , and they can yield we , and leave here one of our little bark call the Benedict , we take with we one of they which they call canter , be of the burden of 40. ton or thereabouts . all these thing be finish , we depart this harbour the 22. of Januarie , carry along with we one of the Portugal caravel which be bind to the island of cape Verde for salt , whereof good store be make in one of those island . the master or pilot of that caravel do advertise our general that upon one of those island call Mayo , the isle of there be great store of dry cabritos , which a few maj°-inhabitants there dwell do yearly make ready for such of the king ship as do there touch , be bind for his country of Brasile or elsewhere . we fall with this island the 27. of January , but the inhabitant will in no case traffic with we , be 103 thereof forbid by the king edict : yet the next day our general send to view the island , and the likelihood that may be there of provision of victual , about threescore and two man under the conduct and government of master winter and master doughty , and march towards the chief place of habitation in this island ( as by the Portugal we be inform ) have travail to the mountain the space of three mile , and arrive there somewhat before the day break , we arrest our self to see day before we , which appear , we find the inhabitant to be flee : but the place , by reason that it be manure , we find to be more fruitful than the other part , especial the valley among the hill . rife grape in here we give our self a little refresh , as by very winter . ripe anj swee [ e grape , which the fruitfulness of the earth at that season of the year yield we : and that season be with we the depth of winter , it may seem strange that those fruit be then there grow : but the reason thereof be this , because they be between the Tropike and the equinoctial , the sun pass twice in the year through their zenith over their head , by mean whereof they have two summer , and be so near the heat of the line , they never lose the heat of the sun so much , but the fruit have their increase and continuance in the midst of winter . the island be wonderful store with goat and wild hen , and it have salt also without labour , save only that the people gather it into heap , which continual in great quantity be increase upon the sand by the flow of the sea , and the receive heat of the sun kern the same , so that of the increase thereof they keep a continual traffic with their neighbour . the descrip - among other thing we find here a kind of fruit cion of the tree cahe Cocos , which because it be not common know kos^* we in England , i think good to make some description of it . 104 the tree bear no leaf nor branch , but at the very top the fruit grow in cluster , hard at the top of the stem of the tree , as big every several fruit as a man head : but have take off the uttermost bark , which you shall find to be very full of string or sinew , as i may term they , you shall come to a hard shell which may hold of quantity in liquor a pint common , or some a quart , and some less : within that shell of the thickness of half a inch good , you shall have a kind of hard substance and very white , no less good and sweet than almond : within that again a certain clear liquor , which be drink , you shall not only find it very delicate and . sweet , but most comfortable and cordial . after we have satisfy our self with some of these fruit , we march further into the island , and see great store of * cabritos alive , which be so chase by the inhabitant , that we can do no good towards our provision , but they have lay out as it be to stop our mouth withal , certain old dry cabritos , which be but ill , and small and few , we make no account of . A.D. 1578. * or goat . be return to our ship , our general depart hence the 31. of this month , and sail by the island the isle of saint of S. Iago , but far enough from the danger of the inhabitant , who shot and discharge at we three piece , but they all fall short of we , and do we not harm . the island be fair and large , and as it seem , rich and fruitful , and inhabit by the Portugal , but the mountain and high place of the island be say to be possess by the moor , who have be slave to the Portugal , to ease themselves , make escape to the desert place of the island , where they abide with great strength . be before this island , we espy two ship under [ in . 732. ] sail , to the one of which we give chase , and in the end board she with a shipboat without resistance , which we find to be a good prize , and she yield unto we 105 a prize , and good store of wine : which prize our general commit to the custody of master doughty , and retain the % lfot take . p^ot > send the rest away with his pinnace , give they a butt of wine and some victual , and their wear clothes , and so they depart . the isle of the same night we come with the island call by the Portugal , ilha del fogo , that be , the burn island : in the northside whereof be a consume fire , the matter be say to be of sulphur , but notwithstanding it be like to be a commodious island , because the Portugal have build , and do inhabit there . upon the south side thereof lie a most pleasant and sweet island , the tree whereof be always green and fair to look upon , in respect whereof they call it ilha brava , that be , the brave island . from the bank thereof into the sea do run in many place reasonable stream of fresh water easy to be come by , but there be no convenient road for our ship : for such be the depth , that no ground can be have for anchor , and it be report , that ground be never find in that place , so that the top of Fogo burr ne not so high in the air , but the root of Brava be quench as low in the sea . be depart from these island , we draw towards the line , where we be becalm the space of 3. week , but yet subject to diverse great storm , terrible lightning and much thunder : but with this misery we have the commodity of great store of fish , as dolphin , bonito , and fly fish , whereof some fall into our ship , wherehence they can not rise again for want of moisture , for when their wing be dry , they can fly . from the first day of our departure from the island of cape Verde , we sail 54. day without sight of land , and the first land that we fall with be the coast April . of Brasil , which we see the five of April in the height 33 - agree . o£ 33. degree towards the pole antarctike , and be discover at sea by the inhabitant of the country , 106 1578. they make upon the coast great fire for a sacrifice ( as we learn ) to the devil , about which they use conjuration , make heap of sand and other ceremony , that when any ship shall go about to stay upon their coast , not only sand may be gather together in shoald in every place , but also that storm and tempest may arise , to the cast away of ship and man , whereof ( as it be report ) there have be diverse experiment . the seven day in a mighty great storm both of lightning , rain and thunder , we lose the canter which we call the Christopher : but the eleven day after , by our general great care in disperse his ship , we find she again , and the place where we meet , our general call the cape of joy , where every ship take in some cape of water . here we find a good temperature and sweet air , a very fair and pleasant country with a exceed fruitful soil , where be great store of large and mighty deer , but we come not to the sight of any people : but travel further into the country , we perceive the foot of people in the clay-ground , show that they be man of great stature . be return to our ship , we weigh anchor , and run somewhat further , and harbour our self between a rock and the main , where by mean of the rock that break the force of the sea , we rid very safe , and upon this rock we kill for our provision certain seawolve , common call with we seal . from hence we go our course to 36. degree , and t^ir entrance enter the great river of plate , and run into 54. and 55. fathom and a half of fresh water , where we fill our water by the ship side : but our general find here no good harbour , as he think he shall , bear out again to sea the 27. of April , and in bear out we lose sight of our flyboat wherein master Doughtie be , but we sail along , find a fair and reasonable good bay wherein be many , and the same profitable abundance of island , one whereof have so many seal , as will at the seal . 107 the file-boat cast off and burn . the people of the country . the english voyage least have lade all our ship , and the rest of the island be as it be lade with fowl which be wonderful to see , and they of diverse sort . it be a place very plentiful of victual , and have in it no want of fresh water . Oure general after certain day of his abode in this place , be on shore in a island , the people of the country show themselves unto he , leap and dance , and enter into traffic with he , but they will not receive any thing at any man hand , but the same must be cast upon the ground . they be of clean , comely , and strong body , swift on foot , and seem to be very active . the eighteenth day of May our general thought it needful to have a care of such ship as be absent , and therefore endeavour to seek the flyboat wherein master Doughtie be , we espy she again the next day : and whereas certain of our ship be send to discover the coast and to search a harbour , the marigold and the canter be employ in that business , come unto we and give we understanding of a safe harbour that they have find , wherewith all our ship bare , and enter it , where we water and make new provision of victual , as by seal , whereof we slay to the number of 200. or 300. in the space of a hour . here our general in the admiral ride close aboard the flyboat , and take out of her all the provision of victual and what else be in she , and hail she to the land , set fire to she , and so burn she to save the iron work : which be a do , there come down of the country certain of the people naked , save only about their waste the skin of some beast with the fur or hair on , and something also wreathe on their head : their fence be paint with diverse colour , and some of they have on their head the similitude of home , every man his bow which be a ell in length , and a couple of arrow . they be very agile people and quick to deliver , and seem not to be ignorant in the feat of 108 war , as by their order or range a few man , may appear . Theise people will not of a long time receive any thing at our hand ; yet at length our general be ashore , and they dance after their accustom manner about he , and he once turn his back towards they , one leap sudden to he , and take his cap with his gold bane off his head , and run a little distance from he and share it with his fellow , the cap to the one , and the band to the other . have dispatch all our business in this place , we depart and set sail , and immediate upon our set forth we lose our canter which be absent three or four day : but when our general have she again , he take out the necessary , and so give she over near to the cape of good hope . the cape of the next day after be the twenty of June , we harbour our self again in a very good harbour , u ‘ call by Magellan port S. Julian , where we find a port . Julian . gibbet stand upon the main , which we suppose to be the place where Magellan do execution upon some of his disobedient and rebellious company . the two and twenty day our general go ashore to the main , and in his company , John Thomas , and Robert Winterhie , Oliver the master gunner , John Brewer , Thomas hood , and Thomas Drake , and enter on land , they present meet with two or three of the country people , and Robert Winterhie have in his hand a bow and arrow , go about to make a shoot of pleasure , and in his draught his bowstring break , which the rude savage take as a token of war , begin to bend the force of their bow against our company , and drive they to their shift very narrow . in this port our general begin to inquire diligent of the action of m. Thomas Doughtie , and find they not to be such as he look for , but tend rather to contention or mutiny , or some other disorder , whereby ( without redress ) the success of the voyage may great have be hazard : whereupon the company 109 be call together and make acquaint with the particular of the cause , which be find partly by master doughties own confession , and partly by the evidence of the fact , to be true : which when our general saw , although his private affection to m. Doughtie ( as he then in the presence of we all sacred protest ) be great , yet the care he have of the state of the voyage , of the expectation of her majesty , and of the honour of his country do more touch he , ( as indeed it ought ) then the private respect of one man : so that the cause be thorough hear , and all thing do in good order as near as may be to the course of our law in England , it be conclude that m. dough tie shall receive punishment accord to the quality of the offence : and he see no remedy but patience for himself , desire before his death to receive the communion , which he do at the hand of m. Fletcher our minister , and our general himself accompany he in that holy action : which be do , and the place of execution make ready , he have embrace our general and take his leave of all the company , with prayer for the queen majesty m. Thomas and our realm , in quiet sort lay his head to the block , doughty where he end his life . This be do , our general ’ make diverse speech to the whole company , persuade we to unity , obedience , love , and regard of our voyage ; and for the better confirmation thereof , will every man the next Sunday follow to prepare himself to receive the communion , as christian brethren and friend ought to do , which be do in very reverent sort , and so with good contentment every man go about his business . August . the 17. day of August we depart the port of the strait saint Julian , and the 2o . day we fall with the strait or of Magellan . fret of Magellan go into the south sea , at the cape or headland whereof we find the body of a dead man , who flesh be clean consume . the 21. day we enter the strait , which we find to have many turn , and as it be shutting up , as if there be no passage at all , by mean whereof we have iio in that the wind often against we , so that some of the fleet recover a cape or point of land , other shall be force to turn back again , and to come to a anchor [ m . 7$+ ] where they can . in this strait there be many fair harbour , with store of fresh water , but yet they lack their best commodity : for the water be there of such depth , that no man shall find ground to anchor in , except it be in some narrow river or corner , or between some rock , so that if any extreme blast or contrary wind do come ( whereunto the place be much subject ) it carry with it no small danger . the land on both side be very huge and mountainous , the low mountain whereof , although they be monstrous and wonderful to look upon for their height , yet there be other which in height exceed they in a strange manner , reach themselves above their fellow so high , that between they do appear three region of cloud . Theise mountain be cover with snow : at both the southerly and easterly part of the strait there be island , among which the sea have his indraught into the strait , even as it have in the main entrance of the fret . This straight be extreme cold , with frost and snow continual ; the tree seem to stoop with the burden of the weather , and yet be green continual , and many good and sweet herb do very plentiful grow and increase under they . the breadth of the strait be in some place a league , the breadth of in some other place 2. league , and three league , and the itreight of in some other 4. league , but the narrow place have °se and a league over . the 24. of August we arrive at a island in the strait , where we find great store of foul which - abundance of can not fly , of the bigness of goose , whereof we * e kill in less than one day 3000. and victual our self thorough therewith . 57 degree and a terce of southerly latitude . Botero wit that another have find this place all island . m. winter separate and return . the trending the english voyage the 6. day of September we enter the south sea at the cape or head shore . the seven day we be drive by a great storm from the enter into the south sea two hundred league and odd in longitude , and one degree to the southward of the strait : in which height , and so many league to the westward , the fifteen day of September fall out the eclipse of the moon at the hour of six of the clock at night : but neither do the elliptical conflict of the moon impair our state , nor her clear again amend we a whit , but the accustom eclipse of the sea continue in his force , we be darken more than the moon seven fold . from the bay ( which we call the bay of sever of friend ) we be drive back to the southward of the strait in 57 degree and a terce : in which height we come to a anchor among the island , have there fresh and very good water , with herb of singular virtue . not far from hence we enter another bay , where we find people both man and woman in their canoas , naked , and range from one island to another to seek their meat , who enter traffic with we for such thing as they have . we return hence northward again , find the 3. of October three island , in one of which be such plenty of bird as be scant credible to report . the 8. day of October we lose sight of one of our consort wherein m. winter be , who as then we suppose be put by a storm into the strait again , which at our return home we find to be true , and he not perish , as some of our company fear . thus be come into the height of the strait again , we run , suppose the coast of Chili to lie as the general map have describe it , namely northwest , which we find to lie and trend to the north-east and of the coast of eastwards , whereby it appear that this part of Chili have not be true hitherto discover , or at the least not true report for the space of 12. degree at the 112 least , be set down either of purpose to deceive , or of ignorant conjecture . we continue our course , fall the 29. of November with a island call la Mocha , where we cast anchor , 2% and our general hoist out our boat , go with ten of Mocha in 38. our company to shore , where we find people , who the cruel and extreme deal of the Spaniard have force for their own safety and liberty to flee from the main , and to fortify themselves in this island . we be on land , the people come down to we to the water side with show of great courtesy , bring to we potato , root , and two very fat sheep , which our general receive and give they other thing for they , and have promise to have water there : but the next day repair again to the shore , and send two man aland with barrel to fill water , the people take they for Spaniards ( to who they use to show no favour if they take they ) lay violent hand on they , and as we think , slay they . Oure general see this , stay here no long , but weigh anchor , and set sail towards the coast of Chili , and draw towards it , we meet near to the shore a Indian in a Canoa , who think we to have be Spaniards , come to we and tell we , that at a place call S. Iago , there be a great spanish ship lade from the kingdom e of Peru : for which good news our general give he [ three . 735. ] diverse trifle , whereof he be glad , and go along with we and bring we to the place , which be call the port the port of of Valparizo . when we come thither , we find indeed the ship nute . ride at anchor , have in her eight Spaniard and three negro , who think we to have be Spaniards and their friend , welcome we with a drum , and make ready a Bottija of wine of Chili to drink to we : but as wine ofChili . soon as we be enter , one of our company call Thomas moon begin to lay about he , and strike one of the Spaniard , and say unto he , Abaxo Perro , that be in english , go down dog . one of these Spaniards xi 113 h see person of that quality in those sea , all to cross , and bless himself : but to be short , we stow they under hatch all save one Spaniard , who sudden and desperate leap over board into the sea , and swim ashore to the town of saint Iago , to give they warning of our arrival . they of the town be not above 9 household , present flee away and abandon the town . Oure general the town of man his boat , and the spanish ship boat , and go saint Iago take . to t^e town , and be come to it , we rifle it , and come to a small chapel which we enter , and find therein a silver chalice , two cruet , and one altar-cloth , the spoil whereof our general give to m. Fletcher his minister . we find also in this town a warehouse store with WineofChiR . wine of Chili , and many board of cedarwood , all which wine we bring away with we , and certain of the board to burn for firewood : and so be come aboard , we depart the haven , have first set all the John Grieg > a Spaniard on land , save one John Griego a greek pilot take , bear , who our general carry with he for his pilot to bring he into the haven of Lima. when we be at sea , our general rifle the ship , and find in her good store of the wine of Chili , and 25000. gold of Bal - pezoe of very pure and fine gold of Baldivia , amount divia . in vaiue to 37000. ducat of spanish money , and above . So go on our course , we arrive next at a place call coquimbo in coquimbo , where our general send 14. of his man on 29. degree ianJ to fetch water : but they be espy by the Spaniard , 30. mtnu es . who come with 300. horseman and 200 footman , and slay one of our man with a piece , the rest come aboard in safety , and the Spaniard depart : we go on shore again , and bury our man , and the Spaniard come down again with a flag of truce , but we set sail and will not trust they . Tarapaza . from hence we go to a certain port call Tarapaza , where be land , we find by the sea side a Spaniard lie asleep , who have lie by he 13. bar of silver , 114 which weigh 4000 ducat Spanish ; we take the silver , and leave the man . not far from hence go on land for fresh water , we meet with a Spaniard and a Indian boy drive 8. Llamas or sheep of Peru which be as big as ass ; every of which sheep have on his back 2. bag of leather , each bag contain 50. livre . weight of fine silver : so that bring both the sheep and their burden to the ship , we find in all the bag 800. weight of silver . here hence we sail to a place call Arica , and - Arica in 18. be enter the port , we find there three small bark 3° > min-which we rifle , and find in one of they 57 wedge of silver , each of they weigh about 20 pound weight , and every of these wedge be of the fashion and bigness of a brickbat . in all these 3. bark we find not one person : for they mistrust no stranger , be all go aland to the town , which consist of about twenty house , which we will have ransack if our company have be better and more in number . but our general content with the spoil of the ship , leave the town and put off again to sea and set sail for Lima , and by the way meet with a small bark , which he board , and find in her good store of linen cloth , whereof take some quantity . he let she go . to Lima we come the 13. day of February , and be Lima in 11. enter the haven , we find there about twelve sail of 5° - ship lie fast moor at a anchor , have all their sail ‘ carry on shore ; for the master and merchant be here most secure , have never be assault by enemy , and at this time fear the approach of none such as we be . Oure general rifle these ship , and find in one of they a chest full of royal of plate , and good store of silk and linen cloth , and take the chest into his own ship , and good store of the silk and linen . in which ship he have news of another ship call the cacafuego which be go towards Paita , and that the same ship be lade with treasure : whereupon we stay no long here , but cut all the cable of the ship in the 115 the rich ship call the cacafuego take . Cape de San Francisco in i , degree to the north . the english voyage haven , we let they drive whither they will , either to sea or to the shore , and with all speed we follow the cacafuego towards Paita , think there to have find she : but before we arrive there , she be go from thence towards Panama , who our general still pursue , and by the way meet with a bark lade with rope and tackle for ship , which he board and search , and find in she 8o . li . weight of gold , and a crucifix of gold with goodly great emerald set in it which he take , and some of the cordage also for his own ship . from hence we depart , still follow the cacafuego , and our general promise our company , that whosoever can first descry she , shall have his chain of gold for his good news . it fortune that John Drake go up into the top , descry she about three of the clock , and about six of the clock we come to she and board she , and shoot at her three piece of ordinance , and strike down her mizzen , and be enter , we find in her great riches , as jewel and precious stone , thirteen chest full of royal of plate , four score pound weight of gold , and six and twenty ton of silver . the place where we take this prize , be call cape de San Francisco , about 150. league from Panama . the pilot name of this ship be Francisco , and among other plate that our general find in this ship , he find two very fair guilt bowl of silver , which be the pilot : to who our general say : senior pilot , you have here two silver cup , but i must needs have one of they : which the pilot because he can not otherwise choose , yield unto , and give the other to the steward of our general ship . when this pilot depart from we , his boy say thus unto our general : captain , our ship shall be call no more the cacafuego , but the Cacaplata , and your ship shall be call the cacafuego : which pretty speech of the pilot boy minister matter of laughter to we , both then and long after . 116 when our general have do what he will with this cacafuego , he cast she off , and we go on our course still towards the west , and not long after meet with a ship lade with linen cloth and fine chinadish of white earth , and great store of china-silk , of china-silk , all which thing we take as we list . andporceuan . the owner himself of this ship be in she , who be a spanish gentleman , from who our general take a falcon of gold , with a great Emeraud in the breast thereof , and the pilot of the ship he take also with he , and so cast the ship off . this pilot bring we to the haven of Guatulco , the Guatulco . town whereof , as he tell we , have but 17. Spaniards in it . assoon as we be enter this haven , we land , and go present to the town , and to the town-house , where we find a judge sit in judgement , be associate with three other officer , upon three negro that have conspire the burn of the town : both which judge and prisoner we take , and bring they a shipboard , and cause the chief judge to write his letter to the town , to command all the townsman to avoid , that we may safe water there . which be do , and they depart , we ransack the town , and in one house we find a pot of the quantity of a bushel , full of real of plate , which we bring to our ship . and here one Thomas Moone one of our company , take a spanish gentleman as he be fly out of the town , and search he , he find a chain of gold about he , and other jewel , which he take , and so let he go . at this place our general among other Spaniards , set the Portugal ashore his Portugal pilot , which he take at the Pitot set on island of cape Verde , out of a ship of saint mary port lan ’ of Portugal : and have set they ashore , we depart hence , and sail to the island of can , where our the island of general land , and bring to shore his own ship , camk-and discharge she , mend , and grave she , and furnish our ship with water and wood sufficient . 117 a ship with a govemour fir the island of phirppinas . [ he . 737 - ] June . sir Francis Drake sail on the hackside of America to 43 - degree of northerly latitude . the english voyage and while we be here , we espy a ship , and set sail after she , and take she , and find in her two pilot , and a spanish governor , go for the island of the philippinas : we search the ship , and take some of her merchandize , and so let she go . Oure general at this place and time , think himself both in respect of his private injury receive from the Spaniard , as also of their contempt and indignity offer to our country and prince in generail , sufficient satisfy , and revenge : and suppose that her majesty at his return will rest content with this service , purpose to continue no long upon the spanish coast , but begin to consider and to consult of the best way for his country . he think it not good to return by the strait , for two speciali cause : the one , lest the Spaniard shall there wait , and attend for he in great number and strength , who hand , he be leave but one ship , can not possible escape . the other cause be the dangerous situation of the mouth of the strait in the south sea , where continual storm reign and bluster , as he find by experience , beside the shoald and sand upon the coast , he think it not a good course to adventure that way : he resolve therefore to avoid these hazard , to go forward to the island of the Malucos , and therehence to sail the course of the Portugal by the cape of buena esperanza . upon this resolution , he begin to think of his best way to the Malucos , and find himself where he now be becalm , he see that of necessity he must be force to take a spanish course , namely to sail somewhat northerly to get a wind . we therefore set sail , and sail 600. league at the least for a good wind , and thus much we sail from the x6 . of April , till the 3. of June . the 5. day of June , be in 43. degree towards the pole arctike , we find the air so cold , that our man be grievous pinch with the same , complain 118 of the extremity thereof , and the further we go , the I579* moor the cold increase upon we . whereupon we think it best for that time to seek the land , and do so , find it not mountainous , but low plain land , till we come within 38. degree towards the line . degree . in which height it please God to send we into a fair and good bay , with a good wind to enter the same . 