How they were welcomed at their returne.{n}Basilius and Daniel Princes.{n}Ecclus. 39. ver. 4.{n}181{n}182{n}183{n}186{n}190{n}OFicium fceminarum est ducere bigas, ponere domus super eas & deponere, mungere vaccas, facere butirum{n}192{n}i	193	N{n}194{n}196{n}197{n}198{n}200{n}201{n}202{n}203{n}204{n}205{n}207{n}208{n}Oceanus.{n}Presbyter Johannes.{n}Frater Andreas in Curia Kencham.{n}Tartarorum sedes.{n}Cyngis.{n}Mangu-can.{n}210{n}211{n}Frater Andreas.{n}212{n}213{n}Astracan.{n}214{n}lagag flumen 12. dietis a Volga.{n}219{n}221{n}Casale.{n}Frater Andreas.{n}Casale.{n}Aurifodina.{n}Longissime a Perside.{n}Contomanni.{n}222{n}223{n}Jugurespopuli, Idolatrce.{n}Cailac.{n}224{n}i	225	p{n}kalendae ipsi extrahunt praedict{n}Patria Presbiteri Johannis.{n}Boves pilosis caudis: his similes sunt in Quivera America septentrionalis provincia.{n}Tangut homines magni sed fusci.{n}-	. ...	.	Hispanis, &{n}227{n}228{n}The journal of frier William de Rubruquis a  French man of the order of the minorite friers, unto the East parts of the worlde. An. Dom.{n}1253-{n}O his most Soveraigne, & most Christian Lord Lewis, by Gods grace the renowmed king of France, frier William de Rubruk, the meanest of the Minorites order, wisheth health & continual triumph in CHRIST.{n}It is written in the booke of Ecclesi- Ecclus. 39.{n}asticus concerning the wise man : He shall travell ver- +• into forren countries, and good and evill shall he trie in all things. The very same action (my lord and king) have I atchieved : howbeit I wish that I have done it{n}like a wise man, and not like a foole. For many there be, that performe the same action which a wise man doth, not wisely but more undiscreetly : of which number I feare my selfe to be one. Notwithstanding howsoever I have done it, because you commanded mee, when I departed from your highnes, to write all things unto you, which I should see among the Tartars, and you wished me also that I should not feare to write long letters, I have done as your majestie injoined me : yet with feare and reverence, because I want wordes and eloquence sufficient to write unto so great a majestie. Be it knowen therefore unto your sacred Majestie, that in the yeare of our Lord 1253. about the Nones of May, we entered into the sea of Pontus, which the Bulgarians call the great sea. It containeth in length (as I learned of certaine merchants) 1008 miles, and is in a maner, divided into two parts. About the midst thereof are two provinces, one towards the North, and another towards the South. The South province is called Synopolis, and it is the castle and porte of the Soldan of Turkie : but the North province is called of the Latines, Gasaria: of the Greeks, which{n}229{n}inhabite upon the sea shore thereof, it is called Cassaria, that is to say Caesaria. And there are certaine head lands stretching foorth into the sea towards Synopolis. Also, there are 300. miles of distance betweene Synopolis and Cassaria. Insomuch that the distance from those points or places to Constantinople, in length and breadth is about 700. miles : and 700. miles also from thence to the East, namely to the countrey of Hiberia which is a province of Gasaria. Georgia. At the province of Gasaria or Cassaria we arrived, which province is, in a maner, three square, having a citie on the West part thereof called Kersova, wherein S. Clement suffered martyrdome. And sayling before the said citie, we sawe an island, in which a Church is sayd to be built by the hands of angels. But about the midst of the said province toward the South, as it were, upon a sharpe angle or point, standeth a citie called Sold ala.	Soldaia directly over against Synopolis. And there doe{n}all the Turkie merchants, which traffique into the North countries, in their journey outward, arrive, and as they returne homeward also from Russia, and the said Northerne regions, into Turkie. The foresaid merchants transport thither ermines and gray furres, with other rich and costly skinnes. Others carrie cloathes made of cotton or bombast, and silke, and divers kindes of spices. But upon the East part of the said province standeth a citie The ritie of called Matriga, where the river Tanais dischargeth his Matriga. streames into the sea of Pontus, the mouth wherof is twelve miles in breadth. For this river, before it entreth into the sea of Pontus, maketh a little sea, which hath in breadth and length seven hundreth miles, & it is in no place thereof above sixe paces deepe, whereupon great vessels cannot sayle over it. Howbeit the merchants of \\Matriga. Constantinople, arriving at the foresayd ci tie of II Materta, send their barkes unto the river of Tanais to buy dried fishes, Sturgeons, Thosses, Barbils, and an infinite number of other fishes. The foresayd province of Cassaria is compassed in with the sea on three sides thereof: namely on the West side, where Kersova the citie of Saint{n}230{n}Clement is situate : on the South side the citie of Soldaia whereat we arrived : on the East side Maricandis, and there stands the citie of Matriga upon the mouth of the river Tanais. Beyond the sayd mouth standeth Zikia, Zikia. which is not in subjection unto the Tartars : also the people called Suevi and Hiberi towards the East, who likewise are not under the Tartars dominion. Moreover towards the South, standeth the citie of Trapesunda, which hath a governour proper to it selfe, named Guydo, being of the linage of the emperours of Constantinople, and is subject unto the Tartars. Next unto that is Synopolis the citie of the Soldan of Turkie, who likewise is in subjection unto them. Next unto these lyeth the countrey of Vastacius, whose sonne is called Astar, of his grandfather by the mothers side, who is not in subjection. All the land from the mouth of Tanais Westward as farre as Danubius is under their jurisdiction.{n}Yea beyond Danubius also, towards Constantinople, Valakia, which is the land of Assanus, and Bulgaria minor as farre as Solonia, doe all pay tribute unto them. And besides the tribute imposed, they have also, of late yeares,  exacted of every houshold an axe, and all such corne as they found lying on heapes. We arrived therefore at Soldaia the twelfth of the Kalends of June. And divers merchants of Constantinople, which were arrived there before us, reported that certaine messengers were com-ming thither from the holy land, who were desirous to travell unto Sartach. Notwithstanding I my self had publikely given out upon Palme Sunday within ye Church of Sancta Sophia, that I was not your nor any other mans messenger, but that I travailed unto those infidels according to the rule of our order. And being arrived, the said merchants admonished me to take diligent heede what I spake: because they having reported me to be a messenger, if I should say the contrary, that I were no messenger, I could not have free passage granted unto me.{n}Then I spake after this maner unto the governors of the citie, or rather unto their Lieutenants, because the{n}231{n}governors themselves were gone to pay tribute unto Baatu, & were not as yet returned. We heard of your lord Sartach (quoth I) in the holy land, that he was become a Christian: and the Christians were exceeding glad therof, & especially the most Christian king of France, who is there now in pilgrimage, & fighteth against the Saracens to redeeme the holy places out of their handes: wherfore I am determined to go unto Sartach, & to deliver unto him ye letters of my lord the king, wherein he admonisheth him concerning the good and commoditie of all Christendome. And they received us with gladnes, and gave us enterteinement in the cathedrall Church. The bishop of which Church was with Sartach, who told me many good things concerning the saide Sartach, which afterward I found to be nothing so. Then put they us to our choyce, whither we woulde have cartes and oxen, or packe horses to transport our cariages. And the marchants of Constantinople advised me, not to take cartes of the citizens of Soldaia, but to buy covered cartes of mine owne, (such as the Russians carrie their skins in) and to put all our carriages, which I would daylie take out, into them: because, if I should use horses, I must be constrained at every baite to take downe my carriages, and to lift them up againe on sundry horses backs: and besides, that I should ride a more gentle pace by the oxen drawing the cartes. Wherfore, contenting my selfe with their evil counsel, I was travelling unto Sartach 2. moneths which I could have done in one, if I had gone by horse. I brought with me from Constantinople (being by the marchants advised so to doe) pleasant fruits, muscadel wine, and delicate bisket bread to present unto the governours of Soldaia, to the end I might obtaine free passage: because they looke favourablie upon no man which commeth with an emptie hand. All which thinges I bestowed in one of my cartes, (not finding the governours of the citie at home) for they told me, if I could carrie them to Sartach, that they would be most acceptable unto him. Wee tooke our journey therefore about the{n}232{n}kalends of June, with fower covered cartes of our owne and with two other which wee borrowed of them, wherein we carried our bedding to rest upon in the night, and they allowed us five horses to ride upon. For there were just five persons in our company: namely, I my selfe and mine associate frier Bartholomew of Cremona, and Goset the bearer of these presents, the man of God Turgeman-nus, and Nicolas my servant, whome I bought at Constantinople with some part of the almes bestowed upon me. Moreover, they allowed us two men, which drave our carts and gave attendance unto our oxen and horses. There be high promontories on the sea shore from Kersova unto the mouth of Tanais. Also there are fortie castles betweene Kersova and Soldaia, every one of which almost have their proper languages: amongst whome there were many Gothes, who spake the Dutch tongue. Beyond the said mountaines towards the North, there is a most beautifull wood growing on a plaine ful of fountaines & freshets. And beyond the wood there is a mightie plaine champion, continuing five dayes journey unto the very extremitie and borders of the said province northward, and there it is a narrow Isthmus or neck land, having sea on the East & West sides therof, insomuch that there is a ditch made from one sea unto the other. In the same plaine (before the Tartars sprang up) were the Comanians wont to inhabite, who compelled the foresayd cities and castles to pay tribute unto them. But when the Tartars came upon them, the multitude of the Comanians entred into the foresaid province, and fled all of them, even unto the sea shore, being in such extreame famine, that they which were alive, were constrained to eate up those which were dead: and (as a marchant reported unto me who sawe it with his owne eyes) that the living men devoured and tore with their teeth, the raw flesh of the dead, as dogges would gnawe upon carrion. Towards the borders of the sayd province there be many great lakes: upon the bankes whereof are salt pits or fountaines, the water of which so soone as it entereth into{n}233{n}The necke of Taurica Chersonesus.{n}the lake, becommeth hard salte like unto ice. And out of those salte pittes Baatu and Sartach have great revenues: for they repayre thither out of all Russia for salte: and for each carte loade they give two webbes of cotton amounting to the value of half an Yperpera. There come by sea also many ships for salt, which pay tribute every one of them according to their burden. The third day after wee were departed out of the precincts of Soldaia, we{n}The Tartars, found the Tartars. Amongst whome being entred, me  thought I was come into a new world. Whose life and maners I wil describe unto your Highnes as well as I can.{n}Of the Tartars, and of their houses. Chap. 2.{n}THey have in no place any setled citie to abide in, neither knowe they of the celestiall citie to come.{n}They have divided all Scythia among themselves, which stretcheth from the river Danubius even unto the rising of the sunne. And every of their captaines, according to the great or small number of his people, knoweth the bounds of his pastures, and where he ought to feed his cattel winter and summer, Spring and autumne. For in the winter they descend unto the warme regions southward. And in the summer they ascend unto the colde regions northward. In winter when snowe lyeth upon the ground, they feede their cattell upon pastures without water, because then they use snow in stead of water. Their houses wherein they sleepe, they ground upon a round foundation of wickers artificially wrought and compacted together: the roofe whereof consisteth (in like sorte) of wickers, meeting above into one little roundell, out of which roundell ascendeth upward a necke like unto a chimney, which they cover with white felte, and oftentimes they lay morter or white earth upon the sayd felt, with the powder of bones, that it may shine white. And sometimes also they cover it with blacke felte. The sayd felte on the necke of their house, they doe garnish over with beautifull varietie of pictures. Before the doore likewise they hang a felt curiously painted over. For{n}234{n}1253-they spend all their coloured felt, in painting vines, trees, birds, and beastes thereupon. The sayd houses they make so large, that they conteine thirtie foote in breadth.{n}For measuring once the breadth betweene the wheele-ruts of one of their cartes, I found it to be 2 o feete over: and when the house was upon the carte, it stretched over the wheeles on each side five feete at the least. I told 22. oxen in one teame, drawing an house upon a cart, eleven in one order according to the breadth of the carte, and eleven more before them : the axletree of the carte was of an huge bignes like unto the mast of a ship. And a fellow stood in the doore of the house, upon the forestall of the carte driving forth the oxen. Moreover, they make certaine fouresquare baskets of small slender wickers as big as great chestes: and afterward, from one side to another, they frame an hollow lidde or cover of such like wickers, and make a doore in the fore side thereof. And then they cover the sayd chest or little house with black felt rubbed over with tallow or sheeps milke to keepe the raine from soaking through, which they decke likewise with painting or with feathers. And in such chests they put their whole houshold stuffe & treasure. Also the same chests they do strongly bind upon other carts, which are drawen with camels, to ye end they may wade through rivers. Neither do they at any time take down the sayd chests from ofF their carts. When they take down their dwelling houses, they turne the doores alwayes to the South: & next of all they place the carts laden with their chests, here & there, within half a stones cast of ye house: insomuch that the house standeth between two ranks of carts, as it were, between two wals. The matrons make for themselves most beautiful carts, which I am not The benefits of able to describe unto your majestie but by pictures onlie: “f^ntertn for I would right willingly have painted al things for you, C°Un~ had my skill bin ought in that art. One rich Moal or Tartar hath 200. or 100. such cartes with chests. Duke Baatu hath sixteene wives, every one of which hath one great house, besides other little houses, which they place{n}235{n}behind the great one, being as it were chambers for their maidens to dwel in. And unto every of the said houses do belong 200. cartes. When they take their houses from off the cartes, the principal wife placeth her court on the West frontier, and so all the rest in their order: so that the last wife dwelleth upon the East frontier: and one of the said ladies courts is distant from another about a stones cast. Whereupon the court of one rich Moal or Tartar will appeare like unto a great village, very few men abiding in the same. One woman will guide 20. or 30. cartes at once, for their countries are very plaine, and they binde the cartes with camels or oxen, one behind another. And there sittes a wench in the foremost carte driving the oxen, and al the residue follow on a like pace. When they chance to come at any bad passage, they let them loose, and guide them over one by one: for they goe a slowe pace, as fast as a lambe or an oxe can walke.{n}Of their beds, and of their drinking pots.{n}Chap. 3.{n}HAving taken downe their houses from off their cartes, and turning the doores Southward, they place the bed of the master of the house, at the North part thereof. The womens place is alwaies on the East side, namely on the left hand of the good man of the house sitting upon his bed with his face Southwards: but the mens place is upon ye West side, namely at the right hand of their master. Men when they enter into the house, wil not in  any case hang their quivers on the womens side. Over the masters head there is alwayes an image, like a puppet, made of felte, which they call the masters brother: and another over the head of the good wife or mistresse, which they call her brother being fastened to the wall: and above betweene both of them, there is a little leane one, which is, as it were the keeper of the whole house. The good wife or mistresse of the house placeth aloft at her beds feete, on the right hand, the skinne of a Kidde stuffed with wooll or some other matter, and neare unto{n}236{n}that a litle image or puppet looking towards the maidens and women. Next unto the doore also on the womens side, there is another image with a cowes udder, for the women that milke the kine. For it is the duety of their women to milke kine. On the other side of the doore next unto the men, there is another image with the udder of a mare, for the men which milke mares. And when they come together to drinke and make merie, they sprinckle parte of their drinke upon the image which is above the masters head: afterward upon other images in order: then goeth a servant out of the house with a cuppe full of drinke sprinckling it thrise towards the South, and bowing his knee at every time: and this is done for the honour of the fire. Then perfourmeth he the like superstitious idolatrie towards the East, for the honour of the ayre: and then to the West for the honour of the water: & lastly to the North in the behalfe of the dead. When the maister holdeth a cuppe in his hande to drinke, before he tasteth thereof, hee powreth his part upon the ground. If he drinketh sitting on horse backe, hee powreth out part thereof upon the necke or maine of his horse before hee himselfe drinketh. After the ser-vaunt aforesaide hath so discharged his cuppes to the fower quarters of the world, hee returneth into the house: and two other servants stand ready with two cuppes, and two basons, to carrie drinke unto their master and his wife, sitting together upon a bed. And if he hath more wives then one, she with whome hee slept the night before, sitteth by his side the daye following: and all his other wives must that day resorte unto the same house to drinke: and there is the court holden for that day: the giftes also which are presented that daye are layd up in the chests of the sayd wife. And upon a bench stands a vessell of milke or of other drinke and drinking cuppes.{n}237{n}[Of their{n}They use the like custome in Florida.{n}Of their drinkes, and how they provoke one another to drinking. Chap. 4.{n}IN winter time they make excellent drinke of Rise, of Mill, and of honie, being well and high coloured like wine. Also they have wine brought unto them from farre countries. In summer time they care not for any drinke, but Cosmos. And it standeth alwaies within the entrance of his doore, and next unto it stands a minstrell with his fidle. 1 sawe there no such citerns and vials as ours commonly be, but many other musicall instruments which are not used among us. And when the master of the house begins to drinke, one of his servants cryeth out with a lowde voice HA, and the minstrell playes upon his fidle. And when they make any great solemne feast, they all of them clap their hands & daunce to the noyse of musique, the men before their master and the women before their mistresse. And when the master hath drunke, then cries out his servant as before, and the minstrell stayeth his musique. Then drinke they all around both men and women : and sometimes they carowse for the victory very filthily and drunkenly. Also when they will provoke any man, they pul him by the eares to the drinke, and so lug and draw him strongly to stretch out his throate clapping their handes and dauncing before him. Moreover when some of them will make great feasting and rejoycing, one of the company takes a full cuppe, and two other stand, one on his right hand and another on his left, and so they three come singing to the man who is to have the cuppe reached unto him, still singing and dauncing before him: and when he stretcheth foorth his hand to receive the cuppe, they leape suddenly backe, returning againe as they did before, and so having deluded him thrice or fower times by drawing backe the cuppe untill he be merie, and hath gotten a good appetite, then they give him the cuppe, singing and dauncing and stamping with their feete, untill he hath done drinking.{n}238{n}Of their foode and victuals. Chap. 5.{n}/concerning their foode and victuals, be it knowen unto kJ your Highnesse that they do, without al difference or exception, eat all their dead carrions. And amongst so many droves it cannot be, but some cattell must needes die. Howbeit in summer, so long as their Cosmos, that is, their mares milke lasteth, they care not for any foode. And if they chance to have an oxe or an horse dye, they drie the flesh thereof: for cutting it into thin slices and hanging it up against the Sunne and the wind, it is Dryingofflesh presently dried without salt, and also without stenche tn the mnd" or corruption. They make better puddings of their  horses then of their hogs, which they eate being new made: the rest of the flesh they reserve untill winter. They make of their oxe skins great bladders or bags, which they doe wonderfully dry in the smoake. Of the hinder part of their horse hides they make very fine sandals & pantofles. They give unto 50. or an 100. men the flesh of one ram to eat. For they mince it in a bowle with salt and water (other sauce they have none) and then with the point of a knife, or a litle forke which they make for the same purpose (such as wee use to take rosted peares or apples out of wine withal) they reach unto every one of the company a morsel! or twaine, according to the multitude of guestes. The master of the house, before the rams flesh be distributed, first of all himselfe taketh thereof, what he pleaseth. Also, if he giveth unto any of the company a speciali part, the receiver therof must eat it alone, and must not impart ought therof unto any other. Not being able to eate it up all, he caries it with him, or delivers it unto his boy, if he be present, to keepe it: if not, he puts it up into his Saptargat, that is to say, his foure square buget, which they use to cary about with them for the saving of all such provision, and wherein they lay up their bones, when they have not time to gnaw them throughly, that they may burnish them afterward,{n}239{n}1253-to the end that no whit of their food may come to nought.{n}How they make their drinke called Cosmos. Chap. 6.{n}THeir drinke called Cosmos, which is mares milke, is prepared after this maner. They fasten a long line unto 2. posts standing firmely in the ground, & unto the same line they tie the young foies of those mares, which they mean to milke. Then come the dams to stand by their foies gently suffering themselves to be milked. And if any of them be too unruly, then one takes her foie, & puts it under her, letting it suck a while, and presently carying it away againe, there comes another man to milke the said mare. And having gotten a good quantity of this milke together (being as sweet as cowes milke) while it is newe they powre it into a great bladder or bag, and they beat the said bag with a piece of wood made for the purpose, having a club at the lower ende like a mans head, which is hollow within: and so soone as they beat upon it, it begins to boile like newe wine, & to be sower and sharp of taste, and they beate it in that maner till butter come thereof. Then taste they thereof, and being indifferently sharpe they drinke it: for it biteth a mans tongue like the wine of raspes, when it is drunk. After a man hath taken a draught therof, it leaveth behind it a taste like the taste of almon milke, and goeth downe very pleasantly, intoxicating weake braines: also it causeth urine to be avoided in great measure. Likewise Caracosmos, that is to say black Cosmos, for great lords to drink, they make on this maner. First they beat the said milke so long till the thickest part thereof descend right downe to the bottome like the lees of white wine, and that which is thin and pure remaineth above, being like unto whay or white must. The said lees or dregs being very white, are given to servants, and will cause them to sleepe exceedingly. That which is thinne and cleare their masters drinke: and in very deed it is marveilous{n}240{n}sweete and holesome liquor. Duke Baatu hath thirty cottages or granges within a daies journey of his abiding place: every one of which serveth him dayly with the Caracosmos of an hundreth mares milk, and so all of them together every day with the milke of 3000. mares, besides white milke which other of his subjects bring. For even as the husbandmen of Syria bestow the third part of their fruicts and carie it unto the courts of their lords, even so doe they their mares milke every third day. Out of their cowes milke they first churne butter, boyling the which butter unto a perfect decoction, they put it into rams skinnes, which they reserve for the same purpose. Neither doe they salte their butter: and yet by reason of the long seething, it putrifieth not: and they keepe it in store for winter. The churnmilke which remaineth of the butter, they let alone till it be as sowre as possibly it may be, then they boile it and in boiling, it is turned all into curdes, which curds they drie in the sun, making them as hard as the drosse of iron: and this kind of food also they store up in sachels against winter. In the winter season when milke faileth them, they put the foresaid curds (which they cal Gry-ut) into a bladder, and powring hot water thereinto, they beat it lustily till they have resolved it into the said water, which is thereby made exceedingly sowre, and that they drinke in stead of milke. They are very scrupulous, and take diligent heed that they drinke not fayre water by it selfe.{n}Of the beastes which they eat, of their garments, and of their maner of hunting. Chap. 7.{n}GReat lords have cottages or granges towards the South, from whence their tenants bring them Millet and meale against winter. The poorer sort provide themselves of such necessaries, for ye exchange of rams, & of other beasts skins. The Tartars slaves fil their bellies with thick water, & are therewithal! contented. They wil neither eate mise with long tailes, i	241	Q{n}Another strange cus-tome, which I leave to be scanned by falconers themselves.{n}nor any kinde of mise with short tailes. They have also certaine litle beasts called by them Sogur, which lie in a cave twenty or thirty of them together, al the whole winter sleeping there for the space of sixe moneths: and these they take in great abundance. There are also a kind of conies having long tayles like unto cats: & on the outside of their tailes grow blacke & white haires. They have many other small beasts good to eat, which they know and discerne right well. I saw no Deere there, & but a fewe hares, but a great number of Roes. I saw wild asses in great abundance, which be like unto Mules. Also I saw another kind of beast called Artak, having in al resemblance the body of a ram, & crooked homes, which are of such bignes, that I could scarce lift up a paire of them with one hand: & of these homes they make great drinking cups. They have Falcons, Girfalcons, & other haukes in great plenty: all which they cary upon their right hands: 8c they put alwaies about their Falcons necks a string of leather, which hangeth down to ye midst of their gorges, by the which string, when they cast them off the fist at their game, with their left hand they bow downe the heads & breasts of the sayd haukes, least they should be tossed up & downe, & beaten with the wind, or least they should soare too high. Wherefore they get a great part of their victuals, by hunting 8c hauking. Concerning their garments and attire be it knowen unto your Majestie, that out of Cataya 8c other regions of the East, out of Persia also and other countries of the South, there are brought unto them stuffes of silke, cloth of gold, 8c cotton cloth, which they weare in time of summer. But out of Russia, Moxel, Bulgaria the greater, 8c Pascatir, that is Hungaria the greater, and out of Kersis (all which are Northerne regions 8c full of woods) 8c also out of many other countries of the North, which are subject unto them, the inhabitants bring them rich and costly skins of divers sortes (which I never saw in our{n}242{n}1253-countries) wherewithal they are clad in winter. And alwaies against winter they make themselves two gownes, one with the fur inward to their skin, & another with the furre outward, to defend them from wind & snow, which for the most part are made of woolves skins, or Fox skins, or els of Papions. And when they sit within the house, they have a finer gowne to weare. The poorer sort make their upper gowne of dogs or of goats skins. When they goe to hunt for wild beasts, there meets a great company of them together, & in-vironing the place round about, where they are sure to find some game, by litle & litle they approch on al sides, til they have gotten the wild beasts into the midst, as it were into a circle, & then they discharge their arrowes at them. Also they make themselves breeches of skins. The rich Tartars somtimes fur their gowns with pelluce or silke shag, which is exceeding soft, light, & warme. The poorer sort do line their clothes with cotton cloth which is made of the finest wooll they can pick out, & of the courser part of the said wool, they make felt to cover their houses and their chests, and for their bedding also. Of the same wool, being mixed with one third part of horse haire, they make all their cordage. They make also of the said felt coverings for their stooles, and caps to defende Great expense their heads from the weather: for all which purposes efwmU-they spend a great quantity of their wooll. And thus much concerning the attyre of the men.{n}Of the fashion which the Tartars use in cutting their haire, and of the attire of their women. Chap. 8.{n}THe men shave a plot foure square upon the crownes of their heads, and from the two formost corners they shave, as it were, two seames downe to their temples: they shave also their temples and the hinder part of their head even unto the nape of the necke: likewise they shave the forepart of their scalp downe 243{n}to their foreheads, & upon their foreheads they leave a locke of hayre reaching downe unto their eye browes: upon the two hindermost corners of their heads, they have two lockes also, which they twine and braid into knots and so bind and knit them under each eare one. Moreover their womens garments differ not from their mens, saving that they are somwhat longer. But on the morrowe after one of their women is maried, shee shaves her scalpe from the middest of her head down to her forehead, & weares a wide garment like unto the hood of a Nunne, yea larger and longer in all parts then a Nuns hood, being open before and girt unto them under the right side. For herein doe the Tartars differ from the Turkes: because the Turkes fasten their garments to their bodies on the left side: but the Tartars alwaies on the right side. They have also an ornament for their heads which they call Botta, being made of the barke of a tree, or of some such other lighter matter as they can find, which by reason of the thicknes & roundnes therof cannot be holden but in both hands together: & it hath a square sharp spire rising from the top therof, being more then a cubite in length, & fashioned like unto a pinacle. The said Botta they cover al over with a piece of rich silke: & it is hollow within : & upon the midst of the sayd spire or square toppe, they put a bunch of quils or of slender canes a cubite long and more: & the sayd bunch, on the top thereof, they beautifie with Peacocks feathers, & round about al ye length therof, with the feathers of a Malards taile, & with precious stones also. Great ladies weare this kind of ornament upon their heads binding it strongly with a certain hat or coyfe, which hath an hole in the crowne, fit for the  spire to come through it: & under the foresaid ornament they cover the haires of their heads, which they gather up round together from the hinder part therof to the crowne, & so lap them up in a knot or bundel within the said Botta, which afterward they bind strongly under{n}244{n}their throtes. Hereupon when a great company of such gentlewomen ride together, and are beheld a far off, they seem to be souldiers with helmets on their heads carrying their launces upright: for the said Botta appeareth like an helmet with a launce over it. Al their women sit on horsebacke bestriding their horses like men: & they bind their hoods or gownes about their wastes with a skie coloured silke skarfe, & with another skarfe they girde it above their breasts: & they bind also a piece of white silke like a mufler or maske under their eyes, reaching down unto their breast. These gentlewomen are exceeding fat, & the lesser their noses be, the fairer are they esteemed: they daube over their sweet faces with grease too shamefully: and they never lie in bed for their travel of childbirth.{n}Of the dueties injoined unto the Tartarian women, and of their labours, and also of their mariages. Chap. 9.{n}THe duties of women are, to drive carts: to lay their houses upon carts & to take them downe again: to milke kine: to make butter & Gry-ut: to dresse skins & to sow them, which they usually sowe with thread made of sinewes, for they divide sinewes into slender threads, & then twine them into one long thread. They make sandals & socks & other garments. Howbeit they never wash any apparel: for they say that God is then angry, & that dreadful thunder wil ensue, if washed garments be hanged forth to drie: yea, they beat such as wash, & take their garments from them. They are wonderfully afraid of thunder: for in the time of thunder they thrust all strangers out of their houses, & then wrapping themselves in black felt, they lie hidden therein, til the thunder be overpast. They never wash their dishes» or bowles: yea, when their flesh is sodden, they wash the platter wherein it must be put, with scalding hot broth out of the pot, & then powre the said broth into the pot againe. They make felte also, & cover their houses therewith. The{n}245{n}duties of the men are to make bowes & arrowes, stirrops, bridles, and saddles: to build houses & carts, to keepe horses: to milke mares: to churne Cosmos and mares milke, & to make bags wherein to put it: they keepe camels also & lay burthens upon them. As for sheepe & goates they tend and milke them, aswell the men as the women. With sheeps milke thicked & salted they dresse and tan their hides. When they wil wash their hands or their heads, they fil their mouthes full of water, & spouting it into their hands by little and little, they sprinckle their haire & wash their heades therwith. As touching mariages, your Highnes is to understand, that no man can have a wife among them till he hath bought her: whereupon somtimes their maids are very stale before they be maried, for their parents alwaies keepe them till they can sei them. They keepe the first and second degrees of consanguinitie inviolable, as we do : but they have no regard of the degrees of affinity: for they wil marrie together, or by succession, two sisters. Their widowes marie not at al, for this reason: because they beleeve, that al who have served them in this life, shall do them service in the life to come also. Whereupon they are perswaded, that every widow after death shal returne unto her own husband. And herehence ariseth an abominable & filthy custome among them, namely that the sonne marieth somtimes all his fathers wives except his own mother: For the court or house of the father or mother falleth by inheritance alwaies to the yonger son. Wherupon he is to provide for all his fathers wives, because they are part of his inheritance aswel as his fathers possessions. And then if he will he useth them for his owne wives: for he thinks it no injurie or disparagement unto himselfe, although they returne unto his father after death. Therfore when any man hath bargained with another for a maid, the father of the said damosel makes him a feast: in the meane while she fleeth unto some of her kinsfolks to hide her selfe. Then saith her father unto the bridegrome: Loe, my daughter is yours, take{n}246{n}her wheresoever you can find her. Then he and his friends seek for her till they can find her, and having found her hee must take her by force and cary her, as it were, violently unto his owne house.{n}Of their execution of justice and judgement: and of their deaths and burials. Chap. 10.{n}Concerning their lawes or their execution of justice, your Majesty is to be advertised, that when two men fight, no third man dare intrude • himself to part them. Yea, the father dare not help his owne sonne. But he that goes by the worst must appeale unto the court of his lord. And whosoever els ofFereth him any violence after appeale, is put to death. But he must go presently without all delay: and he that hath suffered the injury, carieth him, as it were captive. They punish no man with sentence of death, unles hee bee taken in the deede doing, or confesseth the same. But being accused by the multitude, they put him unto extreame torture to make him confesse the trueth. They punish murther with death, and carnali copulation also with any other besides his owne. By his own, I meane his wife or his maid servant, for he may use his slave as he listeth himself. Heinous theft also or felony they punish with death. For a light theft, as namely for stealing of a ram, the party (not being apprehended in the deed doing, but otherwise detected) is cruelly beaten. And if ye executioner laies on an 100. strokes, he must have an 100. staves, namely for such as are beaten upon sentence given in the court. Also counterfeit messengers, because they feine themselves to be messengers, when as indeed they are none at all, they punish with death. Sacrilegious persons they use in like maner (of which kind of malefactors your Majesty shall understand more fully hereafter) because they esteeme such to be witches. When any man dieth, they lament & howle most pitifully for him: & the said mourners are free from paying any tribute for one whole yeare after. Also whosoever is present at the house{n}247{n}where any one growen to mans estate lieth dead, he must not enter into the court of Mangu-Can til one whole yere be expired. If it were a child deceased he must not enter into the said court til the next moneth after. Neere unto the grave of the partie deceased they alwaies leave one cottage. If any of their nobles (being of the stock of Chingis, who was their first lord & father) deceaseth, his sepulcher is unknowen. And alwayes about those places where they interre their nobles, there is one house of men to keep the sepulchers. I could not learn that they use to hide treasures in the graves of their dead. The Comanians build a great toomb over their dead, & erect the image of the dead party thereupon, with his face towards the East, holding a drinking cup in his hand, before his navel. They erect also upon the monuments of rich men, Pyramides, that is to say, litle sharpe houses or pinacles: & in some places I saw mighty towers made of brick, in other places Pyramides made of stones, albeit there are no stones to be found thereabout. I saw one newly buried, in whose behalfe they hanged up 16. horse hides, unto each quarter of the world 4, betweene certain high posts: & they set besides his grave Cosmos for him to drink, & flesh to eat: & yet they sayd that he was baptized. I beheld other kinds of sepulchers also towards the East: namely large flowres or pavements made of stone, some round & some square, & then 4. long stones pitched upright, about the said pavement towards the 4. regions of the world. When any man is sicke, he lieth in his bed, & causeth a signe to be set upon his house, to signifie that there lieth a sicke person there, to the end that no man may enter into the sayd house: whereupon none at all visit any sicke party but his servant only. Moreover, when any one is sicke in their great courts, they appoint watchmen to stand round about the said court, who wil not suffer any person to enter within the precincts thereof. For they feare least evill spirits or winds should come together with the parties that enter in. They esteeme of soothsayers, as of their priests.{n}248{n}Of our first entrance among the Tartars, and of their ingratitude. Chap. 11.{n}A Nd being come amongst those barbarous people, me thought (as I said before) y‘ I was entred into a new world: for they came flocking about us on horse back, after they had made us a long time to awaite for them sitting in the shadow, under their black carts. The first question which they demanded was whether we had ever bin with them heretofore, or no ? And giving them answere that we had not, they began impudently to beg our victuals from us. And we gave them some of our bisket & wine, which we had brought with us from the towne of Soldaia. And having drunke off- one flagon of our wine they demanded another, saying, that a man goeth not into the house with one foote. Howbeit we gave them no more, excusing our selves that we had but a litle. Then they asked us, whence we came, & whither we were bound ? I answered them with the words above mentioned: that we had heard concerning duke Sartach, that he was become a Christian, & that unto him our determination was to travel, having your Majesties letters to deliver unto him. They were very inquisitive to know whether I came of mine own accord, or whether I were sent ? I answered that no man compelled me to come, neither had I come, unies I my selfe had bin willing: & that therefore I was come according to mine own wil, & to the will of my superior. I tooke diligent heed never to say that I was your Majesties ambassador. Then they asked what I had in my carts; whether it were gold or silver, or rich garments to carie unto Sartach ? I answered that Sartach should see what we had brought, when we were once come unto him, & that they had nothing to do to aske such questions, but rather ought to conduct me unto their captaine, and that he, if he thought good, should cause me to be directed unto Sartach: if not, that I would returne. For there was in the same province one of Baatu his kinsmen called Scacati, unto whom my lord 249{n}the Emperor of Constantinople had written letters of request, to suffer me to passe through his territory. With this answere of ours they were satisfied, giving us horses & oxen, & two men to conduct us. Howbeit before they would allow us the foresayd necessaries for our journey, they made us to awayt a long while, begging our bread for their yong brats, wondering at all things which they sawe about our servants, as their knives, gloves, purses, & points, and desiring to have them. I excused my self that  we had a long way to travel, & that we must in no wise so soon deprive our selves of things necessary, to finish so long a journey. Then they said that I was a very varlet. True it is, that they tooke nothing by force from me: howbeit they wil beg that which they see very importu-natly & shamelesly. And if a man bestow ought upon them, it is but cost lost, for they are thankles wretches. They esteeme themselves lords & think y* nothing should be denied them by any man. If a man gives them nought, & afterward stands in neede of their service, they will do right nought for him. They gave us of their cowes milke to drink after ye butter was cherned out of it, being very sower, which they cal Apram. And so we departed from them. And in very deed it seemed to me y‘ we were escaped out of the hands of divels. On the morrow we were come unto the captain. From the time wherin we departed from Soldaia, till we arrived at the court of Sartach, which was the space of two moneths, we never lay in house or tent, but alwaies under the starry canopy, & in the open aire, or under our carts. Neither yet saw we any village, nor any mention of building where a village had bin, but the graves of the Comanians in great abundance. The same evening our guide which had conducted us, gave us some Cosmos. After I had drunke thereof I sweat most extreamly for the novelty and strangenes, because I never dranke of it before. Notwithstanding me thought it was very savory, as indeed it was.{n}Of the court of Scacatai: and how the Christians drinke no Cosmos. Chap. 12.{n}ON the morrowe after we met with the cartes of Scacatai laden with houses, and me thought that a mighty citie came to meete me. I wondered also at the great multitude of huge droves of oxen, & horses, and at the flockes of sheepe. I could see but a fewe men that guided all these matters: wherupon I inquired how many men he had under him, & they told me that he had not above 500. in all, the one halfe of which number we were come past, as they lay in another lodging. Then the servant which was our guide told me, that I must present somwhat unto Scacatay: & so he caused us to stay, going himselfe before to give notice of our comming. By this time it was past three of the clocke, and they unladed their houses nere unto a certain water: And there came unto us his interpreter, who being advertised by us that wee were never there before, demanded some of our victuals, & we yeelded unto his request. Also he required of us some garment for a reward, because he was to interpret our sayings unto his master. Howbeit we excused our selves as well as wee could. Then he asked us, what we would present unto his Lord ? And we tooke a flagon of wine, & filled a maund with bisket, & a platter with apples & other fruits. But he was not contented therewith, because we brought him not some rich garment. Notwithstanding we entred so into his presence with feare and bashfulnes. He sate upon his bed holding a citron in his hand, and his wife sate by him : who (as I verily thinke) had cut and pared her nose betweene the eyes, that she might seeme to be more flat and saddle-nosed: for she had left her selfe no nose at all in that place, having annointed the very same place with a black ointment, and her eye browes also: which sight seemed most ugly in our eies. Then I rehearsed unto him the same wordes, which I had spoken in other places before. For it stoode us in hand to use one and the same speech in all places. For 251{n}A caveat right we were wel forewarned of this circumstance by some worthy the which had been amongst the Tartars, that we should never varie in our tale. Then I besought him, that he would vouchsafe to accept that small gifte at our hands, excusing my selfe that I was a Monke, and that it was against our profession to possesse gold, or silver, or precious garments, and therefore that I had not any such thing to give him, howbeit he should receive some part of our victuals in stead of a blessing. Hereupon he caused our present to be received, and immediately distributed the same among his men, who were mette together for the same purpose, to drinke and make merrie. I delivered also unto Him the Emperor of Constantinople his letters (this was eight dayes after the feast of Ascension) who sent them forthwith to Soldaia to have them interpreted there: for they were written in Greeke, and he had none about him that was skilfull in the Greeke tongue. He asked us also whether we would drink any Cosmos, that is to say mares milke? (For those that are Christians among them, as namely the Russians, Grecians, and Alanians, who keep their own law very strictly, wil in no case drinke thereof, yea, they ac-compt themselves no Christians after they have once drunke of it, & their priests reconcile them unto the Church as if they had renounced the Christian faith.) I gave him answere, that we had as yet sufficient of our owne to drinke, and that when our drinke failed us, we must be constrained to drink such as should be given unto us. He enquired also what was contained in our letters, which your Majestie sent unto Sartach ? I answered: that they were sealed up, and that there was nothing conteined in them, but good and friendly wordes. And he asked what wordes wee would deliver unto Sartach ? I answered: the words of Christian faith. He asked again what these words were? For he was very desirous to heare them.{n}[I. i O2.J	Then 1 expounded unto him as well as I could, by mine{n}interpreter, (who had no wit nor any utterance of speech) the Apostles creed. Which after he had heard, holding his peace, he shooke his head. Then hee assigned unto us 252{n}two men, who shoulde give attendance upon our selves, upon our horses, and upon our Oxen. And hee caused us to ride in his companie, till the messenger whome hee had sent for the interpretation of the Emperours letters, was returned. And so wee traveiled in his companie till the morowe after Pentecost.{n}Howe the Alanians came unto us on Pentecost or Whitson even. Chap. 13.{n}UPon the even of Pentecost, there came unto us cer-taine Alanians, who are there called * Acias, being Christians after the maner of the Grecians, using greeke bookes and Grecian priests: howbeit they are not schis-matiques as the Grecians are, but without acception of persons, they honour al Christians. And they brought unto us sodden flesh, requesting us to eat of their meat, and to pray for one of their company being dead. Then I sayd, because it was the even of so great and so solemne a feast day, that we would not eate any flesh for that time. And I expounded unto them the solemnitie of the sayd feast, whereat they greatly rejoyced: for they were ignorant of all things appertayning to Christian religion, except only the name of Christ. They and many other Christians, both Russians, and Hungarians demanded of us, whether they might be saved or no, because they were constrained to drinke Cosmos, & to eate the dead carkases of such things, as were slaine by the Saracens, and other infidels ? Which even the Greeke & Russian priests themselves also esteeme as things strangled or offered unto idoles: because they were ignorant of the times of fasting, neither could they have observed them albeit they had knowen them. Then instructed I them aswell as I could and strengthened them in the faith. As for the flesh which they had brought we reserved it untill the feast day. For there was nothing to be sold among the Tartars for gold & silver, but only for cloth and garments, of the which kind of marchandise wee had none at all. When our servants offered them any coine called Yperpera, they 253{n}Cloth is the chiefe marchandise in Tartaric.{n}rubbed it with their fingers, and put it unto their noses, to try by the smell whether it were copper or no. Neither did they allow us any foode but cowes milke onely which was very sowre & filthy. There was one thing most necessary greatly wanting unto us. For the water was so foule and muddy by reason of their horses, that it was not meete to be drunk. And but for certaine bisket, which was by the goodnes of God remaining unto us, we had undoubtedly perished.{n}Of a Saracen which said that he would be baptized : and of certaine men which seemed to be lepers. Chap. 14.{n}UPon the day of Pentecost there came unto us a certain Saracen, unto whome, as hee talked with us, we expounded the Christian faith. Who (hearing of Gods benefits exhibited unto mankind by the incarnation of our Saviour Christ, and the resurrection of the dead, & the judgement to come, & that in baptisme was a washing away of sinnes) sayd, that hee would be baptized. But when we prepared our selves to the baptizing of him, he suddenly mounted on horsebacke, saying that he would goe home and consult with his wife what were best to be done. And on the morrow after he told us, that he durst in no case receive baptisme, because then he should drinke no more Cosmos. For the Christians of that place affirme that no true Christians ought to drinke thereof: and that without the said liquor he could not live in that desert. From which opinion, I could not for my life remove him. Wherefore be it knowen of a certainty unto your highnes, that they are much estranged from the Christian faith by reason of that opinion which hath bin broached & confirmed among them by the Russians, of whom there is a great multitude in that place. The same day Scacatay the captaine aforesayd gave us one man to conduct us to Sartach, and two other to guide us unto the next lodging, which was distant from that{n}254{n}place five dayes journey for oxen to travell. They gave unto us also a goate for victuals, and a great many bladders of cowes milke, 8c but a little Cosmos, because it is of so great estimation among them. And so taking our journey directly toward the North, me thought that wee had passed through one of hell gates. The servants which conducted us began to play the bold theeves with us, seeing us take so little heed unto our selves. At length having lost much by their theevery, harme taught us wisdome. And then we came unto the extremity of that province, which is fortified with a ditch from one sea unto another: without the bounds wherof their lodging was situate. Into the which, so soone as we had entred, al the inhabitants there seemed unto us to be infected with leprosie: for certain base fellowes were placed there to receive tribute of al such as tooke salt out of the salt Salt pits. pits aforesaid. From that place they told us that we  must travel fifteen daies journey, before we shuld find any other people. With them wee dranke Cosmos, and gave unto them a basket full of fruites and of bisket. And they gave unto us eight oxen and one goate, to sustaine us in so great a journey, and I knowe not how many bladders of milke. And so changing our oxen, ?en we tooke our journey which we finished in tenne J°urneD-dayes, arriving at another lodging: neither found we any water all that way, but onely in certaine ditches made in the valleys, except two small rivers. And from the time wherein wee departed out of the foresaid province of Gasaria, we travailed directly Eastward, having a Sea on the South side of us, and a waste desert on the North, which desert, in some places, reacheth twenty dayes journey in breadth, and there is neither tree, mountaine, nor stone therein. And it is most excellent pasture. Here the Comanians, which were called Capthac, were wont to feede their cattell. Howbeit by the Dutch men they are called Valani, and the province it selfe Valania. But Isidore calleth all that{n}2S5{n}The length of tract of land stretching from the river of Tanais to the Comania. lake of Maeotis, and so along as farre as Danubius, the countrey of Alania. And the same land continueth in length from Danubius unto Tanais (which divideth Asia from Europe) for the space of two moneths journey, albeit a man should ride poste as fast as the Tartars use to ride : and it was all over inhabited by the Comanians, called Capthac: yea and beyond Tanais, as farre as the river of Edil or Volga: the space be-tweene the two which rivers is a great and long{n}Russia. journey to bee travailed in ten dayes. To the North of the same province lieth Russia, which is full of wood in all places, and stretcheth from Polonia and Hungaria, even to the river of Tanais: and it hath bene wasted all over by the Tartars, and as yet is daily wasted by them.{n}Of our afflictions which we sustained: and of the Comanians maner of buriall. Chap. 15.{n}Prussia. ' | 'Hey preferre the Saracens before the Russians, A because they are Christians, and when they are able to give them no more golde nor silver, they drive them and their children like flockes of sheepe into the wildernes, constraining them to keepe their cattell there. Beyond Russia lieth the countrey of Prussia, which the Dutch knights of the order of Saint Maries hospitali of Jerusalem have of late wholly conquered and subdued. And in very deede they might easily winne Russia, if they would put to their helping hand. For if the Tartars should but once know, that the great Priest, that is to say, the Pope did cause the ensigne of the crosse to bee displaied against them, they would flee all into their desert and solitarie places. We therefore went on towards the East, seeing nothing but heaven and earth, and sometimes the sea on our right hand, called the Sea of Tanais, and the sepulchres of the Comanians, which appeared unto us two leagues off, in which places they were wont to burie their kinred 256{n}altogether. So long as we were travelling through the desert, it went reasonably well with us. For I cannot sufficiently expresse in words the irkesome and tedious troubles which I susteined, when I came at any of their places of abode. For our guide would have us goe in unto every Captaine with a present, and our expenses would not extend so farre. For we were every day eight persons of us spending our waifaring provision, for the Tartars servants would all of them eate of our victuals. We our selves were five in number, and the servants our guides were three, two to drive our carts, and one to conduct us unto Sartach. The flesh which they gave us was not sufficient for us: neither could we finde any thing to be bought for our money. And as we sate Extreme heate under our carts in the code shadowe, by reason of the tn Sommer-extreame and vehement heate which was there at that time, they did so importunately and shamelesly intrude themselves into our companie, that they would even tread upon us, to see whatsoever things we had. Having list at any time to ease themselves, the filthy lozels had not the maners to withdrawe themselves farther from us, then a beane can bee cast. Yea, like vile slovens they would lay their tailes in our presence, while they were yet talking with us: many other things they committed, which were most tedious and loathsome unto us. But above all things it grieved me to the very heart, that when I would utter ought unto them, which might tend to their edification, my foolish interpreter would say: you shall not make me become a Preacher now: I tell you, I cannot nor I will not rehearse any such wordes. And true it was which he saide, For I perceived afterward, when I began to have a litle smattering in the language, that when I spake one thing, he would say quite another, whatsoever came next unto his witlesse tongues end. Then seeing the danger I might incurre in speaking by such an interpreter, I resolved much rather to holde my peace, and thus we travelled with great toile from lodging to lodging, till at the length,{n}I	257	R{n}The breadth of Tanais.{n}He is much deceived.{n}a fewe dayes before the feast of Saint Marie Magdalene, we arrived at the banke of the mightie river Tanais which divideth Asia from Europa, even as the river Nilus of ./Egypt disjoyneth Asia from Africa. At the same place where wee arrived, Baatu and Sartach did cause a certaine cottage to be built, upon the Easterne banke of the river, for a companie of Russians to dwell in to the ende they might transport Ambassadours and merchants in ferrie-boates over that part of the river. First they ferried us over, and then our carts, putting one wheele into one lyter, and the other wheele into another lyter, having bounde both the lyters together, and so they rowed them over. In this place our guide played the foole most extreamely. For hee imagining that the said Russians, dwelling in the cottage, should have provided us horses, sent home the beasts which we brought with us, in another cart, y‘ they might returne unto their owne masters. And when we demanded to have some beasts of them, they answered, that they had a priviledge from Baatu, wherby they were bound to none other service, but only to ferry over goers & commers: and that they received great tribute of marchants in regard therof. We staied therfore by the said rivers side three daies. The first day they gave unto us a great fresh turbut: the second day they bestowed rye bread, and a litle flesh upon us, which the purveyer of the village had taken up at everie house for us: and the third day dried fishes, which they have there in great abundance. The saide river was even as broad in that place, as the river of Sein is at Paris. And before we came there, we passed over many goodly waters, and full of fish : howbeit the barbarous and rude Tartars know not how to take them: neither do they make any reckoning of any fish, except it be so great, that they may pray upon the flesh therof, as upon the flesh of a ram. This river is the limite of the East part of Russia, and it springeth out of the fennes of Maeotis, which fennes stretch unto the North Ocean. And it runneth South-{n}258{n}ward into a certain great sea 700. miles about, before it falleth into the sea called Pontus Euxinus. And al the rivers, which we passed over, ran with ful stream into those quarters. The foresaid river hath great store of wood also growing upon the West side thereof. Beyond this place the Tartars ascend no farther unto the North : for at that season of the yeere, about the first of August, they begin to returne backe unto the South. And therfore there is another cottage somwhat lower, where passengers are ferried over in Winter time. And in this place wee were driven to great extremitie, by reason that we could get neither horses, nor oxen for any money. At length, after I had declared unto them, that my comming was to labour for the common good of all Christians, they sent us oxen & men; howbeit we our selves were faine to travel on foote. At this time they were reaping their rye. Wheat prospereth not wel in that soile. They have the seed of Millium in great abundance. The Russian women attire their heads like unto our women. They imbroder their safegards or gowns on the outside, from their feet unto their knees with particoloured or grey stuffe. The Russian men weare caps like unto the Dutch men. Also they weare upon their heads certain sharpe, & high-crowned hats made of felt, much like unto a sugar loafe. Then travelled we 3. dales together, not finding any people. And when our selves and our oxen were exceeding weary and faint, not knowing how far off we should find any Tartars, on the sudden, there came two horses running towards us, which we tooke with great joy, and our guide and interpreter mounted upon their backes, to see, how far off they could descry any people. At length upon the fourth day of our journey, having found some inhabitants, we rejoyced like sea-faring men, which had escaped out of a dangerous tempest, and had newly recovered the haven. Then having taken fresh horses, and oxen, we passed on from lodging to lodging, till at the last, upon the{n}259{n}About the beginning of August, the Tartars returne Southward.{n}A.D.{n}I253’{n}The people of Moxel are Pagans.{n}The people called Merdui being Saracens.{n}The circuite of the Caspian sea.{n}[I. 105.J{n}second of the Kalends of August, we arrived at the habitation of Duke Sartach himselfe.{n}Of the dominion of Sartach, and of his Subjects. Chap. 16.{n}THe region lying beyond Tanais, is a very goodly countrey, having store of rivers and woods toward the North part thereof. There be mighty huge woods which two sorts of people do inhabite. One of them is called Moxel, being meere Pagans, and without law. They have neither townes nor cities, but only cottages in ye woods. Their lord & a great part of themselves were put to the sword in high Germanie. Whereupon they highly commend the brave courage of the Almans, hoping as yet to be delivered out of the bondage of the Tartars, by their meanes. If any merchant come unto them, he must provide things necessary for him, with whom he is first of all enter-teined, all the time of his abode among them. If any lieth with another mans wife, her husband, unles he be an eiewitnes therof, regardeth it not: for they are not jelous over their wives. They have abundance of hogs, and great store of hony & waxe, and divers sorts of rich & costly skins, and plentie of falcons. Next unto them are other people called Merclas, which the Latines cal Merdui, and they are Saracens. Beyond them is the river of Etilia or Volga, which is ye mightiest river that ever I saw. And it issueth from the North part of Bulgaria the greater, & so trending along Southward, disimboqueth into a certain lake containing in circuit the space of 4. moneths travel, whereof I will speak hereafter. The two foresaid rivers, namely Tanais & Etilia, otherwise called Volga, towards the Northren regions through the which we travelled, are not distant asunder above x. daies journey, but Southward they are divided a great space one from another. For Tanais descendeth into the sea of Pontus : Etilia maketh the foresaid sea or lake, with the help of many{n}260{n}other rivers which fal therinto out of Persia. And we had to the South of us huge high mountains, upon the sides wherof, towards the said desert, doe the people called Cergis, and the Alani or Acas inhabit, who are Ker&s or as yet Christians, & wage warre against the Tartars. Aas-Beyond them, next unto the sea or lake of Etilia, there are certaine Saracens called Lesgi, who are in subjection unto the Tartars. Beyond these is Porta ca ferrea, or the yron gate, nowe called Derbent, which Alexander built to exclude the barbarous nations out of Persia. Concerning the situation whereof, your majestie shall understand more about the end of this Treatise : for I travailed in my returne by the very same place. Betweene the two foresaid rivers, in the	’{n}regions through the which we passed did the Comanians of olde time inhabite, before they were overrun by the Tartars.{n}Of the Court of Sartach, and of the magnificence thereof. Chap. 17.{n}A Nd we found Sartach lying within three daies journey of the river Etilia : whose Court seemed unto us to{n}be very great. For he himselfe had sixe wives, and his eldest sonne also had three wives : every one of which women hath a great house, & they have ech one of them about 200. cartes. Our guide went unto a certaine Nestorian named Coiat, who is a man of great authoritie Calat the in Sartachs Court. He made us to goe very farre unto Nestorian. the Lordes gate. For so they call him, who hath the office of enterteining Ambassadours. In the evening Coiac commanded us to come unto him. Then our guide began to enquire what we would present him withal, & was exceedingly offended, when he saw that we had nothing ready to present. We stoode before him, and he sate majestically, having musicke and dauncing in his presence. Then I spake unto him in the wordes before recited, telling him, for what purpose I was come unto his lorde, and requesting so much{n}261{n}favour at his hands, as to bring our letters unto the sight of his Lord. I excused my selfe also, that I was a Monke, not having, nor receiving, nor using any golde, or silver, or any other precious thing, save onely our bookes, and the vestiments wherein wee served God: and that this was the cause why I brought no present unto him, nor unto his Lord. For I that had abandoned mine owne goods, could not be a transporter of things for other men. Then hee answered very courteously, that being a Monke, and so doing, I did well: for so I should observe my vowe: neither did himselfe stand in neede of ought that we had, but rather was readie to bestow upon us such things as we our selves stood in neede of: and he caused us to sit downe, and to drinke of his milke. And presently after he requested us to say our devotions for him: and we did so. He enquired also who was the greatest Prince among the Franckes ? And I saide, the Emperour, if he could injoy his owne dominions in quiet. No (quoth he) but the king of France. For he had heard of your Highnes by lord Baldwine of Henault. I found there also one of the Knights of the Temple, who had bene in Cyprus, and had made report of all things which he sawe there. Then returned wee unto our lodging. And on the morow we sent him a flagon of Muscadel wine (which had lasted very wel in so long a journey) and a boxe full of bisket, which was most acceptable unto him. And he kept our servants with him for that evening. The next morning he commanded me to come unto the Court, and to bring the kings letters and my vestimentes, and bookes with me : because his Lorde was desirous to see them. Which we did accordingly, lading one cart with our bookes and vestiments, and another with bisket, wine, and fruites. Then he caused all our bookes and vestiments to bee laide forth. And there stoode round about us many Tartars, Christians and Saracens on horseback. At the sight whereof, he demanded whether{n}262{n}I would bestow all those things upon his Lord or no ? Which saying made me to tremble, and grieved me full sore. Howbeit, dissembling our griefe as well as we could, we shaped him this answere : Sir, our humble request is, that our Lorde your master would vouchsafe to accept our bread, wine, and fruits, not as a present, because it is too meane, but as a benediction, least we should come with an emptie hand before him. And he shall see the letters of my sovereigne Lord the king, and by them he shall understand for what cause we are come unto him, and then both our selves, and all that we have, shall stand to his curtesie : for our vestiments be holy, and it is unlawfull for any but Priests to touch them. Then he commaunded us to invest our selves in the saide garments, that we might goe before his Lord : and wee did so. Then I my selfe putting on our most precious ornaments, tooke in mine armes a very faire cushion, and the Bible which your Majesty gave me, and a most beautifull Psalter, which the Queenes Grace bestowed upon me, wherein there were goodly pictures. Mine associate tooke a missal and a crosse : and the clearke having put on his surplesse, tooke a censer in his hand. And so wee came unto the presence of his Lord : and they lifted up the felt hanging before his doore, that hee might behold us. Then they caused the clearke and the interpreter thrise to bow the knee: but of us they required no such submission. And they diligently admonished us to take heed, that in going in, and in comming out, we touched not the threshold of the house, and requested us to sing a benediction for him. Then we entred in, singing Salve Regina. And within the entrance of the doore, stood a bench with cosmos, and drinking cups thereupon. And all his wives were there assembled. Also the Moals or rich Tartars thrusting in with us pressed us sore. Then Coiat caried unto his lord the censer with incense, which he beheld very diligently, holding it in his hand. Afterward hee caried the Psalter 263{n}unto him, which he looked earnestly upon, and his wife also that sate beside him. After that he caried the Bible: then Sartach asked if the Gospel were contained therein ? Yea (said I) and all the holy scriptures besides. He tooke the crosse also in his hand, and demanded concerning the image, whether it were the image of Christ or no ? I said it was. The Nestorians & the Armenians do never make the figure of Christ upon their crosses. Wherfore either they seem not to think wel of his passion, or els they are ashamed of it. Then he caused them that stood about us, to stand aside, that he might more fully behold our ornaments. Afterward I delivered unto him your Majesties letters, with the translation therof into the Arabike, & Syriake languages. For I caused them to be translated at Aeon into the character, & dialect of both the saide tongues. And there were certain Armenian priests, which had skil in the Turkish & Arabian languages. The aforesaid knight also of the order of the Temple had knowledge in the Syriake, Turkish, & Arabian tongues. Then we departed forth, and put off our vestiments, and there came unto us certaine Scribes together with the foresaid Coiat, & caused our letters to be interpreted. Which letters being heard, he caused our bread, wine and fruits to be received. And he permitted us also to carie our vestiments and bookes unto our owne lodging. This was done upon the feast of S. Peter ad vincula.{n}How they were given in charge to goe unto Baatu the Father of Sartach. Chap. 18.{n}THe next morning betimes came unto us a certaine Priest, who was brother unto Coiat, requesting to have our boxe of Chrisme, because Sartach (as he said) was desirous to see it: and so we gave it him. About eventide Coiat sent for us, saying: My lord your king wrote good words unto my lord and master Sartach. Howbeit there are certaine matters of difficulty in them concerning which he dare not determine ought, without 264{n}the advise and counsell of his father. And therfore of necessitie you must depart unto his father, leaving behind you the two carts, which you brought hither yesterday with vestiments and bookes, in my custodie: because my lorde is desirous to take more diligent view thereof. I presently suspecting what mischiefe might ensue by his covetousnes, said unto him: Sir, we will not onely leave those with you, but the two other carts also, which we have in our possession, will we commit unto your custodie. You shall not (quoth he) leave those behinde you, but for the other two carts first named, we will satisfie your request. I saide that this could not conveniently be done: but needes we must leave all with him. Then he asked, whether we meant to tarie in the land? I answered: If you throughly understand the letters of my lorde the king, you know that we are even so determined. Then he replied, that we ought to bee patient and lowly: and so we departed from him that evening. On the morrowe after he sent a Nestorian Priest for the carts, and we caused all the foure carts to be delivered. Then came the foresaid brother of Coiat to meet us, and separated all those things, which we had brought the day before unto the Court, from the rest, namely, the bookes and vestiments, and tooke them away with him. Howbeit Coiat had commanded, that we should carie those vestiments with us, which wee ware in the presence of Sartach, that we might put them on before Baatu, if neede should require: but the said Priest tooke them from us by violence, saying: thou hast brought them unto Sartach, and wouldest thou carie them unto Baatu ? And when I would have rendred a reason, he answered: be not too talkative, but goe your wayes. Then I sawe that there was no remedie but patience: for wee could have no accesse unto Sartach himselfe, neither was there any other, that would doe us justice. I was afraide also in regard of the interpreter, least he had spoken other things then I saide unto him: for his will was good that we should have given away all{n}265{n}They are come as farre as Tolga.{n}The Tartars wil be called Moal.{n}that wee had. There was yet one comfort remaining unto me : for when I once perceived their covetous intent, I conveyed from among our bookes the Bible, and the sentences, and certaine other bookes which I made speciali account of. Howbeit I durst not take away the Psalter of my soveraigne Lady the Queene, because it was too wel known, by reason of the golden pictures therein. And so we returned with the two other carts unto our lodging. Then came he that was appointed to be our guide unto the court of Baatu, willing us to take our journey in all poste-haste: unto whom I said, that I would in no case have the carts to goe with me. Which thing he declared unto Coiat. Then Coiat commaunded, that we should leave them and our servant with him : And we did as he commanded. And so traveling directly Eastward towards Baatu, the third day we came to Etilia or Volga : the streams whereof when I beheld, I wondered from what regions of the North such huge and mighty waters should descend. Before we were departed from Sartach, the foresaid Coiat, with many other Scribes of the court said unto us : doe not make{n}report that our Lord is a Christian, but a Moal. Because the name of a Christian seemeth unto them to be the name of some nation. So great is their pride, that albeit they beleeve perhaps some things concerning Christ, yet will they not bee called Christians, being desirous that their owne name, that is to say, Moal should be exalted above all other names. Neither wil{n}This history of they be called by the name of Tartars. For the Presbiter John Tartars were another nation, as I was informed by them. in the North-{n}east, is allead- How Sartach, and Mangu-Can, and Ken-Can ged at large doe reverence unto Christians. Chap. 10. by Gerardus	*	1 z{n}Mercator in A T the same time when the French-men tooke his general Antioch, a certaine man named Con Can had mappe. dominion over the Northren regions, lying thereabouts.{n}Con is a proper name: Can is a name of authority or dignitie, which signifieth a diviner or soothsayer. All{n}266{n}diviners are called Can amongst them. Whereupon their princes are called Can, because that unto them belongeth the government of the people by divination. Wee doe reade also in the historic of Antiochia, that the Turkes sent for aide against the French-men, unto the kingdome of Con Can. For out of those parts the whole nation of From whence the Turkes first came. The said Con was of the nation Turkes of Kara-Catay. Kara signifieth blacke, and Catay is the Frst sPran&-name of a countrey. So that Kara-Catay signifieth the blacke Catay. This name was given to make a difference between the foresaid people, and the people of Catay, inhabiting Eastward over against ye Ocean sea: con- An Ocean sea. cerning whom your majesty shall understand more hereafter. These Catayans dwelt upon certaine Alpes, by the which I travailed. And in a certain plaine countrey within those Alpes, there inhabited a Nestorian shepheard, being a mighty governour over the people called Yayman, Nayman. which were Christians, following the sect of Nestorius.{n}After the death of Con Can, the said Nestorian exalted{n}himselfe to the kingdome, and they called him King John, reporting ten times more of him then was true. For so the Nestorians which come out of those parts, use to doe. For they blaze abroade great rumors, and reports upon just nothing. Whereupon they gave out concerning Sartach, that he was become a Christian, and the like also they reported concerning Mangu Can, and Ken Can: namely because these Tartars make more account of Christians, then they doe of other people, and yet in very deede, themselves are no Christians. So likewise there went foorth a great report concerning the said king John. Howbeit, when I travailed along by his territories, there was no man that knew any thing of him, but onely a fewe Nestorians. In his pastures or territories dwelleth Ken Can, at whose Court Frier Andrew was. And I my selfe passed by it at my returne. This John had a brother, being a mightie man also, and a shepheard like himselfe, called Vut, and he inhabited beyond the Alpes of Cara Catay, being 267{n}Presbiter John.{n}The place of Ken Kan his aboade.{n}Vut Can, or Une Can.{n}distant from his brother John, the space of three weekes The village of journey. He was lord over a certain village, called Cara (Crh^rUm Carum, having people also for his subjects, named Crit, or{n}Merkit, who were Christians of the sect of Nestorius. But their Lorde abandoning the worship of Christ, followed after idoles, reteining with him Priests of the saide idoles, who all of them are worshippers of devils and sorcerers. Beyond his pastures some tenne or Moal in aide fifteene dayes journey, were the pastures of Moal, who y	were a poore and beggerly nation, without governour,{n}and without Lawe, except their soothsayings, and their divinations, unto the which detestable studies, all in The place of those partes doe apply their mindes. Neere unto the Tartan. MoaJ were other poore people called Tartars.	The{n}foresaid king John died without issue male, and thereupon his brother Vut was greatly inriched, and caused himselfe to be named Can : and his droves and flockes raunged even unto the borders of Moal. About the Cyngis. same time there was one Cyngis, a blacke smith among the people of Moal. This Cyngis stole as many cattel from Vut Can, as he could possibly get : insomuch that the shepheards of Vut complained unto their Lord. Then provided he an armie, and marched up into the countrey of Moal to seeke for the saide Cyngis. But Cyngis fledde among the Tartars, and hidde himselfe amongest them. And Vut having taken some spoiles both from Moal, and also from the Tartars, returned home. Then spake Cyngis unto the Tartars, and unto the people of Moal, saying: Sirs, because we are destitute of a governour and Captaine, you see howe our neighbours do oppresse us. And the Tartars and Moals appointed him to be their Chieftaine. Then having secretly gathered together an armie, he brake in suddenly upon Vut, and overcame him, and Vut fledde into Cataya. At the same time was the daughter of  Vut taken, which Cyngis married unto one of his sonnes, by whom she conceived, & brought forth the great Mangu-Can. Can, which now reigneth, called Mangu-Can. Then 268{n}Cyngis sent ye Tartars before him in al places where he came : and thereupon was their name published and spread abroade: for in all places the people woulde crie out: Loe, the Tartars come, the Tartars come. Howbeit, through continual! warres, they are nowe, all of them in a maner, consumed and brought to nought. Whereupon the Moals indevour what they can, to extinguish the name of the Tartars, that they may exalt their owne name. The countrey wherein they first inhabited, and where the Court of Cyngis Can as yet remaineth, is called Mancherule. But because Tartaria Mancheruk. is the region, about which they have obtained their conquests, they esteeme that as their royall and chiefe citie, and there for the most part doe they elect their great Can.{n}Of the Russians, Hungarians, and Alanians: and of the Caspian Sea. Chap. 20.{n}NOw, as concerning Sartach, whether he beleeves in Christ, or no, I knowe not. This I am sure of, that he will not be called a Christian. Yea rather he seemeth unto mee to deride and skofle at Christians. He lieth in the way of the Christians, as namely of the Russians, the Valacfiians, the Bulgarians of Bulgaria the lesser, the Soldaianes, the Kerkis, and the Alanians: who all of them passe by him, as they are going to the Court of his father Baatu, to carie giftes : whereupon he is more in league with them. Howbeit, if the Saracens come, and bring greater giftes then they, they are dispatched sooner. He hath about him certaine Nestorian Priestes, who pray upon their beades, and sing their devotions. Also, there is another under Baatu called Berta, who feedeth his cattell toward Porta Or, Berea. ferrea, or Derbent, where lieth the passage of all those Saracens, which come out of Persia, and out of Turkie to goe unto Baatu, and passing by, they give rewards unto him. And he professeth himselfe to be a Saracene, and will not permit swines flesh to be eaten in his dominions.{n}269{n}Howbeit, at the time of our returne, Baatu commanded him to remove himselfe from that place, and to inhabite upon the East side of Volga : for hee was unwilling that the Saracens messengers should passe by the saide Berta, because he sawe it was not for his profite. For the space of foure dayes while we remained in the court of Sartach, we had not any victuals at all allowed us, but once onely a litle Cosmos. And in our journey betweene him and his father, wee travelled in great feare. For certaine Russians, Hungarians, and Alanians being servants unto the Tartars (of whom they have great multitudes among them) assemble themselves twentie or thirtie in a com-panie, and so secretly in the night conveying themselves from home, they take bowes and arrowes with them, and whomesoever they finde in the night season, they put him to death, hiding themselves in the day time. And having tired their horses, they goe in the night unto a company of other horses feeding in some pasture, and change them for newe, taking with them also one or two horses besides, to eate them when they stand in neede. Our guide therefore was sore afraide, least we should have met with such companions. In this journey wee had died for famine, had we not caried some of our bisket with us. At length we came unto the mighty river of Etilia, or Volga. For it is foure times greater, then the river of Sein, and of a wonderfull depth : and issuing forth of Bulgaria the greater, it runneth into a certaine lake or sea, which of late they cal the Hircan sea, according to the name of a certain citie in Persia, standing upon the shore thereof. Howbeit Isidore calleth it the Caspian sea. For it hath the Caspian mountaines and the land of Persia situate on the South side thereof: and the mountaines of Musihet, that is to say, of the people called Assassini towards the East, which mountaines are con-joyned unto the Caspian mountaines: but on the North side thereof lieth the same desert, wherein the Tartars doe now inhabite. Howbeit heretofore there dwelt certaine{n}270{n}I253-people called Changlae. And on that side it receiveth ChangLe. the streams of Etilia; which river increaseth in Sommer time, like unto the river Nilus in ./Egypt. Upon the West part thereof, it hath the mountaines of Alani, and Lesgi, and Porta ferrea, or Derbent, and the mountaines of Georgia. This Sea therefore is compassed in on three sides with the mountaines, but on the North side with plaine grounde. Frier Andrew, in his journey travelled Frier round about two sides therof, namely the South and the Andrew East sides: and I my selfe about other two, that is to say, the North side in going from Baatu to Mangu-Can, and in returning likewise: and the West side in comming home from Baatu into Syria. A man may travel round about it in foure moneths. And it is not true which Isidore reporteth, namely that this Sea is a bay or gulfe comming forth of the Ocean: for it doeth, in no part thereof, joyne with the Ocean, but is invironed on all sides with lande.{n}Of the court of Baatu: and howe we were  interteined by him. Chap. 21.{n}AL the region extending from the West shore of the foresaid sea, where Alexanders Iron gate, otherwise called the citie of Derbent, is situate, and from the mountaines of Alania, all along by the fennes of Maeotis, whereinto the river of Tanais falleth, and so forth, to the North Ocean, was wont to be called The North Albania. Of which countrey Isidore reporteth, that there be dogs of such an huge stature, and so fierce, that they are able in fight to match bulles, and to master lions. Which is true, as I understand by divers, who tolde me, that there towardes the North Ocean they make their dogges to draw in carts like oxen, by reason of their bignesse and strength. Moreover, upon that part of Etilia where we arrived, there is a new cottage built, wherein they have placed Tartars and Russians both together, to ferrie over, and transport messengers going and comming to and fro the court of Baatu. For{n}271{n}Baatu remaineth upon the farther side towards the East. Neither ascendeth hee in Sommer time more Northward then the foresaide place where we arrived, but was even then descending to the South. From Januarie untill August both he and all other Tartars ascend by the banks of rivers towards cold and Northerly regions, and in August they begin to returne backe againe.{n}He descended We passed downe the streame therefore in a barke, from dim>ne the	the foresaid. cottage unto his court. From the same{n}To’barke	place unto villages of Bulgaria the greater, standing{n}toward the North, it is five dayes journey. I wonder what devill caried the religion of Mahomet thither. For, from Derbent, which is upon the extreame borders of Persia, it is above 30. daies journey to passe overthwart the desert, and so to ascend by the banke of{n}Astracan. Etilia, into the foresaid countrey of Bulgaria. All which way there is no citie, but onely certaine cottages neere unto that place where Etilia falleth into the sea. Those Bulgarians are most wicked Saracens, more earnestly professing the damnable religion of Mahomet, then{n}The descrip- any other nation whatsoever. Moreover, when I first tion of Baatu beheld the court of Baatu, I was astonied at the sight sscomt. thereof: for his houses or tents seemed as though they had bene some huge and mighty citie, stretching out a great way in length, the people ranging up and downe about it for the space of some three or foure leagues. And even as the people of Israel knew every man, on which side of the tabernacle to pitch his tent : even so every one of them knoweth right well, towards what side of the court he ought to place his house when he takes it from ofF the cart.	Wherupon the court{n}called in their language Horda, which signifieth, the et t e mt st. mjjst. because the governour or chieftaine among them dwels alwaies in the middest of his people : except onely that directly towards the South no subject or inferiour person placeth himselfe, because towards that region the court gates are set open : but unto the right hand, and the left hand they extend themselves as farre as they{n}272{n}will, according to the conveniencie of places, so that they place not their houses directly opposite against the court. At our arrival we were conducted unto a Saracen, who provided not for us any victuals at all. The day following, we were brought unto the court: and Baatu had caused a large tent to be erected, because his house or ordinarie tent could not containe so many men and women as were assembled. Our guide admonished us not to speake, till Baatu had given us commandement so to doe, and that then we should speake our mindes briefly. Then Baatu demanded whether your Majestie had sent Ambassadours unto him or no ? I answered, that your Majestie had sent messengers to Ken-Can : and that you would not have sent messengers unto him, or letters unto Sartach, had not your Highnes bene perswaded that they were become Christians: because you sent not unto them for any feare, but onely for congratulation, and curtesies sake, in regard that you heard they were converted to Christianitie. Then led he us unto his pavilion : and wee were charged not to touch the cordes of the tent, which they account in stead of the threshold of the house. There we stoode in our habite bare-footed, and bare-headed, and were a great and strange spectacle in their eyes. For indeed Frier John de Plano John de Plano Carpini had byn there before my comming: Carpini. howbeit, because he was the Popes messenger, he changed his habit that he might not be contemned. Then we were brought into the very midst of the tent, neither required they of us to do any reverence by bowing our knees, as they use to doe of other messengers. Wee stood therefore before him for the space wherein a man might have rehearsed the Psalme, Miserere mei Deus: and there was great silence kept of all men. Baatu himselfe sate upon a seate long and broad like unto a bed, guilt all over, with three staires to ascend thereunto, and one of his ladies sate beside him. The men there assembled, sate downe scattering, some on the right hand of the saide Lady, and some on the left. Those places{n}i	273	s{n}on the one side which the women filled not up (for there were only the wives of Baatu) were supplied by the men. Also, at the very entrance of the tent, stoode a bench furnished with cosmos, and with stately great cuppes of silver, and golde, beeing richly set with precious stones. Baatu beheld us earnestly, and we him: and he seemed to me to resemble in personage, Monsieur John de beau mont, whose soule resteth in peace. And hee had a fresh ruddie colour in his countenance. At length he commanded us to speake. Then our guide gave us direction, that wee should bow our knees & speak. Wherupon 1 bowed one knee as unto a man: then he signified that I should kneele upon both knees: and 1 did so, being loath to contend about such circumstaunces. And again he commanded me to speak. Then I thinking of praier unto God, because I kneeled on both my knees, began to pray on this wise: Sir, we beseech the Lord, from whom all good things doe proceed, and who hath given you these earthly benefites, that it would please him hereafter to make you partaker of his heavenly blessings : because the former without these are but vain and improfitable. And I added further. Be it knowen unto you of a certainty, that you shal not obtain the joyes of heaven, unles you become a Christian: for God saith, Whosoever beleeveth & is baptized, shalbe saved: but he that beleeveth not, shalbe condemned. At this word he modestly smiled: but the other Moals began to clap their hands, and to deride us. And my silly interpreter, of whom especially I should have received comfort in time of need, was himself abashed & utterly dasht out of countenance. Then, after silence made, I said unto him, I came unto your sonne, because we heard that he was become a Christian : and I brought unto him letters on the behalfe of my sovereigne Lord the king of France : and your sonne sent me hither unto you. The cause of my comming therefore is best known unto your selfe. Then he caused me to rise up. And he enquired your majesties name, and my name, and the name of mine{n}274{n}associate and interpreter, and caused them all to be put down in writing. He demaunded likewise (because he had bene informed, that you were departed out of your owne countreys with an armie) against whom you waged warre ? I answered: against the Saracens, who had defiled the house of God at Jerusalem. He asked also, whether your Highnes had ever before that time sent any messengers unto him, or no? To you sir? (said I) never. Then caused he us to sit downe, and gave us of his milke to drinke, which they account to be a great favour, especially when any man is admitted to drinke Cosmos with him in his own house. And as I sate looking downe upon the ground, he commanded me to lift up my countenance, being desirous as yet to take more diligent view of us, or els perhaps for a kinde of superstitious observation. For they esteeme it a signe of ill lucke, or a prognostication of evill unto them, when any man sits in their presence, holding downe his head, as if he were sad: especially when he leanes his cheeke or chinne upon his hand. Then we departed forth, and immediatly after came our guide unto us, and conducting us unto our lodging, saide unto me: Your master the King requesteth that you may remaine in this land, which request Baatu cannot satisfie without the knowledge and consent of Mangu-Can. Wherefore you, and your interpreter must of necessitie goe unto Mangu-Can. Howbeit your associate, and the other man shall returne unto the court of Sartach, staying there for you, till you come backe. Then began the man of God mine interpreter to lament, esteeming himselfe but a dead man. Mine associate also protested, that they should sooner chop off his head, then withdrawe him out of my companie. Moreover I my selfe saide, that without mine associate I coulde not goe: and that we stood in neede of two servants at the least, to attend upon us, because, if one should chance to fall sicke, we could not be without another. Then returning unto the court, he told these sayings unto Baatu. And Baatu commanded saying: let{n}275{n}the two Priests and the interpreter goe together, but let the clearke returne unto Sartach. And comming againe unto us, hee tolde us even so. And when I would have spoken for the clearke to have had him with us, he saide: No more words: for Baatu hath resolved, that so it shall be, and therefore I dare not goe unto the court any more. Goset the clearke had remaining of the almes money bestowed upon him, 26. Yperperas, and no more; 10. whereof he kept for himselfe and for the lad, and 16. he gave unto the man of God for us. And thus were we parted asunder with teares: he returning unto the court of Sartach, and our selves remaining still in the same place.{n}Of our journey towards the Court of Mangu Can. Chap. 22.{n}UPon Assumption even our clearke arrived at the court of Sartach. And on the morrow after, the Nestorian Priestes were adorned with our vestments in the presence of the saide Sartach. Then wee our selves were conducted unto another hoste, who was appointed to provide us housefoome, victualles, and horses. But because wee had not ought to bestowe upon him, hee did They travell all things untowardly for us. Then wee rode on for-^thubanh^of^ warde whh Baatu, descending along by the banke of Etilia, Etilia. J for the space of five weekes together : Sometimes mine associate was so extremelie hungrie, that hee would tell mee in a manner weeping, that it fared with him as though hee had never eaten any thing in all his life before. There is a faire or market following the court of Baatu at all times: but it was so farre distant from us that we  could not have recourse thereunto. For wee were constrained to walke on foote for want of horses. At length Hungarians, certaine Hungarians (who had sometime bene after a sort{n}Cleargie men) found us out: and one of them could as yet sing many songs without booke, and was accompted of other Hungarians as a Priest, and was sent for unto the funerals of his deceased countrey men. There was 276{n}another of them also pretily wel instructed in his Grammer : for hee could understand the meaning of any thing that wee spake, but could not answere us. These Hungarians were a great comfort unto us, bringing us Cosmos to drinke, yea, and sometimes flesh for to eate also: who, when they requested to have some bookes of us, and I had not any to give them (for indeede we had none but onely a Bible, and a breviarie) it grieved mee exceedingly. And I saide unto them: Bring mee some inke and paper, and I will write for you so long as we shall remaine here: and they did so. And I copied out for them Horas beatae Virginis, and Officium defunctorum. Moreover, upon a certaine day, there was a Comanian A Comanian. that accompanied us, saluting us in Latine, and saying : Salvete Domini. Wondering thereat and saluting him againe, I demaunded of him, who had taught him that kinde of salutation ? Hee saide that hee was baptized in Hungaria by our Friers, and that of them hee learned it.{n}He saide moreover, that Baatu had enquired many things of him concerning us, and that hee tolde him the estate of our order. Afterwarde I sawe Baatu riding with Kis companie, and all his subjects that were housholders or masters of families riding with him, and (in mine estimation) they were not five hundred persons in all. At length about the ende of Holy roode, there came a certaine rich Moal unto us (whose father was a Millenarie, which is a great office among them) saying : I am the man that must conduct you unto Mangu-Can, and wee have thither a journey of foure moneths long to travell, and A journey of there is such extreame colde in those parts, that stones and +• moneths trees doe even rive asunder in regarde thereof. Therefore ^rom I would wish you throughly to advise your selves, whether you be able to indure it or no. Unto whome I answered : I hope by Gods helpe that we shalbe able to brooke that which other men can indure. Then he saide : if you cannot indure it, I wil forsake you by the way. And I answered him: it were not just dealing for you so to doe: for wee goe not thither upon anie businesse of our owne,{n}277{n}but by reason that we are sent by your lord. Wherfore sithence we are committed unto your charge, you ought in no wise to forsake us. Then he saide : all shalbe well. Afterward he caused us to shewe him all our garments: and whatsoever hee deemed to be lesse needfull for us, he willed us to leave it behind in the custodie of our hoste. On the morrow they brought unto ech of us a furred gowne, made all of rammes skinnes, with the wool stil upon them, and breeches of the same, and bootes also or buskins according to their fashion, and shooes made of felt, and hoods also made of skinnes after their maner.{n}The 16. of The second day after Holy rood, we began to set forward September. on our journey, having three guides to direct us : and we 46. dayes. rode continually Eastward, till the feast of All Saints.{n}Throughout all that region, and beyonde also did the Or,Kangjtt&. people of Changle inhabite, who were by parentage descended from the Romanes. Upon the North side of us, wee had Bulgaria the greater, and on the South, the foresaid Caspian sea.{n}Or, laic. Of the river of lagac : and of divers regions or nations. Chap. 23.{n}laic twelve T T Aving travelled twelve dayes journey from Etilia, wee dayes journey x found a mightie river called lagac : which river jtom oga.	issuing out of the North, from the land of Pascatir,{n}descendeth into the foresaid sea. The language of Pascatir. Pascatir, and of the Hungarians is all one, and they are all of them shepheards, not having any cities. And their countrey bordereth upon Bulgaria the greater, on the West frontier thereof. From the Northeast part of the said countrey, there is no citie at all. For Bulgaria the greater is the farthest countrey that way, that hath any citie therein. Out of the forenamed region of Pascatir, descendedfrom Proceeded the Hunnes of olde time, who afterwarde were the Bascirdes. caded Hungarians. Next unto it is Bulgaria the greater.{n}Isidore reporteth concerning the people of this nation, that with swift horses they traversed the impregnable walles and bounds of Alexander, (which, together with the rocks 278{n}of Caucasus, served to restraine those barbarous and blood-thirstie people from invading the regions of the South) insomuch that they had tribute paied unto them, as farre as TEgypt. Likewise they wasted all countreis even unto France. Whereupon they were more mightie then the Tartars as yet are. And unto them the Blacians, the ValaMans. Bulgarians, and the Vandals joyned themselves. For out of Bulgaria the greater, came those Bulgarians. Moreover, they which inhabit beyond Danubius, neere unto Constantinople, and not farre from Pascatir, are called Ilac, which (saving the pronunciation) is al one with Blac, (for the Tartars cannot pronounce the letter B) from whom also descended the people which inhabit the land of Assani. For they are both of them called Ilac (both these, & the other) in ye languages of the Russians, ye Polonians, & the Bohemians. The Sclavonians speake all  one language with the Vandals, all which banded themselves with the Hunnes : and now for the most part, they unite themselves unto the Tartars: whom God hath raised up from the utmost partes of the earth, according{n}to that which the Lord saith : I will provoke them to 32- v-envy (namely such as keepe not his Law) by a people, which is no people, and by a foolish nation will I anger ' ' ' them. This prophecie is fulfilled, according to the literal sense thereof, upon all nations which observe not the Law of God. All this which I have written concerning the land of Pascatir, was told me by certaine Friers predicants, which travailed thither before ever the Tartars came abroad. And from that time they were subdued unto their neighbors the Bulgarians being Saracens, whereupon many of them proved Saracens also. Other matters concerning this people, may be known out of Chronicles.{n}For it is manifest, that those provinces beyond Constantinople, which are now called Bulgaria, Valachia, & Sclavonia, were of old time provinces belonging to the Greekes. Also Hungaria was heretofore called Pannonia. And wee were riding over the land of Cangle, from the feast of Holy roode, untill the feast of All Saints : traveil- countrey.{n}279{n}ing almost every day (according to mine estimation) as farre, as from Paris to Orleans, and sometimes farther, as we were provided of poste horses : for some dayes we had change of horses twise or thrise in a day. Sometimes we travailed two or three daies together, not finding any people, and then we were constrained not to ride so fast. Of 20. or 30. horses we had alwayes the woorst, because wee were strangers. For every one tooke their choice of the best horses before us. They provided mee alwaies of a strong horse, because I was very corpulent & heavy: but whether he ambled a gentle pase or no, I durst not make any question. Neither yet durst I complaine, although he trotted full sore. But every man must be contented with his lot as it fell. Whereupon wee were exceedingly troubled : for oftentimes our horses were tired before we could come at any people. And then wee were constrained to beate and whip on our horses, and to lay our garments upon other emptie horses : yea and sometimes two of us to ride upon one horse.{n}Of the hunger, and thirst, and other miseries, which wee sustained in our journey.{n}Chap. 24.{n}OF hunger and thirst, colde and wearinesse, there was no end. For they gave us no victuals, but onely in the evening. In the morning they used to give us a little drinke, or some sodden Millet to sup off. In the evening they bestowed flesh upon us, as namely, a shoulder and breast of rams mutton, and every man a measured quantitie of broath to drinke. When we had sufficient of the flesh-broath, we were marvellously wel refreshed. And it seemed to me most pleasant, and most nourishing drinke. Every Saterday I remained fasting until night, without eating or drinking of ought. And when night came, I was constrained, to my great grief and sorow, to eat flesh. Sometimes we were faine to eate flesh halfe sodden, or almost rawe, and all for want of fewel to seethe it withal: especially when we lay in the fields, or were 280{n}1253-benighted before we came at our journeis end : because we could not then conveniently gather together the doung of horses or oxen : for other fewel we found but seidome, except perhaps a few thornes in some places. Likewise Certaine upon the bankes of some rivers, there are woods growing nvers" here and there. Howbeit they are very rare. In the beginning our guide highly disdained us, and it was tedious unto him to conduct such base fellowes. After-{n}ward, when he began to know us somewhat better, he directed us on our way by the courts of rich Moals, and we were requested to pray for them. Wherefore, had 1 caried a good interpreter with me, I should have had opportunitie to have done much good. The foresaid Chingis, who was the first great Can or Emperour of the Tartars, had foure sonnes, of whome proceeded by natural descent many children, every one of which doeth at this day enjoy great possessions : and they are daily multiplied and dispersed over that huge and waste desert, which is, in dimensions, like unto the Ocean Sea. Our guide therefore directed us, as we were going on our journey, unto many of their habitations. And they marveiled exceedingly, that we would receive neither gold, nor silver, nor precious and costly garments at their hands. They inquired also, concerning the great Pope, whether he was of so lasting an age as they had heard ? For there had gone a report among them, that he was 500. yeeres olde. They inquired likewise of our countreis, whether there were abundance of sheep, oxen, & horses or no ? Concerning the Ocean sea, they could not conceive of it, because it was without limits or banks. Upon the even of ye feast of Al Saints, we forsook the way leading towards the East, (because the people were now descended{n}very much South) and we went on our journey by certaine Alpes, or mountaines directly Southward, for the space of Eight Jayes 8. dayes together. In the foresaid desert I saw many j°urney asses (which they cal Colan) being rather like unto mules: wJrd' ■ f these did our guide & his companions chase very eagerly: f00te_ J howbeit, they did but lose their labour : for the beastes{n}281{n}1253-High mountaines.  Manured grounds.{n}Kenchat a village of the Saracens.{n}were two swift for them. Upon the 7. day there appeared to the South of us huge high mountaines, and we entred into a place which was well watered, and fresh as a garden, and found land tilled and manured. The eight day after the feast of All Saints, we arrived at a certain towne of the Saracens, named Kenchat, the governour whereof met our guide at the townes end with ale and cups. For it is their maner at all townes and villages, subject unto them, to meet the messengers of Baatu and Mangu-Can with meate and drinke. At the same time of the yere, they went upon the yce in that countrey. And before the The 7. day of feast of S. Michael, we had frost in the desert. I November. enquired the name of that province : but being now in a strange territorie, they could not tell mee the name thereof, but onely the name of a very smal citie in A gnat river, the same province. And there descended a great river downe from the mountaines, which watered the whole region, according as the inhabitants would give it passage, by making divers chanels and sluces : neither did this river exonerate it selfe into any sea, but was swallowed up by an hideous gulfe into the bowels of the earth : Many lakes, and it caused many fennes or lakes. Also I saw many Vines. vines, and dranke of the wine thereof.{n}The mountains of Caucasus are extended unto the East-erne Sea.{n}The citie of Talas, or Chincitalas. Frier Andrew.{n}How Ban was put to death : and concerning the habitation of the Dutch men. Chap. 25.{n}THe day following, we came unto another cottage neere unto the mountains. And I enquired what mountains they were, which I understood to be the mountains of Caucasus, which are stretched forth, & continued on both parts to the sea, from the West unto the East: and on the West part they are conjoyned unto the foresaid Caspian sea, wherinto the river of Volga dischargeth his streams. I enquired also of the city of Talas, wherein were certaine Dutchmen servants unto one Buri, of whom Frier Andrew made mention. Concerning whom also I enquired very diligently in the courts of Sartach 8c Baatu. Howbeit I could have no intelligence 282{n}of them, but onely that their lord & master Ban was put to death upon the occasion following : This Ban was not placed in good and fertile pastures. And upon a certain day being drunken, he spake on this wise unto his men. Am not I of the stocke and kinred of Chingis Can, as well as Baatu ? (for in very deede he was brother or nephew unto Baatu.) Why then doe I not passe and repasse upon the banke of Etilia, to feed my cattel there, as freely as Baatu himselfe doeth ? Which speeches of his were reported unto Baatu. Whereupon Baatu wrote unto his servants to bring their Lorde bound unto him. And they did so. Then Baatu demanded of him whether he had spoken any such words ? And hee confessed that he had. Howbeit, (because it is the Tartars maner to pardon drunken men) he excused himselfe that he was drunken at the same time. Howe durst thou (quoth Baatu) once name mee in thy drunkennesse ? And with that hee caused his head to be chopt off. Concerning the foresaid Dutchmen, I could not understand ought, till I was come unto the court of Mangu-Can. And there I was informed that Mangu-Can had removed them out of the jurisdiction of Baatu, for the space of a moneths journey from Talas Eastward, unto a certaine village, called Bolac : where they are set to dig gold, and to make armour. Whereupon I could neither goe nor come by them. I passed very neere the saide citie in going forth, as namely, within three dayes journey thereof: but I was ignorant that I did so : neither could I have turned out of my way, albeit I had knowen so much. From the foresaide cottage we went directly Eastward, by the mountaines aforesaid. And from that time we travailed among the people of Mangu-Can, who in all places sang and daunced before our guide, because hee was the messenger of Baatu. For this curtesie they doe affoord eche to other : namely, the people of Mangu-Can receiving the messengers of Baatu in maner aforesaide : and so likewise the people of Baatu intertaining the messengers of Mangu-Can. Notwithstanding the people 283{n}The village of Bolac.{n}He entreth into the territories of Mangu-Can.{n}Certain Alpes wherein the Cara Catalans inhabited. A mighty river.{n}A lake of fifteene dayes journey in compasse.{n}Cailac a great citie, and full of merchants.{n}Contomanni.{n}of Baatu are more surlie and stoute, and shewe not so much curtesie unto the subjectes of Mangu-Can, as they doe unto them. A fewe dayes after, wee entered upon those Alpes where the Cara Catayans were woont to inhabite. And there wee found a mightie river : insomuch that wee were constrained to imbarke our selves, and to saile over it. Afterward we came into a certaine valley, where I saw a castle destroyed, the walles whereof were onely of mudde: and in that place the ground was tilled also. And there wee founde a certaine village, named Equius, wherein were Saracens, speaking the Persian language: howbeit they dwelt an huge distance from Persia. The day following, having passed over the foresaide Alpes which descended from the great mountains Southward, we entred into a most beautiful plaine, having high mountaines on our right hande, and on the left hande of us a certaine Sea or lake, which containeth fifteene dayes journey in circuite. All the foresayde plaine is most commodiously watered with certaine freshets distilling from the said mountaines, all which do fall into the lake. In Sommer time wee returned by the North shore of the saide lake, and there were great mountaines on that side also. Upon the forenamed plaine there were wont to bee great store of villages : but for the most part they were all wasted, in regarde of the fertile pastures, that the Tartars might feede their cattel there. Wee found one great citie there named Cailac, wherein was a mart, and great store of Merchants frequenting it. In this citie wee remained fifteene dayes, staying for a certaine Scribe or Secretarie of Baatu, who ought to have accompanied our guide for the dispatching of certaine affaires in the court of Mangu. All this countrey was wont to be called Organum : and the people thereof had their proper language, and their peculiar kinde of writing. But it was altogether inhabited of the people called Contomanni. The Nestorians likewise in those parts used the very same kinde of language and writing. They are called Organa, because they were wont to be most{n}284{n}skilfull in playing upon the Organes or citherne, as it was reported unto me. Here first did I see worshippers of idoles, concerning whom, bee it knowen unto your majestie, that there be many sects of them in the East countries.{n}How the Nestorians, Saracens, and Idolaters are joyned together. Chap. 26.{n}THe first sort of these idolaters are called Jugures : The people whose land bordereth upon the foresaid land of Jusures Organum, within the said mountains Eastward : and in al their cities Nestorians do inhabit together, and they are dispersed likewise towards Persia in the cities of the Saracens. The citizens of ye foresaid city of Cailac had 3. idole-Temples : and I entred into two of them, to beholde their foolish superstitions. In the first of which I found a man having a crosse painted with ink upon his hand, wherupon I supposed him to be a Christian: for he answered like a Christian unto al questions which I demanded of him. And I asked him, Why therefore have you not the crosse with the image of Jesu Christ therupon ? And he answered : We have no such custome. Whereupon I conjectured that they were indeede Christians : but, that for lacke of instruction they omitted the foresaide ceremonie. For I saw there behind a certaine chest (which was unto them in steed of an altar, whereupon they set candles and oblations) an image having wings like unto the image of Saint Michael, and other images also, holding their fingers, as if they would blesse some body. That evening I could not find any thing els. For the Saracens doe onely invite men thither, but they will not have them speake of their religion. And therfore, when I enquired of the Saracens concerning such ceremonies, they were offended thereat. On the morrow after were the Kalends, and the Saracens feast of Passeover. And changing mine Inne or lodging the same day, I tooke up mine abode neere unto another idole-Temple. For{n}285{n}the citizens of the said citie of Cailac doe curteously invite, & lovingly intertaine all messengers, every man of them according to his abilitie and portion. And entring into the foresaid idole-Temple, I found the Priests of the said idoles there. For alwayes at the Kalends they set open their Temples, and the priests adorne themselves, and offer up the peoples oblations of bread and fruits. First therefore I will describe{n}Frier William was at Cara-carum.{n}unto you those rites and ceremonies, which are common unto all their idole-Temples : and then the superstitions of the foresaid Jugures, which be, as it were, a sect distinguished from the rest. They doe all of them worship towards the North, clapping their hands together, and prostrating themselves on their knees upon ye earth, holding also their foreheads in their hands. Wherupon the Nestorians of those parts will in no case joyne their hands together in time of prayer : but they pray, displaying their hands before their breasts. They extend their Temples in length East and West : and upon the North side they build a chamber, in maner of a Vestry for themselves to goe forth into. Or sometimes it is otherwise. If it be a foure square Temple, in the midst of the Temple towards the North side therof, they take in one chamber in that place where the quire should stand. And within the said chamber they place a chest long and broad like unto a table : and behinde the saide chest towardes the South stands their principali idole : which I sawe at Caracarum, and it was as bigge as the idole of Saint Christopher. Also a certaine Nestorian priest, which had bin in Catay, saide that in that countrey there is an idole of so huge a bignes, that it may be seen two daies journey before a man come at it. And so they place other idoles round about the foresaid principal idole, being all of them finely gilt over with pure golde : and upon the saide chest, which is in manner of a table, they set candles and oblations. The doores of their Temples are alwayes opened towards the South, contrary to the custome of the Saracens. They have also great{n}286{n}belles like unto us. And that is the cause (as I thinke) why the Christians of the East will in no case use great belles. Notwithstanding they are common among the Russians, and Graecians of Gasaria.{n}Of their Temples and idoles : and howe they behave themselves in worshipping their false gods. Chap. 27.{n}A LI their Priests had their heads and beards shaven quite over : and they are clad in saffron coloured garments : and being once shaven, they lead an unmaried life from that time forward : and they live an hundreth or  two hundreth of them together in one cloister or covent. Upon those dayes when they enter into their temples, they place two long foormes therein : and so sitting upon the sayd foormes like singing men in a quier, namely the one halfe of them directly over against the other, they have certaine books in their hands, which sometimes they lay Bookes. downe by them upon the foormes : and their heads are bare so long as they remaine in the temple. And there they reade softly unto themselves, not uttering any voice at all. Whereupon comming in amongst them, at the time of their superstitious devotions, and finding them all siting mute in maner aforesayde, I attempted divers waies to provoke them unto speach, and yet could not by any means possible. They have with them also whithersoever they goe, a certaine string with an hundreth or two hundreth nutshels thereupon, much like to our bead-roule which we cary about with us. And they doe alwayes utter these words : Ou mam Hactani, God thou knowest: as one of them expounded it unto me. And so often doe they expect a reward at Gods hands, as they pronounce these words in remembrance of God. Round about their temple they doe alwayes make a faire court, like unto a churchyard, which they environ with a good wall: and upon the South part thereof they build a great portal, wherein they sit and conferre together. And upon the top of the said portali they pitch a long pole right up,{n}287{n}exalting it, if they can, above all the whole towne besides. And by the same pole all men may knowe, that there stands the temple of their idoles, These rites and ceremonies aforesayd be common unto all idolaters in those parts. Going upon a time towardes the foresayd idole-temple, I found certain priests sitting in the outward portal. And those which I sawe, seemed unto me, by their shaven beards, as if they had bene French men. They wore certaine ornaments upon their heads made of paper. The priestes of the foresaide Jugures doe use such attire whithersoever they goe. They are alwaies in their saffron coloured jackets, which be very straight being laced or buttened from the bosome right downe, after the French fashion. And they have a cloake upon their left shoulder descending before and behind under their right arme, like unto a deacon carying the houssel-boxe in time Paper. of lent. Their letters or kind of writing the Tartars did So do the receive. They begin to write at the top of their paper people of China drawjng their lines right downe : and so they reade and “draw'mgfheir multiply their lines from the left hand to the right. They lines perpendi- doe use certaine papers and characters in their magical cularly down- practises. Whereupon their temples are full of such short ward,not scrou]es hanged round about them. Also Mangu-Can ^righthand sent letters unto your Majestie written in the to the lefie. language of the Moals or Tartars, and in the foresayd hand or letter of the Jugures. They burne their dead according to the anncient custome, and lay up the ashes in the top of a Pyramis. Now, after I had sit a while by the foresaid priests, and entred into their temple and seene many of their images both great and small, I demanded of them what they beleeved concerning God ? And they answered : We beleeve that there is onely one God. And I demaunded farther: Whether do you beleve that he is a spirit, or some bodily substance ? They saide : We beleeve that he is a spirite. Then said I : Doe you beleeve that God ever tooke mans nature upon him ? They answered : Noe. And againe I said : Sithence ye beleeve that he is a spirit, to what end doe you make so{n}288{n}many bodily images to represent him ? Sithence also you beleeve not that hee was made man : why doe you resemble him rather unto the image of a man then of any other creature ? Then they answered saying : we frame not those images whereby to represent God. But when any rich man amongst us, or his sonne, or his wife, or any of his friends deceaseth, hee causeth the image of the dead party to be made, and to be placed here : and we in remembrance of him doe reverence thereunto. Then I replyed : you doe these things onely for the friendship and flatterie of men. Noe (said they) but for their memory. Then they demanded of me, as it were in scoffing wise : Where is God ? To whom I answered : where is your soule ? They said, in our bodies. Then saide I, is it not in every part of your bodie, ruling and guiding the whole bodie, and yet notwithstanding is not seene or perceived ? Even so God is every where and ruleth all things, and yet is he invisible, being understanding and wisedome it selfe. Then being desirous to have had some more conference with them, by reason, that mine interpreter was weary, and not able to expresse my meaning, I was constrained to keepe silence. The Moals or Tartars are in this regard of their sect: namely they beleeve that there is but one God : howbeit they make images of felt, in remembrance of their deceased friends, covering them with five most rich and costly garments, and putting them into one or two carts, which carts no man dare once touch : and they are in the custody of their soothsayers, who are their priests, concerning whom I will give your Highnesse more at large to understand hereafter. These soothsayers or diviners do alwaies attend upon the court of Mangu and of other great personages. As for the poorer or meaner sorte, they have them not, but such onely as are of the stocke and kindred of Chingis. And when they are to remove or to take any journey, the said diviners goe before them, even as the cloudie piller went before the children of Israel. And they appoint ground where the tents must{n}i	289	T{n}be pitched, and first of al they take down their owne  houses: & after them the whole court doth the like.{n}Also upon their festival daies or kalends they take forth the foresayd images, and place them in order round, or circle wise within the house. Then come the Moals or Tartars, and enter into the same house, bowing themselves before the said images and worship them. Moreover, it is not lawfull for any stranger to enter into that house. For upon a certaine time I my selfe would have gone in, but I was chidden full well for my labour.{n}Of divers and sundry nations : and of certaine people which were wont to eate their owne parents. Chap. 28.{n}BUt the foresayd Jugures (who live among the Christians, and the Saracens) by their sundry disputations, as I suppose, have bene brought unto this, to beleeve, that there is but one onely God. And they dwelt in certaine cities, which afterward were brought in subjection unto Chingis Can : whereupon he gave his daughter in mariage unto their king. Also the citie of Caracarum it selfe is in a manner within their territory : The countrey and the whole countrey of king or Presbyter John, & of ofPresbiter bis brother Vut lyeth neere unto their dominions: saving, that they inhabite in certaine pastures Northward, and the sayde Jugures betweene the mountaines towardes the South. Whereupon it came to passe, that the Moals received letters from them. And they are the Tartars principali scribes : & al the Nestorians almost can skill of their letters. Next unto them, between the foresaid Tangut. mountaines Eastward, inhabiteth the nation of Tangut, who are a most valiant people, and tooke Chingis in battell. But after the conclusion of a league hee was set at libertie by them, and afterward subdued them. These Strange oxen, people of Tangut have oxen of great strength, with tailes like unto horses, and with long shagge haire upon their backes and bellyes. They have legges greater then other oxen have, and they are exceedingly fierce. These oxen{n}290{n}drawe the great houses of the Moals : and their hornes are slender, long, streight, and most sharpe pointed : insomuch that their owners are faine to cut off the endes of them. A co we will not suffer her selfe to be coupled unto one of them, unles they whistle or sing unto her. They have also the qualities of a Buffe : for if they see a man clothed in red, they run upon him immediately to kill him. Next unto them are the people of Tebet, men which were wont to eate the carkases of their deceased parents : that for pities sake, they might make no other sepulchre for them, then their owne bowels. Howbeit of late they have left off this custome, because that thereby they became abominable and odious unto al other nations. Notwithstanding unto this day they make fine cups of the skuls of their parents, to the ende that when they drinke out of them, they may amidst all their jollities and delights call their dead parents to remembrance. This was tolde mee by one that saw it. The sayd people of Tebet have great plentie of golde in their land. Whosoever therefore wanteth golde, diggeth till he hath found some quantitie, and then taking so much thereof as will serve his turne, he layeth up the residue within the earth: because, if he should put it into his chest or storehouse, hee is of opinion that God would withholde from him all other gold within the earth. I sawe some of those people, being very deformed creatures. In Tangut I saw lusty tall men, but browne and swart in colour. The Jugures are of a middle stature like unto our French men. Amongst the Jugures is the originali and roote of the Turkish, and Comanian languages. Next unto Tebet are the people of Langa and Solanga, whose messengers I saw in the Tartars court. And they had brought more then ten great cartes with them, every one of which was drawen with sixe oxen. They be little browne men like unto Spaniards. Also they have jackets, like unto the upper vestment of a deacon, saving that the sleeves are somewhat streighter. And they have miters upon their heads like bishops. But the fore part of their{n}291{n}The people of Tebet.{n}Abundance of glide.{n}The stature of the people of Tangut, and of the Jugures.{n}The people ofSolanga resemble Spaniards.{n}miter is not so hollow within as the hinder part: neither is it sharpe pointed or cornered at the toppe: but there hang downe certaine square flappes compacted of a kinde of strawe which is made rough and rugged with extreme heat, and is so trimmed, that it glittereth in the sunne beames, like unto a glasse, or an helmet well burnished. And about their temples they have long bands of the foresayd matter fastened unto their miters, which hover in the wind, as if two long homes grewe out of their heads. And when the winde tosseth them up and downe too much, they tie them over the midst of their miter from one temple to another: and so they lie circle wise overthwart their heads. Moreover their principal messenger Atabkofele- comming unto the Tartars court had a table of elephants phants tooth,	about him of a cubite in length, and a handfull in{n}breadth, being very smoothe. And whensoever hee spake unto the Emperor himselfe, or unto any other great personage, hee alwayes beheld that table, as if hee had found therein those things which hee spake: neither did he cast his eyes to the right hand, nor to the lefte, nor upon his face, with whom he talked. Yea, going too and fro before his lord, he looketh no where but only upon ne people ^is table. Beyond them (as I understand of a certainty) called Muc. there are other people called Muc, having villages, but no  one particular man of them appropriating any cattell unto{n}himselfe. Notwithstanding there are many flockes and droves of cattell in their countrey, & no man appointed to keepe them. But when any one of them standeth in neede of any beast, hee ascendeth up unto an hill, and there maketh a shout, and all the cattell which are within hearing of the noyse, come flocking about him, and suffer themselves to be handled and taken, as if they were tame. And when any messenger or stranger commeth into their countrie, they shut him up into an house, ministring there things necessary unto him, untill his businesse be dispatched. For if anie stranger should travell through that countrie, the cattell would flee away at the very sent of him, and so would become wilde. Beyond Muc is great{n}292{n}Cathaya, the inhabitants whereof (as I suppose) were of Great olde time, called Seres. For from them are brought most Cat^a-excellent stuffes of silke. And this people is called Seres of a certain towne in the same countrey. I was crediblie informed, that in the said countrey, there is one towne having walles of silver, and bulwarkes or towers of golde. There be many provinces in that land, the greater part whereof are not as yet subdued unto the Tartars. And amongst*{n}Somewhat is wanting.{n}.