The league betweene Carolus Magnus and Offa King of Mercia concerning safe trade of the English Marchants in all the Emperours Dominion. This Offa died in the yeere of our Lord 795.{n}partem hic apponam.{n}310{n}IN the meane season Offa by often legacies solicited Charles le maigne the king of France, to be his friend: albeit he could not easily finde king Charles any whit enclined to further and promote his craftie attempts. Their mindes were so alienated before, that, bearing hauty stomacks on both parts, even the mutuall traffique of Trajfyue their Marchants was prohibited. The Epistle of Albinus tnhtblted-is a sufficient testimony of this matter: part whereof I will here put downe.{n}I know not (quoth he) what will become of us. For there is of late, by the instigation of the devill, some discord and variance sprung up betweene king Charles and king Offa: insomuch that sailing to and fro is  forbidden unto the Marchants of both their dominions. Navigation Some say that we are to be sent, for the obtaining of a firbn<tien-peace, into those partes. And againe, after a fewe lines. Nowe (quoth he) out of Charles his owne words, I will make report of the league concluded betweene him and Offa.{n}Charles by the grace of God king of the Franks and Lombards and Senatour of the Romanes, unto the reverend and his most deare brother Offa king of the Mercians sendeth greeting. First we doe render unto almightie God most humble thankes for the salvation of soules, and the sinceritie of the Catholique faith, which we, to your great commendation, have found signified in your letters. As touching those pilgrimes, who for the love of God and their owne soules health, are desirous to resort unto the Churches of the holy Apostles, let them goe in peace without all disturbance. But if any be found amongst them not honouring religion, but following their owne gaine, they are to pay their ordinarie customes at places convenient. It is our pleasure also and commandement, that your marchants shall have lawfull patronage and protection in our dominions. Who, if in any place they chance to be afflicted with any injust oppression, let them{n}311{n}a league betweene Carol. Mag. and K.{n}Offa.{n}Protection of the English Marchants.{n}make their supplication unto us, or unto our Judges, and we will see justice executed to the full.{n}.