Charta anno regni sexto confecta.
350
351
In portu villae Weymouth.
In	portu	villae	de	magna lernemutha.
The same in English.
An Ordinance of the Staple to bee holden at one certaine place.
THe King unto his Collectors of custome, for wooll and woollen fels, in his port of London, greeting.
Whereas we upon the 20. of May, in the sixt yeere of our reigne, considering the damages and grievances that have diversly happened unto the marchants of our realme, upon occasion that the marchants both of our owne, 8c of other countreis, buying up wooll and woollen fels within our kingdome and dominions, have, for the better sale thereof, at their pleasure conveyed themselves, and trasported the said wooll 8c fels into sundry places within the provinces of Brabant, Flanders and Artoys : and being desirous also, to our power, to 352
provide a remedie against such damages and inconveniences, have ordained by our counsel, that all marchants, both homeborne and aliens, buying up such wools and fels, within our kingdome and dominion aforesaid, and being desirous to transport them into the foresaid provinces, there to bee solde, may carrie the saide wools and fels, or cause them to be caried to some certaine staple, within any of the saide Provinces, by the Maior and Communaltie of the said marchants of our realme, to be appointed and assigned, and when they shall thinke it expedient, to be changed and removed, and not unto any other place within the saide Provinces whatsoever : and whereas also, amongst other things, we have granted unto the marchants of our foresaid realme, for us and our heires, that the Maior and Councel of the saide marchants for the time being, may impose upon all marchants, homeborne or aliens whatsoever, that shall transgresse the foresaid ordination, and shall thereof lawfully be convicted, certaine summes of money to be paid for their offences, and that such summes must by our ministers and officers, to our use, be levied out of the goods and wares of the marchants so offending, wheresoever they shall chance to be found within our kingdome and dominions aforesaid, as in our Charter made for the same purpose, it is more plainly expressed, (which Charter we have caused to be published upon the Seacoasts, throughout all the countreys of our realme, and a strong prohibition to be proclaimed, that no marchants, neither home-borne, nor strangers, may in any wise transgresse the tenour of the foresaide Charter, under the penalties therein contained) and whereas afterward it beeing given us to understand, that divers marchants both home-borne, and aliens, bought up such woolles and woollen felles within our saide Realme and dominions, and conveyed themselves with the saide wools and felles for the sale thereof, unto other places within the foresaide Provinces, besides the saide Staple, which
i	353	z
1320.
A Charter made in the sixt yeere of his reigne.
was, according to our graunt aforesaide, appointed and ordained by the Maior and communaltie of the said marchants of our Realme, in some one of those Provinces, to the contempt of our authoritie, and contrary to the Charter of the ordination, publication, and inhibition aforesaide, wee assigned certaine of our faithfull subjects, in divers parts of our Realme, to make inquisition for such wools and woollen felles, as were conveyed unto any other place of the saide Provinces, then unto the Staple, so that by these meanes, the penalties due unto us might bee levied unto our use: and having intelligence also, that in a maner all marchants both home-borne, and strangers bartering such wares in our kingdome, are culpable of the premisses, and that many being indicted thereupon, and others fearing to bee indicted, doe cause their wools and woollen felles to bee avouched under the names of persons not culpable, and to be sent over unto certaine strangers being also culpable, and not minding perhaps to return any more into our realme, that they may so escape the foresaid forfeitures, and defraud us of the penaltie, appertaining of right unto us, (which abuses, if they were suffered so to goe unpunished woulde redound unto our extreame hinderance:) and beeing likewise desirous to withstand such deceitefull dealing, and so farre forth as wee can, to prevent our owne losses, we firmely command, and streightly charge you, that you doe receive of every particular marchant, desirous to convey any wools, or woollen fels out of the foresaid port, into any forrein dominions, a corporal oath upon Gods holy Evangelists: that they shall avouch all those wools and woollen fels under his name unto whom they doe properly belong, & under the name of none other: and then taking sufficient security from the owner of those wools and fels, or in his name, in regard whereof you wil undertake to warrantize, and make good unto us those penalties and forfaitures which shal unto us appertaine, for all wools, and woollen fels conveied or sent by any of the foresaid merchants unto any of the
354
said provinces of Flanders, Brabant, and Artoys, contrary to the Charter of the Proclamation and inhibition above mentioned (if they shal chance to be convinced hereof) that first, our due custome being received, you doe permit the said wools and woollen fels to passe out of the foresaid port into forrein countries. Witnes the king at Dover the 18. day of June. By the king himselfe and his Councell.
And afterwarde by a Writte under the Kings privie Seale there was a like commandement given unto the Collectors of the custome aforesayde in the portes underwritten.
That is to say:
A.D.
In the port of the Towne of
Weymouth.
Southhampton.
Saint Botulphs towne, now called Boston.
Kingtone upon Hull.
Newcastle.
lernemouth magna, or Yermouth.
Gypwick or Ipswich.
.