A letter of Henry the fourth king of England &c. unto Frater Conradus de Jungingen the master general of Prussia.
HEnrie &c. to the most noble and mighty personage of sacred religion Fr: Conradus de Jungingen
Master general of the order of the Dutch knights of S. Marie, our most deare friend, greeting, and continual perfection of amity.
When as your messengers and ambassadors were of late personally present in Holland, and there expected 83
the arrival of our ambassadors untill the first day of the moneth of November last expired, that there might bee by way of friendly conference a remedie provided in regard of certaine injuries pretended to be offered, by both our subjects one against another, for the publique commoditie of both parts, we were determined to have sent unto Dordract, at the foresaid daye, our welbeloved and faithfull knight William Sturmy, and our welbeloved clerke John Kington, upon our ambassage-affayres: having as yet in our desires, for a peaceable ending of the matter, (which, our foresayd ambassadors, by reason of the shortnes of time, or the finding out of some other remedie and happy conclusion of all and singular the foresaid attempts concerning the principali busines, could by no meanes at that instant attaine unto) that upon some other more convenient day (to the end your ambassadors might not returne home altogether frustrate of their expectation) there might be, after the wonted friendly maner, a conference & agreement with your foresayd ambassadors, even as by other letters of ours directed unto your sayd ambassadors the second day of the moneth of November aforesayd wee have delivered our mind unto them. But it fortuned not long before the departure of your ambassadors into their owne countrey, that no sufficient shipping could be found wherein our sayd ambassadors might have secure and safe passage unto Dordract, or Middleburgh, neither was it thought that they should get any passage at all, till the ships at Middleborough were returned into our kingdome, by the force whereof they might be the more strongly wafted over. And so by reason of the departure of your ambassadours, all matters remaine in suspense till such time as the sayd ambassadors shall againe meete with ours to adde perfection unto the busines as yet imperfect. Wherefore (our friend unfainedly beloved) desiring from the bottome of our heart that the integritie of love, which hath from auncient times taken place betweene our & your subjects, may in time to come
also be kept inviolable, we have thought good once again to send one of our foresaid ambassadors, namely William Esturmy knight to Dordract, giving him charge thither to make haste, and there to stay, till some of your messengers, at your commandement doe in time convenient repayre unto that place, there (by Gods assistance) to bring the matter unto an happy conclusion. May it please you therefore of your unfayned friendship, without all inconvenience of delay, to returne, not unto us, but unto our forenamed knight an answere in writing, what your will and determination is. Neither let it seeme strange unto you, that we have not at this present sent our forenamed John Kington clerke together with the sayd William: for the cause of his abode with us is, that he may in the meane season employ his care and diligence about those matters which must be preparatives for the finall conclusion of the foresayd busines. Honorable sir, and most deare friend, we doe most heartily wish increase of prosperity and joy unto your person. Given in our palace of Westminster the 14. day of Feb. in the yeare of our Lord 1407.	1407.
.