The othe ministred to the Maister of the ship, &c.{n}Ou shall sweare by the holy contents in that booke, that you according and to the uttermost of your knowledge, and good understanding in mariners science and craft, shall in your vocation doe your best to conduct the good shippe called the N. &c. whereof you nowe{n}are Maister under God, both unto and from the portes of your discoverie, and so use your indevour and faithfull diligence, in charging, discharging, lading againe, and roomaging of the same shippe, as may be most for the benefite and profite of this right woorship-full fellowship : and you shall not privately bargein, buy, sell, exchange, barter, or distribute any goods, wares, merchandize, or things whatsoever (necessary tackles and victuals for the shippe onely excepted) to or for your owne lucre, gaine or profit, neither to nor for the private lucre, gaine, or profit of any other person or persons whatsoever. And further, If you shall know any boat-swaine, mariner, or any other person or persons whatsoever, to buy, sell, barter, trucke, or exchange any goods, wares, marchandizes, or things for private account, reckoning, or behalfe, you shall doe your best to withstand and let the same: and if you cannot com-modiously so doe, that then before the discharge of such goods bought for privat account, you shal give knowledge therof to the cape marchant of this said fellowship for the time being. And you shal not receive nor take, nor suffer to be received or taken into your said ship during this voyage any maner person or persons whatsoever, going or returning, but onely those mariners which without fraud or guile shall be hired to be of your company, and to serve in mariners craft and science onely : So helpe you God, &c.{n}2l6{n}These foresaid shippes being fully furnished with their pinnesses and boates, well appointed with al maner of artillerie, and other things necessary for their defence with al the men aforesaid, departed from Ratcliffe, and valed unto Detford, the io. day of May, 1553.{n}The 11. day about two of the clocke, we departed from Detford, passing by Greenwich, saluting the kings Majesty then being there, shooting ofF our ordinance, & so valed unto Blackwall, and there remained until the 17. day, and that day in the morning we went from Blackwall, and came to Woolwich by nine of the clocke, and there remained one tide, and so the same night unto Heyreth.{n}The 18. day from Heyreth unto Gravesend, and there remained until the twentieth day : that day being Sater-day, from Gravesend unto Tilberie Hope, remaining there untill the two and twentieth day.	MaJ-{n}The 22. day from Tilbery Hope to Hollie haven.{n}The 23. day from Hollie Haven, till we came against Lee, and there remained that night, by reason that the winde was contrary to us.{n}The 24. day the winde being in the Southwest in the morning, we sailed along the coast over the Spits, untill we came against S. Osyth, about sixe of the clocke at night, and there came to anker, and abode there all that night.{n}The 25. day about tenne of the clocke we departed from S. Osyth, and so sailed forward unto the Nase, and there abode that night for winde and tide.{n}The 26. day at five of the clock in the morning, we weyed our anker, and sailed over the Nase, the winde being at the Southwest, untill wee came to Orwell wands, and there came to an anker, and abode there untill the 28. day.{n}The same day being Trinitie Sunday about 7. of the clocke before noone we weyed our ankers, and sailed til we came athwart Walsursye, and there came to an anker.{n}The 29. day from thence to Holmehead, where we{n}217{n}stayed that day, where we consulted which way, and what courses were best to be holden for the discoverie of our voyage, and there agreed.{n}The 30. day of May at five of the clocke in the morning wee set saile, and came against Yermouth about three leagues into the sea, riding there at anker all that night.{n}The last of May into the sea sixe leagues Northeast, and there taried that night, where the winde blew very sore.{n}June. The first of June the winde being at North contrary to us, wee came backe againe to Orwell, and remained there untill the 15. day, tarying for the winde, for all this time the winde was contrary to our purpose.{n} The 15 day being at Orwel in the latitude of 52 degrees, in the morning wee weyed our ankers, and went forth into the wands about two miles from the towne, and lay there that night.{n}The 16 day at eight of the clocke we set forward, and sayled untill we came athwart Alburrough, and there stayed that night.{n}The 17 day about five of the clocke before noone we went backe unto Orfordnesse, and there remained untill the 19 day.{n}The 19 day at eight of the clocke in the morning we went backe to Orwel, and abode there three dayes tarying for the winde.{n}The 23 day of June the wind being faire in the Southwest we hailed into the seas to Orfordnesse, and from thence into the seas ten leagues Northeast: then being past the sands, we changed our course sixe leagues Northnortheast: about midnight we changed our course againe, and went due North, continuing in the same unto the 27 day.{n}The 27 day about seven of the clocke Northnorthwest 42 leagues to the ende to fall with Shotland : then the wind veared to the West, so that we could lie but North and by West, continuing in the same course 40 leagues, 218{n}1553-whereby we could not fetch Shotland: then we sayled North 16 leagues by estimation, after that North and by West, & Northnorthwest, then Southeast, with divers other courses, traversing and tracing the seas, by reason of sundry and manifolde contrary windes, untill the 14 day of July: and then the sunne entring into Leo, we July. discovered land Eastward of us, unto the which we sayled that night as much as we might: and after wee went on shore with our Pinnesse, & found little houses to the number of 30, where we knew that it was inhabited, but the people were fled away, as we judged, for feare of us.{n}The land was all full of little Islands, and that innu- I” t!lis land merable, which were called (as we learned afterwards) dwellt ^cthe'' JEgeland and Halgeland, which lieth from Orfordnesse	‘{n}North and by East, being in the latitude of 66 degrees. The distance betweene Orfordnesse and ^Egeland 250 leagues. Then we sailed from thence 12 leagues Northwest, and found many other Islandes, and there came to anker the 19 day, and manned our Pinnesse, and went on shore to the Islands, and found people mowing and making of hay, which came to the shore and welcomed us. In which place were an innumerable sort of Islands, which were called the Isles of Rost, being under the Rost Islands. dominion of the king of Denmarke: which place was in latitude 66 degrees, and 30 minutes. The winde being contrary, we remayned there three dayes, & there was an innumerable sort of foules of divers kindes, of which we tooke very many.{n}The 22 day the winde comming fayre, we departed from Rost, sailing Northnortheast, keeping the sea untill the 27 day, and then we drew neere unto the land, which was still East of us : then went foorth our Pinnesse to seeke harborow, & found many good harbours, of the which we entred into one with our shippes, which was called Stanfew, and the land being Islands, were called Stanfew Lewfoot, or Lofoot, which were plentifully inhabited, and very gentle people, being also under the king of Denmarke : but we could not learne how farre it was from{n}219{n}the maine land: and we remained there until the 30 day, being in latitude 68 degrees, and from the foresaid Rost about 30 leagues Northnortheast.{n}The 30 day of July about noone we weyed our ankers, and went into the Seas, and sayled along these Islands Northnortheast, keeping the land still in sight untill the August. second day of August: then hailing in close aboord the land, to the entent to knowe what land it was, there came a skiffe of the Island aboord of us, of whom we asked many questions, who shewed unto us, that the Island was Seynam in 70 called Seynam, which is the latitude of seventy degrees, degrees. anj from Stanfew thirtie leagues, being also under the king of Denmarke, and that there was no merchandise there, but onely dryed fish, and traine oyle. Then we being purposed to goe unto Finmarke, inquired of him, if we might have a pilot to bring us unto Finmarke, & he said, that if we could beare in, we should have a good harbour, and on the next day a pilot to bring us to Finmarke, unto the wardhouse, which is the strongest holde in Finmarke, and most resorted to by report. But when wee would have entred into an harbour, the land being very high on every side, there came such flawes of winde and terrible whirlewinds, that we were not able to beare in, but by violence were constrained to take the sea agayne, our Pinnesse being unshipt : we sailed North and by East, the wind increasing so sore that we were not able to beare any saile, but tooke them in, and lay a drift, to the end to let the storme over passe. And that night by violence of winde, and thickenesse of mists, we were not able to keepe together within sight, and then about midnight we lost our pinnesse, which was a discomfort unto us. Assoone as it was day, and the fogge overpast, we looked about, and at the last we descried one of our shippes to Leeward of us : then we spred an hullocke of our foresaile, and bare roome with her, which was the Confidence, but the Edward we could not see. Then the flaw something abating, we and the Confidence hoysed  up our sailes the fourth day, sayling Northeast and by{n}220{n}North, to the end to fall with the Wardhouse, as we did consult to doe before, in case we should part company. Thus running Northeast and by North, and Northeast fiftie leagues, then we sounded, and had 160 fadomes, whereby we thought to be farre from land, and perceived that the land lay not as the Globe made mention. Wherfore we changed our course the sixt day, and sailed Southeast and by South eight and fortie leagues, thinking thereby to find the Wardhouse.{n}The eight day much winde rising at the Westnorthwest, we not knowing how the coast lay, strook our sayles, and lay a drift, where we sounded and found 160 fadomes as afore.{n}The ninth day, the wind vearing to the South Southeast, we sailed Northeast 25 leagues.{n}The tenth day we sounded, and could get no ground, neither yet could see any land, wherat we wondered: then the wind comming at the Northeast, we ran Southeast about 48 leagues.{n}The 11 day, the wind being at South, we sounded, and found 40 fadoms, and faire sand.{n}The 12 day the winde being at South and by East, we lay with our saile East, and East and by North 30 leagues.{n}The 14 day early in the morning we descried land, which land we bare with all, hoising out our boat to discover what land it might be : but the boat could not come to land the water was so shoale, where was very much ice also, but there was no similitude of habitation, and this land lyeth from Seynam East and by North 160 leagues, being in latitude 72 degrees. Then we plyed to the Northward the 15, 16 and 17 day.{n}The 18 day, the winde comming at the Northeast, and the Confidence being troubled with bilge water, and stocked, we thought it good to seeke harbour for her redresse : then we bare roome the 18 day Southsoutheast, about 70 leagues.{n}The 21 day we sounded, and found 10 fadome, after that we sounded againe, and found but 7 fadome, so{n}221{n}A.D.{n}I553-{n}Willoughbie his land, in "z degrees.{n}shoalder and shoalder water, and yet could see no land, where we marvelled greatly : to avoide this danger, we bare roomer into the sea all that night Northwest and by West.{n}The next day we sounded, and had 20. fadoms, then shaped our course, and ran West Southwest untill the 23. day : then we descried Low land, unto which we bare as nigh as we could, and it appeared unto us unhabitable. Then wee plyed Westward along by that lande, which lyeth West Southwest, and East Northeast, and much winde blowing at the West, we haled into the sea North and by East 30. leagues. Then the winde comming about at the Northeast, we sailed West Northwest: after that, the winde bearing to the Northwest, we lay with our sailes West southwest, about 14. leagues, and then descried land, and bare in with it, being the 28. day, finding shoale water, and bare it till we came to 3. fadome, then perceiving it to be shoale water, and also seeing drie sands, we haled out againe Northeast along that land until we came to the point therof. That land turning to the Westwarde, we ran along 16. leagues Northwest: then comming into a faire bay, we went on land with our boat, which place was unhabited, but yet it appeared unto us that the people had bin there, by crosses, and other signes : from thence we went all along the coast Westward.{n}September. The fourth day of September we lost sight of land, by reason of contrary winds, and the eight day we descried land againe. Within two dayes after we lost the sight of it: then running West and by South about 30. leagues, we gat the sight of land againe, and bare in with it untill night : then perceiving it to be a lee shore, we gat us into the sea, to the end to have sea roome.{n}The 12. of September we hailed to shoareward againe, having then indifferent winde and weather : then being neere unto the shoare, and the tide almost spent, wee came to an anker in 30. fadoms water.{n}222{n}The 13. day we came along the coast, which lay Northwest and by West and Southeast and by East.{n}The 14. day we came to an anker within two leagues of the shoare, having 60. fadoms.{n}There we went a shore with our boat, & found two or three good harboroughs, the land being rocky, and high, but as for people could we see none. The 15 day we ran still along the coast untill the 17 day: then the winde being contrary unto us, we thought it best to returne unto the harbor which we had found before, and so we bare roomer with the same, howbeit we could not accomplish our desire that day. The next day being the 18 of September, we entred into the haven, and there came to an anker at 6 fadoms. This haven runneth into the maine, about two leagues, this haven and is in bredth halfe a league, wherein were very they many seale fishes, & other great fishes, and upon the maine we saw beares, great deere, foxes, with divers strange beasts, as II guloines, and such other which were || Or, Elions. to us unknowen, and also wonderfull. Thus remaining in this haven the space of a weeke, seeing the yeare farre spent, & also very evill wether, as frost, snow, and haile, as though it had beene the deepe of winter, we thought best to winter there. Wherefore we sent out three men Southsouthwest, to search if they could  find people, who went three dayes journey, but could finde none : after that, we sent other three Westward willoughbie foure daies journey, which also returned without finding his note, which any people. Then sent we three men Southeast three was written dayes journey, who in like sorte returned without finding of people, or any similitude of habitation.	'{n}These two notes following were written upon the outside of this Pamphlet, or Booke.{n}1	The proceedings of Sir Hugh Willoughbie after he was separated from the Edward Bonaventure.{n}2	Our shippe being at an anker in the harbour called Sterfier in the Island Lofoote.{n}223{n}The river or haven wherein Sir Hugh Willoughbie with the companie of his two ships perished for cold, is called Arzina in Lapland, neere unto Kegor. But it appeareth by a Will found in the ship that Sir Hugh Willoughbie and most of the company were alive in January 1554.{n}.