Certaine notes unperfectly written by Richard Johnson servant to Master Richard Chan-celour, which was in the discoverie of Vaigatz and Nova Zembla, with Steven Burrowe in the Serchthrift 1556. and after- i$56 warde among the Samoedes, whose devilish rites hee describeth.
Norway.
Roste Etf Lofoot. Finmarke.
Wardhouse.
Lappia.
The Serie-
Irst, after we departed out of England we fell with Norway, and on that coste lieth Northbern or Northbergen, and this people are under the King of Denmarke : But they differ in their speech from the Danes, for they speake Norsh. And North of Northbern lie the Isles of Roste
and Lofoot, and these Islands pertaine unto Finmarke, and they keepe the lawes and speake the language of the Islanders. And at the Eastermost part of that land is a castle which is called the Ward house, and the King of Denmarke doeth fortifie it with men of warre : and the Russes may not goe to the Westward of that castle. And East Southeast from that castle is a lande called Lappia : in which’ lande be two maner of people, that is to say, the Lappians, and the Scrickfinnes, which Scrickfinnes are a
wilde people which neither know God, nor yet good fames-order : and these people live in tents made of Deares skinnes : and they have no certaine habitations, but continue in heards and companies by one hundred and two hundreds. And they are a people of small stature, and are clothed in Deares skinnes, and drinke nothing but water, and eate no bread but flesh all raw. And the The Lappians. Lappians bee a people adjoyning to them & be much like to them in al conditions : but the Emperour of Russia hath of late overcome manie of them, and they are in subjection to him. And this people will say that they beleeve in the Russes God. And they live in tents as the other doe. And Southeast and by South from Lappia
345
Corelia. lyeth a province called Corelia, and these people are called Kerilli. And South southeast from Corelia lyeth a Novogardia. countrey called Novogardia. And these three nations are The Russes, under the Emperour of Russia, and the Russes keepe the Lawe of the Greekes in their Churches, and write somewhat like as the Greekes write, and they speake their owne language, and they abhorre the Latine tongue, neither have they to doe with the Pope of Rome, and they holde it not good to worshippe any carved Image, yet they will worshippe paynted Images on tables or  boordes. And in Russia their Churches, steeples, and houses are all of wood : and their shippes that they have are sowed with withes and have no nayles. The Kerilles, Russians and Moscovians bee much alike in all conditions. And South from the Moscovians lye the Tartaria. Tartarians, which bee Mahumetans, and live in tentes and wagons, and keepe in heardes and companies : and they holde it not good to abide long in one place, for they will say, when they will curse any of their children, I woulde thou mightest tary so long in a place that thou mightest smell thine owne dung, as the Christians doe : and this is the greatest curse that they have.
Lampasamart And East Northeast of Russia lieth Lampas, which is orfaire of the a place where the Russes, Tartars and Samoeds meete Tatars and tw^se a yeerej and make the faire to barter wares for Samoeds. wares. And Northeast from Lampas lieth the countrey The Samoeds of the Samoeds, which be about the river of Pechere, countrey. and these Samoeds bee in subjection to the Emperour of Russia,-and they lie in tentes made of Deere skinnes, and they use much witchcraft, and shoot well in bowes.
Or,Pechora. And Northeast from the river Pechere lieth Vaygatz, Taigatz. and there are the wilde Samoeds which will not suffer the Russes to land out of the Sea, but they will kill them and eate them, as wee are tolde by the Russes : and they live in heards, and have all their carriages with deere, for they have no horses. Beyond Vaygatz NovaZembla. lyeth a lande called Nova Zembla, which is a great lande, but wee sawe no people, and there wee had 346
Foule inough, and there wee sawe white Foxes and white Beares. And the sayde Samoeds which are about the bankes of Pechere, which are in subjection to the Emperour of Russia, when they will remove from one place to another, then they will make sacrifices in manner following. Everie kinred doeth sacrifice in their owne tent, and hee that is most auncient is their Priest. And first the Priest doeth beginne to playe upon a thing like to a great sieve, with a skinne on the one ende like a drumme : and the sticke that he playeth with is about a spann e long, and one ende is round like a ball, covered with the skinne of an Harte. Also the Priest hath upon his head a thing of white like a garlande, and his face is covered with a piece of a shirt of maile, with manie small ribbes, and teeth of fishes, and wilde beastes hanging on the same maile. Then hee singeth as wee use heere in Englande to hallow, whope, or showte at houndes, and the rest of the company answere him with this Owtis, Igha, Igha, Igha, and then the Priest replieth againe with his voyces. And they answere him with the selfesame wordes so manie times, that in the ende he becommeth as it were madde, and falling downe as hee were dead, having nothing on him but a shirt, lying upon his backe I might perceive him to breathe. I asked them why hee lay so, and they answered mee, Nowe doeth our God tell him what wee shall doe, and whither wee shall goe. And when he had lyen still a litle while, they cried thus three times together, Oghao, Oghao, Oghao, and as they use these three calles, hee riseth with his head and lieth downe againe, and then hee rose up and sang with like voyces as hee did before: and his audience answered him, Igha, Igha, Igha. Then hee commaunded them to kill five Olens or great Deere, and continued singing still both hee and they as before. Then hee tooke a sworde of a cubite and a spanne long, (I did mete it my selfe) and put it into his bellie halfeway and sometime lesse, but no wounde was to bee seene, 347
A.D.
1556.
Store offoule. White Foxes. White beares.
The maner of the Samoeds sacrifices, about the river of Pechere.
(they continuing in their sweete song still) Then he put the sworde into the fire till it was warme, and so thrust it into the slitte of his shirte and thrust it through his bodie, as I thought, in at his navill and out at his fundament: the poynt beeing out of his shirt behinde, I layde my finger upon it, then hee pulled out the sworde and sate downe. This beeing done, they set a kettle of water over the fire to heate, and when the water doeth seethe, the Priest beginneth to sing againe they answering him, for so long as the water was in heating, they sate and sang not. Then they made a thing being foure square, and in height and squarenesse of a chaire, and covered with a gown very close the forepart therof, for the hinder part stood to the tents side. Their tents are rounde and are called Chome in their language. The water still seething on the fire, and this square seate being ready, the Priest put off his shirt, and the thing like a garland which was on his head, with those things which covered his face, & he had on yet all this while a paire of hosen of deeres skins with ye haire on, which came up to his buttocks. So he went into the square seat, and sate down like a tailour and sang with a strong voyce or halowing. Then they tooke a small line made of deeres skinnes of foure fathoms long, and with a smal knotte the Priest made it fast about his necke, and under his left arme, and gave it unto two men standing on both sides of him, which held the ends together. Then the kettle of hote water was set before him in the square seat, al this time the square seat was not covered, and then it was covered wl a gown of broad cloth without lining, such as the Russes do weare. Then the 2. men which did hold ye ends of the line stil standing there, began to draw, & drew til they had drawn the ends of the line stiffe and together, and then I hearde a thing fall into the kettle of water which was before him in the tent. Thereupon I asked them that sate by me what it was that fell into the
348
water that stoode before him. And they answered me, that it was his head, his shoulder and left arme, which the line had cut off, I meane the knot which I sawe [I. 285.J afterwarde drawen hard together. Then I rose up and would have looked whether it were so or not, but they laid hold on me, and said, that if they should see him with their bodily eyes, they shoulde live no longer. And the most part of them can speake the Russe tongue to bee understood : and they tooke me to be a Russian. Then they beganne to hallow with these wordes, Oghaoo, Oghaoo, Oghaoo, many times together. And as they were thus singing & out calling, I sawe a thing like a finger of a man two times together thrust through the gowne from the Priest.
I asked them that sate next to me what it was that I sawe, and they saide, not his finger ; for he was yet dead: and that which I saw appeare through the gowne was a beast, but what beast they knew not nor would not tell. And I looked upon the gowne, and there was no hole to bee seene : and then at the last the Priest lifted up his head with his shoulder and arme, and all his bodie, and came forth to the fire. Thus farre of their service which I sawe during the space of certaine houres : but how they doe worship their Idoles that I saw not: for they put up their stuffe for to remove from that place where they lay. And I went to him that served the Priest, and asked him what their God saide to him when he lay as dead. Hee answered, that his owne people doeth not know: neither is it for them to know: for they must doe as he commanded. This I saw the lift day of Januarie in the yere of our Lord 1556. after the English account.
.