A Letter of Master Anthonie Jenkinson upon his returne from Boghar to the worshipful Master Henrie Lane Agent for the Moscovie com-panie resident in Vologda, written in the Mosco the 18. of September, 1559.
WOrshipfull Sir, after my heartie commendations premised with most desire to God of your welfare and prosperous successe in all your affaires. It may please you to bee advertised that the fourth of this present I arrived with Richard Johnson and Robert Johnson all in health, thankes bee to God. Wee have bene as farre as Boghar, and had proceeded farther on our voyage toward the lande of Cathay, had it not bene for the uncessant and continuall warres, which are in all these brutall and wilde countreys, that it is at this present impossible to passe, neither went there any Caravan of people from Boghar that way these three yeeres. And although our journey hath bene so miserable, dangerous, and chargeable with losses, charges and expenses, as my penne is not able to expresse the same : yet shall wee bee able to satisfie the woorship-full Companies mindes, as touching the discoverie of The Caspian Sea, with the trade of merchandise to bee had in such landes and countreyes as bee thereabout adjacent, and have brought of the wares and commodities of those Countries able to answere the principali with profite : wishing that there were utterance for as great a quantitie of kersies and other wares as there is profite to bee had in the sales of a small quantitie, (all such evill fortunes beeing escaped as to us have chaunced this present voyage,) for then it woulde be a trade woorthie to bee followed. Sir, for that I trust you will be here shortly (which I much desire) I will deferre the discourse with you at large untill your comming, as well touching my travel, as of other things. Sir, John Lucke departed from hence toward England the
400
seventh of this present, and intendeth to passe by the Passage to and way of Sweden, by whom I sent a letter to the worshipfull Companie, and have written that I intend to come downe we n'
unto Colmogro to be readie there at the next shipping to imbarke my selfe for England, declaring that my service shal not be needfull here, for that you are a man able to serve their worships in greater affaires then they have heere to doe, so farre as I perceive. As touching the Companies affaires heere, I referre you to Christopher Hudsons letters, for that I am but newly arrived. Having here but litle businesse to doe, I send you Richard Johnson to helpe you there in your affaires. Thus giving you most heartie thanks for my wench Aura Soltana, I commend you to the tuition of God, who send you health with hearts desire.
Your assured to command, Anthonie Jenkinson.
This was a yong Tartar girle which he gave to the Queene afterward.
.