The maner of Justice by lots in Russia, written by Master Henrie Lane, and executed in a controversie betweene him and one Sheray Costromitskey in Mosco. 1560.
AFter the comming home into Russia of Joseph Napea the first ambassadour to Queene Marie, I remaining the Agent there, sundrie Russian marchants by Josephs procurement obtained letters from the Emperour to freight goods and passe in our ships for England: which thing upon good consideration I answered and refused. They were then driven to credite us and compound in value untill the next returne. At which time, notwithstanding good accompt in the value of 600 robles, there grewe question by their double demand. So in April Triallbycom-Anno 1560. before my comming from Moscovia, they hator^t-obtained trial by combat or letter to have their summe double, or as I proffered 600 robles. For combatte I was provided of a strong willing Englishman, Robert Best, one of the companies servants: whome the Russes with their Champion refused. So that we had the words of our priviledge put in effect, which were to draw lots.
The day and maner of triall appointed by the Emperour at his castle in his palace and high Court of Moscovia was thus. The Emperours two Treasurers, being also Chancelours and chiefe Judges, sate in court. They appointed officers to bring me, mine interpreter, & the other, through the great presse within the rayle or barre, and permitted me to sit downe some distance from them: the adverse parties being without at the barre. Both parties were first perswaded with great curtesie, to wit, I to enlarge mine offer, and the Russes to mitigate their challenge. Notwithstanding that I protested my conscience to be cleere, and their gaine by accompt to bee sufficient, yet of gentlenes at the magistrates request I made proffer of 100 robles more: which was openly commended, but of the plaintifes not accepted. Then 411
sentence passed with our names in two equall balles of waxe made and holden up by the Judges, their sleeves stripped up. Then with standing up and wishing well to the trueth attributed to him that should be first drawen, by both consents among the multitude they called a tall gentleman, saying: Thou with such a coate or cap, come up: where roome with speede was made. He was commanded to hold his cappe, wherein they put the balles, by the crowne upright in sight, his arme not abasing. With like circumspection, they called at adventure another tall gentleman, commanding him to strip up his right sleeve, and willed him with his bare arme to reach up, and in Gods name severally to take out the two balles: which he did, delivering to either Judge one. Then with great admiration the lotte in ball first taken out was mine: which was by open sentence so pronounced before all the people, and to be the right and true parte. The chiefe plaintifes name was Sheray Costromitsky. I was willed forthwith to pay the plaintifes the summe by me appointed. Out of which for their wrong or sinne, as it was termed, they payd tenne in the hundred to the Emperor. Many dayes after, as their maner is, the people took our nation to be true and upright dealers, and talked of this judgement to our great credite.
Note.	The former letters dated 1558, 1559, and 1560,
t1- 31 ° ]	should all followe M. Jenkinsons voyage to
Boghar.
.