Notes in writing, besides more privie by mouth, that were given by M. Richard Hakluyt of Eiton in the Countie of Hereford, Esquire, Anno 1580: to M. Arthur Pet, and to M. Charles Jackman, sent by the Merchants of the Moscovie companie for the discovery of the Northeast straight, not altogether unfit for some other enterprises of discovery, hereafter to be taken in hand.
What respect of Islands is to be had, and why.
WHereas the Portingals have in their course to their Indies in the Southeast, certaine ports and fortifications to thrust into by the way, to divers great purposes: so you are to see what Islands, and what ports you had neede to have by the way in your course to the Northeast. For which cause I wish you to enter into consideration of the matter, and to note all the Islands, and to set them downe in plat, to two ends: that is to say, That we may devise to take the benefit by them, And also foresee how by them the Savages or civill Princes may in any sort annoy us in our purposed trade that way.
And for that the people to the which we purpose in this voyage to go, be no Christians, it were good that the masse of our commodities were alwayes in our owne disposition, and not at the will of others. Therefore it were good that we did seeke out some small Island in the Scithian sea, where we might plant, fortifie, and staple safely, from whence (as time should serve) wee might feed those heathen nations with our commodities without cloying them, or without venturing our whole masse in the bowels of their countrey.
 And to which Island (if neede were, and if wee should thinke so good) wee might allure the Northeast navie, 264
1580. the navie of Cambalu to resort with their commodities to us there planted, and stapling there.
And if such an Island might be found so standing as might shorten our course, and so standing, as that the navie of Cambalu, or other those parties might conveniently saile unto without their dislike in respect of distance, then would it fal out well. For so, besides lesse danger and more safetie, our ships might there unlade and lade againe, and returne the selfe same summer to the ports of England or of Norway.
And if such an Island may be for the stapling of our commodities, to the which they of Cambalu would not saile, yet we might, having ships there, imploy them in passing betweene Cambalu and that stapling place.
Respect of havens and harborowes.
A Nd if no such Islands may bee found in the Scithian sea toward the firme of Asia, then are you to search out the ports that be about Nova Zembla, all along the tract of that land, to the end you may winter there the first yeere, if you be let by contrary winds, and to the end that if we may in short time come unto Cambalu, and unlade and set saile againe for returne without venturing there at Cambalu, that you may on your way come as farre in returne as a port about Nova Zembla: that the summer following, you may the sooner be in England for the more speedy vent of your East commodities, and for the speedier discharge of your Mariners: if you cannot go forward and backe in one selfe same Summer.
And touching the tract of the land of Nova Zembla, toward the East out of the circle Arcticke in the more temperate Zone, you are to have regard: for if you finde the soyle planted with people, it is like that in time an ample vent of our warme wollen clothes may be found. And if there be no people at all there to be A good confound, then you shall specially note what plentie of sideration. whales, and of other fish is to be found there, to the
265
ende we may turne our newe found land fishing or Island fishing, or our whalefishing that way, for the ayde and comfort of our newe trades to the Northeast to the coasts of Asia.
Respect of fish and certaine other things.
A Nd if the aire may be found upon that tract temperate, and the soile yeelding wood, water, land and grasse, and the seas fish, then we may plant on that maine the offals of our people, as the Portingals do in Brasill, and so they may in our fishing in our passage, and divers wayes yeelde commoditie to England by harbouring and victualling us.
And it may be, that the inland there may yeeld masts, pitch, tarre, hempe, and all things for the Navie, as plentifully as Eastland doth.
The Islands to be noted with their commodities and wants.
TO note the Islands, whether they be hie land or low land, mountaine or flat, gravelly, clay, chalkie, or of what soile, woody or not woody, with springs and rivers or not, and what wilde beastes they have in the same.
And whether there seeme to be in the same apt matter to build withall, as stone free or rough, and stone to make lime withall, and wood or coale to burne the same withall.
To note the goodnesse or the badnesse of the havens and harborowes in the Islands.
If a straight be found, what is to be done, and what great importance it may be of.
A Nd if there be a straight in the passage into the Scithian seas, the same is specially and with great regard to be noted, especially if the same straight be narrow and to be kept. I say it is to be noted as a thing that doeth much import: for what prince soever shall be Lorde of the same, and shall possesse the same, as 266
the king of Denmarke doeth possesse the straight of Denmarke, he onely shall have the trade out of these regions into the Northeast parts of the world for him-selfe, and for his private profit, or for his subjects onely, or to enjoy wonderfull benefit of the toll of the same, like as the king of Denmarke doth enjoy of his straights, by suffring the merchants of other Princes to passe that way. If any such straight be found, the elevation, the high or lowe land, the havens neere, the length of the straights, and all other such circumstances are to be set downe for many purposes: and al the Mariners in the voyage are to be sworne to keepe close all such things, that other Princes prevent us not of the same, after our returne upon the disclosing of the Mariners, if any such thing should hap.
Which way the Savage may bee made able to [I. 439-1 purchase our cloth and other their wants.
IF you find any Island or maine land populous, and that the same people hath need of cloth, then are you to devise what commodities they have to purchase the same withall.
If they be poore, then are you to consider of the soile, and how by any possibilitie the same may be made to inrich them, that hereafter they may have something to purchase the cloth withall.
If you enter into any maine by portable river, and shall find any great woods, you are to note what kind of timber they be of, that we may know whether they are for pitch, tarre, mastes, dealeboord, clapboord, or for building of ships or houses, for so, if the people have no use of them, they may be brought perhaps to use.
Not to venture the losse of any one man.
YOu must have great care to preserve your people, since your number is so small, and not to venture any one man in any wise.
267
To bring home besides merchandize certaine trifles.
BRing home with you (if you may) from Cambalu or other civil place, one or other yong man, although you leave one for him.
Also the fruites of the Countreys if they will not of themselves dure, drie them and so preserve them.
And bring with you the kernels of peares and apples, and the stones of such stonefruits as you shall find there.
Also the seeds of all strange herbs & flowers, for such seeds of fruits and herbs comming from another part of the world, and so far off, will delight the fansie of many for the strangenesse, and for that the same may grow, and continue the delight long time.
If you arrive at Cambalu or Quinsay, to bring thence the mappe of that countrey, for so shall you have the perfect description, which is to great purpose.
To bring thence some old printed booke, to see whether they have had print there before it was devised in Europe as some write.
To note their force by sea and by land.
IF you arrive in Cambalu or Quinsay, to take a speciali view of their Navie, and to note the force, greatnesse, maner of building of them, the sailes, the tackles, the ankers, the furniture of them, with ordinance, armour, and munition.
Also, to note the force of the wals and bulwarks of their cities, their ordonance, and whether they have any calivers, and what powder and shot.
To note what armour they have.
What swords.
What pikes, halberds and bils.
What horses of force, and what light horses they have.
And so throughout to note the force of the Countrey both by sea and by land.
268
Things to be marked to make conjectures by.
TO take speciali note of their buildings, and of the ornaments of their houses within.
Take a speciali note of their apparell and furniture, and of the substance that the same is made of, of which a Merchant may make a gesse as well of their com-moditie, as also of their wants.
To note their Shoppes and Warehouses, and with what commodities they abound, the price also.
To see their Shambles, and to view all such things as are brought into the Markets, for so you shall soone see the commodities, and the maner of the people of the inland, and so give a gesse of many things.
To note their fields of graine, and their trees of fruite, and how they abound or not abound in one and other, and what plenty or scarsitie of fish they have.
Things to be caried with you, whereof more or  lesse is to bee caried for a shew of our commodities to be made.
KArsies of all orient colours, specially of stamell, broadcloth of orient colours also.
Frizadoes, Motlies, Bristow friezes, Spanish blankets, Baies of al colours, specially with Stamel, Worsteds, Carels, Saies, Woadmols, Flanels, Rash, &c.
Felts of divers colours.
TafFeta hats.
Deepe caps for Mariners coloured in Stamel, whereof if ample vent may be found, it would turne to an infinite commoditie of the common poore people by knitting.
Quilted caps of Levant taffeta of divers colours, for the night.
Knit stocks of silke of orient colours.
Knit stocks of Jerzie yarne of orient colours, whereof if ample vent might folow the poore multitude should be set in worke.
260
Stocks of karsie of divers colours for men and for women.
Garters of silke of severall kinds, and of colours divers.
Girdles of Buffe and all other leather, with gilt and ungilt buckles, specially waste girdles, waste girdles of velvet.
Gloves of all sorts knit, and of leather.
Gloves perfumed.
Points of all sorts of silke, threed, and leather, of all maner of colours.
Shooes of Spanish leather of divers colours, of divers length, cut and uncut.
Shooes of other leather.
Velvet shooes and pantophles.
These shooes and pantophles to be sent this time, rather for a shew then for any other cause.
Purses knit, and of leather.
Nightcaps knit, and other.
A garnish of pewter for a shew of a vent of that English commoditie, bottles, flagons, spoones, &c. of that mettall.
Glasses of English making.
Venice glasses.
Looking glasses for women, great and faire.
Small dials a few for proofe, although there they will not hold the order they do here.
Spectacles of the common sort.
Others of Christall trimmed with silver, and otherwise.
Hower glasses.	)	J Combes of boxe.
Combes of Ivorie.	J	[Combes of horne.
Linnen of divers sorts.
Handkerchiefs with silke of severall colours wrought.
Glazen eyes to ride with against dust.
Knives in sheaths both single and double, of good edge.
Needles great and small of every kind.
Buttons greater and smaller, with moulds of leather
270
1580. and not of wood, and such as be durable of double silke, and that of sundry colours.
Boxes with weights for gold, and of every kind of the coine of gold, good and bad, to shew that the people here use weight and measure, which is a certaine shew of wisedom, and of certaine government setled here.
All the severall silver coynes of our English monies, to be caried with you to be shewed to the governours at Cambalu, which is a thing that shall in silence speake to wise men more then you imagine.
Locks and keyes, hinges, bolts, haspes, &c. great and small of excellent workemanship, whereof if vent may be, hereafter we shall set our subjects in worke, which you must have in great regard. For in finding ample vent of any thing that is to be wrought in this realme, is more woorth to our people besides the gaine of the merchant, then Christchurch, Bridewell, the Savoy, and all the Hospitals of England.
For banketting on shipboord persons of credite.
First, the sweetest perfumes to set under hatches to make ye place sweet against their comming aboord, if you arrive at Cambalu, Quinsey, or in any such great citie, & not among Savages.
Marmelade.	I	J Figs barrelled.	[I. 441.J
Sucket.	J	(Raisins of the sunne.
Comfets of divers kinds made of purpose by him that is most excellent, that shal not dissolve.
Prunes damaske.	)	(Walnuts.
Dried Peares.	j	(Almonds.
Smalnuts.
Olives to make them taste their wine.
The apple John that dureth two yeeres to make shew of our fruits.
Hullocke.	}	{ Sacke.
Vials of good sweet waters, and casting bottels of glasses to besprinkle the ghests withall, after their comming aboord.
271
Suger to use with their wine if they will.
The sweet oyle of Zante, and excellent French vineger, and a fine kind of Bisket stieped in the same do make a banketting dish, and a little Sugar cast in it cooleth and comforteth, and refresheth the spirits of man.
Cynamon water is to be had with you to make a I shew of by taste, and also to comfort
Imperiali water J your sicke in the voyage.
With these and such like, you may banket where you arrive the greater and best persons.
Or with the gift of these Marmelades in small boxes, or small vials of sweet waters you may gratifie by way of gift, or you may make a merchandize of them.
The Mappe of England and of London.
Take with you the mappe of England set out in faire colours, one of the biggest sort I meane, to make shew of your countrey from whence you come.
And also the large Mappe of London to make shew of your Citie. And let the river be drawen full of Ships of all sorts, to make the more shew of your great trade and traffike in trade of merchandize.
Ortelius booke of Mappes.
If you take Ortelius booke of Mappes with you to marke all these Regions, it were not amisse : and if need were, to present the same to the great Can, for it would be to a Prince of marvellous account.
The booke of the attire of all Nations.
Such a booke caried with you and bestowed in gift would be much esteemed, as I perswade my selfe.
Bookes.
If any man will lend you the new Herball and such Bookes as make shew of herbes, plants, trees, fishes, foules and beasts of these regions, it may much delight 272
timdum dedit Ortons inortald^rGan Orbi /^vbtanfumCjaiC’iis Oitdium. e^
ABRAHAM ORTELIUS
the great Can, and the nobilitie, and also their merchants to have the view of them : for all things in these partes so much differing from the things of those regions, since they may not be here to see them, by meane of the distance, yet to see those things in a shadow, by this meane will delight them.
The booke of Rates.
TAke with you the booke of Rates, to the ende you may pricke all those commodities there specified, that you shall chance to find in Cambalu, in Quinsey, or in any part of the East, where you shall chance to be.
Parchment.
Rowles of Parchment, for that we may vent much without hurt to the Realme, and it lieth in small roume.
Glew.
To carie Glew, for that we have plentie and want vent. Red Oker for Painters.
To seeke vent because we have great mines of it, and have no vent.
Sope of both kindes.
To try what vent it may have, for that we make of both kinds, and may perhaps make more.
Saffron.	
To try what vent you may have of Saffron, because this realme yeelds the best of the world, and for the e and other labours may set the poore greatly in worke to their reliefe.
Aquavitae.
By new devises wonderful quantities may be made here, and therefore to seeke the vent.
Blacke Conies skins.
To try the vent at Cambalu, for that it lieth towards the North, and for that we abound with the commoditie, and may spare it.
Threed of all colours.
The vent thereof may set our people in worke. in	273	s
To see the vent for it may set our people in worke. A note and Caveat for the Merchant.
That before you offer your commodities to sale, you indevour to learne what commodities the countrey there hath. For if you bring thither velvet, tafFeta, spice, or any such commoditie that you your selfe desire to lade your selfe home with, you must not sell yours deare, least hereafter you purchase theirs not so cheape as you would.
Seeds for sale.
Carie with you for that purpose all sorts of garden seeds, as well of sweete strawing herbs and of flowers, as also of pot herbes and all sorts for roots, &c.
Lead of the first melting.
Lead of the second melting of the slags.
To make triall of the vent of Lead of all kinds.
English iron, and wier of iron and copper.
To try the sale of the same.
Brimstone.
To try the vent of the same, because we abound with it made in the Realme.
Antimonie a Minerali.
To see whether they have any ample use there for it, for that we may lade whole navies of it and have no use of it unlesse it be for some small portion in founding of bels, or a litle that the Alcumists use : of this you may have two sortes at the Apothecaries.
Tinder boxes with Steele, Flint & Matches and Tinder, the Matches to be made of Juniper to avoid the offence of Brimstone.
To trie and make the better sale of Brimstone by shewing the use.
Candles of Waxe to light.
A painted Bellowes.
For that perhaps they have not the use of them.
274
To try the sale, for that it is a natural commoditie of this Realme.
All maner of edge tooles.
To be sold there or to the lesse civil people by the way where you shall touch.
What I would have you there to remember.
To note specially what excellent dying they use in these regions, and therefore to note their garments and ornaments of houses : and to see their Die houses and the Materials & Simples that they use about the same, and to bring musters and shewes of the colours and of the materials, for that it may serve this clothing realme to great purpose.
To take with you for your owne use.
All maner of engines to take fish and foule.
To take with you those things that be in perfection of goodnesse.
For as the goodnesse now at the first may make your commodities in credite in time to come : so false and Sophisticate commodities shall drawe you and all your commodities into contempt and ill opinion.
.