The opinion of Master William Burrough sent to a friend, requiring his judgement for the fittest time of the departure of our ships towards S. Nicholas in Russia.
WHereas you request me to perswade the company not to send their shippes from hence before the fine of May, I do not thinke the same so good a course for them to observe : for you know that the sooner wee 306
sende them hence, the sooner we may looke for their returne. If wee sende them in the beginning of May, The Russian then may they be at Saint Nicholas by the fine of the same moneth : and by that time the greatest parte or beaming of your lading of necessitie must bee come downe, especially May. the flaxe : but if it should fall out so lateward a breaking up of the river of Duyna, that by the ende of May the goods cannot be brought to Saint Nicholas, yet this is alwayes to be accounted for certaine, that before our ships can come thither, the goods may be brought downe to that place : and if through ice the shippes be kept backe any time, the losse and charge of that time toucheth not the companie at all, but the owners of the shippes, and yet will the Owners put that in adventure, rather then tarie longer time before their going hence.
Now seeing by sending our shippes hence in the beginning of May, their arrivall at S. Nicholas may be at the ende of the same moneth, and remaining thirtie dayes there, they may bee laden and come thence by the last of June, and returne home hither by the 10 of August with commodities to serve the market then, it cannot bee denied but we should reape thereby great commodi tie.
But it may be objected, that if all our shippes be sent then to returne as aforesaid, you shall not be able to send us in so much cordage, Waxe and Oyles, as otherwise you should doe if they remained a moneth longer, neither could you by that time perfect your accounts to be sent in them as you would doe.
For answere thereunto this is my meaning : though I wish the greatest part of our shipping to go as aforesaid, yet would I have one good ship or two at the most well furnished in al points that should depart alwaies from hence, betweene the beginning and the 10 day of June : and the same to be conditioned withall to remaine at S. Nicholas from the first arrivall there untill the middest of August, or to be dispatched thence sooner, 3°7
at the will and liking of our factors for the same : by this order these commodities following may ensue
1	You may have our commodities there timely to send up the river before it waxe shallow, to be dispersed in the countrey at your pleasure.
2	The greatest part of our goods may be returned hither timely to serve the first markets.
3	Our late ships remaining so long here may serve to good purpose, for returning answere of such letters as may be sent over land, and received here before their departure.
4	Their remaining so late with you shal satisfie your desire for perfecting your accounts, and may bring such cordage, Waxe, Oile, & other commodities, as you can provide before that time : and chiefly may serve us in
stead to bring home our goods that may be sent us
from Persia.
Now seeing it may be so many wayes commodious to the company to observe this order, without any charge unto them, I wish that you put to your helping hand to further the same.
.