The contents of M. Garlands Commission unto Thomas Simkinson for the bringing of M. John Dee to the Emperour of Russia his Court.
A.D.
1586.
After our accompt 1596.
Riend Thomas Simkinson I pray you goe to Brounswik or Cassil and inquire if Master John Dee be there or where he is, and when you finde him, certifie him howe that I have sent you purposely to knowe where hee doeth remaine, and at your returne I will come and speake
with him my selfe. Also you may certefie him that the Emperour of Russeland having certaine knowledge 445
of his great learning and wisdome is marveilous desirous of him to come into his Countrey. And hath given me his letter with his hand and golden seale at it for to bring him into the Countrey with mee if it be possible, and for his living shewe him that he shall be sure of 2000. pound yeerely, and also all provision for his table out of the Emperours kitchin free : and if he thinke this too little, I will assure him that if he aske asmuch more, hee shall have it, and for his charges into the Countrey, I have sufficient of the Emperours allowance to bring him and all his royally into the Countrey. And because hee may doubt of these proffers, hee shall remaine at the borders untill the Emperour be certified of him, and of his requests, which he would have. And I am sure he shall be conveyed through the land with five hundred horses, and hee shalbe accompted as one of the chiefest in the land next the Emperour. Also shew him howe that my Lord Protectour at my comming away did take me in his armes, and desired me as hee should be my friend to bring him with me, and he would give him of his owne purse yeerely 1000. rubbles besides the Emperours allowance. All these foresaide grauntes and demaunds doe I Thomas Simkinson acknowledge to be spoken by Edward Garland to mee, and to be sent to declare the same unto Master John Dee. And in witnesse that this is of a trueth I have written the same with my owne hand, and thereunto set my name, in Wittingaw, otherwise called Trebona, the 18. of September, Anno 1586.
By me Thomas Simkinson of Hull.
.