To the Queenes most excellent Majestic from the Lord Boris Pheodorovich Godonova.
Y the grace of God great Lord and great Duke Theodore Ivanovich governour of Russia, Volodimer, Mosco, and Novo-grod, King of Cazan and Astracan, Lord of Vobsko, and great Duke of Smolensco, Otver, Ughori, Perme, Viatsky, Bulgary, and other regions, Lord and great Duke
of Novogrod in the low countrey, of Chernigo, of Rezan, Polotsko, Rostove, Jeroslave, Bealozera, and of Lifland, of Udorsky, Obdorsky, Condinsky, and all the countrey of Sibery, and commander of all the North parts, and Lord over the countrey of Iversky, and King of Grusinsky, and of the countrey of Kabardinsky, Cherchasky, and duke of Igorsky, Lord and ruler of many countreys more, &c.
Most resplendent Queene Elizabeth of England, France, and Ireland, &c. his princely Majesties servant, Lord and Master of his horses, and high Steward of his house, and President of the territories of Cazan and Astracan, Boris Pheodorovich Godonova, unto your most excellent Majesty, great Ladie Queene Elizabeth, send my humble commendations. It hath pleased your Majestie to write unto me your gracious and princely letter by your servant Thomas Lind : which letter I received with all humblenesse. During the time of the abode of your messenger Thomas Lind here in the Mosco, it pleased God of his mercifulnesse, and our Lady the mother of God, and holy Saints, by the prayers of our lord and king his Majestie Theodore Ivanovich 434
LETTER FROM BORIS PHEODOROWICH a.d.
1592-over all Russia governour, the right beleever and lover of Christ, to send our Queene and gracious Lady Irene Tfie Empresu a yoong Princesse, to the great joy and comfort of our a kingdome, named Pheodocine. Wherefore we give all honour and glory to the almightie God unspeakeable, whose giftes had beene manifolde with mercie unto us :  for which all wee Christians laud and praise God.
After all this your servant was occasioned to stay untill the comming of your merchants from the sea port.
Touching the letters which you have received from your loving brother our Lord and Master by your ambassadour, therein you perceive sufficiently my good meaning, in travailing for the continuance of amitie and friendship betwixt you mighty great princes, in the which I will continue mine endevour. Also your merchants I have taken into my protection for to defend them for the love I beare to your Majestie. As heeretofore I have done it willingly, and with great care of their good, so I meane to continue so farre as God will give me leave: to the end that brotherly love be holden betweene you Princes without disturbance.
As 1 have beene to your merchants in times past, so now by the permission and commandement of our Lord and Master, I will be their defendour in all causes : and will cause all our authorised people to favour them and to defend them, and to give them free liberty to buy and sell at their pleasure. The merchants doe not certifie your princely Majestie of all our friendship and favour shewed unto them from time to time. And whereas your Majestie hath now written to our Lord and Master for the debts which your merchants ought to have of William Turnebull lately disceased, I having perused your Majesties letter, whereby I am requested to be a meane for the recoverie and obtaining of their sayd debts, I have moved it to our Lord and King his Majestie, that order may be given therein : and that his kinseman Rainold Kitchin with three persons more may be sent over together with the sayd Turnebulles
435
stuffe and other things, as billes, books and writings. All which shall be delivered to your merchants Agent and his fellowes, and in money 600 rubbles of the sayd Turnebulles.
And touching your merchants, I will have a great care over them, and protect them, whereby they shall suffer no damages in their trade : and all kinde of trafficke in merchandise shall be at their libertie.
Written in our Lord and Kings Majesties royall citie of Mosco, in the yeere from the beginning of the world 7101, in the moneth of Januarie.
.