 A briefe and true report of the Honorable voyage unto Cadiz, 1596. of the overthrow of the kings Fleet, and of the winning, sacking, and burning of the Citie, with all other accidents of moment, thereunto appertaining.
Fter that the two most Noble and Renowmed Lords Generals: The L. Robert Earle of Essex, and the L. Charles Howard L. High Admirall of England, were come unto Plymmouth (which was about the beginning of May last, 1596.) being there accompanied with divers
other noble Peeres, as the Earle of Sussex, the L. Thomas Howard, the L. Harbert, the L. Warden Sir Walter Raleigh : the L. Marshall Sir Francis Vere : the L. Burk, Don Christopher young Prince of Portingall, young Count Lodovick of Nassaw, and the Admirall of the Hollanders, Sir John Vanderfoord : besides many other most worthy Knights and Gentlemen of great woorth attending upon this most honorable Action : It pleased them, there to make their abode for the time of that moneth, as well for the new furnishing and revictualing of her Majesties Royall Navie : as also for the expecting of some other ships, which were to come from divers places of the Realme, and were as yet wanting : making that place as it should seeme the Rendevous for all the whole Fleete, thereto complete the full number of al such companies both for sea and land : as was in their noble and deepe wisedomes thought meete and agreed upon.
236
All the time of this their abode there, there was a most zealous and diligent care had for the holy service of God, dayly and reverently to be frequented: and also for other good and civill orders of militarie discipline to be observed, to the exceeding great comfort and rejoycing of all the hearts of the godly and well disposed.
And for that it might the better appeare, that there was small hope of pardon to be expected of the offenders, if they did at any time neglect their duties, about due observation of matters of importance: Their orders, lawes, and decrees being once published : about the 8. or 9. of the same moneth, there were two offenders executed a little without the towne, in a very fayre pleasant greene, called the Ho : the one for beginning of a muteny in his company, the other for running away from his Colours.
And about the same time in the Dutch Regiment, an other for murthering of one of his companions, about a quarrell betweene themselves, rising as it was supposed, upon their drinke, was by order of Martial! law, presently tyed to the partie so murthered, and foorthwith both of them so cast into the sea.
Moreover, about the 28. of the same moneth, a certaine Lieutenant (whose name I will forbeare) was by sound of Drumme publikely in all the streetes disgraced, or rather after a sort disgraded, and cashierd for bearing any farther Office at that time, for the taking of money by way of corruption, of certaine prest souldiers in the Countrey, and for placing of others in their roomes, more unfit for service, and of lesse sufficiency and abilitie. This severe executing of justice at the very first did breed such a deepe terror in the hearts of the whole armie, that it seemed to cut off all occasion of the like disorder for ever afterwards to be attempted.
And here before their departure from Plymmouth, it pleased their Lordships to publish in print, and make knowen to all the world, especially to such as whom it concerned, and that both in the Latine, French, Dutch,
237
English and Spanish tongue, what were the true, just, and urgent causes, that at this time provoked her Majestie, to undertake the preparing and setting forth of this so great a Navie, annexing thereunto a foil declaration, what was their good will and pleasure should be done and performed of all them that ment not to incurre their owne private present daungers, or else were willing to avoyde her Majesties future indignation and displeasure.
Likewise now, at the same instant, their owne most provident and godly decrees, which they had devised for the honest cariage of every particular person in their degrees and vocation, were made knowen to all men, and published in sundry writings, with divers great punishments, set downe and appointed for the wilfull offenders and breakers of the same.
Thus then, all things being in very good order and well appointed, the most holy name of our Omnipotent God being most religiously and devoutly called upon, and his blessed and sacred Communion being divers times most reverently and publikely celebrated: These two most noble personages, with all their honorable Associats, and most famous worthy Knights, Gentlemen, Captaines, Leaders, and very willing and expert Souldiers, and Mariners, being furnished with 150. good sayle of shippes or thereabout: In the name of the most High & everliving God, and with all true and faithful obedience, to her sacred Majesty, to the infinite good and tranquilli tie of our Countrey, and to the perpetuali glory, and triumphant renowme of the eternall memory of their honorable names to all posterity, the first day of June embarked themselves, weighed Ancre, and hoysed up sayle, and put to sea onward their journey from the Sownds of Plymmouth.
The winde, at the first setting foorth, seemed very favourable : but yet in the evening growing very scant, and all that night falling more and more against us, and we having sayled no further then to a certaine place 238
called Dodman head: we were constrained the next day, to make our returne to the road of Plymmouth againe, and there in the Sownds to lie at ancre for that night.
About this time, and in this very place, by good fortune there came to my handes a prayer in English, touching this present Action, and made by her Majestie, as it was voyced : The prayer seemed to me to be most excellent, aswell for the matter, as also for the manner, and therefore for certaine divers good motives which then presently came to my minde, and whereof hereafter in his more convenient time and place, I will make farther mention, I presumed at that very instant to translate it into Latine.
The Prayer is thus.
MOst Omnipotent maker and guide of all our worlds masse, that onely searchest and fadomest the bottome of all our hearts conceits, and in them seest the true originals of all our actions intended : thou that by thy foresight doest truely discerne, how no malice of revenge, nor quittance of injury, nor desire of bloodshed, nor greedinesse of lucre hath bred the resolution of our now set out Army, but a heedfull care, & wary watch, that no neglect of foes, nor over-suretie of harme might breed either daunger to us, or glory to them : these being the grounds wherewith thou doest enspire the mind, we humbly beseech thee with bended knees, prosper the worke, and with best forewindes guide the journey, speed the victory, and make the returne the advancement of thy glory, the tryumph of their fame, and surety to the Realme, with the least losse of the English blood. To these devout petitions Lord give thou thy blessed grant.
My homely translation is thus.
SUmme praepotens Deus, immensae hujus totius nostri mundi molis fabricator & Rector, qui solus perscrutaris intimos cordis nostri sensus, & ad fundum usque nostrarum cogitationum explorando penetras, ac in eis, 239
quid ver^, & ex animo cogitemus, & quae sint actionum nostrarum rationes, ac fundamenta, cognoscis : Tu, qui ea, quae in te est, ab omni aeternitate praescientia, vides, quod nec aliqua ulciscendi malitiosa cupiditas, nec injuriarum referendarum, desiderium, nec sanguinis effundendi sitis, nec alicujus lucri, quaestusve aviditus ad istam classem praeparandam, & emittendam nos commoverit : sed potiiis, quod provida quaedam cura, solersque vigilantia huc nos impulerit: ne vel inimicorum nostrorum neglectus, vel status nostri firmitatis nimium secura cogitatio, aut illis gloriam & honorem, aut nobis damnum & periculum pariat: Cum, inquam, haec sint nostri, quicquid attentatur, negotii fundamenta : cumque tu hunc nobis animum, mentemque injeceris, ut istud aggrederemur : curvatis genibus a te humillimi petimus, ut velis hoc nostrum incoeptum secundissimi fortunare, totum iter prosperrimis flatibus dirigere, celerem & expeditam victoriam nobis concedere, reditumque talem nostris militibus elargiri, qualis & nomini tuo incrementum gloriae, & illis famae, laudisque triumphum, & Regno nostro firmam tranquillitatem possit apportare : idque cum minimo Anglorum sanguinis dispendio. His nostris religiosis petitionibus concede, Domine, sacrosanctam & annuentem voluntatem tuam.
After that we had anchored at Plymmouth that night, as I have said, the third of June very early in the morning, having a reasonable fresh gale of winde, we set sayle, and kept our course againe, and the ninth of the same moneth comming something neere to the North cape, in a maner in the same altitude, or not much differing, which was about xliii. degrees, and something more, yet bearing so, as it was impossible to bee descried from the land : There it pleased the Lords to call a select Councell, which was alwayes done by hanging out of a flagge of the armes of England, and shooting ofF of a great warning peece. Of this select or privie Councell, were no moe then these : The two Lords general,
240
the Lord Thomas Howard, the Lorde Warden Sir Walter Raleigh, the Lord Martiali Sir Francis Vere, Sir George Cary master of the Ordinance, Sir Coniers Clifford, and Sir Anthony Ashley, Clarke of the sayde Counsell. And when it pleased the Lords general to  call a common Counsell (as often times they did upon weightie matters best knowen to their honours) then they would cause an other kinde of flagge to be hanged out, which was the Redcrosse of S. George, and was very easie to be discerned from the other that appertained onely to the select Counsell, and so often as this flagge of Saint George was hanged out, then came all the Masters and Captaines of all the ships, whose opinions were to be demaunded, in such matters as appertayned unto this sayd select Counsell: It was presently concluded, that our course in sayling should foorthwith be altered, and that we should beare more into the West, for some purposes to them best knowen.
At that very instant many letters of instructions were addressed and sent to every particular Master and Cap-taine of the Ships : What the contentes of those letters of instructions were it was not as yet knowne unto any, neither was it held meet to be enquired or knowen of any of us. But under the titles and superscriptions of every mans particuler letter these words were endorsed. Open not these letters on pain of your lives, unles we chance to be scattered by tempest, and in that case open them, and execute the contents thereof: but if by mishap you fall into your enemies hand, then in any case cast them into the sea, sealed as they are. It should seeme that these letters did conteine in them the principali place and meaning of this entended action, which was hitherto by their deepe foresights kept so secret, as no man to my knowledge either did, or coulde so much as suspect it, more then themselves, who had the onely managing thereof. A conceite in my judgement of greatest moment in the world, to effect any matter of importance. I meane, to entertaine those two
iv	241	Q
vertues, Fidem, & Taciturnitatem : so much commended by the old writers. And if there was ever any great designement, in this our age, and memorie, discreetly, faithfully, and closely caried, I assure my selfe it was this, and though it were but in respect of that poynt onely: yet for such faithfull secrecie, it deserveth immortali praise.
All this while, our ships, God be thanked, kept in a most excellent good order, being devided into five squadrons: that is to say, The Earle of Essex, the Lord Admirall, the Lord Thomas Howard, the Lord Warden Sir Walter Raleigh, and the Admirall of the Hollanders. All which squadrons, albeit they did every day separate themselves of purpose, by the distance of certaine leagues, as well to looke out for such shippes as were happily under sayle, as also for the better procuring of sea-roome: yet alwayes commonly eyther that day, or the next day, towarde evening, they came all together, with friendly salutations and gratulations one to an other : which they terme by the name of Hayling : a ceremonie done solemnly, and in verie good order, with sound of Trumpets and noyse of cheerefull voyces : and in such sort performed as was no small encouragement one to the other, beside a true report of all such accidents, as had happened in their squadrons.
Hitherto, as I sayde, our journey was most prosperous, and all our shippes in very good plight, more then that the Mary Rose, by some mischance, either sprang or spent her foreyarde, and two dayes after Sir Robert Crosse had in a manner the like mischance.
Nowe being thus betweene the North cape, and cape S. Vincent, and yet keeping such a course a loofe, that by no meanes, those from the shoare might be able to descrie us: The tenth of June, a French Barke, and a Fleming comming from the coast of Barbarie were brought in by some of our companie : but they were both of them very honourably and well used by the Lords general: and so after a fewe dayes tarrying, were 242
1596. peaceably sent away, after that they had conferred with them about such matters, as was thought good in their honorable wisedomes.
The twelfth of the same moneth, Sir Richard Levison Knight, assisted with Sir Christopher Blunt, fought with three Hamburgers, and in that fight slewe two of them, and hurt eleven, and in the ende brought them all three in : and this was the very first hansell and mayden-head (as it were) of any matter of importance, or exployt woorthy observation that was done in the way outward of this honorable voyage, and was so well perfourmed of those most worthy Gentlemen, as every man highly commended them for their great valure, and discretion, and no lesse rejoyced at this their fortunate successe.
The next day after, Sir Richard Weston meeting with a Flemming, who refused to vale his foretoppe, with the like good courage and resolution, attempted to bring him in. The fight continued very hot be-tweene them, for a good space: in the end the Swan, wherein the sayd Sir Richard was, had her fore-beake strooken off: and having spent before in fight the one side of her tire of Ordinance, while she prepared to cast about, and to bestow on him the other side, in the meane time the Fleming taking this opportunity, did get almost halfe a league from him : and so for that time made his escape. And yet the next day after, the sayd Flemming being in a maner got to the very mouth of the River up to Lisbone, was taken, and brought in  by M. Dorrell, being Captaine of the John and Francis of London. Thus by deviding their squadrons, and spreading the whole sea over a mighty way, there could not so much as the least pinke passe but she was espied and brought in.
The 13. 14. and 15. dayes, certaine little stragling Caravels were taken by certaine of the Fleete, and in one of them a young beggarly Fryer utterly unlearned, with a great packet of letters for Lisbon : the poore wretches were marvellously well used by the Lords
243
general, and that Caravel, and the like still as they were taken were commaunded to give their attendance, and their Honors did understand what they might of these poore men, of the estate of Spaine for that present.
About this time and in this place it was, that first in all my life time I did see the flying fishes, who when they are hardly pinched and chased by the Bonitoes and other great fishes, then to avoyde the daunger, they presently mount up, and forsake the water, and betake themselves to the benefite of their winges and make their flight, which commonly is not above five or sixe score, or there about, and then they are constrayned to fall downe into the water againe, and it is the Mariners opinion that they can fly no longer then their wings be wet. The fish it selfe is about the bignesse of a Mack-rell or a great white Hearing, and much of that colour and making, with two large wings shaped of nature very cunningly, and with great delight to behold, in all the world much like to our Gentlewomens dutch Fans, that are made either of paper, or parchment, or silke, or other stuffe, which will with certaine pleights easily runne and fold themselves together. One of these flying fishes was presented to my L. Admirall by a fisher man, and newly taken in his L. returne from Cadiz, and then I had good leasure and opportunitie to view it.
The 18. day early in the morning wee tooke an Irish man, and he came directly from Cadiz, having beene there but the day before at twelve of the clocke at high noone. This man being examined, told truely that there was now great store of shipping at Cadiz, and with them xviii. or xix. gallies in a readinesse, and that among those ships there were divers of the kings best: and namely, that the Philip of Spaine was amongst them, but what their intent was, hee could not tell. This man was commanded also to give his attendance.
The 20. of June being Sunday, we came before Cadiz very early in the morning, and in all this time as yet, the whole Navy had not lost either by sicknesse or by any 244
other maner of wayes sixe men to my knowledge: as for the Dutch company, I am not able precisely to say what happened there, for that they were no part of our charge to be looked unto, but were a regiment entire of themselves, and by themselves to be provided for, either for their diet, or for the preservation of their healths by phisicke.
Thus then I say, being all in good plight and strong, the 20. of June wee came to Cadiz, and there very earely in the morning presented our selves before the Towne, ryding about a league or something lesse, from it. The sea at that instant went marvelous high, and the winde was exceeding large. Notwithstanding, a Councell being called, our Lords general foorthwith attempted with all expedition to land some certaine companies of their men at the West side of the Towne, by certaine long boats, light horsemen, pynnesses, and barges made for the purpose, but could not compasse it, and in the attempting thereof, they chanced to sinke one of their Barges, with some foure score good souldiers well appointed in her, and yet by good hap and great care, the men were all saved excepting viii. And therefore they were con-strayned to put off their landing till an other more convenient time.
That morning very timely, there lighted a very faire dove upon the maine yard of the L. Admirals ship, and there she sate very quietly for the space of 3. or 4. houres, being nothing dismayed all that while, every man gazed and looked much upon her, and spake their minds and opinions, yet all concluding by no meanes to disquiet her : I for my part, tooke it for a very good omen and boading, as in trueth (God be thanked) there fell out nothing in the end to the contrary. And as at our very first comming to Cadiz this chanced, so likewise on the very last day of our departing from the same towne, another Dove presented her selfe in the selfe same order into the same ship, and presently grew wonderfull tame and familiar to us all, and did so still keepe us company, even till our arrivall here in England.
245
We no sooner presented our selves, but presently a goodly sort of tall Spanish ships came out of the mouth of the Bay of Cadiz, the Gallies accompanying them in such good order, and so placed as all of them might well succour each other, and therewithal! kept themselves very close to their towne, the castle, and the forts, for their better guard and defence, abiding there still, and expecting our farther determination. All that day passed, being very rough and boysterous, and litle or nothing could be done, more then that about the evening there  passed some friendly and kinde salutations sent one from the other in warlike maner, by discharging certain great peeces, but to my knowledge no hurt done at all, or else very litle.
A carefull and diligent watch was had all that night thorough out the whole armie, and on monday morning being the 21. day, the winde and weather being become moderate and favourable, betweene five and sixe of the clocke in the morning, our ships in the name of almightie God, and in defence of the honour of England, without any farther delay, with all speed, courage, and alacritie, did set upon the Spanish ships, being then under sayle, and making out of the mouth of the Bay of Cadiz, up toward Puente de Suago on Granada side, being in number lix. tall ships, with xix. or xx. Gallies attending upon them, sorted in such good order, and reasonable distance as they might still annoy us, and alwayes relieve themselves interchangeably: having likewise the Castle, Forts, and Towne, continually to assist them and theirs, and alwayes readie to play upon us and ours.
In most mens opinions it seemed that the enemy had a wonderful advantage of us, all circumstances being well weighed, but especially the straightnesse of the place, and the natural forme and situation of the Bay it selfe, being rightly considered. For albeit the very Bay it selfe is very large and exceeding beautifull, so that from Cadiz to Port S. Mary, is some vi. or vii. English miles over or there abouts, yet be there many rockes, shelves, sands 246
and shallowes in it, so that the very chanell & place for sea roome, is not above 2. or 3. miles, yea and in some places, not so much, for the ships of any great burthen, to make way in, but that they must either be set on ground or else constrained to run fowle one on another. All this notwithstanding, with great and invincible courage, the Lords generail presently set upon them, and sorting out some such convenient ships, as to their honorable wisedomes seemed fittest for that times service, they were driven to take some other course then before had beene by them entended. Wherefore upon a grave consultation had by a select Counsell, what great dangers might ensue upon so mightie a disadvantage as appeared in all probability, if it were not by good and sound judgement prevented, & therwithall in their singular wisedomes foreseeing that some great stratageme might be practised by the enemy, either by fire-worke, or some other subtill politike devise, for the hazarding of her Majesties ships of honor in so narrow a place, thus with al expedition they concluded that the Vice-admirall, the L. Thomas Howard, that most noble L. Howard (whose exceeding great magnanimity, courage, & wisedome, joyned with such an honorable kind of sweet courtesie, bountie, and liberalitie, as is not able by me & my weakenes to be expressed, hath wonne him all the faithfull loving hearts of as many as ever have had any maner of dealing with him) This L. Thomas, I say, in ye Non Pareille for that time, & the Reare Admirall Sir Walter Raleigh (a man of marvelous great worth & regard, for many his exceeding singular great vertues, right fortitude & great resolutenes in all matters of importance) in the Warspight associated with divers most famous worthy knights, namely, Sir Francis Vere the L. Martiali in the Rainbow, Sir George Cary M. of the Ordinance, in the Mary rose, Sir Robert Southwell in the Lyon, gentlemen for all laudable good vertues, and for perfect courage & discretion in all military actions, of as great praise & good desert as any gentlemen of their degree whosoever,
247
having with them some of ye ships of London, and some of the Dutch squadron of reasonable burthen, should leade the dance, & give the onset, and that the two most noble Lords generail with some others of their companies, should in their convenient time & order, second the maine battell. The fight being begunne and growen very hot, the L. general the Earle of Essex, (whose infinite princely vertues, with triumphant fame, deserve to be immortalized) being on Port S. Mary side, upon a sudden & unlocked for of others, thrust himselfe among the formost into the maine battell. The other most honorable L. general (whose singular vertues in all respects are of such an excellencie & perfection, as neither can my praise in any part increase them, nor any mans envy any whit blemish or diminish them) understanding, the most noble Earle to be in fight among them, & perceiving by the M. of his ship, the Arke royall, that for lacke of water, it was not possible, that he might put any neerer, without farther delay, called presently for his Pynnesse, and in the same Pynnesse put himselfe, and his honorable son L. William Howard that now is, aboord the Honor de la mer, & there remained in the fight till the battell was ended. The fight was very terrible, and most hideous to the beholder by the con-tinuall discharging of those roaring thundering great peeces, on all sides, and so continued doubtful till about one or two of the clocke in the afternoone: about which time the Philip, whom in very truth, they had all most fancie unto, began to yeeld and give over, her men that remained alive shifting for themselves as they were able, and swimming and running a shoare with all the hast that they could possibly, & therewithal!, at the very same instant themselves fired their ship, and so left her, & presently thereupon a great Argosie, with an other mighty great ship, fired themselves in ye like maner. Immediatly hereupon, the residue of the ships, ran them- selves on ground, as farre from us as they could, and therby purchased their owne safety, or rather breathing
248
/n^n an fJrytna/ ty Henry Cornelius V]*oom.
///.» - Lt/hyraph from an angtnal Letter tn the Pofjteffian rf
John Thane.
space for the time. Of them all two faire ships only were boorded and taken by our men with most part of their furniture in them, the one called S. Matthy, a ship by estimation of some xii. hundred tunne, and the other S. Andrew, being a ship of not much lesser burthen. The Gallies, seeing this suddaine great victorious overthrow, made all the hast they could toward the Bridge called Puente de Sua?o, and there shrowded themselves in such sort as our shippes could not by any meanes possible come nigh them for lacke of water.
The Spanish ships in all were lix. & as is sayd, all tall ships & very richly furnished and well appointed, whereof some of them were bound for the Indies, and other fraighted and furnished for Lisbon, as themselves affirme : and had we not come that very time that we did, (which for my part, I do not attribute so much unto meere chance, as to some secret deepe insight and foreknowledge of the two most worthy Lords general, who no doubt spared for no cost or labour for true intelligence) we had certainely mist of them all.
Of what great wealth and riches these ships were, that I leave to other mens judgement and report, but sure I am, that themselves offered two millions and a halfe of ducats for the redemption of the goods and riches that were in them : which offer of theirs, albeit it was accepted of the Lords general, and should have beene received, yet we were defeated of it, as hereafter shall be more at large declared.
What maner of fight this was, & with what courage performed, and with what terror to the beholders continued, where so many thundring tearing peeces were for so long a time discharged, I leave it to the Reader to thinke & imagine. Yet such was the great mercy & goodnes of our living God, that in all this cruell terrible fight, in the end, there were not either slaine or hurt by any maner of meanes (excepting one mischance that happened, wherof I will by & by make mention) many above the number of 100. of our men : notwithstanding
249
divers of our shippes were many times shot thorow and thorow : yea and some of them no lesse then two and twentie times, as I was enformed by credible report of the Captaines and Masters themselves. I knowe not of any other hurt done, saving onely that Sir Robert Southwell, who alwayes shewed himselfe a most valiant resolute knight in all this action, making a litle too much haste with his Pinnesse to boord the Philip, had there his said Pinnesse burnt with the Philip at the same instant, and yet by good care and diligence his men were saved.
One other mischance (as I said) there happened, and it was thus : One of the Flemings flieboats, who had, in all the conflict before, caried himselfe very well and valiantly, about ten of the clocke while the fight continued sharpest, chanced by great negligence and misfortune, to be fired and blowen up by his owne powder, who could not have any fewer in him, then one hundred fighting men by all supposall, and so in the very twinckling of an eye, both shippe and men were all cast away, excepting vii. or viii. which by very good fortune, and great care and diligence of some of the other ships were saved.
Immediatly upon this notable victory without any farther stay in all the world, the Lord general the Earle of Essex put to shore, and landed about 3000. shot, & pikemen : of the which number the one halfe was presently dispatched to the bridge Puente de Sua?o, under the conduct of three most famous worthy knights, Sir Christopher Blunt, Sir Coniers Clifford, & Sir Thomas Gerard : with the other halfe, being about fifteene hundred, the most noble Earle of Essex himselfe, being accompanied with divers other honorable Lords, namely the Earle of Sussex, the Lord Harbert, the Lord Burk, Count Lodovick of Nassaw, the Lord Martiali Sir Francis Vere, with many other worthy Knights, and men of great regard, who all in that dayes service did most valiantly behave themselves, with all expedition 250
possible marched on foote toward the towne of Cadiz, which was about three English miles march. That time of the day was very hot and faint and the way was all of dry deepe slyding sand in a manner, and beside that, very uneven, and by that meanes so tiresome and painefull as might be. The enemie having reasonable companie both of horse and footemen, stoode in a readinesse some good distance without the towne to welcome us, and to encounter the Lorde general. But the most famous Earle with his valiant Troopes, rather running in deede in good order, then marching, hastened on them with such unspeakeable courage and celeritie, as within one houres space and lesse, the horsemen were all discomfited and put to flight, their leader being strooken downe at the very first encounter, whereat the footemen being wonderfully dismayed and astonished at the unexspected manner of the Englishmens kinde of such fierce and resolute fight, retyred themselves with all the speede possible that they could, to recover themselves into the Towne againe, which being done by them, with farre swifter legges then manly courage, our men were enforced to skale the walles : which thing in very deede, although it was not  without great danger and difficulty to be perfourmed : Yet such was the invincible resolution, and the wonderfull dexterity of the English, that in one halfe houre or thereabout, the enemie was repulsed, and the towne wall possessed, by the noble Earle himselfe, being in all this action, either the very first man or els in a maner joined with the first.
The towne walles being then possessed, and the English Ensigne being there displayed upon them, with all speede possible they proceeded on to march through the towne, making still their waie with sworde and shot so well as they could, being still fought withall at every turne.
Immediately upon this most famous entrie, the noble Earle, (according to their resolutions, as I take it, put
251
downe before) was seconded by the noble L. Admirall in person, who was accompanied, with the noble L. Thomas Howard, the most worthy gentleman his sonne, now L. Howard, Sir Robert Southwell, Sir Richard Levison, and with divers other gentlemen, his L. followers of good account: his colours being advanced by that valiant resolute gentleman, (a man beautified with many excellent rare gifts, of good learning and understanding) S. Edward Hobby Knight. And thus he likewise marching with al possible speede on foote, notwithstanding his L. many yeres, the intolerable heate for the time, and the overtiring tedious deepe sands, with other many impediments : Yet in good time, joyned himselfe with the Earle and his companies, and gave them the strongest, and best assistance that he could.
Thus then the two Lords general with their companies being joyned together, and proceeding so farre as the market place, there they were hotly encountered, where and at what time, that worthy famous knight Sir John Winkfield, being sore wounded before on the thigh, at the very entry of the towne, and yet for all that no whit respecting himselfe, being caried away with the care he had to encourage and direct his company, was with the shot of a musket in the head most unfortunately slaine.
And thus before eight of the clocke that night were these two most noble Lords General, Masters of the market place, the forts, and the whole Towne and all, onely the Castle as yet holding out, & from time to time as they could, still annoying them with seven battering pieces. By this time night began to grow on, and a kind of peace or intermission was obtained by them of the Castle : to whome the Lords general had signified : that unlesse before the next day in the morning they would absolutely render themselves, they should looke for no mercy, but should every one be put to the sword : upon which message they tooke deliberation that night: but in the morning before breake of day 252
they hanged out their flag of truce, and so without any further composition did yeeld themselves absolutely to their mercy, and delivered up the Castle.
And yet notwithstanding all this, in the night time while they had this respite to pause, and deliberate about the peacemaking, there were divers great and suddaine alarms given : which did breed some great outrages and disorder in the towne. At every which alarme, the two Lordes general shewed themselves marvelous ready & forward, insomuch that at the very first alarme, skant wel furnished with any more defence then their shirts, hose, and dublets, & those too altogether in a maner untied, they were abroad in the streetes themselves, to see the uttermost of it. But for that it is not as yet very well knowen (or at the least not well knowen unto me) either wherfore, or by whom these alarmes were attempted : I am therefore to intreat, that a bare report, that such a thing was done, may suffice.
These things being done, and this surrender being made, present proclamation was published, that the fury now being past, all men should surcease from all maner of blood and cruell dealing, and that there should no kind of violence or hard usage be offered to any, either man, woman or child, upon paine of death : And so permitting the spoyle of so much of the towne as was by them thought meete, to the common souldiers for some certaine dayes, they were continually in counsell about other grave directions, best knowen to their honorable wisdomes.
This honorable and mercifull Edict I am sure was streightly and religiously observed of the English: But how well it was kept by the Dutch, I will nether affirme, nor yet denie. For I perceive betweene them and the Spaniards there is an implacable hartburning, and therefore as soone as the Dutch squadron was espied in the fight, immediatly thereupon both they of Sivil and S. Lucar and also some of some other places did not onely arrest all such Dutch ships, as delt with them friendly 253
by the way of traffick & Marchandise, and so confiscated their goods, but also imprisoned the Marchants and Owners of the same, and, as the report goeth, did intreat many of them with extreame cruelty thereupon.
In the meane while the very next day being the two and twenty day of June, all the Spanish shippes which were left on ground in the Bay of Cadiz, where the great overthrowe had beene but the day before, were by the Spaniards themselves there set on fire, and so from that time forward they never left burning of them, till every  one of them, goods and all, as farre as wee know were burnt and consumed. This their doing was much marvelled at of us, and so much the more, for that, as I sayd before, there had bene made some offer for the redemption and saving of the goods, and it was not to them unknowen that this their offer was not misliked, but in all probabilitie should have bene accepted. The common opinion was, that this was done either by the appointment of the Duke de Medina Sidonia, or els by expresse commandement from the higher powers.
Not long after the same time (three dayes as I remember) the gallies that were runne on ground, did quitte themselves also out of that place, and by the bridge of the Hand called Puente de Sua?o, made their way round about the same Hand, and so by putting themselves to the maine sea, escaped to a towne called Rotta, not farre off, but something up towards the Towne of Saint Lucars, and there purchased their safety by that meanes.
Thus was this notable victorie, as well by sea as by land, both begunne and in effect perfourmed, within the compasse, in a maner, of fourteene houres: A thing in trueth so strange and admirable, as in my judgement will rather bee wondered at then beleeved of posteritie. And if ever any notable exploit in any age was comparable to Caesars Veni, Vidi, Vici, certainely in my poore opinion it was this.
2S4
Here it is to be wished (and perchance of some too it is looked for) that every mans particular worthy acte in this dayes service, with the parties names also, should be put downe, that thereby both they and their good deserts might be registred to all posteritie: and for my part I would it were so, and wish I were able to doe it. But for that I confesse it is a matter that passeth my power, yea, and for that I thinke it also a thing impossible to be precisely perfourmed by any other, I am to crave pardon for that I rather leave it out altogether, then presume to doe it maymedly: and in this point I referre the Reader onely to the Mappe that is set foorth of this journey, where it is in some parte conveniently touched and specified.
The Towne of it selfe was a very beautifull towne, and a large, as being the chiefe See of the Bishop there, and having a goodly Cathedrall Church in it, with a right goodly Abbey, a Nunnery, and an exceeding fine College of the Jesuites, and was by natural situation, as also by very good fortification, very strong, and tenable enough in all mens opinions of the better judgement. Their building was all of a kind of hard stone, even from the very foundation to the top, and every house was in a manner a kind of a fort or Castle, altogether flat-roofed in the toppe, after the Turkish manner, so that many men together, and that at ease, might walke thereon: having upon the house top, great heapes of weighty stoanes piled up in such good order, as they were ready to be throwen downe by every woman most easily upon such as passed by, and the streetes for the most part so exceeding narrow, (I thinke to avoide the intolerable great heat of the Sunne) as but two men or three at the most together, can in any reasonable sorte march thorough them, no streete being broader commonly then I suppose Watling streete in London to be.
The towne is altogether without glasse, excepting the Churches, yet with faire comely windowes, and with faire grates of iron to them, and have very large folding leaves 255
of wainscot or the like. It hath very fewe Chimnies in it, or almost none at all: it may be some one chimney in some one or other of the lower out roomes of lest account, serving for some necessary uses, either to wash in, or the like, or els nowe and then perchance for the dressing of a dish of meate, having, as it should seeme unto me, alwayes a greater care and respect how to keepe themselves from all kind of great heat, then how to provide for any store of great roste. It had in it by report of them that should best know it, some foure thousand and moe, of very good able fighting men, and sixe hundred horsemen at the least. No question but that they were well furnished of all things appertaining thereunto, especially so many good ships lying there, and being so well stored with all manner of munition, shot, and powder, as they were.
Whether they had knowledge of our comming or no, I can say nothing to it: Themselves give it out that they understood not of it, but onely by a Caravel the Friday at evening before we came. But whether they knew it or no, thus much I dare boldly affirme, that if the English had bene possessed of that or the like Towne, and had bene but halfe so well provided as they were, they would have defended it for one two moneths at the least, against any power whatsoever in al Christendome. But surely GOD is a mighty GOD, and hath a wonderfull secret stroke in all matters, especially of weight and moment. Whether their hearts were killed at the mighty overthrow by sea, or whether they were amased at the invincible courage of the English, which was more then ordinary, caring no more for either small shot or great, then in a maner for so many hailestones, or whether the remorse of a guilty conscience toward the  English nation, for their dishonorable and divelish practises, against her Sacred Majestie, and the Realme, (a matter that easily begetteth a faint heart in a guilty minde) or what other thing there was in it I know not, but be it spoken to their perpetuali shame and infamie, 256
there was never thing more resolutely perfourmed of the couragious English, nor more shamefully lost of the bragging Spaniard.
Of what wealth this towne should be, I am not able to resolve the asker: for I confesse that for mine owne part, I had not so much good lucke, as to be partaker so much as of one pennie, or penny worth. Howbeit my ill fortune maketh that towne never a whit the poorer. But as it should appeare by the great pillage by the common souldiers, and some mariners too, and by the goodly furnitures, that were defaced by the baser people, and thereby utterly lost and spoyled, as not woorth the carying away, and by the over great plenty of Wine, Oyle, Almonds, Olives, Raisins, Spices, and other rich grocery wares, that by the intemperate disorder of some of the rasher sort were knockt out, and lay trampled under feete, in every common high way, it should appeare that it was of some very mighty great wealth to the first owners, though perchance, not of any such great commodi tie to the last subduers, for that I judge that the better part was most ryotously and intemperately spent and consumed. A disorder in mine opinion very much to be lamented, and if it might be by any good meanes remedied, in my conceit, it were a most honourable device.
The Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday following, the Lords general spent in counsell, about the disposing of all matters, aswell touching the towne and prisoners, as also concerning all other matters, thought meete of them in their honourable wisedomes, and in all that meane while did shew such honourable bounty and mercy, as is not able to be expressed. For not onely the lives of every one were spared, but also there was an especial care had, that al the Religious, as wel men as women, should be well and favourably intreated, whom freely without any maner of ransome or other molestation, they caused to be safely transported over to Port Saint Marie, a towne in a manner as fayre as Cadiz: but at that time,
iv	257	R
as the case did stand, certainely knowen to be of no wealth in the world, and it was some sixe or seven miles distant over against Cadiz, in a maner as Paules is against Southwarke, on the other side of the Bay, in a part of Andaluzia, subject to the territory of the Duke de Medina Sidonia.
Moreover, at the same instant they did appoint that worthy knight Sir Amias Preston, and some others in some convenient Barkes, to transport over to the sayd Towne safely and in good order, a hundred or moe of the better sort of ancient gentlewomen, and marchants wives, who were suffered to put upon themselves, some of them two, yea, some three sutes of apparell, with some convenient quanti tie of many Jewels, Chaines, and other ornaments belonging to their estate and degree. Such was the heroicall liberality, and exceeding great clemencie, of those most honourable Lords general, thereby, as it should seeme unto mee, beating downe that false surmised opinion, which hath bene hitherto commonly spread abroad, and setled among the Spaniards : which is, That the English doe trouble them and their countries, more for their golde, riches and pearle &c. then for any other just occasion. Whereas by these their honourable dealings it is manifest to all the world, that it is onely in respect of a just revenge for the manifolde injuries, and most dishonourable practises that have beene from time to time attempted by them against us and our nation, and also in the defence of the true honour of England : which they have sought, and daylie doe seeke, by so many sinister and reprochfull devices, so much as in them lieth, to deface.
Upon Saturday being the 26. Sir John Winkfield knight was buried, in honourable and warlike manner, so farre foorth as the circumstances of that time and place could permit. At whose funerals the Navie discharged a great part of their Ordinance, in such order, as was thought meete and convenient by the Lords Generals commandement.
258
The twenty seventh day being Sunday, in the Abbey the divine service was had, and a learned Sermon was made there by one Master Hopkins, the right honourable Earle of Essex his Preacher, a man of good learning and sweete utterance, and even there the same day, something before the sermon was made, these worthie Gentlemen following were knighted by the Lords General. And here I am to signifie by the way that two of these were knighted three or foure dayes before, and some three or foure moe were knighted after that time, upon certaine occasions : but yet I holde it best (and I trust without offence) to recite their names in this place altogether.
The names of such noble men and gentlemen, as I1- 6l6-] were knighted at Cadiz in June 1596 by the two most honourable Lordes general.
Olr Samuel Bagnol.	Sir John Leigh, alias Lee. June 21. 22.
O Sir Arthur Savage.	Sir Richard Weston.
The Earle of Sussex.	Sir Richard Wainman.
The Lord Harbert.	Sir James Wootton.	27-
The Lord Burk.	Sir Richard Ruddal.
Count Lodowick.	Sir Robert Mansfield.
Sir William Howard.	Sir William Mounson.
Sir George D’Eureux.	Sir John Bowles.
Sir Henry Nevel.	Sir Edward Bowes.
Sir Edmund Rich.	Sir Humfrey Druel.
Sir Richard Leven.	Sir Amias Preston.
Sir Peter Egomort.	Sir Robert Remington.
Sir Anthonie Ashley.	Sir John Buck.
Sir Henry Leonard.	Sir John Morgan.
Sir Richard Levison.	Sir John Aldridg.
Sir Horatio Vere.	Sir John Asshindon.
Sir Arthur Throckmorton.	Sir Matthew Browne.
Sir Miles Corbet.	Sir John Acton.
Sir Edward Conway.	Sir Thomas Gates.
Sir Oliver Lambert.	Sir Gilly Mericke.
Sir Anthony Cooke.	Sir Thomas Smith.
	259
Sir Christopher Heydon.
Sir Francis Popham.
Sir Philip Woodhouse.
Sir Alexander Clifford.
Sir Maurice Barkley.
Sir Charles Blunt.
Sir George Gifford.
Sir Robert Crosse.
Sir James Escudamor.
Sir Urias Leigh.
Sir William Pooley.
Sir Thomas Palmer.
Sir John Stafford.
Sir Robert Lovel.
Sir John Gylbert.
Sir William Harvie.
Sir John Gray.
Don Christ.prince of Portingal
Sir John Vanderfoord, Admirall of the Hollanders.
Sir Robert Dudley. 8. August.
I am not curious in placing these gentlemen, but put them downe at a venture. Only 1 have observed, as neere as I could, the just day and time when they were created. And I trust where the place of it selfe is so worthy and equall, there the bare naming and placing of the parties, shal breede no offence, or make a disparity. The two gentlemen that were last knighted received their knighthood in the way of our returne from Cadiz : the one of them upon the sea, not farre from the Bay of the Groyne, at what time our ships stood upon their staies for a space, while certaine Pinnasses were sent to descrie what shipping was at the Groine : The other at Plimmouth in the open streete, when the Lords general came from the Sermon. The one a man of long service, and good desert among the Dutch : the other of so many good parts of a worthy gentleman, as the like are seidome seene to concurre in any.
I spake in ye beginning of her Majesties praier, which I presumed (though unworthy) to translate into Latine : and nowe at this very time, there was some opportunity offered, for to make some use of that translation. For nowe being in Cadiz, attending upon my most honourable good Lord, I talked with certaine of the Religious men, such as I found learned, whereof indeed there were some, though not very many. I 260
talked also with the Bishop of Cusco there, a grave aged comely man, and being of late chosen to that Bishopricke, he was as then to have gone to the Indies, had not we then taken him prisoner, and so stayed his journey for that time. With these men ever as occasion did serve, I did seeke nowe and then to spende some speech, and to entertaine time withall, I would breake with them of this our victorie, and of the injuries and bad dealings of their Prince and Countrey offered to her Majestie, whereby shee was provoked, and in a manner drawen to this action : though otherwise of her own most excellent princely good nature,  she was altogether given to peace, and quietnes. And alwayes in some part of our conferences, I would shew them a copie of her Majesties praier in Latine, which I had alwaies of purpose ready about me, whereby it might the better appeare unto them, how unwillingly, and upon how great & urgent occasions her Majesty was, as it were enforced to undertake this action: and therewithal! I did use now and then to bestow upon them a copy of the same in writing. They seemed in all outward shew to allow of my speeches, and to praise her Majesties good inclination, and earnestly to wish that there might be a firme concord and peace againe.
It pleased the Lords general to deale exceeding favourably with this said Bishop of Cusco : for it was their good pleasure to give him his free passage without any ransome, and therewithal to let him to understand, that they came not to deale with Church-men, or unarmed men, or with men of peace, weaklings & children, neither was it any part of their meaning to make such a voyage for gold, silver, or any other their wealth and riches, &c. But that their only comming was to meet with their dishonorable practises, and manifold injuries, & to deale with men of warre and valour, for the defence of the true honour of England: and to let them to understand, that whensoever they 261
attempted any base-conceited & dishonorable practise to their soveraigne Queene, their Mistresse, that it should be revenged to the uttermost, &c.
In this meane space, while the Lords general continued at Cadiz, there came to them certain poore wretched Turks, to the number of 38, that had bin a long time gally-slaves, and either at the very time of the fight by sea, or els immediately thereupon, taking the opportunity, did then make their escape, and did swim to land : yeelding themselves to the mercy of their most honorable Lordships. It pleased them with all speed to apparel them, and to furnish them with money, and all other necessaries, and to bestow on them a barke, and a Pilot, to see them freely and safely conveied into Barbary, willing them to let the countrey understand what was done, and what they had seene. Whereby I doubt not, but as her Majesty is a most admirable Prince already, over all Europe, all Africk, and Asia, and throughout Christendome : so the whole worlde hereafter shall have just cause to admire her infinite Princely vertues, and thereby bee provoked to confesse, that as she hath bin mightily protected from time to time, by the powerful hand of the almighty, so undoubtedly, that she is to be judged and accounted of us, to be his most sacred handmaide, and chosen vessel. And therefore, whatsoever wicked designement shalbe conspired and plotted against her Majesty hereafter, shalbe thought to be conspired, plotted, and intended against the almighty himselfe: and for that cause, as I trust, shalbe by the infinite goodnes and mercy of that almighty, mightily frustrate and over-throwen.
The 28. day being Munday, the L. Admiral came aboord the Arke againe, minding there to remaine for a space, as indeed he did, and upon the advise of his Phisition, to deale something in physicke, for that his L. found his body something out of frame. At that time it pleased his L. to write certain letters to the 262
Duke of Medina Sidonia, for the deliverance of English captives, who were remaining in the gallies. For by this time, it was reported, that the saide Duke was come downe in person with some power, and that he was either at Port S. Mary, or els at Rotta, or thereabout. His L. did endite the letters himselfe, but his pleasure was, they should be turned into Latine by another : and so to be sent (as indeed they were) in the latine tongue unto the Duke.
A copie of the Lord Admirals letters to the Duke of Medina Sidonia.
Illustrissimo Principi Duci de Medina Sidonia.
ILlustrissime Princeps, ex nonnullis quibusdam Hispanis intelligimus, Excellentiam vestram jam nunc esse apud portum S. Mariae. Et quoniam in anno Domini 1588. id nobis tunc muneris assignatum erat a sereniss. nostra Regina domina mea, ut contra vos, ves-trasque copias, Ego solus pro eo tempore Generalis essem constitutus : Idcirco non opinamur vobis ignotum esse, quam mite quoddam, & humanum bellandi genus, tum hic jam in hoc ipso tempore, adversus hujus loci populum atque incolas usurpaverimus : tum etiam saepiiis antehac quam humaniter, benigneque eos omnes tractaverimus, quos ex vestris jure belli captivos acceperimus. Ex quorum numero quam multa millia, etiam gratis, nullo accepto pretio, libertate donaverimus, id putamus omnibus esse testatius, quam ut a quoquam denegetur. Quocirca, neque ullo modo nobis in mentem venire potest, ut dubitemus, quin parem etiam in vobis humanitatem adversus nostros captivos simus reperturi. Cum igitur nobis compertum jam sit, habere vos in vestris galeris, ex Reginae nostrae serenissimae Dominae meae subditis unum & quinquaginta captivos: non equidem dubitamus, quin eos omnes sitis relaxaturi, & ad nos missuri :  ea lege, ac conditione, ut totidem ex vestris hic captivis ejusdem loci atque ordinis, melioris etiam fortassis notae, 263
ac conditionis, homuncios, ad vos vicissim remittamus. Id quod nos facturos data fide spondemus, quam primum nostros captivos ex vestris manibus acceperimus. Hac in re si nostro desiderio ac voluntati parum satisfactum erit, aliud profectd tunc posthac belli genus ingrediemur, aliiimque bellandi morem cogemur, etiam inviti, & contra voluntatem prosequi. Ex Regia Anglicana classe apud Cadiz ultimo Junii, stilo antiquo. 1596.
Carolus Howard.
These letters were sent by a Spaniard, and an answere was brought from the Duke with al convenient speed, and as it should seeme by the L. Admirals next answere returned to him in writing, which immediatly hereafter foloweth, the Duke de Medina Sidonia his letters were honorable, and with good regard.
A copie of my L. Admirals second letter to the Duke of Medina Sidonia.
Illustrissimo Principi Duci de Medina Sidonia.
ILlustrissime Princeps, literas ab excellentia vestra hodie accepimus : quae verb nostra sit ad illas responsio, nobiles isti viri, qui vestras literas ad nos pertulerunt : plenius declarabunt. Hoc interim cupimus esse penitus persuasum Excellentiae vestrae, nos seduld operam daturos, ut in omni honorificae benignitatis humanitatisque genere, expectation! vestrae omni ex parte respondeamus. Quod ad Anglicos nostros captivos attinet, quos ab Excellentia vestra huc ad nos crastino die missum iri expectamus, in ea re pollicemur Excellentiae vestrae, quod plenius a nobis vestrae voluntati satisfactum erit: & quid pro illis captivis tales nos captivos vobis remittemus, quales tum ab ipso Dom. Mendoza, tum ab aliis illustrib. viris, qui a Dom. Porta Carero in illorum ad nos favorem mittebantur, communi cum consensu erant ab ipsis approbati. Si vero quis alius jam captivus est vel posthac futurus erit in nostra potestate, pro cujus redemptione nondum plenb conventum est & stipulatum de certo pretio persolvendo: concedimus Excellentiae 264
THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ vestrae, ut in hoc etiam casu vos, vestro pro arbitrio, de illis quicquid velitis, imperetis. Ex Regia classe Anglicana, apud Cadiz, 3. die Julii stylo antiquo. 1596. Carolus Howard.
The next day after, being the 4. of July, the LL. general caused the town of Cadiz to be set on fire, and rased & defaced so much as they could, the faire cathedral Church, and the religious houses only being spared, and left unblemished. And with the town al such provision for shipping, & other things, as were serviceable for ye K. use, & yet were not either so convenient for us to be caried away, or els such as we stood no whit at all in need of, were likewise at the same instant consumed with fire. And presently therupon, their Lordships, with as convenient speed as they could, and the whole army in such good order and leisure, as they thought best, came aboord.
The next day being the 5. of July, the LL. general with all the armie being under saile, & now making for England, & but as yet passing the very mouth of the bay of Cadiz, a galley ful of English prisoners, with a flag of truce, met us from Rotta, sent by the D. of Medina Sidonia, & sent as it should seeme, one day later then his promise : but yet their flag being either not big enough, or not wel placed in the galley, or not wel discerned of our men, or by what other mischance I know not: but thus it was : by one of our smallest ships y' sailed formost, assoone as the said galley came within gunshot, there was a great peece discharged upon her, & at that instant there was one man slaine outright, and 2. other grievously hurt. The error being espied and perceived, our ship gave over immediatly from any farther shooting. Assoone as the galley came neere us, my L. Admiral caused a gracious salutation to be sounded with his trumpets, & willed the captains forthwith to come aboord his ship : which they did, and then he feasted them with a very fine and honorable banket, as the time and place might serve. And then by them under-265
standing of that unfortunate mischance that had hapned by the shot of the said ship, he was very sory for the same, and yet such was the merciful providence of almighty God, that even in this mischance also, he did hold his holy hand over the English. And al the harme that was done did light only upon the poore Turk, and the Spaniard himselfe. When this Lorde had well banqueted them, hee presently called for his barge, and did accompany the said galley to the Lorde general the Earle of Essex, who then did ride with his ship a good distance off: and there they being in like maner most honorably received, and intertained, the Spanish gentlemen delivered up their prisoners the English captives, of whom some had bin there 6 yere, some 8, or ten : yea, and some 22. yeere, and upward, and some of them but lately taken in S. Francis Drakes last voiage to the Indies. The number of the prisoners delivered were but 39. and no mo, and were brought in, and delivered by Don Antonio de Corolla and his brother, and by Don Pedro de Cordua, and certaine others. If you demaund why, of one and fiftie Captives, there were no moe delivered then was, I presuppose, (and I thinke it true to) that at that time the residue were farther off in some remote places of Spaine bestowed, and so by that meanes, not able at this time  to bee in a readinesse, but yet like enough that there is some good order taken for them hereafter, to be redeemed, and sent over into England.
If any man presume here so farre, as to enquire how it chanced, that the Lords general rested so long at Cadiz, and went no farther, and why Port S. Mary being so faire a towne, and so neere to them, was forborne ? and why Sheres ali&s Xeres ? And why Rotta and the like ? And why this or that was done ? And why that or this left undone ? I will not answere him with our common English proverbe, as I might, which is: That one foole may aske moe questions in one houre, then ten discrete men can wel answere in five dayes.
266
But that grave auncient writer, Cornelius Tacitus, hath a wise, briefe, pithy saying, and it is this: Nemo tentavit inquirere in columnas Herculis, sanctifisque ac reverentius habitum est de factis Deorum credere, quim scire. Which saying, in my fancy, fitteth marvellous well for this purpose: and so much the rather, for that this Cadiz is that very place, (at least by the common opinion) where those said pillers of Hercules were thought to be placed: and, as some say, remaine as yet not farre off to be seene. But to let that passe, the saying beareth this discrete meaning in it, albeit in a prety kind of mystical maner uttered: That it befitteth not inferiour persons to be curious, or too inquisitive after Princes actions, neither yet to be so sawcy and so malapert, as to seeke to dive into their secrets, but rather alwayes to have a right reverend conceite and opinion of them, and their doings: and theron so resting our inward thoughts, to seek to go no further, but so to remaine ready alwaies to arme our selves with dutiful minds, and willing obedience, to perform and put in execution that which in their deepe insight and heroicall designements, they shall for our good, and the care of the common wealth determine upon.
This, and much lesse to, might suffice to satisfie any honest minded man. But yet if any will needs desire to be a little farther satisfied, albeit it neede not, yet then, thus much I dare say and affirme, that upon my knowledge, the chiefest cause why Port Saint Mary, and the rest were left untouched, was this: For that it was most certainly knowen, that they were townes not woorth the saluting of such a royal companie, in which there was no maner of wealth in the world left, more then bare houses of stone, and standing walles, and might well have served rather as a stale, perchance, to have entrapped, then as a meanes to have enriched. And it had bin more then a suspition of follie, for such an army as this, to have sought to fight with the aire, and to have laboured with great paine and charges, yea, and with 267
A.D.
I596.
some evident danger too, to have overthrowen that, which could very litle or nothing have profited, being destroyed: and yet nowe, can doe as little harme being left, as it is, untouched.
And thus much for our journey to Cadiz: for the accidents that happened by the way, for the winning, spoiling, and burning of the said towne, for the over-throwe of the Spanish Fleet there, and for al other by-matters that happened, as appendances to the same, both in the time of our abode there, as also at the very last houre of our comming from thence.
As for our returne home, and our entrance into a part of Portingal by the way, with the taking, spoyling, and burning of the towne of Faraon there, and marching into the Spanish confines therabouts, &c. I minde to leave it to some other, whose chance was to be present at the action, as my selfe was not, and shalbe of more sufficient ability to performe it.
.