The voyage of Gutwere an English Lady maried to Baldwine brother of Godfreide duke of Bouillon, toward Jerusalem about 1097. And the 11. yeere of William Rufus King of England.{n}He Christian armie of Godfrie of Bouillon passing the citie of Iconium, alias Agogna in the countrey of Licaonia, and from thence by the city of Heraclia, came at length unto the ci tie of Marasia, where they encamped, and sojourned there three whole dayes, because of the wife{n}of Baldwine brother germane of the duke of Loraigne.{n}«93{n}Which Lady being long time vexed with a grievous  malady, was in extremitie, where at length paying the debt due to nature, she changed this transitorie life, for life eternall; Who, in her life time, was a very worthy and vertuous Lady, borne in England, and descended of most noble parentage named Gutwere; Which, according to her degree, was there most honourably enterred, to the great griefe of all the whole armie. As reporteth William Archbishop of Tyre, lib. 3. cap. 17. hist, belli sacri. The same author in the 10. booke 8c first chapter of the same historic concerning the same English Lady, writeth further as followeth, Baldwine having folowed the warres for a time, gave his minde to marriage, so that being in England he fell in love with a very honourable and noble Lady named Gutwere, whom he married and caried with him in that first happy expedition, wherin he accompanied his brethren the Lords, duke Godfrey and Eustace, persons very commendable in all vertues and of immortali memorie. But he had hard fortune in his journey, because his foresaid wife, being wearied with a long sicknes finished her life with a happie end neere the citie of Marasia, before the Christian armie came unto Antioch, where she was honourably buried, as we have declared before.{n}Chronicon Hierosolymitanum in lib. 3. cap. 27. maketh also mention of this English Lady, which he calleth Godwera in this maner.{n}Ac in regione Maresch uxor Baldewini nobilissima, quam de regno Angliae eduxit, diutina corporis molestia aggravata, 8c duci Godefrido commen-{n}data, vitam exhalavit, sepulta Catholicis obsequiis; cujus nomen erat Godwera.{n}The same in English.{n}IN this province of Maresch the most noble wife of Baldwine, which he caried with him out of England being visited with dayly sicknesses and infirmities of{n}294{n}body, and commended to the custody of duke Godfrey, departed out of this life, and was buried after the Christian maner. Her name was Godwera.{n}.