Mention made of one Hardine of England one of the chiefest personages, and a leader among other of two hundred saile of ships of Christians that landed at Joppa in the yeere of our Lord God 1102.{n}The same in English.	[II. i. 13.]{n}WHile the Sarazens continued their siege against{n}Joppa, two hundred saile of Christian ships arrived at Joppa, that they might performe their devotions at Hierusalem. The chiefe men and leaders of these Christians are reported to have bene : Bernard Witrazh of the land of Galatia, Hardine of England, Otho of Roges, Haderwerck one of the chiefe noble men of Westphalia, &c. This Christian power through Gods speciali provision, arrived here for the succour and reliefe of the distressed & besieged Christians in Joppa, the third day of July, 1102. and in the second yeere of Baldwine king of Jerusalem. Whereupon the multitude of the Sarazens, seeing that the Christian power joyned themselves boldly, close by them even face to face in a lodging hard by them, the very next night at midnight, remooved their tents, and pitched them more then a mile off, that they might the next morning bee advised whether they should returne to Ascalon, or by often assaults vexe the citizens of Japhet.{n}Chronicon Hierosolymitanum, eodem libro 9. cap. 12. continueth this historic of these two hundreth saile of ships, and sheweth how by their prowesse chiefly, the multitude of the Sarazens were in short space vanquished and overthrowen : The words are these ; Ab ipso verb die tertiae feriae dum sic in superbia & elatione suae multitudinis immobiles Saraceni persisterent, & multis armorum terroribus Christianum populum vexarent,{n}299{n}The same in English.{n}YEt notwithstanding, after the said third day of July, the Sarazens persisted high minded and insolent, by reason of their great multitude, and much annoied the Christian people with their many forceable and terrible weapons; whereupon, on the sixt day of July early in the morning king Baldwine issued out of Japhet, his trumpets and cornets yeelding a great and lowd sound, and with a very strong armie as well of horsemen as footemen, who on every side making great shoutes and outcries, with fierce and sharpe battell set on the maine power of their enemies. The Christians also who arrived in the navie, rearing great clamours and noyses, with loud voices and shoutings in horrible wise together, with king Baldwine assaulted likewise with strong battell the Babylonians, and afflicted them with most sore and deadly wounds, untill the Sarazens being wearied with fighting, nor able longer to endure and hold out against the valure of the Christians, fled towards Ascalon. And other of them hoping to escape from them that pursued them, lept into the sea, and were swalowed up in the waves thereof. And so the citie of Joppa with the inhabitants thereof were freed{n}300{n}of their enemies. There were slaine this day three thousand Sarazens, and but a few of the Christians perished.{n}.