The life and travailes of Baldwinus Devonius, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury.{n}The same in English.{n}BAldwine a Devonshire man borne in Exceter of mean parentage, was a very eloquent man, an exact Philosopher, and in those dayes very excellent in all kind of studies. He was first of all a Schoolemaster : afterwards he became an Archdeacon, very famous for his learning 339{n}& wisdom in all his doings. He was also a Cistercian Monke and Abbot of Foord Monasterie, and the chiefe of all those that were of his order : he grew after this to be bishop of Worcester, and at last after the death of Archb. Richard he was promoted & made Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all England. In the discharge of which place he being very vigilant, shewed himselfe a worthy Pastor, sowing the seed of Gods word in every place as farre foorth as the iniquitie of that time permitted. In his time king Richard with all indevour prepared a Fleet and all things necessary for waging of warre against the Infidels at Jerusalem, taking with him the standerd and ensignes of the kingdome. This Baldwine eftsoones folowed the king into Syria and Palestina, as one desirous to be partaker of his travailes, paines, and perils in so holy a voyage. Hee was Archbishop of Canterburie almost sixe yeres : but having followed the king into{n}where he was also buried.{n}[II. i. 29.] An annotation concerning the travailes of the sayd Baldwine, taken out of Giraldus Cam-brensis, in his Itinerarium Cambrias, lib. 2. Cap. 14. Fol. 229.{n}340{n}Syria, in the yeere 1190. he died at Tyre,{n}The same in English.{n}THis Baldwine being the second successor unto Thomas Becket, after he had heard ye wrong which was done to our Saviour, and the signe of the Crosse by Saladine the Sultan of Egypt, taking upon him the Lords Character, he couragiously perfourmed his office of preaching in the obedience thereof, as well in farre distant Countreis as at home. And afterwards taking his journey and imbarking himselfe at Marseils, having at length passed ye Levant sea, he arrived safely in the Haven of Tyrus, and from thence went over to Achon unto our armie, besieging the Towne, and yet (as it were) besieged it selfe: where finding many of our Countreymen, and almost all men remaining in wonderfull pensivenesse and despaire, through the withdrawing of the Princes, some of them tyred with long expectation, others grievously afflicted with hunger and povertie, and others distempered with the heate of the weather, being ready happily to ende his dayes in the Holy land, embracing every one according to his abilitie in the bond of love, he ayded them at his costes and charges, and them with his wordes and good exam{n}strengthened of life.{n}.