372{n}374{n}375{n}376{n}377{n}378{n}380{n}A.D.{n}1330-{n}iv	385	2 B{n}Java.{n}386{n}387{n}389{n}390{n}391{n}393{n}395{n}Pythagorica{n}Chilenso.{n}Thalay.{n}Kakam.{n}Caramoran.{n}Cambalec.{n}397{n}398{n}400{n}iv	401	2 c{n}402{n}403{n}405{n}406{n}Here beginneth the journall of Frier Odoricus, one of the order of the Minorites, concerning strange things which hee sawe among the Tartars of the East.{n}Pera.{n}[II. i. 5+-]{n}Lbeit many and sundry things are reported by divers authors concerning the fashions and conditions of this world : notwithstanding I frier Odoricus of Friuli, de portu Vahonis being desirous to travel unto the forrein and remote nations of infidels, sawe and heard great and mira-{n}culous things, which I am able truely to avouch. First of al therefore sayling from Pera by Constantinople, I arrived at Trapesunda. This place is right commodi-ously situate, as being an haven for the Persians and Medes, and other countreis beyonde the sea. In this lande I behelde with great delight a very strange spectacle, namely a certaine man leading about with him more then foure thousande partriges. The man him-selfe walked upon the ground, and the partriges flew in the aire, which he ledde unto a certaine castle called Zavena, being three dayes journey distant from Trapesunda. The saide partriges were so tame, that when the man was desirous to lie downe and rest, they 408{n}would all come flocking about him like chickens. And so hee led them unto Trapesunda, and unto the palace of the Emperour, who tooke as many of them as he pleased, and the rest the saide man carried unto the place from whence he came. In this citie lyeth the body of Athanasius, upon the gate of the citie. And then I passed on further unto Armenia major, to a The citie of certaine citie called Azaron, which had bene very rich Azaronin Ar-in olde time, but nowe the Tartars have almost layed maJor-it waste. In the saide citie there was abundance of bread and flesh, and of all other victuals except wine and fruites. This citie also is very colde, and is reported to be higher situated, then any other city in the world. It hath most holesome and sweete waters about it: for the veines of the said waters seeme to spring and flow from the mighty river of Euphrates, which is but a dayes journey from the saide city.{n}Also, the said citie stands directly in the way to Tauris. And I passed on unto a certaine mountaine called Sobissacalo. In the foresaide countrey there is the very Sobissacalo. same mountaine whereupon the Arke of Noah rested : unto the which I would willingly have ascended, if my company would have stayed for me. Howbeit the people of that countrey report, that no man could ever ascend the said mountaine, because (say they) it pleaseth not the highest God. And I travailed on further unto{n}Tauris that great and royal city, which was in old time Tauris a citie called Susis. This city is accompted for traffique of °f^ersta-marchandize the chiefe city of the world: for there is no kinde of victuals, nor any thing else belonging unto marchandize, which is not to be had there in great abundance. This city stands very commodiously: for unto it all the nations of the whole worlde in a maner may resort for traffique. Concerning the said citie, the Christians in those parts are of opinion, that the Persian Emperour receives more tribute out of it, then the King of France out of all his dominions. Neare unto the said city there is a salt-hill yeelding salt unto the city : and of{n}409{n}that salt ech man may take what pleaseth him, not paying ought to any man therefore. In this city many Christians of all nations do inhabite, over whom the Saracens beare rule in all things. Then I traveiled on further unto a Or, Su/tania. city called *Soldania, wherein the Persian Emperour lieth all Sommer time : but in winter hee takes his progresse The Caspian unto another city standing upon the Sea called * Baku. sea-	Also the foresaid city is very great and colde, having{n}good and holesome waters therein, unto the which also store of marchandize is brought. Moreover I travelled with a certaine company of Caravans toward upper India : and in the way, after many dayes journey, I came unto Or, Cassibin. the citie of the three wise men called * Cassan, which is a noble and renowmed city, saving that the Tartars have destroyed a great part thereof, and it aboundeth with bread, wine, and many other commodities. From this city unto Jerusalem (whither the three foresaid wisemen were miraculously led) it is fiftie dayes journey. There be many wonders in this citie also, which, for brevities sake, I omit. From thence I departed unto a certaine Geste. city called * Geste, whence the Sea of Sand is distant, one dayes journey, which is a most wonderfull and dangerous thing. In this city there is abundance of all kinds of victuals, and especially of figs, reisins, and grapes; more (as I suppose) then in any part of the whole world besides. This is one of the three principali cities in all the Persian Empire. Of this city the Saracens report, that no Christian can by any meanes live therein above a yeere. Then passing many dayes journey on forward, I Como. came unto a certaine citie called * Comum, which was an huge and mightie city in olde time, conteyning well nigh fiftie miles in circuite, and hath done in times past great damage unto the Romanes. In it there are stately palaces altogether destitute of inhabitants, notwithstanding it aboundeth with great store of victuals. From hence traveiling through many countreys, at length I came unto the land of Job named Hus, which is rail of all kinde of victuals, and very pleasantly situated. There-{n}410{n}abouts are certaine mountaines having good pastures for cattell upon them. Here also Manna is found in great aboundance. Foure partriges are here solde for lesse then a groat. In this countrey there are most comely olde men. Here also the men spin and card, and not the women. This land bordereth upon the North part of Chaldasa.{n}Of the maners of the Chaldasans, and of India.{n}FRom thence I traveled into Chaldaea, which is a great kingdome, and 1 passed by the tower of Babel. This tw °f region hath a language peculiar unto it selfe, and there are beautifull men, and deformed women. The men of the same countrey use to have their haire kempt, and trimmed like unto our women: and they weare golden turbants upon their heades richly set with pearle, and pretious stones. The women are clad in a course smock onely reaching to their knees, and having long sleeves hanging downe to the ground. And they goe barefooted, wearing breeches which reach to the ground also. They weare no attire upon their heads, but their haire hangs disheaveled about their eares: and there be many [II. i. $5.] other strange things also. From thence I came into the lower India, which the Tartars overran and wasted. And in this countrey the people eat dates for the most part, whereof 42. li. are there sold for lesse then a groat. I passed further also many dayes journey unto the Ocean sea, and the first land where I arrived, is called * Ormes, Ormus. being well fortified, and having great store of marchandize and treasure therein. Such and so extreme is the heat in that countrey, that the privities of men come out of their bodies and hang downe even unto their mid-legs. And therefore the inhabitants of the same place, to preserve their owne lives, do make a certaine ointment, and anointing their privie members therewith, do lap them up in certaine bags fastened unto their bodies, for otherwise they must needs die. Here also they use a kinde of Bark or shippe called Jase being compact together onely{n}411{n}with hempe. And I went on bourd into one of them, wherein I could not finde any yron at all, and in the Thana,where- space of 28. dayes I arrived at the city of Thana, wherein of Frederick foure of our Friers were martyred for the faith of Christ.{n}etfl This countrey is well situate, having abundance of bread and wine, and of other victuals therein. T. his kingaome in olde time was very large and under the dominion of king Porus, who fought a great battel with Alexander the great. The people of this countrey are idolaters worshipping fire, serpents and trees. And over all this land the Saracens do beare rule, who tooke it by maine force, and they themselves are in subjection unto king Daldilus. There be divers kinds of beasts, as namely blacke lyons in great abundance, and apes also, and monkeis, and battes as bigge as our doves. Also there are mise as bigge as our countrey dogs, and therefore they are hunted with dogs, because cats are not able to incounter them. Moreover, in the same countrey every man hath a bundle of great boughs standing in a water-pot before his doore, which bundle is as great as a piller, and it will not wither, so long as water is applied thereunto: with many other novelties and strange things, the relation whereof would breed great delight.{n}How peper is had: and where it groweth.{n}MOreover, that it may be manifest how peper is had, it is to be understood that it groweth in a certaine Malabar. kingdome whereat I my selfe arrived, being called * Minibar, and it is not so plentifull in any other part of the worlde as it is there. For the wood wherein it growes conteineth in circuit 18. dayes journey. And in the said Or, Alan-	wood or forrest there are two cities, one called * Flan-{n}dnna.	drina, and the other Cyncilim. In Flandrina both Jewes{n}and Christians doe inhabite, betweene whom there is often contention and warre: howbeit the Christians overcome the Jewes at all times. In the foresaid wood pepper is had after this maner: first it groweth in leaves like unto pot-hearbs, which they plant neere unto great trees{n}412{n}as we do our vines, and they bring forth pepper in clusters, as our vines doe yeeld grapes, but being ripe, they are of a greene colour, and are gathered as we gather grapes, and then the graines are layed in the Sunne to be dried, and being dried are put into earthen vessels: and thus is pepper made and kept. Now, in the same wood there be niany rivers, wherein are great store of Crocodiles, and of other serpents, which the inhabitants thereabout do burne up with straw and with other dry fewel, and so they go to gather their pepper without danger. At the South end of the said forrest stands the city of Polumbrum, which aboundeth with marchandize of all Polumbrum. kinds. All the inhabitants of that countrey do worship a living oxe, as their god, whom they put to labour for sixe yeres, and in the seventh yere they cause him to rest from al his worke, placing him in a solemne and publique place, and calling him an holy beast. Moreover they use this foolish ceremonie : Every morning they take two basons, either of silver, or of gold, and with one they receive the urine of the oxe, and with the other his dung.{n}With the urine they wash their face, their eyes, and all their five senses. Of the dung they put into both their eyes, then they annoint the bals of their cheeks therewith, and thirdly their breast: and then they say that they are sanctified for all that day; And as the people doe, even so doe their King and Queene. This people worshippeth also a dead idole, which, from the navel upward, re-sembleth a man, and from the navel downeward an oxe. The very same Idol delivers oracles unto them, and sometimes requireth the blood of fourtie virgins for his hire. And therefore the men of that region do consecrate their daughters and their sonnes unto their idols, even as Christians do their children unto some Religion or Saint in heaven. Likewise they sacrifice their sonnes and their daughters, and so, much people is put to death before the said Idol by reason of that accursed ceremony. Also, many other hainous and abominable villanies doeth that brutish beastly people commit: and I sawe many{n}413{n}moe strange things among them which I meane not here to insert. Another most vile custome the foresaide The burning nation doeth retai ne : for when any man dieth they burne of their dead,	dead corps to ashes : and if his wife surviveth him,{n}her they burne quicke, because (say they) she shall accompany her husband in his tilthe and husbandry, when he is come into a new world. Howbeit the said wife having children by her husband, may if she will, remaine [II. i. 56.] still alive with them, without shame or reproch : notwithstanding, for the most part, they all of them make choice to be burnt wl their husbands. Now, albeit the wife dieth before her husband, that law bindeth not the husband to any such inconvenience, but he may mary another wife also. Likewise, ye said nation hath another strange custome, in that their women drink wine, but their men do not. Also the women have the lids & brows of their eyes & beards shaven, but the men have not: with many other base & filthy fashions which the said women do use contrary to the nature of their sexe. From that kingdom I travelled 10. daies journey unto Mobar, or another kingdome called Mobar, which containeth many Maltapor. cities. Within a certaine church of the same countrey, the body of S. Thomas the Apostle is interred, the very same church being full of idols : and in 15. houses round about the said Church, there dwell certaine priests who are Nestorians, that is to say, false, and bad Christians, and schismatiques.{n}Of a strange and uncouth idole : and of certaine customes and ceremonies.{n}IN the said kingdome of Mobar there is a wonderfull strang idole, being made after the shape and resemblance of a man, as big as the image of our Christopher, & consisting all of most pure and glittering gold. And about the neck thereof hangeth a silke riband, ful of most rich & precious stones, some one of which is of more value then a whole kingdome. The house of this idol is all of beaten gold, namely the roofe, the pave-{n}414{n}ment, and the sieling of the wall within and without. Unto this idol the Indians go on pilgrimage, as we do unto S. Peter. Some go with halters about their necks, some with their hands bound behind them, some other with knives sticking on their armes or legs : and if after their peregrination, the flesh of their wounded arme festereth or corrupteth, they esteeme that limme to be holy, & thinke that their God is wel pleased with them. Neare unto the temple of that idol is a lake made by the hands of men in an open & common place, whereinto the pilgrimes cast gold, silver, & precious stones, for the honour of the idol and the repairing of his temple. And therfore when any thing is to be adorned or mended, they go unto this lake taking up the treasure which was cast in. Moreover at every yerely feast of the making or repairing of the said idol, the king and queene, with the whole multitude of the people, & all the pilgrimes assemble themselves, & placing the said idol in a most stately & rich chariot, they cary him out of their temple with songs, & with all kind of musical harmonic, & a great company of virgins go procession-wise two and two in a rank singing before him. Many pilgrims also put themselves under the chariot wheeles, to the end that their false god may go over them : and al they over whom the chariot runneth, are crushed in pieces, & divided asunder in the midst, and slaine right out. Yea, & in doing this, they think themselves to die most holily & securely, in the service of their god. And by this meanes every yere, there die under the said filthy idol, mo then 500. persons, whose carkases are burned, and their ashes are kept for reliques, because they died in that sort for their god. Moreover they have another detestable ceremony. For when any man offers to die in the service of his false god, his parents, & all his friends assemble themselves together with a consort of musicians, making him a great & solemne feast: which feast being ended, they hang 5. sharpe knives about his neck carying him before the idol, & so soone as he is come thither, he{n}415{n}taketh one of his knives crying with a loud voice, For the worship of my god do I cut this my flesh, and then he casteth the morsel which is cut, at ye face of his idol : but at the very last wound wherewith he murthereth him-selfe, he utterth these words : Now do I yeeld my self to death in the behalfe of my god, and being dead, his body is burned, & is esteemed by al men to be holy. The king of the said region is most rich in gold, silver, and precious stones, & there be the fairest unions in al the world. Traveling from thence by the Ocean sea 50. daies journey southward, I came unto a certain land named Perhaps he Lammori, where, in regard of extreeme heat, the people meaneth Co- both men and women go stark-naked from top to toe : mort‘ who seeing me apparelled scoffed at me, saying, that God made Adam & Eve naked. In this countrey al women are common, so that no man can say, this is my wife. Also when any of the said women beareth a son or a daughter, she bestowes it upon any one that hath lien with her, whom she pleaseth. Likewise al the land of that region is possessed in common, so that there is not mine & thine, or any propriety of possession in the division of lands : howbeit every man hath his owne house peculiar unto himselfe. Mans flesh, if it be fat, is eaten as ordinarily there, as beefe in our country. And albeit the people are most lewd, yet the country is exceeding good, abounding with al commodities, as flesh, corne, rise, silver, gold, wood of aloes, Campheir, and many other things. Marchants comming unto this region for traffique do usually bring wl them fat men, selling them unto the inhabitants as we sei hogs, who immediatly kil & eat them. In this island towards the Sumatra. south, there is another kingdome called Simoltra, where both men and women marke themselves with red-hot yron in 12. sundry spots of their faces : and this nation is at continual warre with certaine naked people in another region. Then I traveled further unto another Java.	island called Java, the compasse whereof by sea is 3000.{n}[II. i. 57.] miles< The king of this Hand hath 7. other crowned{n}416{n}kings under his jurisdiction. The said Hand is throughly inhabited, & is thought to be one of the principali Hands of ye whole world. In the same Hand there groweth great plenty of cloves, cubibez, and nutmegs, and in a word all kinds of spices are there to be had, and great abundance of all victuals except wine. The king of the said land of Java hath a most brave and sumptuous pallace, the most loftily built, that ever I saw any, & it hath most high greeses & stayers to ascend up to the roomes therin contained, one stayre being of silver, & another of gold, throughout the whole building. Also the lower roomes were paved all over with one square plate of silver, & another of gold. All the wals upon the inner side were seeled over with plates of beaten gold, wherupon were ingraven ye pictures of knights, having about their temples, ech of them a wreath of golde, adorned with precious stones. The roofe of the palace was of pure gold. With this king of Java the great Can of Catay hath had many conflictes in war: whom notwithstanding the said king hath alwayes overcome & vanquished.{n}Of certaine trees yeelding meale, hony, and poyson.{n}NEere unto the said Hand is another countrey called Panten, or Tathalamasin. And the king of the same country hath many Hands under his dominion. In this land there are trees yeelding meale, hony, & wine, &: the most deadly poison in all ye whole world : for against it there is but one only remedy : & that is this : if any man hath taken of ye poyson, & would be delivered from the danger therof, let him temper the dung of a man in water, & so drinke a good quantitie thereof, & it expels the poyson immediatly, making it to avoid at the fiinde-ment. Meale is produced out of the said trees after this maner. They be mighty huge trees, and when they are cut with an axe by the ground, there issueth out of the stocke a certain licour like unto gumme, which they take{n}IV	417	2D{n}and put into bags made of leaves, laying them for 15 daies together abroad in the sun, & at the end of those 15 dayes, when the said licour is throughly parched, it becommeth meale. Then they steepe it first in sea water, washing it afterward with fresh water, and so it is made very good & savorie paste, wherof they make either meat or bread, as they thinke good. Of which bread I my selfe did eate, & it is fayrer without & somewhat browne within. By this countrey is the sea called Mare mortuum, which runneth continually Southward, into ye which whosoever falleth is never seene after. In this countrey also are found canes of an incredible length, namely of 60 paces high or more, & they are as bigge as trees. Other canes there be also called Cassan, which overspread the earth like grasse, 8c out of every knot of them spring foorth certaine branches, which are continued upon the ground almost for the space of a mile. In the sayd canes there are found certaine stones, one of which stones, whosoever carryeth about with him, cannot be wounded with any yron : 8c therefore the men of that countrey for the most part, carry such stones with them, whithersoever they goe. Many also cause one of the armes of their children, while they are yong, to be launced, putting one of the said stones into the wound, healing also, and closing up the said wound with the powder of a certaine fish (the name whereof I do not know) which powder doth immediatly consolidate and cure the said wound. And by the vertue of these stones, the people aforesaid doe for the most part triumph both on sea and land. Howbeit there is one kind of strata-geme, which the enemies of this nation, knowing the vertue of the sayd stones, doe practise against them : namely, they provide themselves armour of yron or steele against their arrowes, 8c weapons also poisoned with the poyson of trees, 8c they carry in their hands wooden stakes most sharpe 8c hard-pointed, as if they were yron : likewise they shoot arrowes without yron heads, and so they confound 8c slay some of their un-{n}418{n}1330armed foes trusting too securely unto the vertue of their stones. Also of the foresayd canes called Cassan they make sayles for their ships, and litle houses, and many made other necessaries. From thence after many dayes travel!, °freedes-I arrived at another kingdome called Campa, a most Campa. beautiful and rich countrey, & abounding with all kind of victuals : the king wherof, at my being there, had so many wives & concubines, that he had 300 sonnes & daughters by them. This king hath 10004 tame Elephants, which are kept even as we keepe droves of oxen, or flocks of sheepe in pasture.{n}Of the abundance of fishes, which cast themselves upon the shore.{n}IN this countrey there is one strange thing to be observed, yc every several kind of fishes in those seas come swimming towards the said countrey in such abundance, that, for a great distance into the sea, nothing can be seene but ye backs of fishes : which, casting themselves upon the shore when they come neere unto it, do suffer men, for the space of 3. daies, to come & to take as many of them as they please, & then they returne againe unto the sea. After that kind of fishes comes another kind, offering it selfe after the same maner, and so in like sort all other kinds whatsoever : notwithstanding they do this but once in a yere. And I demaunded of the inhabitants there, how, or by what meanes this strange accident could come to passe ? They answered, that fishes were taught, even by nature, to come & to do homage unto their, Emperour. There be Tortoises also as bigge as an oven. Many other T'artojses. things I saw which are incredible, unlesse a man should I-11' b see them with his own eies. In this country also dead men are burned, & their wives are burned alive with them, as in the city of Polumbrum above mentioned : for the men of that country say that she goeth to accompany him in another world, that he should take none other wife in manage. Moreover I traveled on{n}419{n}further by the ocean-sea towards the south, passed through many countries and islands, wherot one is called Moumoran, & it containeth in compasse ii. M. miles, wherin men & women have dogs faces, and worship an oxe for their god : and therefore every one of them cary the image of an oxe of gold or silver upon their foreheads. The men and the women of this country go all naked, saving that they hang a linen cloth before their privities. The men of the said country are very tall and mighty, and by reason that they goe naked, when they are to make battell, they cary yron or steele-targets before them, which do cover and defend their bodies from top to toe : and whomsoever of their foes they take in battel not being able to ransom him-selfe for money, they presently devoure him : but if he be able to redeeme himselfe for money, they let him go free. Their king weareth about his necke 300. great and most beautifull unions, and saith every day 300. prayers unto his god. He weareth upon his finger also a stone of a span long, which seemeth to be a flame of fire, and therefore when he weareth it, no man dare once approch unto him : and they say that there is not any stone in the whole world of more value then it. Neither could at any time the great Tartarian Emperour of Katay either by force, money, or policie obtaine it at his hands : notwithstanding that he hath done the utmost of his indevour for this purpose.{n}Of the island of Sylan : and of the mountaine where Adam mourned for his sonne Abel.{n}1 Passed also by another island called Sylan, which conteineth in compasse above ii. M. miles : wherin are an infinit number of serpents, & great store of lions, beares, & al kinds of ravening & wild beasts, and especially of elephants. In the said country there is an huge mountaine, whereupon the inhabitants of that region do report that Adam mourned for his son Abel ye space of 500. yeres. In the midst of this mountain{n}420{n}there is a most beautiful plain, wherin is a litle lake conteining great plenty of water, which water ye inhabitants report to have proceeded from the teares of Adam & Eve : howbeit I proved that to be false, because I saw the water flow in the lake. This water is ful of hors-leeches, & blood-suckers, & of precious stones also : which precious stones the king taketh not unto his owne use, but once or twise every yere he permitteth certaine poore people to dive under the water for ye said stones, & al that they can get he bestoweth upon them, to the end they may pray for his soule. But yl they may with lesse danger dive under the water, they take limons which they pil, anointing themselves throughly with the juice therof, & so they may dive naked under ye water, the hors-leeches not being able to hurt them. From this lake the water runneth even unto the sea, and at a low ebbe the inhabitants dig rubies, diamonds, pearls, & other pretious stones out of the shore : wher-upon it is thought, that ye king of this island hath greater abundance of pretious stones, then any other monarch in the whole earth besids. In the said country there be al kinds of beasts and foules : & the people told me, that those beasts would not invade nor hurt any stranger, but only the natural inhabitants. I saw in this island fouls as big as our country geese, having two heads, and other miraculous things, which I will not here write off Traveling on further toward the south, I arrived at a certain island called Bodin, which Or^Dadin. signifieth in our language unclean. In this island there do inhabit most wicked persons, who devour & eat raw flesh committing al kinds of uncleannes & abominations in such sort, as it is incredible. For the father eateth his son, & the son his father, the husband his owne wife, & the wife her husband : and that after this maner.{n}If any mans father be sick, the son straight goes unto the sooth-saying or prognosticating priest, requesting him to demand of his god, whether his father shall recover of that infirmity or no ? Then both of them{n}421{n}go unto an idol of gold or of silver, making their praiers unto it in maner folowing : Lord, thou art our god, & thee we do adore, beseeching thee to resolve us, whether such a man must die, or recover of such an infirmity or no ? Then the divel answereth out of ye foresaid idol: if he saith (he shal live) then re-turneth his son and ministreth things necessary unto him, til he hath attained unto his former health : but if he saith (he shal die) then goes ye priest unto him, & putting a cloth into his mouth doth strangle him therewith : which being done, he cuts his dead body into morsels, & al his friends and kinsfolks are invited unto the eating thereof, with musique and all kinde of mirth : howbeit his bones are solemnely buried. And when I found fault with that custome demanding a reason thereof, one of them gave me this answere : this we doe, least the wormes should eat his flesh, for then his soule should suffer great torments, neither could I by any meanes remoove them from that errour. Many other novelties and strange things there bee in this countrey, which no man would credite, unies he saw them with his owne eyes. Howbeit, I (before almighty [II. i. 59.] God) do here make relation of nothing but of that only, whereof I am as sure, as a man may be sure. Concerning the foresaid islands I inquired of divers wel-experienced persons, who al of them, as it were with one consent, answered me saying, That this India contained 4400. islands under it, or within it : in which islands there are sixtie and foure crowned kings : and they say moreover, that the greater part of those islands are wel inhabited. And here I conclude concerning that part of India.{n}Or, China. Of the upper India : and of the province of Maney.{n}First of al therefore, having traveled many dayes journey upon the Ocean-sea toward the East, at length I arrived at a certaine great province called{n}422{n}Maney, being in Latine named India. Concerning this India I inquired of Christians, of Saracens, & of Idolaters, and of al such as bare any office under the great Can. Who all of them with one consent answered, that this province of Maney hath mo then 2000. great cities within the precincts thereof, & that it aboundeth with all plenty of victuals, as namely with bread, wine, rise, flesh, and fish. All the men of this province be artificers & marchants, who, though they be in never so extreme penurie, so long as they can helpe themselves by the labor of their hands, wil never beg almes of any man. The men of this province are of a faire and comely personage, but somewhat pale, having their heads shaven but a litle: but the women are the most beautiful under the sunne. The first city of ye said India which I came unto, is called Ceuskalon, which Or, Ceuskala. being a daies journey distant from the sea, stands upon a river, the water whereof, nere unto the mouth, where it exonerateth it selfe into the sea, doth overflow the land for the space of 12. daies journey. All the inhabitants of this India are worshippers of idols. The foresaid city of Ceuskalon hath such an huge navy belonging thereunto, that no man would beleeve it unlesse he should see it. In this city I saw 300.lL of good & new ginger sold for lesse then a groat. There are the He meaneth greatest, and the fairest geese, & most plenty of them to be sold in al the whole world, as I suppose : they are as ^aniarci5 cai white as milke, and have a bone upon the crowne of their Alcatrarzi. heads as bigge as an egge, being of the colour of blood : under their throat they have a skin or bag hanging downe halfe a foot. They are exceeding fat & wel sold. Also they have ducks and hens in that country, one as big as two of ours. There be monstrous great serpents likewise, which are taken by the inhabitants & eaten : whereupon a solemne feast among them without serpents is nought set by : and to be briefe, in this city there are al kinds of victuals in great abundance. From thence I passed by many cities & at length I came unto a city{n}423{n}named Cai tan, wherin ye friers Minorites have two places of aboad, unto the which I transported the bones of the dead friers, which suffred martyrdom for the faith of Christ, as it is above mentioned. In this city there is abundance of al kind of victuals very cheap. The said city is as big as two of Bononia, & in it are many monasteries of religious persons, al which do worship idols. I my selfe was in one of those Monasteries, & it was told me, that there were in it iii. M. religious men, having xi. M. idols : and one of ye said idols which seemed unto me but litle in regard of the rest, was as big as our Christopher. These religious men every day do feed their idol-gods : wherupon at a certaine time I went to behold the banquet : and indeed those things which they brought unto them were good to eat, & fuming hote, insomuch that the steame of the smoke thereof ascended up unto their idols, & they said that their gods were refreshed with the smoke : howbeit all the meat they conveyed away, eating it up their owne selves, and so they fed their dumb gods with the smoke onely.{n}Of the citie Fuco.{n}TRaveling more eastward, I came unto a city named Fuco, which conteineth 30. miles in circuit, wherin be exceeding great & faire cocks, and al their hens are as white as the very snow, having wol in stead of feathers, like unto sheep. It is a most stately & beautiful city & standeth upon the sea. Then I went 18. daies journey on further, & passed by many provinces & cities, and in the way I went over a certain great mountaine, upon ye one side whereof I beheld al living creatures to be as black as a cole, & the men and women on that side differed somwhat in maner of living from others : howbeit, on the other side of the said hil every living thing was snow-white, & the inhabitants in their maner of living, were altogether unlike unto others. There, all maried women cary in token that they have husbands, a great trunke of horne upon their heads. From thence I 424{n}travelled 18. dayes journey further, and came unto a certaine great river, and entered also into a city, where- A great unto belongeth a mighty bridge to passe the said river. nver-And mine hoste with whom I sojourned, being desirous to shew me some sport, said unto me : Sir, if you will see any fish taken, goe with me. Then hee led me unto the foresaid bridge, carying in his armes with him certaine dive-doppers or water-foules, bound unto a company routes Catch-of poles, and about every one of their necks he tied a ingfish. threed, least they should eat the fish as fast as they tooke them : and he caried 3. great baskets with him also : then loosed he the dive-doppers from the poles, which presently went into the water, & within lesse then the space of one houre, caught as many fishes as filled the 3.{n}baskets : which being full, mine hoste untyed the threeds  from about their neckes, and entering the second time into the river they fed themselves with fish, and being satisfied they returned and suffered themselves to be bound unto the saide poles as they were before. And when I did eate of those fishes, me thought they were exceeding good. Travailing thence many dayes journeys, at length I arrived at another city called * Canasia, which Cansahor signifieth in our language, the city of heaven. Never in Quinzat-all my life did I see so great a citie ; for it conteineth in circuit an hundreth miles: neither sawe I any plot thereof, which was not throughly inhabited: yea, I sawe many houses of tenne or twelve stories high, one above another. It hath mightie large suburbs containing more people then the citie it selfe. Also it hath twelve principali gates : and about the distance of eight miles, in the high way unto every one of the saide gates standeth a city as big by estimation as Venice, and Padua. The foresaid city of Canasia is situated in waters or marshes, which alwayes stand still neither ebb-{n}ing nor flowing : howbeit it hath a defence for the winde The Italian like unto Venice. In this citie there are mo then 10002.{n}bridges, many whereof I numbred and passed over them : 7ioo^ and upon every of those bridges stand certaine watch- bridges.{n}425{n}men of the citie, keeping continuall watch and ward about the said city, for the great Can the Emperour of Catay. The people of this countrey say, that they have one duetie injoyned unto them by their lord : for every fire payeth one Balis in regard of tribute : and a Balis is five papers or pieces of silke, which are worth one floren and an halfe of our coine. Tenne or twelve housholds are accompted for one fire, and so pay tribute but for one fire onely. Al those tributary fires amount unto the number of 85. Thuman, with other foure Thuman of the Saracens, which make 89. in al ; And one Thuman con-sisteth 10000. fires. The residue of the people of the city are some of them Christians, some marchants, and some travellers through the countrey : whereupon I mar-veiled much howe such an infinite number of persons could inhabite and live together. There is great abound-ance of victuals in this citie, as namely of bread and wine, and especially of hogs-flesh, with other necessaries.{n}Of a Monastery where many strange beastes of divers kindes doe live upon an hill.{n}IN the foresaide citie foure of our friers had converted a mighty and riche man unto the faith of Christ, at whose house 1 continually abode, for so long time as I remained in the citie. Who upon a certaine time saide unto me : Ara, that is to say, Father, will you goe and beholde the citie ? And I said, yea. Then embarqued we our selves, and directed our course unto a certaine great Monastery : where being arrived, he called a religious person with whom he was acquainted, saying unto him concerning me : this Raban Francus, that is to say, this religious Frenchman commeth from the Westerne parts of the world, and is now going to the city of Cambaleth to pray for the life of the great Can, and therefore you must shew him some rare thing, that when hee returnes into his owne countrey, he may say, this strange sight or novelty have I seene in the city of Canasia. Then the said religious man tooke two great 426{n}baskets full of broken reliques which remained of the table, and led me unto a little walled parke, the doore whereof he unlocked with his key, and there appeared unto us a pleasant faire greene plot, into the which we entred. In the said greene stands a litle mount in forme of a steeple, replenished with fragrant herbes, and fine shady trees. And while we stood there, he tooke a cymbali or bell, and rang therewith, as they use to ring to dinner or bevoir in cloisters, at the sound whereof many creatures of divers kinds came downe from the mount, some like apes, some like cats, some like monkeys; and some having faces like men. And while I stood beholding of them, they gathered themselves together about him, to the number of 4200. of those creatures, putting themselves in good order, before whom he set a platter, and gave them the said fragments to eate. And when they had eaten he rang upon his cymbal the second time, and they al returned unto their former places. Then, wondring greatly at the matter, I demanded what kind of creatures those might be ? They are (quoth he) the soules of noble men which we do here feed, for the love of God who governeth the world : and as a man was honorable or noble in this life, so his soule after death, entreth into the body of some excellent beast or other, but the soules of simple and rusticall people do possesse the bodies of more vile and brutish creatures. Then I began to refute that foule error : howbeit my speach did nothing at all prevaile with him : for hee could not be perswaded that any soule might remaine without a body. From thence I departed unto a certaine citie named Chilenso, the walls whereof conteined 40. miles in cir- Chilenso. cuit. In this city there are 360. bridges of stone, the fairest that ever I saw : and it is wel inhabited, having a great navie belonging thereunto, & abounding with all kinds of victuals and other commodities. And thence I{n}went unto a certaine river called Thalay, which, where it Thalay. is most narrow, is 7. miles broad : and it runneth through the midst of the land of Pygmaei, whose chiefe city is{n}427{n}Cakam. called Cakam, and is one of the goodliest cities in the [II. i. 61.] world. These Pigmaeans are three of my spans high, and they make larger and better cloth of cotten and silke, then any other nation under the sunne. And coasting along by the saide river, I came unto a certaine citie Janzu. named Janzu, in which citie there is one receptacle for{n}the Friers of our order, and there be also three Churches of the Nestorians. This Janzu is a noble and great citie, containing 48 Thuman of tributarie fiers, and in it are all kindes of victuals, and great plenty of such beastes, foules and fishes, as Christians doe usually live upon. The lord of the same citie hath in yeerely revenues for salt onely, fiftie Thuman of Balis, and one balis is worth a floren and a halfe of our coyne: insomuch that one Thuman of balis amounteth unto the value of fifteene thousand florens. Howbeit the sayd lord favoureth his people in one respect, for sometimes he forgiveth them freely two hundred Thuman, least there should be any scarcity or dearth among them. There is a custome in this citie, that when any man is determined to banquet his friends, going about unto certaine tavernes or cookes houses appointed for the same purpose, he sayth unto every particular hoste, you shall have such, and such of my friendes, whom you must intertaine in my name, and so much I will bestowe upon the banquet. And by that meanes his friendes are better feasted at diverse places, then they should have beene at one. Tenne miles from the sayde citie, about the head of the foresayd river of Thalay, there is a certaine other citie called Montu, which hath the greatest navy that I saw in the whole world. All their ships are as white as snow, and they have banqueting houses in them, and many other rare things also, which no man would beleeve, unlesse he had seene them with his owne eyes.{n}428{n}TRavelling eight dayes journey further by divers territories and cities, at length I came by fresh water unto a certaine citie named Leneyn, standing upon the river of *Karavoran, which runneth through the midst of Cataie, and doeth great harme in the countrey when it overfloweth the bankes, or breaketh foorth of the chanell. From thence passing along the river Eastward, after many dayes travell, and the sight of divers cities, 1 arrived at a citie called *Sumakoto, which aboundeth more with silke then any other citie in the world: for when there is great scarcitie of silke, fortie pound is sold for lesse then eight groates. In this citie there is abundance of all merchandize, and of all kindes of victuals also, as of bread, wine, flesh, fish, with all choise and delicate spices. Then travelling on still towards the East by many cities, I came unto the noble and renowmed citie of Cambaleth, which is of great antiquitie, being situate in the province of Cataie. This citie the Tartars tooke, and neere unto it within the space of halfe a mile, they built another citie called Caido. The citie of Caido hath twelve gates, being each of them two miles distant from another. Also the space lying in the midst betweene the two foresayd cities is very well and throughly inhabited, so that they make as it were but one citie betweene them both. The whole compasse or circuit of both cities together, is 40. miles. In this citie the great emperour Can hath his principali seat, and his Imperiali palace, the wals of which palace containe foure miles in circuit: and neere unto this his palace are many other palaces and houses of his nobles which belong unto his court. Within the precincts of the sayd palace Imperiali, there is a most beautifull mount, set and replenished with trees, for which cause it is called the Greene mount, having a most royall and sumptuous palace standing thereupon, in which, for the most part, the great Can is resident. Upon the one side of the{n}429{n}Karamoron.{n}Sumacoto.{n}sayd mount there is a great lake, whereupon a most stately bridge is built, in which lake is great abundance of geese, ducks, and all kindes of water foules: and in the wood growing upon the mount there is great store of all birds, and wilde beasts. And therefore when the great Can will solace himselfe with hunting or hauking, he needs not so much as once to step forth of his palace. Moreover, the principali palace, wherein he maketh his abode, is very large, having within it 14 pillers of golde, and all the walles thereof are hanged with red skinnes, which are sayd to be the most costly skinnes in all the world. In the midst of the palace standes a cisterne of two yards high, which consisteth of a pretious stone called Merdochas, and is wreathed about with golde, & at ech corner thereof is the golden image of a serpent, as it were, furiously shaking and casting forth his head. This cisterne also hath a kind of networke of pearle wrought about it. Likewise by the sayd cisterne there is drinke conveyed thorow certeine pipes and conducts, such as useth to be drunke in the emperors court, upon the which also there hang many vessels of golde, wherein, whosoever will may drinke of the sayd licour. In the foresayd palace there are many peacocks of golde: & when any Tartar maketh a banquet unto his lord, if the guests chance to clap their hands for joy and mirth, the sayd golden peacocks also will spread abroad their wings, and lift up their traines, seeming as if they danced: and this I suppose to be done by arte magike or by some secret engine under the ground.{n} Of the glory and magnificence of the great Can.{n}MOreover, when the great emperor Can sitteth in his imperiali throne of estate, on his left hand sitteth his queene or empresse, and upon another inferior seate there sit two other women, which are to accompany the emperor, when his spouse is absent, but in the lowest place of all, there sit all the ladies of his kinred. All the maried women weare upon their heads a kind of orna-43°{n}ment in shape like unto a mans foote, of a cubite and a halfe in length, and the lower part of the sayd foote is adorned with cranes feathers, and is all over thicke set with great and orient pearles. Upon the right hand of the great Can sitteth his first begotten sonne and heire apparant unto his empire, and under him sit all the nobles of the blood royall. There bee also foure Secretaries, which put all things in writing that the emperor speaketh. In whose presence likewise stand his Barons and divers others of his nobilitie, with great traines of folowers after them, of whom none dare speake so much as one word, unlesse they have obtained licence of the emperor so to doe, except his jesters and stage-players, who are appointed of purpose to solace their lord. Neither yet dare they attempt to doe ought, but onely according to the pleasure of their emperor, and as hee enjoineth them by lawe. About the palace gate stand certaine Barons to keepe all men from treading upon the threshold of the sayd gate. When it pleaseth the great Can to solemnize a feast, he hath about him 14000. Barons, carying wreathes & litle crownes upon their heads, and giving attendance upon their lord, and every one of them weareth a garment of gold and precious stones, which is woorth ten thousand Florens. His court is kept in very good order, by governours of tens, governours of hundreds, and governours of thousands, insomuch that every one in his place performeth his duetie committed unto him, neither is there any defect to bee found. I Frier Odoricus was there present in person for the space of three yeeres, and was often at the sayd banquets; for we friers Minorites have a place of aboad appointed out for us in the emperors court, and are enjoined to goe and to bestow our blessing upon him. And I enquired of certaine Courtiers concerning the number of persons pertaining to the emperors court ? And they answered mee, that of stage-players, musicians, and such like, there were eighteene Thuman at the least, and that the keepers of dogs, beasts and foules were{n}431{n}fifteene Thuman, and the physicians for the emperours body, were foure hundred; the Christians also were eight in number, together with one Saracen. At my being there, all the foresayd number of persons had all kind of necessaries both for apparell and victuals out of the emperors court. Moreover, when he will make his progresse from one countrey to another, hee hath foure troupes of horsemen, one being appointed to goe a dayes journey before, and another to come a dayes journey after him, the third to march on his right hand, and the fourth on his left, in the maner of a crosse, he himselfe being in the midst, and so every particular troupe have their daily journeys limited unto them, to the ende they may provide sufficient victuals without defect. Nowe the great Can himselfe is caried in maner following; hee rideth in a chariot with two wheeles, upon which a majesticall throne is built of the wood of Aloe, being adorned with gold and great pearles, and precious stones, and foure elephants bravely furnished doe drawe the sayd chariot, before which elephants foure great horses richly trapped and covered doe lead the way. Hard by the chariot on both sides thereof, are foure Barons laying hold and attending thereupon, to keepe all persons from approching neere unto their emperour. Upon the chariot also two milke-white Jer-falcons doe sit, and seeing any game which hee would take, hee letteth them flie, and so they take it, and after this maner doeth hee solace himselfe as hee rideth. Moreover, no man dare come within a stones cast of the chariot, but such as are appointed. The number of his owne followers, of his wives attendants, and of the traine of his first begotten sonne and heire apparant, would seeme incredible unto any man, unlesse hee had seene it with his owne eyes. The foresayd great Can hath devided his Empire into twelve partes or Provinces, and one of the sayd provinces hath two thousand great cities within the precincts thereof. Whereupon his empire is of that length and breadth, that unto whatsoever part thereof he{n}43 2{n}. . . I33°* intendeth his journy, he hath space enough for six moneths continual progresse, except his Islands which are at the least 5000.{n}Of certaine Innes or hospitals appointed for travailers throughout the whole empire.{n}THe foresayd Emperor (to the end that travailers may have all things necessary throughout his whole empire) hath caused certaine Innes to be provided in sundry places upon the high wayes, where all things pertaining unto victuals are in a continuall readi-nesse. And when any alteration or newes happen in any part of his Empire, if he chance to be farre absent from that part, his ambassadors upon horses or drome- [II. i. 63.] daries ride post unto him, and when themselves and their beasts are weary, they blow their horne, at the noise whereof, the next Inne likewise provideth a horse and a man, who takes the letter of him that is weary, and runneth unto another Inne : and so by divers Innes, and divers postes, the report, which ordinarily could skarce come in 30. days, is in one natural day brought unto the emperor: and therefore no matter of any moment can be done in his empire, but straightway he hath intelligence thereof. Moreover, when ye great Can himselfe will go on hunting, he useth this custome. Some twenty dayes journey from the citie of Kambaleth there is a forrest containing sixe dayes journey in circuit, in which forrest there are so many kinds of beasts and birds, as it is incredible to report. Unto this forrest, at the ende of every third or fourth yeere, himselfe with his whole traine resorteth, and they all of them together environ the sayd forrest, sending dogs into the same, which by hunting do bring foorth the beasts : namely, lions and stags, and other creatures, unto a most beautifull plaine in the midst of the forrest, because all the beasts of the forrest doe tremble, especially at the cry of hounds. Then commeth the great Can himselfe, being caried upon three elephants, and shooteth five{n}iv	433	2 e{n}arrowes into the whole herd of beasts, and after him all his Barons, and after them the rest of his courtiers and family doe all in like maner discharge their arrowes also, and every mans arrow hath a sundry marke. Then they all goe unto the beasts which are slaine (suffering the living beasts to returne into the wood that they may have more sport with them another time) and every man enjoyeth that beast as his owne, wherein he findeth his arrow sticking.{n}Of the foure feasts which the great Can solemnizeth every yeere in his Court.{n}FOure great feasts in a yeere doeth the emperor Can celebrate : namely, the feast of his birth, the feast of his circumcision, the feast of his coronation, and the feast of his mariage. And unto these feasts he inviteth all his Barons, his stage-players, and all such as are of his kinred. Then the great Can sitting in his throne, all his Barons present themselves before him, with wreaths and crownes upon their heads, being diversly attired, for some of them are in greene, namely, the principali : the second are in red, and the third in yellow, and they hold each man in his hand a little Ivorie table of elephants tooth, and they are girt with golden girdles of halfe a foote broad, and they stand upon their feete keeping silence. About them stand the stage-players or musicians with their instruments. And in one of the corners of a certaine great pallace, all the Philosophers or Magicians remaine for certaine howers, and doe attend upon points or characters : and when the point and hower which the sayd Philosophers expected for, is come, a certaine crier crieth out with a loud voyce, saying, Incline or bowe your selves before your Emperour : with that all the Barons fall flat upon the earth. Then hee crieth out againe ; Arise all, and immediately they all arise. Likewise the Philosophers attend upon a point or character the second time, and when it is fulfilled, the crier crieth out amaine ; Put{n}434{n}your fingers in your eares : and foorthwith againe he saieth; Plucke them out. Againe, at the third point he crieth, Boult this meale. Many other circumstances also doe they performe, all which they say have some certaine signification: howbeit, neither would I write them, nor give any heed unto them, because they are vaine and ridiculous. And when the musicians hower is come, then the Philosophers say, Solemnize a feast unto your Lord: with that all of them sound their instruments, making a great and a melodious noyse. And immediately another crieth, Peace, peace, and they are all whist. Then come the women-musicians and sing sweetly before the Emperour, which musike was more delightfull unto me. After them come in the lions and doe their obeisance unto the great Can. Then the juglers cause golden cups full of wine to flie up and downe in the ayre, and to apply themselves unto mens mouthes that they may drinke of them. These and many other strange things I sawe in the court of the great Can, which no man would beleeve unlesse he had seen them with his owne eies, and therefore I omit to speake of them. I was informed also by certaine credible persons, of another miraculous thing, namely, that in a certaine kingdome of the sayd Can, wherein stand the mountains called Kapsei (the kingdomes name is Kalor) there growe great Gourds or Pompions, which lambe in a being ripe, doe open at the tops, and within them is &urd" found a little beast like unto a yong lambe, even as I my selfe have heard reported, that there stand certaine trees upon the shore of the Irish sea, bearing fruit like unto a gourd, which, at a certaine time of the yeere doe fall into the water, and become birds called Bernacles, and this is most true.{n}Of divers provinces and cities.{n}A Nd after three yeres I departed out of the empire His retume of Cataie, travailing fiftie dayes journey towards Westward.{n}the West. And at length I came unto the empire of{n}435{n}[II. i. 64.] Pretegoani, whose principali citie is Kosan, which hath many other cities under it. From thence passing many{n}Casan. dayes travell, I came unto a province called Casan, which is for good commodities, one of the onely provinces under the Sunne, and is very well inhabited, insomuch that when we depart out of the gates of one city we may beholde the gates of another city, as I my selfe saw in divers of them. The breadth of the sayd province is fifty dayes journey, & the length above sixty. In it there is great plenty of all victuals, and especially of chesnuts, and it is one of the twelve provinces of the great Can. Going on further, I came unto a certaine{n}II Or, Thebet. kingdome called II Tebek, which is in subjection unto the great Can also, wherein I thinke there is more plenty of bread & wine then in any other part of the world besides. The people of the sayd countrey do, for the most part, inhabit in tents made of blacke felt. Their principali city is invironed with faire and beautifull walles, being built of most white and blacke stones, which are disposed checkerwise one by another, and curiously compiled together : likewise all the high wayes in this countrey are exceedingly well paved. In the sayd countrey none dare shed the bloud of a man, or of any beast, for the reverence of a certaine idole. In the foresayd city their Abassi, that is to say, their Pope is resident, being the head and prince of all idolaters (upon whom he bestoweth and distributeth gifts after his maner) even as our pope of Rome accounts himselfe to be the head of all Christians. The women of this countrey weare above an hundreth tricks and trifles about them, and they have two teeth in their mouthes as long as the tushes of a boare. When any mans father deceaseth among them, his sonne assembleth together all the priests and musicians that he can get, saying that he is determined to honour his father : then causeth he him to be caried into the field (all his kinsfolks, friends, and neighbours, accompanying him in the sayd action) where the priests with great solemnity cut 436{n}off the fathers head, giving it unto his sonne, which being done, they divide the whole body into morsels, and so leave it behinde them, returning home with prayers in the company of the sayd sonne. So soone as they are departed, certaine vultures, which are accustomed to such bankets, come flying from the mountaines, and cary away all the sayd morsels of flesh : and from thenceforth a fame is spread abroad, that the sayd party deceased was holy, because the angels of God carried him into paradise. And this is the greatest and highest honour, that the sonne can devise to performe unto his deceased father. Then the sayd sonne taketh his fathers same head, seething it and eating the flesh thereof, but of storycmcern-the skull he makes a drinking cup, wherein himselfe same people with all his family and kinred do drinke with great in William de solemnity and mirth, in the remembrance of his dead Rubricis. and devoured father. Many other vile and abominable things doth the sayd nation commit, which I meane not to write, because men neither can nor will beleeve, except they should have the sight of them.{n}Of a certaine rich man, who is fed and nourished by fiftie virgins.{n}WHile I was in the province of Maney, I passed by the palace of a certaine famous man, which hath fifty virgin damosels continually attending upon him, feeding him every meale, as a bird feeds her yoong ones. Also he hath sundry kindes of meat served in at his table, and three dishes of ech kinde: and when the sayd virgins feed him, they sing most sweetly. This man hath in yeerely revenues thirty thuman of tagars of rise, every of which thuman yeeldeth tenne thousand tagars, and one tagar is the burthen of an asse. His palace is two miles in circuit, the pavement whereof is one plate of golde, and another of silver. Neere unto the wall of the sayd palace there is a mount artificially wrought with golde and silver, whereupon stand turrets and steeples and other delectable things for the solace{n}437{n}and recreation of the foresayd great man. And it was tolde me that there were foure such men in the sayd kingdome. It is accounted a great grace for the men Long nailes. of that countrey to have long nailes upon their fingers, and especially upon their thumbes, which nailes they may folde about their hands: but the grace and beauty of their women is to have small and slender feet: and therefore the mothers when their daughters are yoong, do binde up their feet, that they may not grow great. Travelling on further towards the South, I arrived at a Melistorte. certaine countrey called Melistorte, which is a pleasant and fertile place. And in this countrey there was a certeine aged man called Senex de monte, who round about two mountaines had built a wall to inclose the sayd mountaines. Within this wall there were the fairest and most chrystall fountaines in the whole world: and about the sayd fountaines there were most beautifull virgins in great number, and goodly horses also, and in a word, every thing that could be devised for bodily solace and delight, and therefore the inhabitants of the countrey call the same place by the name of Paradise.{n}The sayd olde Senex, when he saw any proper and valiant yoong man, he would admit him into his paradise. Moreover by certaine conducts he makes wine and milke [II. i. 65.] to flow abundantly. This Senex, when he hath a minde to revenge himselfe or to slay any king or baron, com-mandeth him that is governor of the sayd paradise, to bring thereunto some of the acquaintance of the sayd king or baron, permitting him a while to take his pleasure therein, and then to give him a certaine potion being of force, to cast him into such a slumber as should make him quite voide of all sense, and so being in a profound sleepe to convey him out of his paradise: who being awaked, & seeing himselfe thrust out of the paradise would become so sorowfull, that he could not in the world devise what to do, or whither to turne him. Then would he go unto the foresaid old man, beseeching him that he might be admitted againe into 438{n}his paradise: who saith unto him, You cannot be admitted thither, unlesse you will slay such or such a man for my sake, and if you will give the attempt onely, whether you kill him or no, I wil place you againe in paradise, that there you may remaine alwayes: then would the party without fade put the same in execution, indevouring to murther all those against whom the sayd olde man had conceived any hatred. And therefore all the kings of the east stood in awe of the sayd olde man, and gave unto him great tribute.{n}Of the death of Senex de monte.{n}A Nd when the Tartars had subdued a great part of the world, they came unto the sayd olde man, and tooke from him the custody of his paradise: who being incensed thereat, sent abroad divers desperate and resolute persons out of his forenamed paradise, and caused many of the Tartarian nobles to be slaine. The Tartars seeing this, went and besieged the city wherein the said olde man was, tooke him, and put him to a most cruell and ignominious death. The friers in that place have this speciali gift and prerogative: namely, that by the vertue of the name of Christ Jesu, and in the vertue of his pretious bloud, which he shedde upon the crosse for the salvation of mankinde, they doe cast foorth devils out of them that are possessed. And because there are many possessed men in those parts, they are bound and brought ten dayes journey unto the sayd friers, who being dispossessed of the uncleane spirits, do presently beleeve in Christ who delivered them, accounting him for their God, and being baptised in his name, and also delivering immediatly unto the friers all their idols, and the idols of their cattell, which are commonly made of felt or of womens haire: then the sayd friers kindle a fire in a publike place (whereunto the people resort, that they may see the false gods of their neighbors burnt) and cast the sayd idols thereinto: howbeit at the first those idols came out of the fire againe. Then the friers sprinkled{n}439{n}A.D.{n}1330-{n}the sayd fire with holy water, casting the idols into it the second time, and with that the devils fled in the like-nesse of blacke smoake, and the idols still remained till they were consumed unto ashes. Afterward, this noise & outcry was heard in the ayre: Beholde and see how I am expelled out of my habitation. And by these meanes the friers doe baptise great multitudes, who presently revolt againe unto their idols: insomuch that the sayd friers must eftsoones, as it were, underprop them, and informe them anew. There was another terrible thing which I saw there: for passing by a certaine valley, which is situate beside a pleasant river, I saw many dead bodies, and in the sayd valley also I heard divers sweet sounds and harmonies of musike, especially the noise of citherns, whereat I was greatly amazed. This valley conteineth in length seven or eight miles at the least, into the which whosoever entreth, dieth presently, and can by no meanes passe alive thorow the middest thereof: for which cause all the inhabitants thereabout decline unto the one side. Moreover, I was tempted to go in, and to see what it was. At length, making my prayers, and recommending my selfe to God in the name of Jesu, I entred, and saw such swarmes of dead bodies there, as no man would beleeve unlesse he were an eye witnesse thereof. At the one side of the foresayd valley upon a certaine stone, I saw the visage of a man, which beheld me with such a terrible aspect, that I thought verily I should have died in the same place. But alwayes this sentence, the word became flesh, and dwelt amongst us, I ceased not to pronounce, signing my selfe with the signe of the crosse, and neerer then seven or eight pases I durst not approch unto the said head: but I departed & fled unto another place in the sayd valley, ascending up into a little sandy mountaine, where looking round about, I saw nothing but the sayd citherns, which me thought I heard miraculously sounding and playing by themselves without the helpe of musicians. And being upon the toppe of the mountaine, I found{n}440{n}silver there like the scales of fishes in great abundance : and I gathered some part thereof into my bosome to shew for a wonder, but my conscience rebuking me, 1 cast it upon the earth, reserving no whit at all unto my selfe, and so, by Gods grace I departed without danger. And when the men of the countrey knew that I was returned out of the valley alive, they reverenced me much, saying that I was baptised and holy, and that the foresayd bodies were men subject unto the devils infernali, who used to play upon citherns, to the end they might allure people to. enter, and so murther them. Thus much concerning those things which I beheld most certainely with mine eyes, I frier Odoricus have heere written: many strange things also I have of purpose [II. i. 66.] omitted, because men will not beleeve them unlesse they should see them.{n}Of the honour and reverence done unto the great Can.{n}I Will report one thing more, which I saw, concerning the great Can. It is an usuall custome in those parts, that when the forsayd Can travelleth thorow any countrey, his subjects kindle fires before their doores, casting spices thereinto to make a perfume, that their lord passing by may smell the sweet and delectable odours thereof, and much people come foorth to meet him. And upon a certaine time when he was comming towardes Cambaleth, the fame of his approch being published, a bishop of ours with certaine of our minorite friers and my selfe, went two dayes journey to meet him: and being come nigh unto him, we put a crosse upon wood, I my selfe having a censer in my hand, and began to sing with a loud voice : Veni creator spiritus. And as we were singing on this wise, he caused us to be called, commanding us to come unto him : notwithstanding (as it is above mentioned) that no man dare approch within a stones cast of his chariot, unlesse he be called, but such onely as keepe his chariot. And when we came{n}441{n}neere unto him, he vailed his hat or bonet being of an inestimable price, doing reverence unto the crosse. And immediatly I put incense into the censer, and our bishop taking the censer perfumed him, and gave him his benediction. Moreover, they that come before the sayd Can do alwayes bring some oblation to present unto him, observing the ancient law : Thou shalt not appeare in my presence with an empty hand. And for that cause we carried apples with us, and offered them in a platter with reverence unto him : and taking out two of them he did eat some part of one. And then he signified unto us, that we should go apart, least the horses comming on might in ought offend us. With that we departed from him, and turned aside, going unto certaine of his barons, which had bene converted to the faith by certaine friers of our order, being at the same time in his army : and we offered unto them of the foresayd apples, who received them at our hands with great joy, seeming unto us to be as glad, as if we had given them some great gift-	.	....{n}All the premisses abovewritten frier William de Solanga hath put downe in writing even as the foresayd frier Odoricus uttered them by word of mouth, in the yeere of our Lord 1330, in the moneth of May, and in the place of S. Anthony of Padua. Neither did he regard to write them in difficult Latine or in an eloquent stile, but even as Odoricus himselfe rehearsed them, to the end that men might the more easily understand the things reported. I frier Odoricus of Friuli, of a certaine territory called Portus Vahonis, and of the order of the minorites, do testifie and beare witnesse unto the reverend father Guidotus minister of the province of S. Anthony, in the marquesate of Treviso (being by him required upon mine obedience so to doe) that all the premisses above written, either I saw with mine owne eyes, or heard the same reported by credible and substantiali persons. The 442{n}common report also of the countreyes where I was, testifieth those things, which I saw, to be true. Many other things I have omitted, because I beheld them not with mine owne eyes. Howbeit from day to day I purpose with my selfe to travell countreyes or lands, in which action I dispose my selfe to die or to live, as it shall please my God.{n}Of the death of frier Odoricus.{n}IN the yeere therefore of our Lord 1331 the fore-sayd frier Odoricus preparing himselfe for the performance of his intended journey, that his travell and labour might be to greater purpose, he determined to present himselfe unto pope John the two and twentieth, whose benediction and obedience being received, he, with a certaine number of friers willing to beare him company, might convey himselfe unto all the countreyes of infidels. And as he was travelling towards the pope, and not farre distant from the city of Pisa, there meets him by the way a certaine olde man, in the habit and attire of a pilgrime, saluting him by name, and saying: All haile frier Odoricus. And when the frier demaunded how he had knowledge of him : he answered: Whilest you were in India I knew you full well, yea, and I knew your holy purpose also : but see that you returne imme-diatly unto the coven from whence you came, for tenne dayes hence you shall depart out of this present world. Wherefore being astonished and amazed at these wordes (especially the olde man vanishing out of his sight, presently after he had spoken them) he determined to returne. And so he returned in perfect health, feeling no crazednesse nor infirmity of body. And being in his coven at Udene in the province of Padua, the tenth day after the foresayd vision, having received the Communion, and preparing himselfe unto God, yea, being strong and sound of body, hee happily rested in the Lord : whose sacred departure was signified unto the [II. i. 67.]{n}443{n}Pope aforesaid, under the hand of the publique notary in these words following.{n}In the yeere of our Lord 1331, the 14. day of Januarie, Beatus Odoricus a Frier minorite deceased in Christ, at whose prayers God shewed many and sundry miracles, which I Guetelus publique notarie of Utina, sonne of M. Damianus de Porto Gruaro, at the com-mandement and direction of the honorable Conradus of the Borough of Gastaldion, and one of the Councell of Utina, have written as faithfully as I could, and have delivered a copie thereof unto the Friers minorites: howbeit not of all, because they are innumerable, and too difficult for me to write.{n}.