To the worshipfull M. William Winter.{n}T may please your worship to understand, that as concerning the voyage to Chio, what great profit would be gotten, both for marchants, and also for owners of shippes (as it was well knowen in those dayes when the Matthew Gonson, the Trinitie Fitzwilliams, and the Saviour of{n}Bristow, with divers other ships which traded thither yerely, and made their voyage in ten or twelve moneths, and the longest in a yeere) M. Francis Lambert, M. John Brooke, and M. Drauer can truely informe you heereof at large. And by reason that wee have not traded into those parts these many yeeres, and the Turke is growen mighty, whereby our ships doe not trade as ir5{n}Gaspar Campion married-in Chio 24 yeeres.{n}they were woont, I finde that the Venetians doe bring those commodities hither, and doe sell them for double the value that we our selves were accustomed to fetch them. Wherefore, as I am informed by the above named men, that there is none so fit to furnish this voyage as your selfe : my request is that there may be a shippe of convenient burthen prepared for this voyage, and then I will satisfie you at large what is to be done therein. And because the Turke, as I sayd before, is waxen strong, and hath put out the Christian rulers, and placed his owne subjects, we may doubt whether we may so peaceably trade thither as we were woont : therefore I dare undertake to obtaine a safeconduct, if my charges may be borne to goe and come. Of the way how this may be done, M. Locke can satisfie you at large. Moreover, I can informe you more of the trade of that countrey, then any other, for that I have, bene in those parts these thirty yeeres, and have bene married in the very towne of Chio full foure and twenty yeres. Furthermore, when one of our ships commeth thither, they bring at the least sixe or eight thousand carsies, so that the custome thereof is profitable for the prince, and the returne of them is profitable to the common people : for in barter of our wares, we tooke the commodities which the poore of that towne made in their houses : so that one of our shippes brought the prince and countrey more gaines then sixe ships of other nations. The want of this our trade thither was the onely cause why the Christian rulers were displaced : for when they payd not their yerely tribute, they were put out by force. Touching the ship that must go, she must observe this order, she must be a ship of countenance, and she must not touch in any part of Spaine, for the times are dangerous, nor take in any lading there : but she must lade in England, either goods of our owne, or els of strangers, and go to Genoa or Legorno, where we may be wel intreated, and from thence she must make her money to buy wines, by ex-116{n}change to Candia, for there both custome & exchange are reasonable: and not do as the Math. Gonson & other ships did in time past, who made sale of their [II. i. 117.] wares at Messina for the lading of their wines, and payed for turning their white money into golde after foure and five in the hundreth, and also did hazzard the losse of shippe and goods by carying away their money. Thus by the aforesayd course we shall trade quietly,{n}and not be subject to these dangers. Also from Legorno Store °f h™?5 to Castilla de la mar, which is but 16 miles from Naples, j* Fas~ and the ready way to Candia, you may lade hoopes, mare for which will cost carolins of Naples 27 and a halfe the Candia. thousand, which is ducats two and a halfe of Spaine.{n}And in Candia for every thousand of hoops you shall have a but of Malmesey cleare of all charges. Insomuch that a ship of the burden of the Mathew Gonson will cary foure hundreth thousand hoops, so that one thousand ducats will lade her, and this is an usual trade to Candia, as M. Michael Locke can testifie. Furthermore, it is not unknowen to you, that the oiles which we do spend in England for our cloth, are brought out of Spaine, and that very deare, and in England we cannot sell them under 28 pound and 30 pound the tunne : I say we may have good oile, and better cheape in divers places within the streights. Wherefore if you thinke good to take this voyage in hand, I will informe you more particularly when you please. In the meane time I rest your worships to command.{n}Yours at your pleasure Jasper Campion.{n}.