The true report of the siege and taking of Famagusta, of the antique writers called Tamassus, a city in Cyprus 1571. In the which the whole order of all the skirmishes, batteries, mines, and assaults given to the sayd fortresse, may plainly appeare. Englished out of Italian by William Malim.
To the right honourable and his singular good Lord, and onely Patron the Earle of Leicester, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the honourable order of the Garter, one of the Queenes Majesties most honourable privy Councell &c. William Malim wisheth long health with increase of honour.
T hath bene a natural instinct (right honourable and mine especiall good lord) ingraffed in noble personages hearts, much approved and confirmed also by custome, for them to seeke from time to time, by some meanes in their life, by the which they after their death
might deliver over their name to their posteritie : least otherwise with their body, their fame also altogether might perchance be buried. Upon the which consideration we reade many notable and famous things to have bene erected in time past of noble personages (having had wealth at will) in such sort, that not onely certaine ruines of the same sumptuous works builded so many hundred yeres past, do still remaine, but also the most part of those princes, the authours of them, do continually by them dwell in our memories. As the Pyramides made at Memphis, or neere the famous river of Nilus, by the great expenses of the kings of Egypt: the tower called Pharia, made in the Hand of Pharos by king Ptolomee: the walles of Babylon, made or at the least reedified by 118
queene Semiramis: Dianas church at Ephesus builded by all the noble persons of Asia: Mausolus toome or sepulchre, made by his wife queene of Caria: Colossus Solis placed at Rhodes, I remember not by what Princes charge, but made by the hands of Cares Lindius scholar to Lysippus: and the image of Jupiter, made of Yvory by the hands of the skilfull workman Phydias. The which monuments made of barbarous and heathen Princes to redeeme themselves from oblivion deserved both for the magnificence, and perfect workmanship of the same, to be accounted in those dayes as the seven woonders of the world. Since the which time, an easier, readier, and lighter way, being also of more continuance then the former, hath bene found out, namely, Letters, which were first invented by the Caldies and Egyptians, as we reade, and augmented since by others, to our great benefit, and now last of all (no long time past) the same to have bene committed to Printers presses, to the greatest perfection of the same: men being first inforced to write their actes and monuments in beasts skinnes dried, in barkes of trees, or otherwise perchance as unreadily. By the which benefit of letters (now reduced into print) we see how easie a thing it is, and hath bene for noble persons, to live for ever by the helpe of learned men. For the memory of those two woorthy and valiant captaines Scipio and Hannibal had bene long before this present  quite forgotten, except Titus Livius, or some such learned Historiographer had written of them in time. And Alexander Magnus himselfe that great conquerour had nothing beene spoken of, had not Q. Curtius, or some other like by his learned stile revived the remembrance of him, and called backe againe his doings to his posteritie. For the which cause we see commonly in all ages learned men to be much made of by noble personages, as that rare paterne of learning Aristotle to have bene greatly honoured of that former renowmed Monarch Alexander: who affirmed openly, that he was more bound to his Master Aristotle, then to king Philip his father,
because the one had well framed his minde, the other onely his body. Many other like examples I could alledge at this present, if I knew not unto whom I now wrote, or in what: for your honour being skilfull in histories, and so familiarly acquainted with the matter it selfe, that is in still entertaining learned men with all curtesie, I should seeme to light a candle at noone tide, to put you in remembrance of the one, or to exhort you to doe the other, dayly being accustomed to performe the same. Crassus say th in Tullies first booke, De Oratore: that a Lawyers house is the oracle of the whole citie. But I can justly witnesse, that for these five yeeres last past, since my returne from my travell beyond the seas, that your lodging in the Court (where I through your undeserved goodnesse to my great comfort do dayly frequent) hath bene a continuall receptacle or harbour for all learned men comming from both the eyes of the realme, Cambridge, and Oxford (of the which University your lordship is Chanceller) to their great satisfaction of minde, and ready dispatch of their sutes. Especially for Preachers and Ministers of true religion: of the which you have beene from time to time not onely a great favourer, but an earnest furtherer, and protectour: so that these two nurseries of learning (in one of the which I have before this spent part of my time, that I may speake boldly what I thinke) should wrong your honour greatly, and much forget themselves, if by all meanes possible they should not heerafter (as at this present to their smal powers many well learned gentlemen of them do) labour and travell in shewing of themselves thanke-full, to reverence and honour your lordship, and honest their owne names: whose studies certeinly would suddenly decay and fall flat, if they were not held up by such noble proppes, and had not some sure ankerholds in their distresse to leane unto. How ready dayly your travell is, and hath long beene besides to benefit all other persons, in whom any sparke of vertue or honesty re-maineth, I need not labour to expresse, the world
1 20
knowing already the same. But whosoever they be, that in all their life time have an especiall care by all meanes to profit as many as they be able, and hurt none, do not onely a laudable act, but leade a perfect and very godly life. Whereupon Strabo affirmeth this most truely to be spoken of them : Mortales tum demum Deum imitari, cum benefici fuerint. That is, Mortali men then specially to follow the nature of God, when they are beneficiall and bountifull to others. Great commendation undoubtedly it bringeth to any noble personage, that as the Moone, that light and brightnesse which she receiveth of the Sun, is wont presently to spread abroad upon the face of the earth, to the refreshing and comforting of all inferiour and natural things bearing life : so for him, to bestow all that favour and credit, which he hath gotten at the princes handes, to the helpe and reliefe of the woorthy and needy. Great is the force (my right honourable lord) of true vertue, which causeth men, as Tully writeth in his booke De Amicitia, to be loved & honored oft of those persons, which never saw them. Whereof I never had better proofe (I take God & mine one conscience to witnesse, the which I declared also to certaine of my friends assoone as I returned) then at my last being at Constantinople, in the yere of our Lord Master 1564, whereas I oft resorting (as occasion served) to the right honorable Christian ambassadors, while I made my	p
abode there (namely unto Monsieur Antonio Petrimol, lieger there for the French king, Sig. M. Victor Braga-dino, for the segniory of Venice, Sig. Lorenzo Giustiniano, for the state of Scio, or Chios, and Sig. Albertacio delli Alberti, for the duke of Florence) heard them often report and speake very honorably of your lordship, partly for your other good inclinations of nature, but especially for your liberality, & courteous intreating of divers of their friends & countrymen, which upon sundry occasions had bene here in this our realme. So that to conclude, all men justly favour your honourable dealings and deserts: and I for my part have reverenced and honoured
121
Scio lost.
the same evermore both here at home, and elswhere abroad, wishing often to have had some just occasion to pay part of that in good will, which my slender abilitie will never suffer me fully to discharge. For unto whom should I sooner present any thing any way, especially concerning matters done abroad, then unto your lordship, by whom I was much cherished abroad in my travell, and mainteined since my returne here at home ? For the which cause I have enterprised (hoping greatly of your lordships favour herein) to clothe and set forth a few Italian newes in our English attire, being first mooved thereunto by the right worshipfull M. D. Wilson Master of her Majesties Requests, your honours assured trusty friend, a great & painfull furtherer of learning, whom I, and many other for divers respects ought to reverence: who remembring that I had bene at Cyprus, was willing that my pen should travell about the Christian and Turkish affaires, which there lately have happened: per-swading himselfe, that somewhat thereby I might benefit this our native countrey. Against whose reasonable motion I could not greatly wrestle, hazzarding rather my slender skill in attempting and performing this his requested taske, then he through my refusall should seeme to want any jot of my good will. In offering up the which newes, although I shall present no new thing to your honour, because you are so well acquainted with the Italian copy, as I know: yet I trust your lordship will not mislike, that the same which is both pleasant to reade, and so necessary to be knowen for divers of our captaines and other our countreymen, which are ignorant in the Italian tongue, may thus now shew it selfe abroad, covered under the wing of your lordships protection. Certeinly it mooveth me much to remember the losse of those three notable Hands, to the great discomfort of all Christendome, to those hellish Turkes, horseleeches of Christian blood: namely Rhodes besieged on S. John Baptists day, and taken on Johns day the Evangelist, being the 27 of December 1522. Scio or Chios being
122
lost since my being there, taken of Piali Basha with 80 gallies, the 17 of April 1566. And now last of all not only Famagusta the chiefe holde & fortresse in Cyprus Cyprus lost. to have bene lost of the Venetians the 15 of August last past 1571 (the chiefe governors & captaines of them being hewen in sunder by the commandement of that tyrant Mustafa Basha) but all the whole Hand also to be conquered by those cruell Turks, ancient professed enemies to all Christian religion. In the which evill successe (comming to us as I take it for our offences) as I lament the generail losse: so I am surely pensive to understand by this too true a report of the vile death of two particular noble gentlemen of Venice, Sig. M.
Lorenzo Tiepolo, and Sig. M. Giovanni Antonio Querini: of both the which I in my travaile was very courteously used, the former of them being then (as now also he was in this overthrow) governour of Baffo in Cyprus, the other captaine of one of the castels at Corcyra in Greece, now called Corfu. But things past are past amendment, and they could never die more honourably, then in the defence of their countrey. Besides that the late blowes, which the Turks have received since this their fury, in token of Gods wrath against them, do much comfort every Christian heart. Moreover this uniforme preparation which is certainly concluded, and forthwith looked for, by very many Christian Princes (would God by all generally) against these barbarous Mahometists: whose cruelty and beastly behaviour I partly know, and am able to judge of, having bene in Turky amongst them more then eight moneths together. Whose unfaithfulnesse also and breach of promise, as the Venetians manly courage in defence of themselves, and their fortresse, your honour may easily reade in this short treatise and small handfull of leaves, I having set downe also a short description of the Hand of Cyprus, for the better understanding of the whole matter. The which I not onely most humbly beseech your honour now favourably to accept as an earnest peny of more to
123
come, and of my present good will: but with your accustomed goodnesse towards me, to defend the same against such persons, whose tongues too readily roule sometime against other mens painfull travels, perswading themselves to purchase the sooner some credit of learning with the ruder sort, by controlling and overdaintie sifting of other mens laboured tasks. For I know in all ages to be found as well Basilisks as Elephants. Thus nothing doubting of your ready ayd heerein, as I assuredly trust of your honours favourable acceptation of this my poore present, wishing long life with the increase of Gods holy spirit to your lordship and to all your most honourable familie (unto whom I have wholly dedicated my selfe by mine owne choise and election for ever) I, craving pardon for my former boldnesse, most humbly thus take my leave. From Lambhith the 23 of March. Ann. 1572.
Your honours most humble and faithfull servant for ever, William Malim.
.