A petition exhibited to the Viceroy for reforma- [II. i. 181.] tion of sundry injuries offered our nation in Morea, as also for sundry demaundes needefull for the establishing of the traffike in those parts.
Irst that our people may be freed of such wonted molestation, as the Janisers of Patrasso have alwayes from time to time offered them, not regarding the kings commandements to the contrary. That they be removed and called away from thence, and none other remaine
in their place.
2	That where heretofore the kings commandements have beene graunted to ours, that no person whatsoever 283
shall forceably take from them any of their commodities, otherwise then paying them before the deliverie thereof, for the same in readie money, at such price as they themselves will, and sell ordinarily to others, as also that no officer whatsoever, of the kings or any other, shall force them to buy any commodities of that countrey, otherwise then the needfull, at their owne will and pleasure, that the said commandements not heretofore obeyed may be renued with such straight charge for the execution of the same, as is requisite for their due effect.
3	That whereas sundry exactions and oppressions be offered ours by such Byes, Sanjacbies, justices and Cadies, Janizaries, Capagies, and others, officers of the kings comming downe into those parts, who finding there resident no other nation but only ours, will under the name of presents forceable take from them what they please: We do require to obvent these harmes, it may be specified by a commandement from the king to which of such his officers, presents may be given, and their sundry values, whereby both they and ours may rest contented, severely prohibiting in the said commandement, that they take no more then that appointed them, and that no other officers but those onely specified in that commaundement, doe forcibly require of them any thing whatsoever.
4	That the Nadir and Customer of the port, having permitted our ship to lade, doe not after demand of the marchants any other then the outward custome due to the king for the same goods. And being so laden, may by them and the Cadie with other their inferiour officers be visited, requiring for the visiting no more then formerly they were accustomed to pay at their first comming. After which the said ship to depart at the Consuls pleasure, without any molestation of them, or any other officer whatsoever.
5	That Mahomet Chaus, sometime Nadir of Lepanto, and Azon Agon his substitute being with him may be severely punished to the example of others, for often 284
and unjustly molesting our nation, contrarie to the kings commandement, which they disdainefully contemned, as also that the said Mahomet restore and pay unto ours thirtie	for 300 sackes of currants nowe taken
forcibly out of a barke, comming thither from the hither partes of Morea, to pay the king his custome, and that from hence forth, neither the said Mahomet, Azon Agon, nor any other officer or person whatsoever doe hinder or trouble any of ours going thither or to any other place about ther affaires.
6	That whereas certaine Jewes of Lepanto owing money to our marchants for commodities solde them, have not hitherto satisfied them, notwithstanding ours had from the king a commandement for the recovery of the same debts, but fled and absented themselves out of the Towne at the comming of the same, another more forcible commaundement may be graunted ours, that for nonpaiment, whatsoever may be found of theirs in goods, houses, vineyards, or any other thing, may be sold, and ours satisfied of their said debt, according to equitie and reason.
.