Notes concerning the trade of Alger.
He money that is coined in Alger is a piece of gold called Asiano, & Doublaes, and two Doublaes make an Asiano, but th for all things which Doubla there.
The Asper there is not so good by halfe & more, as that in Constantinople ; for the Chekin of gold of 270
e Doubla is most used, be sold by Doublaes, is fiftie of their Aspers
1584. the Turkes made at Constantinople is at Alger worth an 150. Aspers, and at Constantinople it is but 66.
Aspers.
The pistolet and roials of plate are most currant there.
The said pistolet goeth for 130. Aspers there : & the piece of 4. roials goeth for 40. Aspers, but oftentimes is sold for more, as men need them to cary up into Turkie.
Their Asianos and Doublaes are pieces of course gold, worth here but 40.S. the ounce, so the same is currant in no place of Turkie out of the kingdom of Alger, neither the Aspers, for that they be lesse then others be, for they coine them in Alger.
The custome to the king is inward 10. per centum, The custome. to the Turke, to be paid of the commodi tie it selfe, or as it shall be rated.
There is another custome to the Ermine, of one & an halfe per centum, which is to the Justice of the Christians: the goods for this custome are rated as they are for the kings custome.
Having paid custome inwards, you pay none outwards for any commoditie that you doe lade, more then a reward to the gate keepers.
The waight there is called a Cantare for fine wares, as The waights. mettals refined, and spices &c. which is here 120.lL subtil.
Mettall not refined, as lead, iron, and such grosse wares, are sold by a great Cantare, which is halfe as big againe : so it is 180.IL subtil of ours here.
The measure of corne is by a measure called a The measure. Curtia, which is about 4. bushels of our measure, and corne is plentiful there and good cheape, except when there hapneth a very dry yeere.
The surest lodging for a Christian there is in a The surest Jewes house: for if he have any hurt, the Jew and M&ngfir a his goods shall make it good, so the Jew taketh great ckrisAan' care of the Christian and his goods that lieth in his house, for feare of punishment.
271
An Englishman called Thomas Williams, which is M. John Tiptons man, lieth about trade of merchandize in the streete called The Soca of the Jewes.
This is another officer.
Other smal customs you pay besides, which may be at two in the hundred: and fir Consullage you pay two in the hundred.
[II. i. 177.]
Notes concerning the trade in Alexandria.
Lexandria in Egypt is a free port, and when a man commeth within the castles, presently the Ermyn sends aboord to have one come and speake with him, to know what goods are aboord : and then hee will set guards aboord the ship to see all the goods
discharged. And then from the Ermin you goe to the * Bye, onely for that he will inquire newes of you, and so from thence to the Consuls house where you lie. The Venetians have a Consul themselves. But all other nations goe to the French nations Consul, who will give you a chamber for your selves apart, if you will so have it.
The customs inward of all commodities are ten in the hundred, & the custome is paid in wares also that you buy : for the same wares in barter you pay also ten in the hundred, at the lading of the wares. But if you sell for mony, you pay no more custome but the ten aforesaid, and one and a half in the hundred, which is for the custome of the goods you lade for the sayd mony, for more custome you pay not. But for all the money you bring thither, you pay nothing for the custome of the same. And if you sell your wares for mony, and with the same money buy wares, you pay but two in the hundred for the custome thereof. And if you steale any custome, if it be taken, you pay double custome for that you steale.
The weight of Alexandria is called Pois Forforeine, which is a kintal in that place, which maketh at Marseils 109.U. of Marseils waight, at 15 ounces the pound, which is 103.lL of 16. ounces to the li. There 272
is another waight called Pois Gerrin, which is 150.lL of Marseils waight, by which are sold all things to eate : but spice is sold by the former waight. -
From Alexandria to Cairo is three daies journey,, Cairo three but you must take	a	Janissarie with you : & to go	^ies j^wy
up thither by water	it	is 8. dayes journey. Roials or	dria	iand
Spaine are currant mony there, and are the best money you can cary. And	4.	roials are woorth 13. Medins,
and 2. Medins, are	3.	Aspers. Pistolets and crownes
of France and Dollers will goe, but of all Roials are best.
Rice is not permitted to goe out of the land, but is kept for a victuali. But with a present to the Bye and Ermine some may passe.
All sortes of spices be garbled after the bargaine is made, and they be Moores which you deale withall, which be good people and not ill disposed. And after you be searched & have leave to passe, you must presently depart out of the port, and if you doe not, they will search you againe. And you must depart in the day, for in the night the castles will not suffer you to depart. The duetie to the Consul is 2. in the hundred, for his aide, and meate and drinke and all. And the port of Alexandria is good when one is within it with good ankers and cables. Silver is better currant then gold in Alexandria, but both are good.
Commonly the Caravans come thither in October from Mecca to Cairo, and from thence to Alexandria, where the merchants be that buy the spices, and therfore the spices are brought most to Alexandria, where each Christian nation remaineth at the Consuls houses. Yet oftentimes the Christians go up to Cairo to buy drugs & other commodities there, as they see cause. And the commodities there vendible are all sorts of kersies, but the most part blewes, and of clothes all colours except mingled colours and blacks. Pepper is usually sold for 24. ducats the quintal, v	273	s
Ginger for 14. ducats. You must take canvas to make bags to put your commoditie in from Alexandria, for there is none. There is also fine flaxe, and good store of Buffe hides.
.