A commaundement for Aleppo.{n}WHen my letters shal come unto you, know that the Queene of England her Embassador by supplication certified how that before this time we had given our commandement that the summe of 70 ducats, & other marchandize belonging to one William Barret in Aleppo, now dead, saying he was a Venetian, should be given to the Venetians. And if they did find that he was not a Venetian, my will was that they should send all his goods and marchandize to our port into my treasurie. But because that man was an Englishman, the Embassadour required that the sayde goods might not be 290{n}diminished, but that they might be restored to one of their Englishmen. This businesse was signified unto us in the nine hundred ninety & fourth yere of Mahomet, and in the moneth of May the io day. This businesse [II- i. 184.] pertaineth to the Englishmen, who have in their handes our privilege, according to which privilege being in their hands let this matter be done. Against this privilege do nothing, aske nothing of them, but restore to every one his goods. And I command that when my com-mandement shall come unto you, you doe according to it. And if it be according as the Ambassadour certified, and that they have the privilege, peruse the same, looke that nothing be committed against it and our league, and let none trouble them contrarie to it, restore them their goods according to justice, and take heede diligently in this businesse : if another strange marchant be dead, and his goods and marchandize be taken, if he be neither Venetian, nor Englishman, let not his goods perish among you. Before this time one of our Chauses called Cerkes Mahomet chaus was sent with our commaunde-ment to sende the money and marchandize of a dead marchant to our port, and hitherto no letters or newes is come of this matter, for which you shall be punished. Wherefore beware, and if he that is dead be neither Venetian nor Englishman in veritie, doe not loose the goods of the said dead marchant, under the name of a Venetian or Englishman, doe not to the discommoditie of my treasurie, for after it will be hard to recover it.{n}.