A Letter written from Goa by Master Ralph Fitch to Master Leonard Poore abovesaid.{n}Oving friend Master Poore, &c. Since my departure from Aleppo, I have not written unto you any letters, by reason that at Babylon I was sicke of the fluxe, and being sicke, I went from thence for Bal-sara, which was twelve dayes journey downe the river Tygris, where we had{n}extreame hot weather, which was good for my disease, ill fare, and worse lodging, by reason our boat was pestered with people. In eight daies, that which I did eate was very small, so that if we had stayed two dayes longer upon the water, I thinke I had died: but comming to Balsara, presently I mended, I thanke God. There we stayed 14 dayes, and then we imbarked our selves for Ormuz, where we arrived the fifth of September, and were put in prison the ninth of the same moneth, where we continued untill the 11 of October, and then were shipt for this citie of Goa in the captaines ship, with an 114 horses, and about 200 men: and passing by Diu & Chaul, where we went on land to Diu. water the 20 of November, we arrived at Goa the 29 Chaul-of the said moneth, where for our better intertainment we were presently put into a faire strong prison, where we continued untill the 22 of December. It was the will of God that we found there 2 Padres, the one an Englishman, the other a Flemming. The Englishmans name is Padre Thomas Stevens, the others Padre Marco, of the order of S. Paul. These did sue for us unto the Viceroy and other officers, and stood us in as much 463{n}The Italians our great enemies for the trade in the East.{n}stead, as our lives and goods were woorth: for if they had not stucke to us, if we had escaped with our lives, yet we had had long imprisonment.{n}After 14 dayes imprisonment they offered us, if we could put in suerties for 2000 duckats, we should goe abroad in the towne : which when we could not doe, the said Padres found suerties for us, that we should not depart the countrey without the licence of the Viceroy. It doth spite the Italians to see us abroad: and many marvell at our delivery. The painter is in the cloister of S. Paul, and is of their order, and liketh there very well. While we were in prison, both at Ormuz and here, there was a great deale of our goods pilfered and lost, and we have beene at great charges in gifts and otherwise, so that a great deale of our goods is consumed. There is much of our things which wil sell very well, & some we shall get nothing for. I hope in God that at the returne of the Viceroy, which is gone to Chaul and to Diu, they say, to winne a castle of the Moores, whose returne is thought will be about Easter, then we shall get our libertie, and our suerties discharged. Then I thinke it wil be our best way, either one or both to returne, because our troubles have bene so great, & so much of our goods spoyled and lost. But if it please God that I come into England, by Gods helpe, I will returne hither againe. It is a brave and pleasant countrey, and very fruitfull. The summer is almost all the yeere long, but the chiefest at Christmas.{n}The day and the night are all of one length, very litle difference, and marveilous great store of fruits. For all our great troubles, yet are we fat and well liking, for victuals are here plentie and good cheape. And here I will passe over to certifie you of strange things, untill our meeting, for it would be too long to write thereof. And thus I commit you to God, who ever preserve you and us all. From Goa in the East Indies the 25 of Januarie 1584.{n}Yours to command, Ralph Fitch. 464{n}.