A briefe extract specifying the certaine dayly pai-ments, answered quarterly in time of peace, by the Grand Signior, out of his Treasurie, to the Officers of his Seraglio or Court, successively in degrees: collected in a yeerely totali summe, as followeth.
Or his owne diet every day, one thousand and one aspers, according to a former custome received from his auncestors: notwithstanding that otherwise his diur-nall expence is very much, and not certainly knowen, which summe maketh sterling money by the yere, two thousand, one hundred, 92. pounds, three shillings, eight pence.
The five and fourtie thousand Janizaries dispersed in sundry places of his dominions, at sixe aspers the day, amounteth by the yeere to five hundreth, fourescore and eleven thousand, and three hundreth pounds.
The Azamoglans, tribute children, farre surmount that number, for that they are collected from among the Christians, from whom betweene the yeeres of sixe and twelve, they are pulled away yeerely perforce: whereof I suppose those in service may be equall in number with the Janizaries abovesaid, at three aspers a day, one with another, which is two hundred fourescore and fifteene thousand, sixe hundred and fiftie pounds.
The five Bassas, whereof the Viceroy is supreme, at one thousand aspers the day, besides their yerely revenues, amounteth sterling by the yeere to ten thousand, nine hundred and fiftie pounds.
The five Beglerbegs, chiefe presidents of Greece, Hungary and Sclavonia, being in Europe, in Natolia, and Caramania of Asia, at one thousande aspers the day: as also to eighteene other go verno urs of Provinces, at five hundred aspers the day, amounteth by the yeere, to thirtie thousand sixe hundred, and threescore pounds.
The Bassa, Admirall of the Sea, one thousand aspers the day, two thousand, one hundred, foure score and ten thousand pounds.
The Aga of the Janizaries, general of the footemen, five hundred aspers the day, and maketh by the yeere in sterling money, one thousand, fourescore and fifteene pounds.
The Imbrahur Bassa, Master of his horse, one hundred and fiftie aspers the day, is sterling money, three hundred and eight and twenty pounds.
The chiefe Esquire under him, one hundred and fiftie aspers, is three hundred and eight and twenty pounds.
The Agas of the Spahi, Captaines of the horsemen, sixe, at one hundred and fiftie aspers to either of them, maketh sterling, one thousand, nine hundred, three score and eleven pounds.
The Capagi Bassas head porters foure, one hundred and fiftie aspers to ech, and maketh out in sterling money by the yeere, one thousand, three hundred, and foure-teene pounds.
The Sisinghir Bassa, Controller of the housholde, one hundred and twentie aspers the day, and maketh out in sterling money by the yeere, two hundred, threescore and two poundes, sixteene shillings.
The Chaus Bassa, Captaine of the Pensioners, one hundred and twentie aspers the day, and amounteth to by the yeere in sterling money, two hundred, threescore and two pounds, sixteene shillings.
The Capigilar Caiasi, Captaine of his Barge, one hun-dreth and twentie aspers the day, and maketh out by the yeere in sterling money, two hundred, threescore and two poundes, sixteene shillings.
The Solach Bassi, Captaine of his guard, one hundred and twentie aspers, two hundred, three score and two pounds, sixteene shillings.
The Giebrigi Bassi, master of the armoury, one hundred and twenty aspers, two hundred, three score and two pounds, sixteene shillings.
The Topagi Bassi, Master of the artillerie, one hundred and twentie aspers, two hundred, three score and two pounds, sixteene shillings.
The Echim Bassi, Phisition to his person, one hundred and twentie aspers, two hundred, three score and two pounds, sixteene shillings.
To fourtie Phisitions under him, to ech fourtie aspers, is three thousand, eight hundred, three score and sixe pounds, sixteene shillings.
The Mustafaracas spearemen, attending on his person, in number five hundred, to either three score aspers, and maketh sterling, threescore and five thousand, and seven hundred pounds.
The Cisingeri gentlemen, attending upon his diet, fourtie, at fourtie aspers ech of them, and amounteth to sterling by the yeere, three thousand, five hundred and foure pounds.
The Chausi Pensioners, foure hundred and fourtie, at thirtie aspers, twenty eight thousand, nine hundred, and eight pounds.
The Capagi porters of the Court and City, foure hundred, at eight aspers, and maketh sterling money by the yeere, seven thousand, and eight pounds.
The Solachi, archers of his guard, three hundreth and twenty, at nine aspers, and commeth unto in English money, the summe of sixe thousand, three hundred and sixe pounds.
The Spahi, men of Armes of the Court and the City, ten thousand, at twenty five aspers, and maketh of English money, five hundred, forty and seven thousand, and five hundred pounds.
The Janizaires sixteene thousand, at six aspers, is two hundred and ten thousand, and two hundred and forty pounds.
The Giebegi furbu shers of armor, one thousand, five hundred, at sixe aspers, and amounteth to sterling 63
 money, nineteene thousand, seven hundred, and fourescore pounds.
The Seiesir, servitors in his Equier or stable, five hundred, at two aspers, and maketh sterling money, two thousand, one hundred, fourescore and ten pounds.
The Saesi, Sadlers and bit makers, five hundred, at seven aspers, seven thousand, six hundred, threescore and five pounds.
The Catergi, Carriers upon Mules, two hundred, at five aspers, two thousand, one hundred, fourescore and ten pounds.
The Cinegi, Carriers upon Camels, one thousand, five hundred, at eight aspers, and amounteth in sterling money, to twenty sixe thousand, two hundred, and fourescore pounds.
The Reiz, or Captaines of the Gallies, three hundred, at ten aspers, and amounteth in English money by the yeere, the summe of sixe thousand, five hundred, threescore and ten pounds.
The Alechingi, Masters of the said Gallies, three hundred, at seven aspers, foure thousand, five hundred, fourescore and nineteene pounds.
The Getti, Boateswaines thereof, three hundred, at sixe aspers, is three thousande, nine hundred, fourty and two pounds.
The Oda Bassi, Pursers, three hundred, at five aspers, maketh three thousand, two hundred, and fourescore pounds.
The Azappi souldiers two thousand sixe hundred at foure Aspers, whereof the six hundred do continually keepe the gallies, two and twentie thousand, seven hundred fourscore and six pounds.
The Mariers Bassi masters over the shipwrights and kalkers of the navie, nine, at 20. Aspers the piece, amounteth to three thousand fourescore and foure pound, foure shillings.
The Master Dassi shipwrights & kalkers, one thousand
at fourteene aspers, which amounteth by the yeere, to thirtie thousand, sixe hundred threescore pound.
Summa totalis of dayly paiments amounteth by the yeere sterling, one million, nine hundred threescore eight thousand, seven hundred thirty five pounds, nineteene shillings eight pence, answered quarterly without default, with the summe of foure hundred fourescore twelve thousand, one hundred fourescore and foure pounds foure shillings eleven pence, and is for every day five thousand three hundred fourescore and thirteene pounds, fifteene shillings ten pence.
Annuities of lands never improved, five times more in value then their summes mentioned, given by the saide Grand Signior, as followeth.
TO the Viceroy for his Timar or annuitie 60. thousand golde ducats.
To the second Bassa for his annuitie 50. thousand ducats.
To the third Bassa for his annuitie 40. thousand ducats. To the fourth Bassa for his annuitie 30. thousand ducats. To the fifth Bassa for his annuitie 20. thousand ducats. To the Captaine of the Janizaries 20. thousand ducats. To the Jeu Merhorbassi master of his horse 15. thousand ducats.
To the Captaine of the pensioners 10. thousand ducats.
To the Captaine of his guard 5. thousand ducats.
Summa totalis 90. thousand li. sterling.
Beside these above specified, be sundry other annuities given to divers others of his aforesaid officers, as also to certaine called Sahims, diminishing from three thousand to two hundreth ducats, esteemed treble to surmount the annuitie abovesaid.
The Turkes chiefe officers.
THe Viceroy is high Treasurer, notwithstanding that under him be three subtreasurers called Teftadars, which bee accomptable to him of the receipts out of vi	65	E
Europe, Asia and Africa, save their yeerely annuitie of lands.
The Lord Chancellor is called Nissangi Bassa, who sealeth with a certaine proper character such licences, safe conducts, passeports, especiall graunts, &c. as proceed from the Grand Signior: notwithstanding all letters to forreine princes so firmed be after inclosed in a bagge, and sealed by the Grand Signior, with a signet which he ordinarily weareth about his necke, credited of them to have bene of ancient appertayning to king Salomon the wise.
The Admirall giveth his voyce in the election of all Begs, Captaines of Islandes, to whom hee giveth their charge, as also appointeth the Subbassas, Bayliffes or Constables over Cities and Townes upon the Sea coastes about Constantinople, and in the Archipelago, whereof hee reapeth great profit.
The Subbassi of Pera payeth him yeerely fifteene thousande ducats, and so likewise either of the others according as they are placed.
The Ressistop serveth in office to the Viceroy and Chancellor, as Secretary, and so likewise doeth the Cogie Master of the Rolls, before which two, passe all writings presented to, or granted by the said Viceroy and Chancellor, offices of especiall credite and like profite, moreover rewarded with annuities of lands.
There are also two chiefe Judges named Cadi Lesker, the one over Europe, and the other over Asia and Africa, which in Court doe sit on the Bench at the left hand of the Bassas. These sell all offices to the under Judges of the land called Cadies, whereof is one in every Citie or towne, before whom all matters in controversie are by judgement decided, as also penalties and corrections for crimes ordained to be executed upon the offenders by the Subbassi.
.