The casting away of the Tobie neere Cape Es-partel corruptly called Cape Sprat without the Straight of Gibraltar on the coast of Barbarie. x593-
He Tobie of London a ship of 250 tunnes manned with fiftie men, the owner whereof was the worshipfull M. Richard Staper, being bound for Livorno, Zante and Patras in Morea, being laden with marchandize to the value of 11 or 12 thousand pounds sterling, set sayle
from Black-wall the 16 day of August 1593, and we went thence to Portesmouth where we tooke in great quantitie of wheate, and set sayle foorth of Stokes bay in the Isle of Wight, the 6. day of October, the winde being faire: and the 16 of the same moneth we were in the heigth of Cape S. Vincent, where on the next morning we descried a sayle which lay in try right a head off us, to which we gave chase with very much winde, the sayle being a Spaniard, which wee found in fine so good of sayle that we were faine to leave her and give her over. Two dayes after this we had sight of mount Chiego, which is the first high-land which we descrie on the Spanish coast at the entrance of the Straight of Gibraltar, where we had very foule weather and the winde scant two dayes together. Here we lay off to the sea. The Master, whose name was George Goodlay, being a young man, and one which never tooke charge before for those parts, was very proud of that charge which he was litle able to discharge, neither would take any counsel of any of his company, but did as he thought best himselfe, & in the end of the two dayes of foule weather cast about, and the winde being faire, bare in with the straights mouth. The 19 day at night he thinking that he was farther off the land then he was, bare sayle all that night, & an houre and 124
THE CASTING AWAY OF THE ‘TOBIE’ a.d.
.	*593-
an halfe before day had ranne our shippe upon the ground on the coast of Barbarie without the straight foure leagues to the South of Cape Espartel. Whereupon being all not a litle astonied, the Master said unto us, I pray you forgive me; for this is my fault and no mans else. The company asked him whether they should cut off the maine maste: no sayd the Master we will hoyse out our boate. But one of our men' comming speedily up, sayd, Sirs, the ship is full of water, well sayd the Master, then cut the mayne-mast over boord: which thing we did with all speede. But the after part suddenly split a sunder in such sort that no man was able to stand upon it, but all fled upon the foremast up into the shrouds thereof; and hung there for a time: but seeing nothing but present death approch (being so suddenly taken that we could not make a raft which we had ■ determined) we committed our selves unto the Lord and beganne with dolefull tune and heavy hearts to sing the 12 Psalme. Helpe Lord for good and godly men &c. Howbeit before we had finished foure verses the waves of the sea had stopped the breathes of most of our men. For the foremast with the weight of our men & the force of the sea fell downe into the water, and upon the fall thereof there were 38 drowned, and onely 12 by Gods providence partly by swimming and other meanes of chests gote on shoare, which was about a quarter of a mile from the wracke of the ship. The [II. ii. 202.] master called George Goodley, and William Palmer his mate, both perished. M. Caesar also being captaine and owner was likewise drowned: none of the officers were saved but the carpenter.
We twelve which the Lord had delivered from extreme danger of the Sea, at our comming ashore fell in a maner into as great distresse. At our first comming on shore we all fell downe on our knees, praying the Lord most humbly for his mercifull goodnesse. Our prayers being done, we consulted together what course
I25
to take, seeing we were fallen into a desert place, & we travelled all that day untill night, sometimes one way and sometimes another, and could finde no kinde of inhabitants; onely we saw where wilde beasts had bene, and places where there had bene houses, which after we perceived to have bene burnt by the Portugals. So at night falling into certaine groves of olive trees, we climed up and sate in them to avoid the danger of lions and other wilde beasts, whereof we saw many the next morning. The next day we travelled untill three of the clocke in the afternoone without any food, but water and wilde date roots: then going over a moun-taine, we had sight of Cape Espartel; whereby we knew somewhat better which way to travell, and then we went forward untill we came to an hedgerow made with great long canes; we spied and looked over it, and beheld a number of men aswell horsemen as footmen, to the number of some five thousand in skirmish together with small shot and other weapons. And after consultation what we were best to do, we concluded to yeeld our selves unto them, being destitute of all meanes of resistance. So rising up we marched toward them, who espying us, foorthwith some hundred of them with their javelings in their hands came running towards us as though they would have run us thorow: howbeit they onely strooke us flatling with their weapons, and said that we were Spaniards: and we tolde them that we were Englishmen; which they would not beleeve yet. By and by the conflict being ended, and night approch-ing, the captaine of the Moores, a man of some 56 yeres olde, came himselfe unto us, and by his interpretor which spake Italian, asked what we were, and from whence we came. One Thomas Henmer of our company which could speake Italian, declared unto him that we were marchants, and how by great misfortune our ship, marchandise, & the greatest part of our company were pitifully cast away upon their coast. But he void of humainity & all manhood, for all this, caused 126
THE CASTING AWAY OF THE ‘ TOBIE ’ a.d.
I593-his men to strip us out of our apparell even to our shirts to see what money and jewels we had about us: which when they had found to the value of some 200 pounds in golde and pearles they gave us some of our apparel againe, and bread and water onely to comfort us. The next morning they carried us downe to the shore where our shippe was cast away, which was some sixteene miles from that place. In which journey they used us like their slaves, making us (being extreame weake,) to carry their stuffe, and offering to beat us if we went not so fast as they. We asked them why they used us so, and they replied, that we were their captives: we sayd we were their friends, and that there was never Englishman captive to the king of Marocco.
So we came downe to the ship, and lay there with them seven dayes, while they had gotten all the goods they could, and then they parted it amongst them. After the end of these seven dayes the captaine appointed twenty of his men wel armed, to bring us up into ye countrey: and the first night we came to the side of a river called Alarach, where we lay on the grasse all that night: so the next day we went over the river in a frigate of nine oares on a side, the river being in that place above a quarter of a mile broad: and that day we went to a towne of thirty houses, called Totteon: there we lay foure dayes having nothing to feed on but bread and water; and then we went to a towne called Cassuri, and there we .were delivered by those twenty souldiers unto the Alcaide, which examined us what we were: and we tolde him. He gave us a goode answere, and sent us to the Jewes house, where we lay seven dayes. In the meane while that we lay here, there were brought thither twenty Spaniards and twenty Frenchmen, which Spaniards were taken in a conflict on land, but the Frenchmen were by foule weather cast on land within the Straights about Cape de Gate, and so made captives. Thus at the seven dayes end we twelve Englishmen, the twelve French,
127
and the twenty Spaniards were all conducted toward Marocco with nine hundred souldiers, horsemen and fotmen, and in two dayes journey we came to the river of Fez, where we lodged all night, being provided of tents. The next day we went to a towne called Salle, and lay without the towne in tents. From thence we travelled almost an hundred miles without finding any towne, but every night we came to fresh water, which was partly running water and sometime raine water. So we came at last within three miles of the city of Marocco, where we pitched our tents: and there we mette with a carrier which did travell in the countrey for the English marchants: and by him we sent word unto them of our estate: and they returned the next day unto us a Moore, which brought us victuals, being at that instant very feeble and hungry; and withall sent us a letter with pen, inke, and paper, willing us to write unto them what ship it was that was cast away, and how many and what men there were alive. For said they we would knowe with speed, for to morow is the kings court: and therefore we would know, for that you should come into the citie like captives. But for all that we were carried in as captives and with ropes about our neckes as well English as the French and Spaniards. And so we were carried before the king: and when we came before him he did commit us all to ward, where wee lay 15 dayes in close prison: and in the end we were cleared by the English Marchants to their great charges: for our deliverance cost them 700 ounces, every ounce in that country con-tayning two shillings. And when we came out of prison we went to the Alfandica, where we continued eight weekes with the English marchants. At the end of which time being well apparelled by the bountie of our marchants we were conveyed downe by the space of eight dayes journey to S. Cruz, where the English ships road: where we tooke shipping about the 20 of March, two in the Anne Francis of London, and five more of us five
128
dayes after in the Expedition of London, and two more in a Flemish flie-boat, and one in the Mary Edward also of London, other two of our number died in the countrey of the bloodie-fluxe: the one at our first imprisonment at Marocco, whose name was George Hancock, and the other at S. Cruz, whose name was Robert Swancon, whose death was hastened by eating of rootes and other un-naturall things to slake their raging hunger in our travaile, and by our hard and cold lodging in the open fields without tents. Thus of fiftie persons through the rashnesse of an unskilfull Master ten onely survived of us, and after a thousand miseries returned home poore, sicke, and feeble into our countrey.
Richard Johnson.	Thomas Henmore.
William Williams Carpenter. John Silvester.
John Durham.	Thomas Whiting.
Abraham Rouse.	William Church.
John Matthewes.	John Fox.
.