A generail and briefe description of the Countrey, and condition of the people, which are found in Meta Incognita.
Aving now sufficiently and truly set forth the whole circumstance, and particuler handling of every occurrent in the 3. voyages of our worthy general, Captaine Frobisher, it shal not be from the purpose to speake somewhat in general of the nature of this Countrey called Meta
Incognita, and the condition of the savages there inhabiting.
First therefore touching the Topographical description of the place, It is now found in the last voyage, that Queene Elizabeths Cape being situate in latitude at 61.
367
A Topographi-call description of Meta Incognita.
The people of Meta Incognita like unto Samoeds.
Their native colour.
 degrees and a halfe, which before was supposed to be part of the firme land of America, and also al the rest of the South side of Frobishers straites, are all severall Islands and broken land, and likewise so will all the North side of the said straites fall out to be as I thinke. And some of our company being entred above 60. leagues within the mistaken straites in the third voyage mentioned, thought certainely that they had discryed the firme land of America towards the South, which I thinke will fall out so to be.
These broken lands and Islands being very many in number, do seeme to make there an Archipelagus, which as they all differ in greatnesse, forme, and fashion one from another; so are they in goodnesse, colour, arid soyle much unlike. They all are very high lands, moun-taines, and in most parts covered with snow even all the Sommer long. The Norther lands have lesse store of snow, more grasse, and are more plaine Countreys: the cause whereof may be, for that the Souther Hands receive all the snow, that the cold winds and percing ayre bring out of the North. And contrarily, the North parts receive more warme blasts of milder ayre from the South, whereupon may grow the cause why the people covet to inhabit more upon the North parts then the South, as farre as we can yet by our experience perceive they doe. These people I judge to be a kind of Tartar, or rather a kind of Samoed, of the same sort and condition of life that the Samoeds bee to the Northeastwards beyond Moscovy, who are called Samoeds, which is as much to say in the Moscovy tongue as eaters of themselves, and so the Russians their borderers doe name them. And by late conference with a friend of mine (with whom I did sometime travell in the parts of Moscovy) who hath great experience of those Samoeds and people of the Northeast, I find that in all their maner of living, those people of the Northeast, and these of the Northwest are like. They are of the colour of a ripe Olive, which how it may come to passe, being borne 368
DESCRIPTION OF META INCOGNITA a.d.
in so cold a climate I referre to the judgement of others, for they are naturally borne children of the same colour and complexion that all the Americans are, which dwell under the Equinoctiall line.
They are men very active and nimble. They are a strong people and very warlike, for in our sight upon the toppes of the hilles they would often muster themselves, and after the maner of a skirmish trace their ground very nimbly, and mannage their bowes and dartes with great dexterity. They go clad in coates made of Theirapparel. the skinnes of beasts, as of Seales, Deere, Beares, Foxes, and Hares. They have also some garments of feathers, being made of the cases of Foules, finely sowed and compact togither. Of all which sorts wee brought home some with us into England, which we found in their tents. In Sommer they use to weare the hairie side of their coates outward, and sometime goe naked for too much heate. And in Winter (as by signes they have declared) they weare foure or five folde upon their bodies with the haire (for warmth) turned inward. Hereby it appeareth, that the ayre there is not indifferent, but either it is fervent hote, or els extreme cold, & farre more excessive in both qualities, then the reason of the climate should yeeld. For there it is colder, being under 62. degrees in latitude, then it is at Wardhouse in the voyage to Saint Nicholas in Moscovie, being at above 72. degrees in latitude. The reason hereof perhaps acdden-may be, that this Meta Incognita is much frequented taUcauserjftlie and vexed with Easterne and Northeastern winds, which Metalncog-from the sea and yce bringeth often an intollerable cold nita. ayre, which was also the cause that this yeere our straits were so long shut up with so great store of yce. But there is great hope and likelihood, that further within  the Straights it will bee more constant and temperate weather.
These people are in nature very subtill and sharpe witted, ready to conceive our meaning by signes, and to make answere well to be understood againe. And if vn	369	2 A
they have not seene the thing whereof you aske them, they will wincke, or cover their eyes with their hands, as who would say, it hath bene hid from their sight. If they understand you not whereof you aske them, they wil stop their eares. They will teach us the names of each thing in their language which wee desire to learne, and are apt to learne any thing of us. They The Savages delight in Musicke above measure, and will keepe time dehghtin	anj stroke to any tune which you shall sing, both with
ustc e'	their voyce, head, hand and feete, and will sing the
same tune aptly after you. They will row with our Ores in our boates, and keepe a true stroke with our Mariners, and seeme to take great delight therein. Hard kind of They live in Caves of the earth, and hunt for their living.	dinners or praye, even as the beare or other wild beastes
do. They eat raw flesh and fish, and refuse no meat howsoever it be stinking. They are desperate in their fight, sullen of nature, and ravenous in their maner of feeding.
Their sullen & desperate nature doth herein manifestly appeare, that a company of them being environed by our men on the top of a hie cliffe, so that they could by no meanes escape our hands, finding themselves in this case distressed, chose rather to cast themselves headlong down the rocks into the sea, and so be bruised and drowned, rather then to yeeld themselves to our mens mercies.
Their wea- For their weapons to offend their enemies or kill t"™- their prey withall, they have darts, slings, bowes, and arrowes headed with sharpe stones, bones, and some with yron. They are exceeding friendly and kind hearted one to the other, and mourne greatly at the losse or harme of their fellowes, and expresse their griefe of mind, when they part one from another with a Their chastity, mourneful song, and Dirges. They are very shamefast in bewraying the secrets of nature, and very chaste in the maner of their living: for when the man, which wee brought from thence into England the last voyage, 370
DESCRIPTION OF META INCOGNITA a.d.
.	.	.	T578-
should put off his coat or discover his whole body for change, hee would not suffer the woman to bee present, but put her forth of his Cabin. And in all the space of two or three moneths, while the man lived in company of the woman, there was never any thing seene or perceived betweene them, more then might have passed betweene brother and sister: but the woman was in all things very serviceable for the man, attending him carefully when he was sicke, and he likewise in all the meates which they did eate together, woulde carve unto her of the sweetest, fattest, and best morsels they had. They wondred much at all our things, and were afraid of our horses and other beasts out of measure. They began to grow more civill, familiar, pleasant, and docible amongst us in very short time.
They have boates made of leather, and covered cleane Their boates. over saving one place in the middle to sit in, planked within with timber, and they use to row therein with one Ore, more swiftly a great deale, then we in our boates can doe with twentie. They have one sort of greater boates wherein they can carrie above twentie persons, and have a Mast with a saile thereon, which saile is made of thinne skinnes or bladders, sowed togither with the sinewes of fishes.
They are good Fishermen, and in their small Boates being disguised with their coates of Seales skinnes, they deceive the fish, who take them rather for their fellow Seales, then for deceiving men.
They are good marke-men. With their dart or arrow they will commonly kill a Ducke, or any other foule in the head, and commonly in the eye.
When they shoote at a great fish with any of their darts, they use to tye a bladder thereunto, whereby they may the better find them againe, and the fish not able to cary it so easily away (for that the bladder doth boy the dart) will at length be wearie, and dye therewith.
They use to traffike and exchange their commodities Sna^ with some other people, of whom they have such things knowen.
371
How they make fire.
Their kettles and pannes.
The people eate grasse and shrubs.
as their miserable Countrey, and ignorance of Art to make, denieth them to have, as barres of yron, heads of yron for their darts, needles made foure square, certaine buttons of copper, which they use to weare upon their forehads for ornament, as our Ladies in the Court of England doe use great pearle.
Also they have made signes unto us, that they have seene gold, and such bright plates of mettals, which are used for ornaments amongst some people with whom they have conference.
We found also in their tents a Guiny Beane of redde colour, the which doth usually grow in they hote Countreys: whereby it appeareth they trade with other nations which dwell farre off, or else themselves are great travellers.
They have nothing in use among them to make fire withall, saving a kinde of Heath and Mosse which groweth there.
And they kindle their fire with continuall rubbing and fretting one sticke against another, as we doe with flints. They drawe with dogges in sleads upon the yce, and remoove their tents therewithal! wherein they dwell in Sommer, when they goe a hunting for their praye and provision against Winter. They doe sometime parboyle their meat a little and seeth the same in kettles made of beasts skins: they have also pannes cut and made of stone very artificially; they use prety ginnes wherewith they take foule. The women carry their sucking children at their backes, and doe feede them with raw flesh, which first they do a little chaw in their owne mouths. The women have their faces marked or painted over with small blewe spots: they have blacke and long haire on their heads, and trimme the same in a decent order. The men have but little haire on their faces, and very thinne beards. For their common drinke, they eate yce to quench their thirst withall. Their earth yeeldeth no graine or fruit of sustenance for man, or almost for beast to live upon: and the people will eate grasse and shrubs
372
DESCRIPTION OF META INCOGNITA a.d.
J578-
of the ground, even as our kine doe. They have no wood growing in their Countrey thereabouts, and yet wee find they have some timber among them, which we thinke doth growe farre off to the Southwards of this place, about Canada, or some other part of New found land: for there belike, the trees standing on the cliffes of the sea side, by the waight of yce and snow in Winter overcharging them with waight, when the Sommers thaw commeth above, and also the Sea underfretting them beneath, which winneth dayly of the land, they are undermined and fall downe from those cliffes into the Sea, and with the tydes and currents are driven to and fro upon the coastes further off, and by conjecture are taken up here by these Countrey people, to serve them to planke and strengthen their boates withall, and to make dartes, bowes, and arrowes, and such other things necessarie for their use. And of this kind of drift wood we find all the Seas over great store, which being cut or sawed asunder, by reason of long driving in the Sea is eaten of wormes, and full of holes, of which sort theirs is found to be.
We have not yet found any venemous Serpent or A strange land other hurtful thing in these parts, but there is a kind of °f small flie or gnat that stingeth and offendeth sorely, leaving many red spots in the face, and other places where she stingeth. They have snow and haile in the best time of their Sommer, and the ground frosen three fadome deepe.
These people are great inchanters, and use many Inchanters. charmes of witchcraft: for when their heads doe ake, they tye a great stone with a string unto a sticke, and with certaine prayers and wordes done to the sticke, they lift up the stone from ground, which sometimes with all a mans force they cannot stirre, and sometime againe they lift as easily as a fether, and hope thereby with certaine ceremonious wordes to have ease and helpe.
And they made us by signes to understand, lying groveling with their faces upon the ground, and making
373
The beasts and foules of the Countrey.
Ihe length of their day.
a noise downeward, that they worship the devill under them.
They have great store of Deere, Beares, Hares, Foxes, and innumerable numbers of sundry sorts of wild foule, as Seawmewes, Guiles, Wilmotes, Ducks, &c. wherof our men killed in one day fifteene hundred.
They have also store of haukes, as Falkons, Tassels, &c. whereof two alighted upon one of our ships at their returne, and were brought into England, which some thinke wil prove very good.
There are also great store of ravens, larkes, and partriges, wherof the Countrey people feed.
All these foules are farre thicker clothed with downe and fethers, and have thicker skinnes then any in England have: for as that countrey is colder, so nature hath provided a remedie thereunto.
Our men have eaten of the Beares, Hares, Partridges, Larkes, and of their wild foule, and find them reasonable good meat, but not so delectable as ours.
Their wild foule must be all fleine, their skins are so thicke : and they tast best fryed in pannes.
The Countrey seemeth to be much subject to Earthquakes.
The ayre is very subtile, piercing and searching, so that if any corrupted or infected body, especially with the disease called Morbus Gallicus come there, it will presently breake forth and shew it selfe, and cannot there by any kind of salve or medicine be cured.
Their longest Sommers day is of great length, without any darke night, so that in July al the night long, we might perfidy and easily write and reade whatsoever had pleased us, which lightsome nights were very beneficiall unto us, being so distressed with abundance of yce as we were.
The Sunne setteth to them in the Evening at a quarter of an houre after tenne of the clocke, and riseth againe in the morning at three quarters of an houre after one of the clocke, so that in Sommer their Sunne shineth to
374
them twenty houres and a halfe, and in the night is absent three houres and a halfe. And although the Sunne bee absent these 3. houres and a halfe, yet it is not darke that time, for that the Sunne is never above three or foure degrees under the edge of their Horizon: the cause is, that the Tropicke of Cancer doth cut their Horizon at very uneven and oblique Angles. But the Moone at any time of the yeere being in Cancer, having North latitude, doth make a full revolution above their Horizon, so that sometime they see the Moone above 24. houres togither. Some of our company of the more ignorant sort, thought we might continually have seene the Sunne and the Moone, had it not bene for two or three high mountaines.
The people are now become so warie, and so circumspect, by reason of their former losses, that by no meanes we can apprehend any of them, although wee attempted often in this last voyage. But to say trueth, wee could not bestow any great time in pursuing them, because of our great businesse in lading, and other things.
A.D.
158?.
A full revolution of the Moone above their Horizon.
.