A letter written to M. John Growte student in Paris, by Jaques Noel of S. Malo, the nephew of Jaques Cartier, touching the foresaid discovery.{n}Aster Growte, your brother in law Giles Walter shewed me this morning a Mappe printed at Paris, dedicated to one M. Hakluyt an English Gentleman : wherein all the West Indies, the kingdome of New Mexico, and the Countreys of Canada, Hochelaga and Saguenay are{n}contained. I hold that the River of Canada which is described in that Mappe is not marked as it is in my booke, which is agreeable to the booke of Jaques Cartier: and that the sayd Chart doth not marke or set downe The great Lake, which is above the Saults, according as the Savages have advertised us, which dwell at the sayd Saults. In the foresayd Chart which you sent me hither, the Great Lake is placed too much toward the North. The Saults or falles of the River stand in 44. degrees of latitude: it is not so hard a matter to passe them, as it is thought: The water falleth not downe from any high place, it is nothing else but that in the middest of the River there is bad ground. It were best to build boates above the Saults: and it is easie to march or travel! by land to the end of the three Saults: it is not above five leagues journey. I have bene upon the toppe 272{n}of a mountaine, which is at the foot of the Saults, where I have seene the sayd River beyond the sayd Saultes, which shewed unto us to be broader then it was where we passed it. The people of the Countrey advertised us, that there are ten dayes journey from the Saults unto Ten this Great Lake. We know not how many leagues they make to a dayes journey. At this present 1 cannot write this great unto you more at large, because the messenger can stay Lake. no longer. Here therefore for the present I will ende, saluting you with my hearty commendations, praying God to give you your hearts desire. For S. Malo in haste this 19 day of June. 1587.{n}Your loving Friend,{n}Jaques Noel.{n}COsin, I pray you doe me so much pleasure as to send mee a booke of the discovery of New Mexico, and one of those new Mappes of the West Indies dedicated to M. Hakluyt the English Gentleman, which you sent to your brother in law Giles Walter. I will not faile to informe my selfe, if there be any meane to find out those descriptions which Captaine Cartier made after his two last voyages into Canada.{n}.