Here followeth the course from Belle Isle, Carpont, and the Grand Bay in Newfoundland up the River of Canada for the space of 230. leagues, observed by John Alphonse of Xanctoigne chiefe Pilote to Monsieur Roberval, 1542.{n}Elles Isles are in 51 degrees and %. Belles Belle Isle. Isles and Carpont are Northnorthwest and Southsoutheast, and they are ten leagues distant. Carpont is in 52 de- Carpant In grees. Carpont and Bell Isle from the 52- degrees. Grand Bay are Northeast and Southwest, and the distance from Bell Isle to the{n}Grand Bay is 7 leagues. The midst of the Grand Bay is The Grand in 52 degrees and a halfe, and on the Northside therof there is a rocke: halfe a league from the Isle, over against J' Carpont toward the East there is a small flat Island, and on the side toward the Northeast there is a flat rocke. A flatte rocke. And when thou commest out of the harborough of Carpont thou must leave this rocke on the starreboord side, and also on the larboord side there are two or three small Isles: and when thou commest out on the Northeast side, ranging along the shore toward the West about two pikes length in the midway there is a shold which lieth on thy starboord side: and saile thou by the North coast, and leave two partes of the Grand Bay toward the South; because there is a rocke which runneth 2 or 3 leagues into the sea. And when thou art come athwart the haven of Butes, run along the North shore about one league or Butes. an halfe ofF, for the coast is without all danger: Bell Isle in the mouth of the Grand Bay, and the Isles of Blanc The Isle of Sablon, which are within the Grand Bay, neere unto the Blanc Sablm North shore lie Northeast, West and Southwest, & the °r m lie san * distance is 30 leagues. The Grand Bay at the entrance The severall is but 7 leagues broad from land to land untill it come bQ^ndBa* over against the Bay des Chasteaux: and from thence y' forward it hath not past 5 leagues in breadth. And{n}275{n}Blanc Sab Ion. in 51. deg. 2. thirdparts.{n}The Isles de la Damoiselle in 50. deg. 3. fourth parts.{n}Many Isles W good harbors.{n}Cape Tienot in 50 deg. one fourth part.{n}against Blanc Sablon it is 8 leagues broad from land to land. And the land on the South shore is all low land along the sea coast. The North shore is reasonable high land, Blanc Sablon is in 5 if degrees. The Isles of Blanc Sablon & the Isles de la Damoiselle, are Northeast, Westsouthwest, and take a little of the Westsouthwest, and they are distant 36 leagues: these Iles are in 50. deg.{n}And there is a good haven : & you may enter by an high Cape which lieth along toward the Northeast, and within the distance of a pike & an half, because of a rocke which lieth on your larrebord side, & you may ancre in 10 fathome water over against a litle nooke: and from the great headland unto the place where thou doest ancre there is not above the length of 2 Cables. And if thou wouldest go out by the West side, thou must saile neere the Isle by the starrebord, & give roome unto the Isle on the larbord at the comming forth: and when thou art not past a cables length out thou must saile hard by the Isles on the larbord side, by reason of a suncken flatte which lieth on the starrebord, and thou shalt saile so on to the Southsouthwest, untill thou come in sight of a rocke which shineth, which is about halfe a league in the sea distant from the Isles, and thou shalt leave it on the larrebord: (and from the Isles of Damoiselle unto Newfoundland the sea is not in bredth above 36. leagues, because that Newfoundland even unto Cape Briton runneth not but Northnortheast & Southsouthwest.) Between the Isles de la Damoiselle and the Isles of Blanck Sablon there be many Isles and good harbours: and on this coast there are faulcons & haukes, and cer-taine foules which seeme to be feasants. The Isles de la Damoiselle & Cape Tienot are Northeast & Westsouthwest & take a little of the Northeast and southwest, & they are distant 18 leagues. Cape Tienot is in 50. deg. and f. And there the sea is broadest. And it may be to the end of Newfoundland, which is at the entrance of Cape Briton 70 leagues, which is the greatest bredth of the sea. And there are 6 or 7 Isles between the Isles de{n}276{n}la Damoiselle & Cape Tienot. Cape Tienot hath in ye sea 5 or 6 leagues distant from it a sunken Hand dangerous for ships. The Cape Tienot and the midst of the Isle of Ascension are Northeast and southsouthwest, & they are 22. leagues distant, the midst of the Isle of Ascension is The in 49 deg. & J. ‘ The said Isle lieth Northwest and Southeast, the Northwest end is in 50. degrees of latitude Or Natiscotec. and the Southeast end is in 48. degrees and a halfe and it  is about 25. leagues long and 4. or 5. leagues broad: and from the Northwest end of the Isle unto the firme land of the North side the Sea is not above seven leagues broad, but unto the firme land on the South side are about 15. leagues. Cape Tienot and the end of the Isle of Ascention toward the Southeast are Northeast and Southwest, and are distant 30. leagues. The said Cape of Tienot and the Northwest end of the Isle of Ascension are East and West, and take a little of the Northeast and Southwest, and they are distant 34. leagues. The Isle of The com-Ascension is a goodly Isle, and a goodly champion land without any hilles, standing all upon white rocks and J Alablaster, all covered with trees unto the Sea shore, and there are al sorts of trees as there be in France: and there{n}be wild beasts, as beares, Luserns, Porkespicks. And From Cape from the Southeast end of the Isle of Ascension unto the t0 tJie entrance of Cape Briton is but 50. leagues. The North-{n}west end of the Isle & the Cape des Monts nostre Dame, Ascention is which is on the maine land towards the South, are North- but tfileagues. east and Westsouth west, and the distance betweene them CaPe °f is 15. leagues. The Cape is in 49. degrees, which is a D^n‘!tri very high land. The Cape and end of the Isle of Ascension toward the Southeast are East and West and there is{n}15. leagues distance betweene them. The Bay of Molves The Bay of or Gaspay is in 48. degrees, and the coast lyeth North Molves or and South, and taketh a quarter of the Northeast and as^' Southwest unto the Bay of Heate: and there are 3. Isles, one great one and two smal: from the Bay of Heate The Bay de untill you passe the Monts nostre Dame al the land is C^^roro^ high and good ground al covered with trees. Ognedoc *{n}277{n}Greater store and better fish then in Newfoundland. Boules.{n}Trees.{n}The mouth of the river of Canada twenty five leases broad. The 7 Isles in 50 degrees and a hafe.{n}The nver is here but 1o leagues broad.{n}The point of Ongear in 49 degrees and a quarter.{n}The Isle of Raquelle in 48 degrees and two third parts.{n}is a good Bay and lyeth Northnorthwest and Southsoutheast, and it is a good Harbour : and you must saile along the shore on the Northside by reason of the low point at the entrance therof: and when you are passed the poynt bring your selfe to an ancre in 15. or 20. fathoms of water toward the South shore, and here within this Haven are two rivers, one which goeth toward the Northwest, and the other to the Southwest. And on this coast there is great fishing for Coddes and other fish, where there is more store then is in Newfoundland, and better fish. And here is great store of river foule, as Malards, wild Geese, and others: And here are all sorts of trees, Rose trees, Raspesses, Filbird trees, Apple trees, Peare trees, and it is hotter here in Sommer then in France. The Isle of Ascension and the 7. Isles which lie on the North shore lie Southeast and Westnorthwest, and are distant 24. leagues. The Cape of Ognedoc and the 7. Isles are Northnorthwest and Southsoutheast, & are distant 35. leagues. The Cape of Monts nostre Dame and the 7. Isles are North and South, and the cut over from the one to the other is 25. leagues: and this is the breadth of this Sea, and from thence upward it beginneth to waxe narrower and narrower. The 7. Isles are in 50. degrees and The 7. Isles and the poynt of Ongear lie Northeast and Southwest and the distance betweene them is 15. leagues, and betweene them are certaine small Islands: and the point of Ongear and the mountaines Nostre Dame, which are on the South side of the entrance of the river, are North and South: and the cut over from the one to the other is ten leagues : and this is here the abredth of the Sea. The poynt of Ongear and the river of Caen lie East and West, and they are distant 12. leagues. And all the coast from the Isle of Ascension hither is very good ground, wherein growe all sortes of trees that are in France and some fruits. The poynt of Ongear is in 49. degrees and And the river of Caen and the Isle of Raquelle lye Northeast and Southwest, and they are distant 12. leagues. The Isle of Raquelle is 278{n}in 48. degrees and In this river of Caen there is great store of fish. And here the Sea is not past 8. leagues The river % broad. The Isle of Raquelle is a very low Isle, which is hoad. neere unto the South shore, hard by a high Cape which is called the Cape of Marble. There is no danger there at all. And betweene Raquelle and the Cape of Marble ships may passe. And there is not from the Isle to the South shore above one league, and from the Isle unto the North shore about foure leagues. The Isle of Raquelle and the entrance of Saguenay are Northeast Westsouthwest, and are distant 14. leagues, and there are betweene them two{n}small Islandes neere the North shore. The entrance The entrance of Saguenay is in 48. degrees and and the entrance hath not past a quarter of a league in breadth, and it is dangerous toward the Southwest: and two or three leagues within the entrance it beginneth to waxe wider and wider: and it seemeth to bee as it were an arme{n}of the Sea: And I thinke that the same runneth into{n}the Sea of Cathay, for it sendeth foorth there a great The sea of current, and there doth runne in that place a terrible rase{n}or tyde. And here the river from the North shore to The river not the South shore is not past foure leagues in breadth, and it is a dangerous passage betweene both the lands, because ‘ there lie bankes of rockes in the river. The Isle of Raquelle and the Isle of Hares lye Northeast and Southwest, and take J of the East and the West, and they are distant 18. leagues. The entrance of Saguenay and the Isle of Liepueres or Hares lie Northnortheast & Southsouthwest, and are distant 5. leagues. The entrance of Saguenay and the Isle of Raquelle are Northnorthwest, and Southsouthwest, and are distant three leagues. The The Isle of Isle of Hares is in 48 and A of a degree. From the Mountaines of Nostre Dame unto Canada and unto fg^ port_ Hochelaga, all the land on the South coast is faire, a lowe  land and goodly champaigne, all covered with trees unto the brink of the river. And the land on the North side is higher, and in some places there are high mountaines.{n}And from the Isle of Hares unto the Isle of Orleans the{n}279{n}Note. river is not past 4 or 5 leagues broad. Betweene the Isle of Hares and the highland on the North side the sea is not past a league and an halfe broad, and it is very deepe, for it is above 100. fathoms deepe in the middest. To the East of the Isle of Hares there are 2 or 3 small Isles and rockes. And from hence to the Isle Des Coudres or of Filbeards, all is nothing but Isles and rockes on the South shore: and towards the North the sea is fayre and deepe. The Isle of Hares and the Isle of Filbeards lie northeast, West and Southwest, and they are distant 12 leagues. And you must alwayes run along the high land on the north shore; for on the other shore there is nothing but rocks. And you must passe by the side of the Isle of Filbeards, and the river there is not past a quarter of a league broad, and you must sayle in the middest of the chanel: and in the middest runneth the best passage either at an hie or a low water, because the sea runneth there strongly, and there are great dangers of rocks, and you had neede of good ancre and cable. The isle of Filbeards is a small isle, about one league long, and halfe a league broad, but they are all banks of sand.{n}The isle of The isle of Filberds stands in 47. deg. and f. The isle filbeards in of FUberds and the isle of Orleans lie northeast and ‘and ‘^quar- southwest, and they are distant 10 leagues, and thou must ters. passe by the high land on the northside about a quarter of a league, because that in the midst of the river there is nothing but sholds and rocks. And when thou shalt bee over against a round Cape, thou must take over to the South shore southwest, and a quarter toward the South; and thou shalt sayle in 5. 6 and 7 fathoms: and there the The beginning river of Canada beginneth to bee fresh, and the salt water of the fresh endeth. And when thou shalt be athwart the point of waUr'	the isle of Orleans, where the river beginneth to be fresh,{n}thou shalt sayle in the midst of the river, and thou shalt leave the isle on the starreboord, which is on the right The river but hand: and here the river is not past a quarter of a league a quarter of a broad, anJ hath 2o and 30 fathoms water. And towards a^ie roa . gouth shore there is a ledge of Isles all covered with 280{n}trees, and they end over against the point of the Isle of Orleans. And the poynt of the isle of Orleans toward the Northeast is in 47 degrees and one terce of a degree. And the Isle of Orleans is a fayre Isle, all covered with trees even unto the rivers side : and it is about 5 leagues long, and a league and an halfe broade. And on the North shore there is another River, which falleth into the mayne River at the ende of the Island: and Shippes may very well passe there. From the middest of the Isle unto Canada the River runneth West; and from the place of Canada unto France-Roy the river turneth West Southwest : and from the West ende of the Isle to Canada is but one league; and unto France-Roy 4 leagues. And when thou art come to the end of the Isle, thou shalt see a great River which falleth fifteene or twenty fathoms downe from a rocke, and maketh a terrible noyse. The Fort of France-roy stands in 47 degrees, and one sixt part of a degree.{n}The extension of all these lands, upon just occasion is called New France. For it is as good and as temperate as France, and in the same latitude. And the reason wherefore it is colder in the Winter is, because the fresh River is naturally more colde then the Sea; and it is also broad and deepe: and in some places it is halfe a league and above in breadth. And also because the land is not tylled, nor full of people, and is all full of Woods, which is the cause of colde, because there is not store of fire nor cattel. And the sunne hath his Meridian as high as the Meridian at Rochel: and it is noone here when the Sunne is at South Southwest at Rochel. And here the North starre by the compasse standeth North northeast. And when at Rochel it is noone, it is but halfe an houre past nine at France-Roy. From the sayde place unto the Ocean sea and the coast of New France, is not above 50 leagues distance. And from the entrance of Norumbega unto Florida are 300 leagues: and from this place of France-Roy to Hochelaga, are about 80 leagues: and unto ye Isle of Rasus 30 381{n}1542.{n}The Isle of Orleans in 47 degrees and one third part.{n}Canada 1 league to the West of the Isle of Orleans.{n}The Fort of France-Roy stood in 47 degrees and one sixt part.{n}Why the countrey is colder in the Winter then France.{n}A second reason.{n}The variation of ye compasse.{n}From the fort of France Roy unto ye mouth of the Grand Bay 230 leags.{n}Gold and silver like to be found in Canada.{n}A Bay in 42. degrees gyving some hope of a passage.{n} Trees.{n}Redde plums.{n}Fowle.{n}Corne.{n}IVhe ate to be sown in March.{n}leagues. And I doubt not but Norumbega entreth into the river of Canada, and unto the Sea of Saguenay. And from the Fort of France-Roy untill a man come foorth of the Grande Bay is not above 230 leagues. And the course is Northeast and West Southwest not above 5 degrees and £ difference: and reckon 16 leagues and ah halfe to a degree. By the nature of the climate the lands toward Hochelaga are still better and better, and more fruitfull. And this land is fitte for Figges and Peares. And I thinke that golde and silver will be found here, according as the people of the countrey say. These landes lye over against Tartarie, and I doubt not but that they stretch toward Asia, according to the roundnesse of the world. And therefore it were good to have a small Shippe of 70 tunnes to discover the coast of New France on the backe side of Florida: for I have bene at a Bay as farre as 42 degrees betweene Norumbega and Florida, and I have not searched the ende thereof, and I knowe not whether it passe through. And in all these Countreys there are okes, and bortz, ashes, elmes, arables, trees of life, pines prussetrees, ceders, great wall nut trees, and wilde nuts, hasel-trees, wilde peare trees, wilde grapes, and there have bene found redde plummes. And very faire corne groweth there, and peason grow of their owne accord, gooseberries and strawberries. And there are goodly Forrests, wherein men may hunt. And there are great store of stagges, deere, porkepicks, and the Savages say there bee Unicornes. Fowle there are in abundance, as bustards, wilde geese, cranes, turtle doves, ravens, crowes, and many other birds. All things which are sowen there, are not past 2. or 3. dayes in comming up out of the ground. I have tolde in one eare of corne an hundred and twenty graines, like the corne of France. And ye neede not to sowe your Wheate untill March, and it will be ripe in the middest of August. The waters are better and perfecter then in France. And if the Countrey were tilled and replenished with people, it would be as hotte as Rochel. And the reason why it{n}282{n}. . I54X snoweth there oftener then in France is, because it raineth The cause of there but seidome: for the raine is converted into the often snow-tnetn Canada. snowes.{n}All things above mentioned, are true.{n}John Alphonse made this Voyage with Monsieur Roberval.{n}There is a pardon to be seene for the pardoning of Monsieur de Saine terre, Lieutenant of the sayd Monsieur de Roberval, given in Canada in the presence of the sayde John Alphonse.{n}.