The maners of the Savages.	
TO dedare unto you the state of the Savages, they are people of a goodly stature, and well made, they are very white, but they are all naked: and if they were apparelled as the French are, they would bee as white and as fayre : but they paynt themselves for feare of heat and sunne burning.
In stead of apparell, they weare skinnes upon them like mantles; and they have a small payre of breeches, wherewith they cover their privities, as well men as women. They have hosen and shooes of lether excellently made. And they have no shirts: neither cover they their heads, but their hayre is trussed up above the crowne of their heads, and playted or broyded. Touching their victuals, they eate good meate, but all unsalted, but they drye it, and afterward they broyle it, as well fish as flesh. They have no certaine dwelling place, and they goe from place to place, as they thinke they may best finde foode, as Aloses in one place, and other fish, Salmons, Sturgions, Mullets, Surmullets, Barz, Carpes, Eeles, Pinperneaux, and other fresh water fish, and store of Porposes. They feede also of Stagges, wilde Bores, Bugles, Porkespynes, and store of other wilde beastes. And there is as great store of Fowle as they can desire.
Touching their bread, they make very good: and it is of great myll: and they live very well; for they take care for nothing else.
They drinke Seale oyle, but this is at their great feasts.
They have a King in every Countrey, and are wonderfull obedient unto him: and they doe him honour according unto their maner and fashion. And when they travayle from place to place, they cary all their goods with them in their boates.
Their apparell.
So have they of Ceula, and Quivira, and Meta Incognita.
Their victuals.
They remove from place to place.
Fish.
Beastes.
Fowle.
Their bread of great Myl or Maiz.
Drinke of Seale oy le at their great feasts. Their government.
The weomen nurse their children with the breast, and they sit continually, and are wrapped about the bellies with skinnes of furre.
.