A shorte and briefe narration of the Navigation made by the commandement of the King of France, to the Islands of Canada, Hochelaga, Saguenay, and divers others which now are called New France, with the particular cus-tomes, and maners of the inhabitants therein.{n}Chap. i.{n}N the yeere of our Lord 1535, upon Whitsunday, being the 16. of May, by the commandement of our Captaine James Cartier, and with a common accord, in the Cathedrall Church of S. Malo we devoutly each one confessed our selves, and received the Sacrament:{n}and all entring into the Quier of the sayd Church, wee presented our selves before the Reverend Father in Christ, the Lord Bishop of S. Malo, who blessed us all, being in his Bishops roabes. The Wednesday following, being the 19 of May, there arose a good gale of wind, and therefore we hoysed sayle with three ships, that is to say, the great Hermina, being in burden about a hun-dreth, or a hundreth and twenty tunne, wherin the foresaid Captaine James Cartier was general, and master Thomas Frosmont chiefe Master, accompanied with master Claudius de Pont Briand, sonne to the Lorde of Montcevell, and Cup-bearer to the Dolphin of France, Charles of Pomeraies, John Powlet, and other Gentlemen. In the second ship called the little Hermina, being of 210{n}threescore tunne burden, were Captaines under the sayd Cartier, Mace Salobert, and master William Marie. In the third ship called the Hermerillon, being of forty tunne in burden, were Captains M. William Britton, and M. James Maingare. So we sayled with a good and prosperous wind, untill the 20 of the said moneth, at which time the weather turned into stormes and tempests, the which with contrary winds, and darkenesse, endured so long that our ships being without any rest, suffered as much as any ships that ever went on seas: so that the 25 of June, by reason of that foule and foggie weather, all our ships lost sight one of another againe till wee came to Newfound land where we had appointed to meete. After we had lost one another, wee in the Generals ship were with contrary windes tost to and fro on the sea, untill the seventh of July, upon which day we arrived in Newe found land, and came to the Island called The Island of Birds, which lyeth from the maine land 14 leagues. This Island is so full of birds, that all our ships might easily have bene fraighted with them, & yet for the great number that there is, it would not seeme that any were taken away. We to victuali our selves filled two boats of them. This Island hath the Pole elevated 49 degrees, and 40 minutes. Upon the eight of the sayd moneth we sailed further, & with a prosperous weather came to the Port called The Port of white sands, that is in the Bay called The Bay of Castels, where we had purposed to meete & stay together the 15 of the said moneth. In this place therefore we looked for our fellowes, that is to say, the other two ships, till the 26 of the moneth, on which day both came together. So soone as our fellowes were come, we set our ships in a readines, taking in both water, wood, & other necessaries. And then on the 29 of the sayd moneth, early in the morning we hoised saile to passe on further, & sayling along the Northerne coast that runneth Northeast and Southwest, til two houres after Sun-set or thereabouts, then we crossed along two Islands, which{n}211{n}The Isle oj birds in 49 degrees 40 minutes.{n}The Bay des Chaste aux er The Grand Bay.{n}doe stretch further foorth then the others, which we called S. Williams Islands, being distant about 20 leagues or more from the Port of Brest. All the coast from the Castels to that place lieth East & West, Northeast & Southwest, having betweene it sundry little Islands, altogether barren and full of stones, without either earth or trees, except certain valleys only. The next day being the 30 of July, we sailed on Westward to find out other Islands which as yet we had not found 12 leagues and a halfe, among which there is a great Bay toward the North all full of Islands and great creekes where many good harboroughs seeme to be: them we named S. Marthas Islands, from which about a league and a halfe further into the sea there is a dangerous shallow, wherein are five rockes, which lie from Saint Marthas Islands about seven leagues as you passe into the sayd Islands, on the East & on the West side, to which we came the sayd day an houre after noone, & from that houre untill midnight we sailed about fifteene leagues athwart a cape of the lower Islands, which we named S. Germans Islands Southeastward, from which place about three leagues, there is a very dangerous shallow. Likewise betweene S. Germans cape and Saint Marthas, about two leagues from the sayd Islands, there lyeth a banke of sand, upon which banke the water is but foure fadome deepe, and therefore seeing the danger of the coast, we strucke saile and went no further that night: The next day being the last of July, we went all along the coast that runneth East and West, and somewhat Southeasterly which is all environed about with Islands and drie sands, and in trueth is very dangerous. The length from S. Germans Cape to the said Islands is about 17 leagues and a halfe, at the end of which there is a goodly plot of ground full of huge and high trees, albeit the rest of the coast be compassed about with sands without any signe or shew of harboroughs, till we came to Cape Thiennot, which trendeth Northwest about seven leagues from the foresaid Islands, which Cape Thiennot we noted in{n}212{n}our former voyage, and therefore we sailed on all that night West and Westnorthwest, till it was day, and then the wind turned against us, wherefore we went to seeke a haven wherein we might harbour our ships, and by good hap, found one fit for our purpose, about seven leagues and a halfe beyond Cape Thiennot, & that we named S. Nicholas Haven, it lieth amidst 4 Islands that stretch into the sea: Upon the neerest wee for a token Nicholas. set up a woodden crosse. But note by the way, that this crosse must be brought Northeast, & then bending toward it, leave it on the left hand and you shall find sixe fadome water, and within the haven foure. Also you are to take heede of two shelves that leane outward halfe a league. All this coast is full of shoulds and very dangerous, albeit in sight many good havens seeme to be there, yet is there nought else but shelves and sands. We staled and rested our selves in the sayd haven, untill the seventh of August being Sonday: on which day we hoysed sayle, and came toward land on the South side toward Cape Rabast, distant from the Cape Rabast. sayd haven about twentie leagues Northnortheast, and Southsouthwest: but the next day there rose a stormie and a contrary winde, and because we could find no haven there toward the South, thence we went coasting along toward the North, beyond the abovesayd haven about ten leagues, where we found a goodly great gulfe, full of Islands, passages, and entrances toward what wind soever you please to bend: for the knowledge of this gulfe there is a great Island that is like to a Cape of lande, stretching somewhat further foorth than the others, and about two leagues within the land, there is an hill fashioned as it were an heape of corne. We named the{n}sayd gulfe Saint Laurence his bay. The twelfth of the The gulfe of sayd moneth wee went from the sayd Saint Laurence s- Laurence-his Bay, or gulfe, sayling Westward, and discovered a Cape of land toward the South, that runneth West and	Cape of{n}by South, distant from the sayd Saint Laurence his	We of{n}Bay, about five and twenty leagues. And of the two tm"{n}213{n}wilde men which wee tooke in our former voyage, it was tolde us, that this was part of the Southerne coaste, & that there was an Island, on the Southerly parte of which is the way to goe from Honguedo (where the yeere before we had taken them) to Canada, and that two dayes journey from the sayd Cape, and Island began the Kingdome of Saguenay, on the North shore extending toward Canada, and about three leagues athwart the sayd A mighty	Cape, there is above a hundreth fadome water. Moreover{n}Shales	I beleeve that there were never so many Whales seen{n}‘ as wee saw that day about the sayd Cape. The next day after being our Ladie day of August the fifteenth of the moneth, having passed the Straight, we had notice of certaine lands that wee left toward the South, which landes are full of very great and high hilles, and this The Isle of Cape wee named The Island of the Assumption, and Assumption. one Qape of the sajj high countreys lyeth Eastnortheast, and Westsouthwest, the distance betweene which is about five and twenty leagues. The Countreys lying North may plainely be perceived to be higher then the Southerly, more then thirty leagues in length. We trended the sayd landes about toward the South: from the sayd day untill Tewesday noone following, the winde came West, and therefore wee bended toward the North, purposing to goe and see the land that we before had spied. Being arrived there, we found the sayd landes, as it were joyned together, and low toward the Sea. And the Northerly mountaines that are upon the sayd low lands stretch East, and West, and a quarter of the South. Our wild men told us that there was the beginning of Saguenay, and that it was land inhabited, and that thence commeth the red Copper, of them named Caignetdaze. There is betweene the Southerly lands, and the Northerly about thirtie leagues distance, The mouth of and more then two hundreth fadome depth. The sayd ^ocheU f men moreover certifie unto us, that there was the about thirty and beginning of the great river of Hochelaga leagues broad, and ready way to Canada, which river the further it{n}214{n}went the narrower it came, even into Canada, and that then there was fresh water, which went so farre upwards, that they had never heard of any man who had gone to the head of it, and that there is no other passage but with small boates. Our Captaine hearing their talke, and how they did affirme no other passage to be there, would not at that time proceede any further, till he had seene and noted the other lands, & coast toward the North, which he had omitted to see from S. Laurence his gulfe, because he would know, if between the lands toward the North any passage might be discovered.{n}How our Captaine caused the ships to returne backe  againe, only to know if in Saint Laurence gulfe there were any passage toward the North.{n}Chap. 2.{n}UPon the 18 of August being Wednesday, our Captaine caused his shippes to wind backe, and bend toward the other shore, so that we trended the said Northerly cost, which runneth Northeast and Southwest, being fashioned like unto halfe a bowe, and is a very high land, but yet not so high as that on the South parts. The Thursday following we came to seven very The seven high Islands, which we named The round Islands. These IslesIslands are distant from the South shore about 40 leagues, and stretch out into the sea about 3 or 4 leagues. Against these there are goodly low grounds to be seene full of goodly trees, which we the Friday following, with our boats compassed about. Overthwart these lands there are divers sandy shelves more then two leagues into the sea, very dangerous, which at a low water remaine almost dry. At the furthest bounds of these lowe lands, that containe about ten leagues, there is a river of fresh water, that with such swiftnesse runneth A swift river. into the sea, that for the space of one league within it the water is as fresh as any fountaine water. We with our boates entred into the sayd river, at the entrance of which we found about one fadome & a halfe of water.{n}215{n}Sea-horses. There are in this river many fishes shaped like horses, which as our wild men told us, all the day long lie in the water, and the night on land: of which we saw therin a great number. The next day being the 21 of the moneth, by breake of day we hoysed saile, and sailed so long along the said coast, that we had sight of the rest of the sayd Northerne coast, which as yet we had The Isle of not seene, and of the Island of the Assumption which Assumption, wee went to discover, departing from the sayd land: ' which thing so soone as we had done, & that we were certified no other passage to be there, we came to our ships againe, which we had left at the said Islands, where is a good harborough, the water being about nine or ten fadome. In the same place by occasion of contrary winds & foggie mists, we were constrained to stay, not being either able to come out of it, or hoise saile, till the 24 of the moneth: On which day we departed & came to a haven on the Southerly coast about 80 leagues from A haven on the said Islands. This haven is over against three flat the Southerne isiands that lie amidst the river, because on the midway ’	betweene those Islands, & the sayd haven toward the{n}great	North, there is a very great river that runneth betweene{n}rwer' the high and low landes, and more then three leagues into the sea it hath many shelves, & there is not altogether two fadome water, so that the place is very dangerous: and neere unto the said shelves, there is either fifteene or 20 fadomes from shore to shore. All the Northerly coaste runneth Northeast and by North, and Southwest 8c by South. The said haven wherin we stayed on the South side, is as it were but a sluce of the waters that rise by the flood, 8c but of smal S. Johns Islets, accompt: we named them S. Johns Islets, because we found them, 8c entred into them the day of the beheading of that Saint. And before you come to the said haven, there is an Island lying Eastward about 5 leagues distant from the same: betweene which and the land there is no passage saving only for smal boats. The haven of S. Johns Islets dryeth up all the waters that rise 216{n}by flowing, although they flow two fadome at the least. The best place to harborough ships therein is on the South part of a little Island that is over against the said haven, whereby the bancke or shore of the Island riseth. Upon the first of September we departed out of the said haven, purposing to go toward Canada; & about 15 leagues from it toward the West, & Westsouthwest, amidst the river, there are three Islands, over against the which there is a river which runneth swift, and is of a great depth, & it is that which leadeth, and runneth into the countrey and kingdome of Saguenay, as by the two wild men of Canada it was told us. This river passeth and runneth along very high and steepe hils of bare stone, where very little earth is, & notwithstanding there is great quantity of sundry sorts of trees that grow in the said bare stones, even as upon good & fertile ground, in such sort that we have seene some so great as wel would suffise to make a mast for a ship of 30 tunne burden, and as greene as possibly can be, growing in a stony rocke without any earth at all. At the entrance of the sayd river we met with 4 boats ful of wild men, which as far as we could perceive, very fearfully came toward us, so that some of them went backe againe, & the other came as neere us as easily they might heare & understand one of our wild men, who told them his name, and then tooke acquaintance of them, upon whose word they came to us. The next day being the 2 of September, we came out of the sayd river to go to Canada, and by reason of the seas flowing, the tide was very swift and dangerous, for that on the South part of it there lie two Islands, about which, more then three leagues compasse, lie many rocks and great stones, & but two fadome water: and the flowing amidst those Islands is very unconstant and doubtful, so that if it had not bene for our boats, we had been in great dailger to lose our Pinnesse: & coasting along the said drie sands, there is more then 30 fadom water.{n}217{n}This is the river of Tadascu or of Saguenay.{n} About five leagues beyond the river of Saguenay Southwest, there is another Hand on the Northside, aguenay. wherein are certaine high lands, and thereabouts we thought to have cast anker, on purpose to stay the next tide, but we could sound no ground in a 120 fadome, within a flight shoot from shore, so that we were constrained to winde backe to the said Hand, where wee sounded againe and found 3 5 fadome. The next morning we hoysed saile and went thence, sayling further on, where we had notice of a certaine kind of fish never before of any man seene or knowen. They are about the bignesse of a Porpose, yet nothing like them, of body very well proportioned, headed like Grayhounds, alto-gither as white as snow without any spot, within which river there is great quantitie of them: they doe live altogither betweene the Sea and the fresh water. These people of the Countrey call them Adhothuys, they tolde us that they be very savory and good to be eaten. Moreover they affirme none to be found elsewhere but in the mouth of that river. The sixth of the month, the weather being calme and faire, we went about 15 leagues more upward into the river, and there lighted on an Hand that looketh Northward, and it maketh a little Innumerable haven or creeke wherein are many and innumerable great Tortoises. Tortoyzes, continually lying about that Hand. There are likewise great quantitie of the said Adhothuys taken by the inhabitours of the countrey, and there is as great a current in that place as is at Bordeaux in France at every tide. This Hand is in length about three leagues, and in bredth two, and is a goodly and fertile plot of ground, replenished with many goodly and great trees of many sorts. Among the rest there are many Filberd-trees, which we found hanging full of them, somewhat bigger and better in savour then ours, but somewhat The Ue of harder, and therefore we called it The Hand of Filberds. ^iaerds^ sevent^ moneth being our Ladies even, after ‘ service we went from that Hand to goe up higher into the river, and came to 14 Hands seven or eight leagues 218{n}from the Hand of Filberds, where the countrey of Canada beginneth, one of which Ilands is ten leagues in length, and five in bredth, greatly inhabited of such men as onely live by fishing of such sorts of fishes as the river afFordeth, according to the season of them. After we{n}had cast anker betwene the said great Hand, & the This great Northerly coast, we went on land and tooke our two{n}wild men with us, meeting with many or those countrey Qrieans_ people, who would not at all approch unto us, but rather fled from us, untill our two men began to speake unto them, telling them that they were Taignoagny and Domagaia, who so soone as they had taken acquaintance of them, beganne greatly to rejoyce, dancing and shewing many sorts of ceremonies: and many of the chiefest of them came to our boats & brought many Eeles and other sorts of fishes, with two or three burdens of great Millet Matz. wherewith they make their bread, and many great muske millions. The same day came also many other boates full of those countreymen and weomen, to see and take acquaintance of our two men, all which were as courteously received and friendly entertained of our Captaine, as possibly could be. And to have them the better acquainted with him, and make them his friends, hee gave them many small gifts, but of small value: never-thelesse they were greatly contented with them. The next day following, the Lord of Canada (whose proper name was Donnacona, but by the name of Lord they call him Agouhanna) with twelve boats came to our ships, accompanied with many people, who causing ten of his boates to goe backe with the other two, approched unto us with sixteene men. Then beganne the said Agouhanna over against the smallest of our ships, according to their maner and fashion, to frame a long Oration, mooving all his bodie and members after a strange fashion, which thing is a ceremonie and signe of gladnesse and securitie among them, and then comming to the Generals ship, where Taignoagny and Domagaia were, he spake with them & they with him, where they began{n}219{n}to tell and shew unto him what they had seene in France, and what good entertainement they had had: hearing which things the said Lord seemed to be very glad thereof, and prayed our Captaine to reach him his arme, that he might kisse it, which thing he did: their Lord taking it, laid it about his necke, for so they use to doe when they will make much of one. Then our Captaine entred into Agouhannas boat, causing bread and wine to be brought to make the said Lord and his companie to eate and drinke, which thing they did, and were greatly thereby contented and satisfied. Our Captaine for that time gave them nothing, because he looked for a fitter opportunity. These things being done, ech one tooke leave of others, and the said Lord went with his boats againe to his place of abode. Our Captaine then caused our boates to be set in order, that with the next tide he might goe up higher into the river, to find some safe harborough for our ships: and we passed up the river against the streame about tenne leagues, coasting the said Hand, at the end whereof, we found a goodly and pleasant sound, where is a little river and haven, where by reason of the flood there is about three fadome water. This place seemed to us very fit and commodious to harbour our ships therein, and so we did very safely, Santa Croix, we named it the holy Crosse, for on that day we came  thither. Neere unto it, there is a village, whereof Donna-cona is Lord, and there he keepeth his abode: it is called Stadacona. Stadacona, as goodly a plot of ground as possibly may be seene, and therewithal! very fruitfull, full of goodly trees even as in France, as Okes, Elmes, Ashes, Walnut trees, Maple tres, Cydrons, Vines, and white Thornes, that bring foorth fruit as bigge as any damsons, and many other sortes of trees, under which groweth as faire tall Goodly hemp, hempe, as any in France, without any seede or any mans worke or labour at all. Having considered the place, and finding it fit for our purpose, our Captaine withdrew himselfe on purpose to returne to our ships: but behold, as we were comming out of the river we met comming{n}220{n}against us one of the Lords of the said village of Stada-cona, accompanied with many others, as men, weomen, and children, who after the fashion of their countrey, in signe of mirth and joy, began to make a long Oration, the women still singing and dancing up to the knees in water. Our Captaine knowing their good will and kindnesse toward us, caused the boat wherein they were, to come unto him, and gave them certaine trifles, as knives, and beades of glasse, whereat they were marvellous glad, for being gone about three leagues from them, for the pleasure they conceived of our comming, we might heare them sing, and see them dance for all they were so farre.{n}How our Captaine went to see and note the bignesse of the Hand, and the nature of it, and then returned to the ships, causing them to be brought to the river of The holy Crosse.{n}Chap. 3.{n}AFter we were come with our boats unto our ships againe, our Captaine caused our barks to be made readie to goe on land in the said Hand, to note the trees that in shew seemed so faire, and to consider the nature and qualitie of it: which thing we did, and found it full of goodly trees likes to ours. Also we saw many goodly Vines, a thing not before of us seene in those countries, and therefore we named it Bacchus Hand. It is in length about twelve leagues, in sight very pleasant, but full of woods, no part of it manured, unlesse it be in certaine places, where a few cottages be for Fishers dwellings as before we have said. The next day we departed with our ships to bring them to the place of the holy Crosse, and on the 14 of that moneth we came thither, and the Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, with 25 boats full of those people, came to meete us, comming from the place whence we were come, and going toward Stadacona, where their abiding is, and all came to our ships, shewing sundry and divers gestures of gladnesse{n}221{n}A.D.{n}I535-{n}The lie of Bacchus, or the Ik of Orleans.{n}and mirth, except those two that we had brought, to wit, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, who seemed to have altered and changed their mind and purpose, for by no meanes they would come unto our ships, albeit sundry times they were earnestly desired to doe it, whereupon we began to mistrust somewhat. Our Captaine asked them if according to promise they would go with him to Hochelaga? They answered yea, for so they had purposed, and then ech one withdrew himselfe. The next day being the fifteenth of the moneth, our Captaine went on shore, to cause certaine poles and piles to be driven into the water, and set up, that the better and safelier we might harbour our ships there: and many of those countrey people came to meete us there, among whom was Donnacona and our two men, with the rest of their company, who kept themselves aside under a point or nooke of land that is upon the shore of a certaine river, and no one of them came unto us as the other did that were not on their side. Our Captaine understanding that they were there, commanded part of our men to follow him, and he went to the saide point where he found the said Donnacona, Taignoagny, Domagaia, and divers other: and after salutations given on ech side, Taignoagny setled himselfe formost to speake to our Captaine, saying that the Lord Donnacona did greatly grieve and sorrow that our Captaine and his men did weare warlike weapons, and they not. Our Captaine answered, that albeit it did greeve them, yet would not he leave them off, and that (as he knew) it was the maner of France. But for all these words our Captaine and Donnacona left not ofF to speake one to another, and friendly to enter-taine one another. Then did we perceive, that whatsoever Taignoagny spake, was onely long of himselfe and of his fellow, for that before they departed thence our Captaine and Donnacona entred into a marvellous stedfast league of friendship, whereupon all his people at once with a loude voyce, cast out three great cryes, (a horrible thing to heare) and each one having taken leave of the{n}222{n}other for that day, we went aboord againe. The day following we brought our two great shippes within the river and harborough, where the waters being at the highest, are three fadome deepe, and at the lowest, but halfe a fadome. We left our Pinnesse without the road to the end we might bring it to Hochelaga. So soone as we had safely placed our ships, behold we saw Donnacona, Taignoagny & Domagaia, with more then five hundred persons, men, women and children, and the said Lord with ten or twelve of the chiefest of the countrey came aboord of our ships, who were all courteously received,  and friendly entertained both of our Captaine and of us all: and divers gifts of small value were given them.{n}Then did Taignoagny tell our Captaine, that his Lord did greatly sorrow that he would go to Hochelaga, and that he would not by any meanes permit that any of them should goe with him, because the river was of no importance. Our Captaine answered him, that for all his saying, he would not leave off his going thither, if by any meanes it were possible, for that that he was commanded by his king to goe as farre as possibly he could: and that if he (that is to say Taignoagny) would goe with him, as he had promised, he should be very well entertained, beside that, he should have such a gift given him, as he should well content himselfe: for he should doe nothing else but goe with him to Hochelaga and come againe. To whom Taignoagny answered, that he would not by any meanes goe, and thereupon they sodainly returned to their houses. The next day being the 17 of September, Donnacona and his company returned even as at the first, and brought with him many Eeles, with sundry sorts of other fishes, whereof they take great store in the said river, as more largely hereafter shall be shewed. And as soone as they were come to our ships, according to their wonted use they beganne to sing and dance. This done, Donnacona caused all his people to be set on the one side: then making a round circle upon the sand he caused our Captaine with all his people to enter thereinto,{n}223{n}then he began to make a long Oration, holding in one of his hands a maiden child of ten or twelve yeeres old, which he presented unto our Captaine: then sodainly beganne all his people to make three great shreeks, or howles, in signe of joy and league of friendship : presently upon that he did present unto him two other young male children one after another, but younger then the other, at the giving of which even as before they gave out shreekes and howles very loud, with other cerimonies: for which presents, our Captaine gave the saide Lorde great and hearty thankes. Then Taignoagny told our Captaine, that one of the children was his owne brother, and that the maiden child was daughter unto the said Lords owne sister, and the presents were only given him to the end he should not goe to Hochelaga at all: to whom our Captaine answered, that if they were onely given him to that intent, if so he would, he should take them againe, for that by no meanes he would leave his going off, for as much as he was so commanded of his King. But concerning this, Domagaia told our Captaine that their Lord had given him those children as a signe and token of goodwill and security, and that he was contented to goe with him to Hochelaga, upon which talke great wordes arose betweene Taignoagny and Domagaia, by which we plainely perceived that Taignoagny was but a craftie knave, and that he intended but mischiefe and treason, as well by this deede as others that we by him had seene. After that our Captaine caused the said children to be put in our ships, and caused two Swords and two copper Basons, the one wrought, the other plaine, to be brought unto him, and them he gave to Donnacona, who was therewith greatly contented, yeelding most heartie thankes unto our Captaine for them, and presently upon that he commaunded all his people to sing and dance, and desired our Captaine to cause a peece of artillerie to be shot off, because Taignoagny and Domagaia made great brags of it, and had told them marvellous things, and also, because they had never heard nor seene{n}224.{n}any before: to whom our Captaine answered, that he was content: and by and by he commanded his men to shoot off twelve cannons charged with bullets into the wood that was hard by those people and ships, at whose noyse they were greatly astonished and amazed, for they thought that heaven had fallen upon them, and put themselves to flight, howling, crying, and shreeking, so that it seemed hell was broken loose. But before we went thence, Taignoagny caused other men to tell us, that those men which we had left in our Pinnesse in the road, had slaine two men of their company, with a peece of ordinance that they had shot ofF, whereupon the rest had put themselves all to flight, as though they should all have bene slaine: which afterward we found untrue, because our men had not shot off any peece at all that day.{n}How Donnacona and Taignoagny with others, devised a prettie sleight or pollicie: for they caused three of their men to be attired like Divels, fayning themselves to be sent from their God Cudruaigny, onely to hinder our voyage to Hochelaga.{n}Chap. 4.{n}THe next day being the eighteenth of September, these men still endevoured themselves to seeke all meanes possible to hinder and let our going to Hochelaga, and devised a prettie guile, as hereafter shalbe shewed. They went and dressed three men like Divels, being wrapped in dogges skinnes white and blacke, their faces besmeered as blacke as any coales, with homes on their heads more then a yard long, and caused them secretly to be put in one of their boates, but came not neere our ships as they were wont to doe, for they lay hidden within the wood for the space of two houres,  looking for the tide, to the end the boat wherein the Divels were, might approch and come neere us, which when time was, came, and all the rest issued out of the wood comming to us, but yet not so neere as they were wont to do. There began Taignoagny to salute{n}viii	225	p{n}our Captaine, who asked him if he would have the boate to come for him; he answered, not for that time, but after a while he would come unto our ships: then presently came that boat rushing out, wherein the three counterfeit Divels were with such long homes on their heads, and the middlemost came making a long Oration and passed along our ships without turning or looking toward us, but with the boat went toward the land. Then did Donnacona with all his people pursue them, and lay hold on the boat and Divels, who so soone as the men were come to them, fell prostrate in the boate even as if they had beene dead: then were they taken up and carried into the wood, being but a stones cast off, then every one withdrew himselfe into the wood, not one staying behind with us, where being, they began to make a long discourse, so loud that we might heare them in our ships, which lasted above halfe an houre, & being ended we began to espie Taignoagny and Domagaia comming towards us, holding their hands upward together, carying their hats under their upper garment, shewing a great admiration, and Taignoagny looking up to heaven, cryed three times Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, and Domagaia doing as his fellow had done before, cryed, Jesus Maria, James Cartier. Our Captaine hearing them, and seeing their gestures and ceremonies, asked of them what they ayled, and what was happened or chanced anew; they answered, that there were very ill tydings befallen, saying in French, Nenni est il bon, that is to say, it was not good: our Captaine asked them againe what it was, then answered they, that their God Cudru-aigny had spoken in Hochelaga: and that he had sent those three men to shewe unto them that there was so much yce and snow in that countrey, that whosoever went thither should die, which wordes when we heard, we laughed and mocked them saying, that their God Cudruaigny was but a foole and a noddie, for he knew not what he did or said: then bade we them shew his messengers from us, that Christ would defend them all{n}226{n}from colde, if they would beleeve in him. Then did they aske of our Captaine if he had spoken with Jesus: he answered no, but that his Priests had, and that he tolde them they should have faire weather: which wordes when they had heard, they thanked our Captaine, and departed toward the wood to tell those newes unto their felowes, who sodainly came all rushing out of the wood, seeming to be very glad for those words that our Captaine had spoken, and to shew that thereby they had had, and felt great joy, so soone as they were before our ships, they altogither gave out three great shreekes, and thereupon beganne to sing and dance, as they were wont to doe. But for a resolution of the matter Taignoagny and Domagaia tolde our Captaine, that their Lord Donnacona would by no meanes permit that any of them should goe with him to Hochelaga, unlesse he would leave him some hostage to stay with him: our Captaine answered them, that if they would not goe with him with a good will, they should stay, and that for all them he would not leave off his journey thither.{n}How our Captaine with all his Gentlemen and fiftie Mariners departed with our Pinnesse, and the two boates from Canada to goe to Hochelaga: and also there is described, what was seene by the way upon the said river.{n}Chap. 5.{n}THe next day being the 19 of September we hoysed saile, and with our Pinnesse and two boates departed to goe up the river with the flood, where on both shores of it we beganne to see as goodly a countrey as possibly can with eye be seene, all replenished with very goodly trees, and Vines laden as full of grapes as could be all laden along the river, which rather seemed to have bin planted 8Wes-by mans hand than otherwise. True it is, that because they are not dressed and wrought as they should be, their bunches of grapes are not so great nor sweete as ours: also we sawe all along the river many houses{n}227{n}inhabited of Fishers, which take all kindes of fishes, and they came with as great familiaritie and kindnesse unto us, as if we had beene their Countreymen, and brought us great store of fish, with other such things as they had, which we exchanged with them for other wares, who lifting up their hands toward heaven, gave many signes of Hochelay. joy: we stayed at a place called Hochelai, about five and twentie leagues from Canada, where the river waxet-h very narrow, and runneth very swift, wherefore it is very dangerous, not onely for that, but also for certaine great stones that are therein: Many boates and barkes came unto us, in one of which came one of the chiefe Lords of the countrey, making a long discourse, who being come neere us, did by evident signes and gestures shew us, that the higher the river went, the more dangerous it was, and bade us take heede of our selves. The said Lord presented and gave unto our Captaine two of his owne children, of which our Captaine tooke one being  a wench 7 or 8 yeres old, the man child he gave him againe, because it was too young, for it was but two or three yeeres old. Our Captaine as friendly and as courteously as he could did entertaine and receive the said Lord and his company, giving them certaine small trifles, and so they departed toward the shore againe. Afterwards the sayd Lord and his wife came unto Canada to visite his daughter, bringing unto our Captaine certaine small presents. From the nineteenth untill the eight and twentieth of September, we sailed up along the saide river, never losing one houre of time, all which time we saw as goodly and pleasant a countrey as possible can be wished for, full (as we have said before) of all sorts of goodly trees, that is to say, Okes, Elmes, Walnut-trees, Cedars, Firres, Ashes, Boxe, Willowes, and great store of Vines, all as full of grapes as could be, so that if any of our fellowes went on shore, they came home laden with them: there are likewise many Cranes, Swannes, Geese, Duckes, Feasants, Partriges, Thrushes, Blackbirds, Turtles, Finches, Redbreasts, Nightingales, 228{n}Sparrowes of diverse kindes, with many other sorts of Birds, even as in France, and great plentie and store. Upon the 28 of September, we came to a great wide lake in the middle of the river five or sixe leagues broad, The la^e of and twelve long, all that day we went against the tide, having but two fadome water, still keeping the sayd scantling: being come to one of the heads of the lake, we could espie no passage or going out, nay, rather it seemed to have bene closed and shut up round about, and there was but a fadome and a halfe of water, little more or lesse. And therefore we were constrayned to cast anker, and to stay with our Pinnesse, and went with our two boates to seeke some going out, and in one place we found foure or five branches, which out of the river come into the lake, and they came from Hochelaga. But in the said branches, because of the great fiercenesse and swiftnesse wherewith they breake out, and the course of the water, they make certaine barres and shoulds, and at that time there was but a fadome water.{n}Those Shouldes being passed, we found foure or five fadome, and as farre as we could perceive by the flood, it was that time of the yeere that the waters are lowest, for at other times they flowe higher by three fadomes. All these foure or five branches do compasse about five or sixe Hands very pleasant, which make the head of the lake: about fifteene leagues beyond, they doe all come into one. That day we landed in one of the saide Hands, and met with five men that were hunting of wilde beastes, who as freely and familiarly came to our boates without any feare, as if we had ever bene brought up togither. Our boates being somewhat neere the shore, one of them tooke our Captaine in his armes, and caried him on shore, as lightly and as easily as if he had bene a child of five yeeres old: so strong and sturdie was this fellow. We found that they had a great heape of wilde Rats that live in the water, as bigge as a Conny, rats as and very good to eate, which they gave unto our Cap- as taine, who for a recompence gave them knives and{n}229{n}Hochelaga distant from the lake of Angolesme 45. leagues.{n}glassen Beades. We asked them with signes if that was the way to Hochelaga, they answered yea, and that we had yet three dayes sayling thither.{n}How our Captaine caused our boates to be mended and dressed to goe to Hochelaga: and because the way was somewhat difficult and hard, we left our Pinnesse behinde: and how we came thither, and what entertainement we had of the people.{n}Chap. 6.{n}THe next day our Captaine seeing that for that time it was not possible for our Pinnesse to goe on any further, he caused our boates to be made readie, and as much munition and victuals to be put in them, as they could well beare: he departed with them, accompanyed with many Gentlemen, that is to say, Claudius of Ponte Briand, Cup-bearer to the Lorde Dolphin of France, Charles of Pommeraye, John Gouion, John Powlet, with twentie 8c eight Mariners: and Mace Jallobert, and William Briton, who had the charge under the Captaine of the other two ships, to goe up as farre as they could into that river: we sayled with good and prosperous weather untill the second of October, on which day we came to the towne of Hochelaga, distant from the place where we had left our Pinnesse five and fortie leagues. In which place of Hochelaga, and all the way we went, we met with many of those countriemen, who brought us fish and such other victuals as they had, still dancing and greatly rejoycing at our comming. Our Captaine to lure them in, and to keepe them our friends, to recompence them, gave them knives, beades, and such small trifles, wherewith they were greatly satisfied. So soone as we were come neere Hochelaga, there came to meete us above a thousand persons, men, women and children, who afterward did as friendly and merily entertaine and receive us as any father would doe his child, which he had not of long time seene, the men dauncing on one side, the women on another, and likewise the children on{n}230{n}*535-another : after that they brought us great store of fish, &{n}of their bread made of Millet, casting them into our  boates so thicke, that you would have thought it to fall from heaven. Which when our Captaine saw, he with many of his company went on shore : so soone as ever we were aland they came clustring about us, making very much of us, bringing their young children in their armes, onely to have our Captaine and his company to touch them, making signes and shewes of great mirth and glad-nesse, that lasted more than halfe an houre. Our Captaine seeing their loving kindnesse and entertainement of us, caused all the women orderly to be set in aray, and gave them Beades made of Tinne, and other such small trifles, and to some of the men he gave knives: then he returned to the boates to supper, and so passed that night, all which while all those people stood on the shore as neere our boates as they might, making great fires, and dauncing very merily, still crying Aguiaze, which in their tongue signifieth Mirth and Safetie.{n}How our Captaine with five Gentlemen and twentie armed men all well in order, went to see the towne of Hochelaga, and the situation of it.{n}Chap. 7.{n}OUr Captaine the next day very earely in the morning, The third of having very gorgeously attired himselfe, caused all Qct0^r.{n}his company to be set in order to go to see the towne and habitation of those people, and a certaine mountaine that is somewhat neere the citie: with whom went also five Gentlemen and twentie Mariners, leaving the rest to keepe and looke to our boates: we tooke with us three men of Hochelaga to bring us to the place. All along as we went we found the way as well beaten and frequented as can be, the fairest and best countrey that possibly can be seene, full of as goodly great Okes as are in any wood in France, under which the ground was all covered over . with faire Akornes. After we had gone about foure or Berniks from five miles, we met by the way one of the chiefest Lords of the rivet side.{n}231{n}the citie, accompanied with many moe, who so soone as he sawe us beckned and made signes upon us, that we must rest us in that place where they had made a great fife and so we did. After that we had rested our selves there a while, the said Lord began to make a long discourse, even as we have saide above, they are accustomed to doe in signe of mirth and friendship, shewing our Captaine and all his company a joyfull countenance, and good will, who gave him two hatchets, a paire of knives and a crosse which he made him to kisse, and then put it about his necke, for which he gave our Captaine heartie thankes. This done, we went along, and about a mile and a halfe farther, we began to finde goodly and large fieldes, full of such corne as the countrie yeeldeth. It is even as the Millet of Bresil, as great and somewhat bigger then small peason, wherewith they live even as we doe with ours. In the midst of those fields is the citie of Hochelaga, placed neere, and as it were joyned to a great mountaine that is tilled round about, very fertili, on the top of which you may see very farre, we named it Mount Roiall. The citie of Hochelaga is round, compassed about with timber, with three course of Rampires, one within another framed like a sharpe Spire, but laide acrosse above. The middlemost of them is made and built, as a direct line, but perpendicular. The Rampires are framed and fashioned with peeces of timber, layd along on the ground, very well and cunningly joyned togither after their fashion. This enclosure is in height about two rods. It hath but one gate or entrie thereat, which is shut with piles, stakes, and barres. Over it, and also in many places of the wall, there be places to runne along, and ladders to get up, all full of stones, for the defence of it. There are in the towne about fiftie houses, about fiftie paces long, and twelve, or fifteene broad, built all of wood, covered over with the barke of the wood as broad as any boord, very finely and cunningly joyned togither. Within the said houses, there are many roomes, lodgings and chambers. In the middest of every one there is a great{n}232{n}Court, in the middle whereof they make their fire. They live in common togither: then doe the husbands, wives and children each one retire themselves to their chambers. They have also on the top of their houses certaine garrets, wherein they keepe their corne to make their bread withall : they call it Carraconny, which they make as hereafter shall follow. They have certaine peeces of wood, made hollow like those whereon we beate our hempe, and with certaine beetles of wood they beat their corne to powder: then they make paste of it, and of the paste, cakes or wreathes, then they lay them on a broad and hote stone, and then cover it with hote stones, and so they bake their bread in stead of Ovens. They make also sundry sorts of pottage with the said corne and also of pease and of beanes, whereof they have great store, as{n}.	.	. -	...	~	- cumbers, and{n}also with other fruits, as Muske-Millions, and very great other fruits.{n}Cowcumbers. They have also in their houses certaine vessels as bigge as any But or Tun, wherein they preserve and keepe their fish, causing the same in sommer to be dried in the sunne, and live therewith in winter, whereof they make great provision, as we by experience have seene. All their viands and meates are without any tast or savour of salt at all. They sleepe upon barkes of trees laide all along upon the ground being over-spread with the skinnes of certaine wilde Beastes, wherewith they also cloth and cover themselves. The thing most precious that they have in all the world they call Asurgny: it is as white as any snow: they take it in the said river of Cornibotz, in the maner folowing. When any one hath deserved death, or that they take any of their enemies in Warres, first they kill him, then with certaine knives they give great slashes and strokes upon their buttocks, flankes, thighs, and shoulders: then they cast the same bodie so mangled downe to the bottome of the river, in a place where the said Esurgny is, and there leave it ten dr 12 houres, then they take it up againe, and in the cuts find the said Esurgny or Cornibotz. Of them they make beads, and weare them about their 233{n}Matz, pease, beanes, muskmilltons, cu-{n}Plentie offish and the preserving thereof.{n}necks, even as we doe chaines of gold and silver, accounting it the preciousest thing in the world. They have this vertue and propertie in them, they will stop or stanch bleeding at the nose, for we have prooved it. These people are given to no other exercise, but onely to husbandrie and fishing for their sustenance: they have no care of any other wealth or commoditie in this world, for they have no knowledge of it, and that is, because they never travell and go out of their countrey, as those of Canada and Saguenay doe, albeit the Canadians with eight or nine Villages more alongst that river be subjects unto them.{n}How we came to the Towne of Hochelaga, and the entertainement which there we had, and of certaine gifts which our Captaine gave them, with divers other things.{n}Chap. 8.{n}SO soone as we were come neere the Towne, a great number of the inhabitants thereof came to present themselves before us after their fashion, making very much of us : we were by our guides brought into the middest of the towne. They have in the middlemost part of their houses a large square place, being from side to side a good stones cast, whither we were brought, and there with signes were commanded to stay: then suddenly all the women and maidens of the towne gathered themselves together, part of which had their armes full of young children, and as many as could came to rubbe our races, our armes, and what part of the bodie soever they could touch, weeping for very joy that they saw us, shewing us the best countenance that possibly they could, desiring us with their signes, that it would please us to touch their children. That done, the men caused the women to withdraw themselves backe, then they every one sate downe on the ground round about us, as if they would have shewen and rehearsed some Comedie or other shew: then presently came the women againe, 234{n}every one bringing a foure square Matte in manner of Carpets, and spreading them abroad on the ground in that place, they caused us to sit upon them. That done, the Lord & King of the countrey was brought upon 9 or 10 mens shoulders, (whom in their tongue they call Agouhanna) sitting upon a great Stagges skinne, and they laide him downe upon the foresaid mats neere to the Captaine, every ope beckning unto us that hee was their Lord and King. This Agouhanna was a man about fiftie yeeres old: he was no whit better apparelled then any of the rest, onely excepted, that he had a certaine thing made of the skinnes of Hedgehogs like a red wreath, and that was in stead of his Crowne. He was full of the palsie, and his members shronke togither. After he had with certaine signes saluted our Captaine and all his companie, and by manifest tokens bid all welcome, he shewed his legges and armes to our Captaine, and with signes desired him to touch them, and so he did, rubbing them with his owne hands: then did Agouhanna take the wreath or crowne he had about his head, and gave it unto our Captaine: that done they brought before him divers diseased men, some blinde, some criple, some lame and impotent, and some so old that the haire of their eyelids came downe and covered their cheekes, and layd them all along before our Captaine, to the end they might of him be touched: for it seemed unto them that God was descended and come downe from heaven to heale them. Our Captaine seeing the misery and devotion of this poore people, recited the Gospel of Saint John, that is to say, In the beginning was the word; touching every one that were diseased, praying to God that it would please him to open the hearts of this poore people, and to make them know his holy word, and that they might receive Baptisme and Christendome: that done, he tooke a Service-booke in his hand, and with a loud voyce read all the passion of Christ, word by word, that all the Standers by might heare him: all which while this poore people kept silence, & were{n}235{n}marvellously attentive, looking up to heaven, and imitating us in gestures. Then he caused the men all orderly to be set on one side, the women on another, & likewise the children on an other, & to the chiefest of them he gave hatchets, to the other knives, & to the women beads & such other small trifles. Then where ye children were, he cast rings, counters, & brooches made of Tin,  whereat they seemed to be very glad. That done, our{n}Captaine commanded Trumpets and other musicall instruments to be sounded, which when they heard, they were very merie. Then we tooke our leave and went to our boate: the women seeing that, put themselves before to stay us, and brought us out of their meates that they had made readie for us, as fish, pottage, beanes, and such other things, thinking to make us eate, and dine in that place: but because the meates had no savour at all of salt, we liked them not, but thanked them, and with signes gave them to understand that we had no neede to eate. When wee were out of the Towne, diverse of the men and women followed us, and brought us to the toppe Mount Roial. of the foresaid mountaine, which wee named Mount{n}Roial, it is about a league from the Towne. When as we were on the toppe of it, we might discerne and A ridge of plainely see thirtie leagues about. On the Northside of mountaines to ;t there are many hilles to be seene running West and Hochelaga	h.ast, and as many more on the South, amongst and{n}and another betweene the which the Countrey is as faire and as to the South, pleasant as possibly can be seene, being levell, smooth, and very plaine, fit to be husbanded and tilled: and in the middest of those fieldes we saw the river further up a great way then where we had left our boates, where was the greatest and the swiftest fall of water that any where hath beene seene, and as great, wide and large as our sight might discerne, going Southwest along three faire The 3 saults and round mountaines that wee sawe, as we judged about Later in? Afteene leagues from us. Those which brought us degrees of^ thither tolde and shewed us, that in the sayd river there latitude. were three such falles of water more, as that was where we 236{n}1535-had left our boates: but because we could not understand their language, we could not knowe how farre they were one from another. Moreover they shewed us with signes, that the said three fals being past, a man might sayle the space of three moneths more alongst that River, and that along the hilles that are on the North side there is a great river, which (even as the other) commeth from{n}the West, we thought it to be the river that runneth 2% mor of through the Countrey of Saguenay: and without any ^a&uenay signe or question mooved or asked of them, they tooke West the chayne of our Captaines whistle, which was of silver, where there is and the dagger-haft of one of our fellow Mariners, gold and hanging on his side being of yellow copper guilt, and shewed us that such stufFe came from the said River, and that there be Agouionda, that is as much to say, as evill people, who goe all armed even to their fingers ends. Also they shewed us the manner and making of their armour: they are made of cordes and wood, finely and cunningly wrought togither. They gave us also to understande that those Agouionda doe continually warre one against another, but because we did not understand them well, we could not perceive how farre it was to that Countrey. Our Captaine shewed them redde Copper, which in their language they call Caignetadze, and looking towarde that Countrey, with signes asked them if any came from thence, they shaking their heads answered no: but they shewed us that it came from Saguenay, and that lyeth cleane contrary to the other. Red copper in After we had heard and seene these things of them, we drewe to our boates accompanied with a great multitude of those people: some of them when as they sawe any of our fellowes weary, would take them up on their shoulders, and carry them as on horsebacke. So soone as we came to our boates we hoysed saile to goe toward our Pinnesse, doubting of some mischance. Our departure grieved and displeased them very much, for they followed us along the river as farre as they could: we went so fast that on munday being the fourth of October{n}237{n}wee came where our Pinnesse was. The Tuesday following being the fift of the moneth, we hoysed saile, and with our Pinnesse and boates departed from thence toward the Province of Canada, to the port of the Holy Crosse, where we had left our ships. The seventh day we came against a river that commeth from the North, and entred into that river, at the entrance whereof are foure little Hands full of faire and goodly trees: we named that river The river of Fovetz: But because one of those Ilandes stretcheth it selfe a great way into the river, our Captaine at the point of it caused a goodly great Crosse to be set up, and commanded the boates to be made readie, that with the next tide he might goe up the saide river, and consider the qualitie of it, which wee did, and that day went up as farre as we could: but because we found it to be of no importance, and very shallow, we returned and sayled downe the river.{n}How we came to the Port of the Holy Crosse, and in what state we found our ships: and how the Lord of the Countrey came to visite our Captaine, and our Captaine him: and of certaine particular customes of the people.{n}Chap. 9.{n}UPon Monday being the 11 of October we came to the Port of the Holy Crosse, where our ships were, and found that the Masters and Mariners we had left there, had made and reared a trench before the ships, altogither closed with great peeces of timber set upright [III. 223.J and very well fastened togither: then had they beset the said trench about with peeces of Artillerie and other necessarie things to shield and defend themselves from the power of all the countrey. So soone as the Lord of the countrey heard of our comming, the next day being the twelfth of October, he came to visite us, accompanied with Taignoagny, Domagaia and many others, fayning to be very glad of our comming, making 238{n}much of our Captaine, who as friendly as he could, entertained them, albeit they had not deserved it. Donnacona their Lord desired our Captaine the next day to come and see Canada, which he promised to doe: for the next day being the 13 of the moneth, he with all his Gentlemen and fiftie Mariners very well appointed, went to visite Donnacona and his people, about a league from our ships. The place where they make their abode is called Stadacona. When we were about a stones cast from their houses, many of the inhabitants came to meete us, being all set in a ranke, and (as their custome is) the men all on one side, & the women on the other, still dancing and singing without any ceasing: and after we had saluted and received one another, our Captaine gave them knives and such other sleight things: then he caused all the women and children to passe along before him, giving ech one a ring of Tin, for which they gave him hearty thankes: that done, our Captaine was by Donnacona and Taignoagny, brought to see their houses, which (the qualitie considered) were very well provided, and stored with such victuals as the countrey yeeldeth, to passe away the winter withall. Then they shewed us the skins of five mens heads spread upon boords as we doe use parchment: Donnacona told us that they were skins of Toudamani, a people dwelling toward the South, who continually doe warre against them. Moreover they told us, that it was two yeeres past that those Touda-mans came to assault them, yea even into the said river, in an Hand that lyeth over against Saguenay, where they had bin the night before, as they were going a warfaring in Hognedo, with 200 persons, men, women, and children, who being all asleepe in a Fort that they had made, they were assaulted by the said Toudamans, who put fire round about the Fort, and as they would have come out of it to save themselves, they were all slaine, only five excepted, who escaped. For which losse they yet sorrowed, shewing{n}Stadacona.{n}Toudamani dwelling Southward of Canada.{n}239{n}with signes, that one day they would be revenged: that done, we came to our ships againe.{n}The manner how the people of that Countrey live: and of certaine conditions: of their faith, maners, and customes.{n}Chap. io.{n}THis people beleeve no whit in God, but in one whom they call Cudruaigni: they say that often he speaketh with them and telleth them what weather shal follow, whether good or bad. Moreover they say, that when he is angry with them he casteth dust into their eyes: they beleeve that when they die they go into the stars, & thence by litle & little descend downe into the Horizon, even as the stars doe, & that then they goe into certaine greene fields full of goodly faire & precious trees, floures, & fruits. After that they had given us these things to understand, we shewed them their error, and told that their Cudruaigni did but deceive them, for he is but a Divell & an evill spirit: affirming unto them, that there is but one onely God, who is in heaven, and who giveth us all necessaries, being the Creatour of all himselfe, and that onely we must beleeve in him: moreover, that it is necessarie for us to be baptised, otherwise wee are damned into hell. These and many other things concerning our faith and religion we shewed them, all which they did easily beleeve, calling their Cudruaigni, Agouiada, that is to say, nought, so that very earnestly they desired and prayed our Captaine that he would cause them to be baptised, and their Lorde, and Taignoagny, Doma-They desire io gaia, and all the people of the towne came unto us, be baptized, hoping to be baptised: but because we did not throughly know their minde, and that there was no bodie could teach them our beliefe & religion, we excused our selves, desiring Taignoagny, & Domagaia, to tell the rest of their countreymen, that he would come againe another time, & bring Priests & chrisome with us, for{n}240{n}without them they could not be baptised: which they did easily beleeve, for Domagaia & Taignoagny had seene many children baptised in Britain whiles they were there. Which promise when they heard they seemed to be very glad. They live in common togither: and of such commodities as their countrey yeeldeth they are indifferently well stored, the inhabitants of the countrey cloth themselves with the skinnes of certaine Wilde beasts, but very miserably. In winter they weare hosen and shoes made of wilde beasts skins, and in Sommer they goe barefooted. They keepe and observe the rites of matrimonie, saving that every one weddeth 2 or 3 wives, which (their husbands being dead) do never marrie againe, but for the death of their husbands weare a certaine blacke weede all the daies of their life, besmearing al their faces with cole-dust & grease mingled togither as thicke as the backe of a knife, and by that they are knowen to be widdowes. They have a filthy  and detestable use in marrying of their maidens, and that is this, they put them all (after they are of lawfull age to marry) in a common place, as harlots free for every man that will have to doe with them, untill such time as they find a match. This I say, because I have seene by experience many housen full of those Damosels, even as our schooles are full of children in France to learne to reade. Moreover, the misrule and riot that they keepe in those houses is very great, for very wantonly they sport and dally togither, shewing whatsoever God hath sent them. They are no men of great labour. They digge their grounds with certaine peeces of wood, as bigge as halfe a sword, on which ground groweth their corne, which they call Offici: it Their Maiz. is as bigge as our small peason: there is great quantitie of it growing in Bresill. They have also great store of Muske-milions, Pompions, Gourds, Cucumbers, Peason and Beanes *of every colour, yet differing from ours. There groweth also a certaine kind of herbe, whereof in Sommer they make great provision for all the yeere,{n}vin	241	Q{n}making great account of it, and onely men use of it, and first they cause it to be dried in the sunne, then weare it about their neckes wrapped in a little beasts skinne made like a little bagge, with a hollow peece of stone or wood like a pipe: then when they please they make pouder of it, and then put it in one of the ends of the said Cornet or pipe, and laying a cole of fire upon it, at the other ende sucke so long, that they fill their bodies full of smoke, till that it commeth out of their mouth and nostrils, even as out of the Tonnell of a chimney. They say that this doth keepe them warme and in health: they nev^r goe without some of it about them. We our selves have tryed the same smoke, and having put it in our mouthes, it seemed almost as hot as Pepper. The women of that countrey doe labour much more then the men, as well in fishing (whereto they are greatly given) as in tilling and husbanding their grounds, and other things: as well the men as women and children, are very much more able to resist cold then savage beastes, for wee with our owne eyes have seene some of them, when it was coldest (which cold was extreme raw and bitter) come to our ships starke naked going upon snow & yce, which thing seemeth incredible to them that have not seene it. When as the snow and yce lyeth on the ground, they take great store of wilde beasts, as Faunes, Stags, Beares, Marterns, Hares & Foxes, with divers other sorts whose flesh they eate raw, having first dried it in ye sunne or smoke, and so they doe their fish. As farre foorth as we could perceive and understand by these people, it were a very easie thing to bring them to some familiaritie & civility, and make them learne what one would. The Lord God for his mercies sake set therunto his helping hand when he seeth cause. Amen.{n}242{n}Of the greatnesse and depth of the said river, and of the sorts of beasts, birdes, fishes, and other things that we have seene, with the situation of the place.{n}Chap. 11.{n}THe said river beginneth beyond the Hand of the Assumption, over against the high mountaines of Hognedo, and of the seven Hands. The distance over from one side to the other is about 35 or 40 leagues. In the middest it is above 200 fadome deepe. The surest way to sayle upon it is on the South side. And toward the North, that is to say, from the said 7 Hands, from side to side, there is seven leagues distance, where are also two great rivers that come downe from the hils of Saguenay, and make divers very dangerous shelves in the sea. At the entrance of those two rivers we saw many & great store of Whales and Sea horses. Overthwart the said Hands there is another little river that runneth along those marrish grounds about 3 or 4 leagues, wherin there is great store of water foules. From the entrance of that river to Hochelaga there is about 300 leagues distance: the originali beginning of it is in the river that commeth from Saguenay, which riseth and springeth among high & steepe hils: it entreth into that river before it commeth to the Province of Canada on the North side. That river is very deepe, high, and streight, wherefore it is very dangerous for any vessell to goe upon it. After that river followeth the Province of Canada, wherein are many people dwelling in open boroughes and villages. There are also in the circuit and territorie of Canada, along, and within the said river, many other Hands, some great & some small, among which there is one that containeth above ten leagues in length, full of goodly and high trees, and also many Vines. You may goe into it from both sides, but yet the surest passage is on the South side. On the shore or banke of that river Westward, there is a goodly, faire, and delectable bay or creeke, convenient and fit for to 243{n}It is now found to be but 200 leagues.{n}harborough ships. Hard by there is in that river one place very narrow, deepe, & swift running, but it is not passing the third part of a league, over against the which there is a goodly high peece of land, with a towne therein: and the countrey about it is very well tilled & wrought, & as good as possibly can be seene. That is the place and abode of Donnacona, and of our two men we tooke in our first voyage, it is called Stadacona. But before we come to it, there are 4 other peopled townes,  that is to say, Ayraste, Starnatan, Tailla, which standeth upon a hill, Scitadin, and then Stadagona, under which towne toward the North the river and port of the holy crosse is, where we staied from the 15 of September, untill the 16 of May 1536, and there our ships remained dry, as we have said before. That place being past, we found the habitation of the people called Teguenondahi, standing upon an high mountaine, and the valley of Hochelay, which standeth in a Champaigne countrey. All the sayd countrey on both sides of the river as farre as Hochelay & beyond, is as faire and plaine as ever was seene. There are certaine mountaines farre distant from the said river, which are to be seene above the foresaid Rivers falling townes, from which mountaines divers rivers descend, from moun-	which fall into the said great river. All that countrey{n}‘	is full of sundry sorts of wood and many Vines, unlesse{n}it be about the places that are inhabited, where they have pulled up the trees to till and labour the ground, and to build their houses and lodgings. There is great store of Beasts. Stags, Deere, Beares, and other such like sorts of beasts, as Connies, Hares, Marterns, Foxes, Otters, Bevers, Weasels, Badgers, and Rats exceeding great, and divers other sortes of wilde beastes. They cloth themselves with the skinnes of those beasts, because they have nothing else to make them apparel! withall. There are Birdes. also many sorts of birdes, as Cranes, Swannes, Bustards, wilde Geese white and gray, Duckes, Thrushes, Black-birdes, Turtles, wilde Pigeons, Lenites, Finches, Redbreasts, Stares, Nightingales, Sparrowes, and other Birdes,{n}244{n}even as in France. Also, as we have said before, the said river is the plentifullest of fish that ever hath of any man Fishes. bene seene or heard of, because that from the mouth to the end of it, according to their seasons, you shall finde all sorts of fresh water fish and salt. There are also{n}many Whales, Porposes, Seahorses, and Adhothuis, which is a kind of fish that we had never seene nor heard of{n}before. They are as great as Porposes, as white as any snow, their bodie and head fashioned as a grayhound, they are wont alwaies to abide betwene the fresh & salt water,{n}which beginneth betweene the river of Saguenay and Canada.{n}Of certaine advertisements and notes given unto us by those countreymen, after our returne from Hochelaga.{n}Chap. 12.{n}AFter our returne from Hochelaga, we dealt, traffickt, and with great familiaritie and love were conversant with those that dwelt neerest unto our ships, except that sometimes we had strife and contention with certaine naughtie people, full sore against the will of the others. Wee understood of Donnacona and of others, that the said river is called the river of Saguenay, and goeth to ' Saguenay, being somewhat more then a league farther Westnorthwest, and that 8 or 9 dayes journey beyond, it wil beare but small boats. But the right and readie The right way way to Saguenay is up that river to Hochelaga, and then t0 Saguenay. into another that commeth from Saguenay, and then entreth into the foresaid river, & that there is yet one moneths sayling thither. Moreover, they told us and gave us to understand, that there are people clad with cloth as we are, very honest, and many inhabited townes, and that they have great store of Gold and red Copper: and that ^tore °f about the land beyond the said first river to Hochelaga red copper. and Saguenay, is an Hand environed round about with that and other rivers, and that beyond Saguenay the said Twg or three river entereth into two or 3 great lakes, and that there is great lakes.{n}245{n}The river of Irrouacasfalling into the lake ofAngo-lesme.{n}a Sea of fresh water found, and as they have heard say of those of Saguenay, there was never man heard of that found out the end thereof: for, as they told us, they themselves were never there. Moreover they told us, that where we had left our Pinnesse when wee went to Hochelaga, there is a river that goeth Southwest, from whence there is a whole moneths sayling to goe to a certaine land, where there is neither yce nor snow seene, where the inhabitants do continually warre one against another, where is great store of Oranges, Almonds, Nuts, and Apples, with many other sorts of fruits, and that the men and women are clad with beasts skinnes even as they: we asked them if there were any gold or red copper, they answered no. I take this place to be toward Florida, as farre as I could perceive and understand by their signes and tokens.{n}Of a strange and cruell disease that came to the people of Stadacona, wherewith because we did haunt their company, we were so infected, that there died 25 of our company.{n}Chap. 13.{n}IN the moneth of December, wee understood that the pestilence was come among the people of Stadacona, in such sort, that before we knew of it, according to their confession, there were dead above 50: whereupon we charged them neither to come neere our Fort, nor about our ships, or us. And albeit we had driven them from us, the said unknowen sicknes began to spread itselfe amongst us after the strangest sort that ever was eyther heard of or seene, insomuch as some did lose all their strength, and could not stand on their feete, then did their legges swel, their sinnowes shrinke as blacke as any cole* Others also had all their skins spotted with spots of blood of a purple coulour: then did it ascend up to their ankels,. knees, thighes, shoulders, armes, and necke: their mouth became stincking, their gummes so rotten, that all the flesh did fall off, even to the rootes of the teeth, which.{n}246{n}did also almost all fall out. With such infection did this sicknesse spread it selfe in our three ships, that about the middle of February, of a hundreth and tenne persons that we were, there were not ten whole, so that one could not helpe the other, a most horrible and pitifull case, considering the place we were in, forsomuch as the people of the countrey would dayly come before our fort, and saw but few of us. There were alreadie eight dead, and more then fifty sicke, and as we thought, past all hope of recovery. Our Captaine seeing this our misery, & that the sicknesse was gone so farre, ordained and commanded, that every one should devoutly prepare himselfe to prayer, and in remembrance of Christ, caused his Image to be set upon a tree, about a flight shot from the fort amidst the yce and snow, giving all men to understand, that on the Sunday following, service should be said there, and that whosoever could goe, sicke or whole, should goe thither in Procession, singing the seven Psalmes of David, with other Letanies, praying most heartily that it would please the said our Christ to have compassion upon us. Service being done, and as well celebrated as we could, our Captaine there made a vow, that if it would please God to give him leave to returne into France, he would go on Pilgrimage to our Ladie of Rocquemado. That day Philip Rougemont, borne in Amboise, died, being 22 yeeres olde, and because the sickenesse was to us unknowen, our Captaine caused him to be ripped to see if by any meanes possible we might know what it was, and so seeke meanes to save and preserve the rest of the company: he was found to have his heart white, but rotten, and more then a quart of red water about it: his liver was indifferent faire, but his lungs blacke and mortified, his blood was altogither shrunke about the heart, so that when he was opened great quantitie of rotten blood issued out from about his heart: his milt toward the backe was somewhat perished, rough as if it had bene rubbed against a stone. Moreover, because one of his thighs was very blacke without, it was{n}247{n}opened, but within it was whole and sound: that done, as well as we could he was buried. In such sort did the sicknesse continue and encrease, that there were not above three sound men in the ships, and none was able to goe under hatches to draw drinke for himselfe, nor for his fellowes. Sometimes we were constrained to bury some of the dead under the snow, because we were not able to digge any graves for them the ground was so hard frozen, and we so weake. Besides this, we did greatly feare that the people of the countrey would perceive our weakenesse and miserie, which to hide, our Captaine, whom it pleased God alwayes to keepe in health, would go out with two or three of the company, some sicke and some whole, whom when he saw out of the Fort, he would throw stones at them and chide them, faigning that so soone as he came againe, he would beate them, and then with signes shewe the people of the countrey that hee caused all his men to worke and labour in the ships, some in calking them, some in beating of chalke, some in one thing, and some in another, and that he would not have them come foorth till their worke was done. And to make his tale seeme true and likely, he would make all his men whole & sound to make a great noyse with knocking stickes, stones, hammers, and other things togither, at which time we were so oppressed and grieved with that sicknesse, that we had lost all hope ever to see France againe, if God of his infinite good-nesse and mercie had not with his pitifull eye looked upon us, and revealed a singular and excellent remedie against all diseases unto us, the best that ever was found upon earth, as hereafter shall follow.{n}248{n}How long we stayed in the Port of the holy Crosse amidst the snow and yce, and how many died of the said disease, from the beginning of it to the midst of March.{n}Chap. 14.{n}FRom the midst of November untill the midst of{n}March, we were kept in amidst the yce above two fadomes thicke, and snow above foure foote high and more, higher then the sides of our ships, which lasted till that time, in such sort, that all our drinkes were frozen in the Vessels, and the yce through all the ships was above a hand-breadth thicke, as well above hatches as beneath, and so much of the river as was fresh, even to Hochelaga, was frozen, in which space there died five and twentie of our best and chiefest men, and all the rest were so sicke, that wee thought they should never recover againe, only three or foure excepted. Then it pleased God to cast his pitifull eye upon us, and sent us the knowledge of remedie of our healthes and recoverie, in such maner as in the next Chapter shall be shewed.{n}How by the grace of God we had notice of a certaine  tree, whereby we all recovered our health: and the maner how to use it.{n}Chap. 15.{n}OUr Captaine considering our estate (and how that sicknesse was encreased and hot amongst us) one day went foorth of the Forte, and walking upon the yce, hee saw a troupe of those Countreymen comming from Stadacona, among which was Domagaia, who not passing ten or twelve dayes afore, had bene very sicke with that disease, and had his knees swolne as bigge as a child of two yeres old, all his sinews shrunke together, his teeth spoyled, his gummes rotten, and stinking. Our Captaine seeing him whole and sound, was thereat marvellous glad, hoping to understand and{n}249{n}A perfect remedy against the French Pocks.{n}know of him how he had healed himselfe, to the end he might ease and help his men. So soone as they were come neere him, he asked Domagaia how he had done to heale himselfe: he answered, that he had taken the juice and sappe of the leaves of a certaine Tree, and therewith had healed himselfe: For it was a singular remedy against that disease. Then our Captaine asked of him if any were to be had thereabout, desiring him to shew him, for to heale a servant of his, who whilest he was in Canada with Donnacona, was striken with that disease: That he did because he would not shew the number of his sicke men. Domagaia straight sent two women to fetch some of it, which brought ten or twelve branches of it, and therewithal! shewed the way how to use it, and that is thus, to take the barke and leaves of the sayd tree, and boile them together, then to drinke of the sayd decoction every other day, and to put the dregs of it upon his legs that is sicke: moreover, they told us, that the vertue of that tree was, to heale any other disease: the tree is in their language called Ameda or Hanneda, this is thought to be the Sassafras tree. Our Captain presently caused some of that drink to be made for his men to drink of it, but there was none durst tast of it, except one or two, who ventured the drinking of it, only to tast & prove it: the other seeing that did the like, and presently recovered their health, and were delivered of that sicke-nes, & what other disease soever, in such sorte, that there were some had bene diseased and troubled with the French Pockes foure or five yeres, and with this drinke were cleane healed. After this medicine was found and proved to be true, there was such strife about it, who should be first to take of it, that they were ready to kill one another, so that a tree as big as any Oake in France was spoiled and lopped bare, and occupied all in five or sixe daies, and it wrought so wel, that if all the phisicians of Mountpelier and Lovaine had bene there with all the drugs of Alexan-{n}250{n}dria, they would not have done so much in one yere, as that tree did in sixe dayes, for it did so prevaile, that as many as used of it, by the grace of God recovered their health.{n}How the Lord Donnacona accompanied with Taignoagny and divers others, faining that they would goe to hunt Stags, and Deere, taried out two moneths, and at their returne brought a great multitude of people with them, that we were not wont to see before.{n}A.D.{n}*535-{n}Chap. 16.{n}WHile that disease lasted in our ships, the lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, with many others went from home, faining that they would goe to catch Stags and Deere, which are in their tongue called Ajounesta, and Asquenoudo, because the yce and snow was not so broken along the river that they could sayle: it was told us of Domagaia and others, that they would stay out but a fortnight, & we beleeved it, but they stayed above two moneths, which made us mistrust that they had bene gone to raise the countrey to come against us, and do us some displeasure, we seeing our selves so weake & faint. Albeit we had used such diligence and policie in our Fort, that if all the power of the countrey had bene about it, they could have done nothing but looke upon us: and whilest they were foorth, many of the people came dayly to our ships, and brought us fresh meat, as Stags, Deere, fishes, with divers other things, but held them at such an excessive price, that rather then they would sell them any thing cheape, many times they would carie them backe againe, because that yere the Winter was very long, and they Alongwmter. had some scarcity and neede of them.{n}[How Donnacona 25x{n}How Donnacona came to Stadacona againe with a great number of people, and because he would not come to visit our Captaine, fained himself to be sore sicke, which he did only to have the Captaine come see him.{n}Chap. 17.{n}ON the one and twentieth day of April Domagaia came to the shore side, accompanied with divers lusty and strong men, such as we were not wont to see, and tolde us that their lord Donnacona would the next day come and see us, and bring great store of Deeres flesh, and other things with him. The next day he came and brought a great number of men to Stadacona, to what end, and for what cause wee knew not, but (as the proverb sayth) he that takes heede and shields himselfe from all men, may hap to scape from some: for we had need to looke about us, considering how in number we were diminished, and in strength greatly weakned, both by reason of our sicknesse and also of the number that were dead, so that we were constrained to leave one of our ships in the Port of the Holy Crosse. Our Captaine was warned of their comming, and how they had brought a great number of men with them, for Domagaia came to tell it us, and durst not passe the river that was betwixt Stadacona and us, as he was wont to doe, whereupon we mistrusted some treason. Our Captaine seeing this, sent one of his servants to them, accompanied with John Poulet being best beloved of those people, to see who were there, and what they did. The sayd Poulet & the other fained themselves onely to be come to visit Donnacona, & bring him certaine presents, because they had beene together a good while in the sayd Donnaconas Towne. So soone as he heard of their comming, he got himselfe to bed, faining to bee very sicke. That done, they went to Taignoagny his house to see him, and wheresoever they went, they saw so many people, that in a maner one{n}252{n}could not stirre for another, and such men as they were never wont to see. Taignoagny would not permit our men to enter into any other houses, but still kept them company, and brought them halfe way to their ships, and tolde them that if it would please our captaine to shew him so much favour as to take a Lord of the Countrey, whose name was Agonna, of whom hee had received some displeasure, and carie him with him into France, he should therefore for ever be bound unto him, and would doe for him whatsoever hee would command him, and bade the servant come againe the next day, and bring an answere. Our Captain being advertised of so many people that were there, not knowing to what end, purposed to play a prettie prancke, that is to say, to take their Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, Domagaia, and some more of the chiefest of them prisoners, in so much as before hee had purposed, to bring them into France, to shew unto our King what he had seene in those Westerne parts, and marvels of the world, for that Donnacona had told us, that he had bene in the Countrey of Saguenay, in which are infinite Rubies, Gold, and other riches, and Rubles, Gold, that there are white men, who clothe themselves with woollen cloth even as we doe in France. Moreover he riches in reported, that hee had bene in another countrey of a Saguenay. people called Picquemians, and other strange people. A people called The sayd Lord was an olde man, and even from his Picquemians. childehood had never left off nor ceased from travailing into strange Countreys, as well by water and rivers, as by lande. The sayd Poulet, and the other having tolde our Captaine their Embassage, and shewed him what Taignoagny his will was, the next day he sent his servant againe to bid Taignoagny come and see him, and shewe what hee should, for he should be very well entertained, and also part of his will should be accomplished. Taignoagny sent him word, that the next day hee would come and bring the Lord Donnacona with him, and him that had so offended him, which hee did not, but stayed two dayes, in which time none came from Stadacona to{n}253{n}our shippes, as they were wont to doe, but rather fled from us, as if we would have slaine them, so that then wee plainely perceived their knavery.{n}The towne of But because they understood, that those of Sidatin did ^tdatm. frequent our company, and that we had forsaken the bottome of a ship which we would leave, to have the olde nailes out of it, the third day following they came from Stadacona, and most of them without difficulty did passe from one side of the river to the other with small Skiffes: but Donnacona would not come over: Taignoagny, and Domagaia stood talking together above an houre before they would come over, at last they came to speake with our Captaine. There Taignoagny prayed him that hee would cause the foresayd man to be taken and caried into France. Our Captaine refused to doe it, saying, that his King had forbidden him to bring any man or woman into France, onely that he might bring two or three yong boyes to learne the language, but that he would willingly cary him to Newfoundland, and there leave him in an Island. Our Captaine spake this, onely to assure them, that they should bring Donnacona with them, whom they had left on the other side: which wordes, when Taignoagny heard, hee was very glad, thinking hee should never returne into France againe, and therefore promised to come the next day, which was the day of the Holy Crosse, and to bring Donnacona and all the people with him.{n} How that upon Holyrood day our Captaine caused a Crosse to be set up in our Forte: and how the Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, Domagaia, and others of their company came: and of the taking of the sayd Lord.{n}Chap. 18.{n}THe third of May being Holyroode day, our Captaine for the solem nitie of the day, caused a goodly fayre crosse of 35 foote in height to bee set up, under the crosset of which hee caused a shield to be hanged, 254{n}wherein were the Armes of France, and over them was written in antique letters, Franciscus primus Dei gratia Francorum Rex regnat. And upon that day about noone, there came a great number of the people of Stadacona, men, women, and children, who told us that their Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia were comming, whereof we were very glad, hoping to retaine them. About two of the clocke in the afternoone they came, & being come neere our ships, our Captaine went to salute Donnacona, who also shewed him a mery countenance, albeit very fearefully his eyes were still bent toward the wood. Shortly after came Taignoagny, who bade Donnacona that he should not enter into our Forte, and therefore fire was brought forth by one of our men, Sc kindled where their Lord was. Our Captaine prayed him to come into our ships to eate & drinke as hee was wont to do, and also Taignoagny, who promised, that after a while he would come, and so they did, & entred into our ships: but first it was told our Captain by Domagaia that Taignoagny had spoken ill of him, & that he had bid Donnacona hee should not come aboord our ships. Our Captaine perceiving that, came out of the Forte, and saw that onely by Taignoagny his warning the women ran away, and none but men stayed in great number, wherefore he straight commanded his men to lay hold on Donnacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, & Donnacona, two more of the chiefest whom he pointed unto : then Taignoagny, he commanded them to make the other to retire. Presently after, the said lord entred into the Fort with the Captaine, but by & by Taignoagny came to make him come out againe. Our Captaine seeing that there was no other remedy, began to call unto them to take them, at whose crie and voice all his men came forth, and tooke the sayd Lord with the others, whom they had appointed to take. The Canadians seeing their Lord taken, began to run away, even as sheepe before the woolfe, some crossing over the river, some through the woods, each one seeking for his owne advantage. That{n}255{n}Foure and twenty chains of Esurgny{n}done, we retired our selves, and laid up the prisoners under good guard and safety.{n}How the said Canadians the night following came before our ships to seeke their men, Crying and howling all night like Woolves : of the talke and conclusion they agreed upon the next day: and of the gifts which they gave our Captaine.{n}Chap. 19.{n}THe night following they came before our ships, (the river being betwixt us) striking their breasts, and crying and howling like woolves, still calling Agouhanna, thinking to speake with him, which our Captaine for that time would not permit, neither all the next day till noone, whereupon they made signes unto us, that we had hanged or killed him. About noone, there came as great a number in a cluster, as ever we saw, who went to hide themselves in the Forest, except some, who with a loud voice would call and crie to Donnacona to speake unto them. Our Captaine then commanded Donnacona to be brought up on high to speake unto them, and bade him be merrie, for after he had spoken, and shewed unto the King of France what hee had seene in Saguenay and other countreys, after ten or twelve moneths, he should returne againe, and that the King of France would give him great rewards, whereat Donnacona was very glad, and speaking to the others, told it them, who in token of joy, gave out three great cryes, and then Donnacona and his people had great talke together, which for want of interpreters, cannot be described. Our Captaine bade Donnacona that hee should cause them to come to the other side of the river, to the end they might better talke together without any feare, & that he should assure them: which Donnacona did, and there came a boate full of the chiefest of them to the ships, and there anew began to talke together, giving great praise to our captaine, and gave him a present of foure and twenty chaines of Esurgny, for that is the greatest 256{n}and preciousest riches they have in this world, for they esteeme more of that, then of any gold or silver. After they had long talked together, and that their Lord sawe that there was no remedy to avoide his going into France, hee commanded his people the next day, to bring him some victuals to serve him by the way. Our Captaine gave Donnacona, as a great present, two Frying pannes of copper, eight Hatchets, and other small trifles, as Knives, and Beades, whereof hee seemed to be very glad, who sent them to his wives and children. Likewise, he gave to them that came to speake with Donacona, they thanked him greatly for them, and then went to their lodgings.{n}How the next day, being the fift of May, the sayd people came againe to speake unto their Lord, and how foure women came to the shore to bring him victuals.{n}Chap. 20.{n}UPon the fifth of May, very early in the morning, a great number of the sayd people came againe to speake unto their Lord, and sent a Boate, which in their tongue they call Casnoni, wherein were onely foure women, without any man, for feare their men should be retained.{n}These women brought great store of victuals, as great Millet, which is their corne that they live withall, flesh, fish, and other things, after their fashion.{n}These women being come to our shippes, our Captaine did very friendly entertaine them. Then Donnacona prayed our Captaine to tell those women that hee should come againe after ten or twelve moneths, and bring Donnacona to Canada with him: this hee sayd onely to appease them, which our captaine did: wherefore the women, as well by words as signes, seemed to be very glad, giving our Captaine thanks, and told him, if he came againe, and brought Donnacona with him, they would give him many things: in signe whereof, each one gave our Captaine a chaine of Esurgny, and then passed vin	257	R{n}Coudres.{n}A knife of red copper brought from Saguenay.{n}The Isle of Hares.{n}to the other side of the river againe, where stood all the people of Stadacona, who taking all leave of their Lord, went home againe. On Saturday following, being the sixt of the moneth, we departed out of the sayd Port of Santa Croix, and came to harborough a little beneath the Island of Orleans, about twelve leagues from the Port of the Holy Crosse, and upon Sonday we came to the Island of Filberds, where wee stayed untill the sixteenth of that moneth, till the fiercenesse of the waters were past, which at that time ranne too swift a course, and were too dangerous to come downe along the river, and therefore we stayed till faire weather came. In the meane while many of Donnaconas subjects came from the river of Saguenay to him, but being by Domagaia advertised, that their Lord was taken to bee caryed into France, they were all amazed: yet for all that they would not leave to come to our ships, to speake to Donnacona, who told them that after twelve moneths he should come againe, and that he was very well used by the Captaine, Gentlemen, and Mariners. Which when they heard, they greatly thanked our Captaine and gave their Lord three bundles of Beavers, and sea Woolves skinnes, with a great knife of red copper that commeth from Saguenay, and other things. They gave also to our Captaine a chayne of Esurgny, for which our Captaine gave them ten or twelve Hatchets, and they gave him hearty thankes, and were very well contented. The next day, being the sixteenth of May, we hoysed sayle, and came from the said Island of Filberds, to another about fifteene leagues from it, which is about five leagues in length, and there, to the end we might take some rest the night following, we stayed that day, in hope the next day we might passe and avoide the dangers of the river of Saguenay, which are great. That evening we went aland and found great store of Hares, of which we tooke a great many, and therefore we called it The Island of Hares: in the night there arose a contrary winde, with such stormes and tempest, that wee were constrained to 258{n}returne to the Island of Filberds againe, from whence wee were come, because there was none other passage among the sayde Islandes, and there we stayed till the one and twentieth of that moneth, till faire weather and good winde came againe: and then wee sayled againe, and that so prosperously, that we passed to Honguedo, which passage untill that time had not bene discovered: wee caused our ships to course athwart Cape Prat which is the beginning of the Port of Chaleur: and because the winde was good and convenient, we sayled all day and all night without staying, and the next day we came to the middle of Brions Island, which we were not minded lsle °f to doe, to the end wee might shorten our way. These Brion-two lands lie Northwest, and Southeast, and are about fiftie leagues one from another. The sayd Island is in latitude 47 degrees and a halfe. Upon Thursday being the twenty sixe of the moneth, and the feast of the Ascension of our Lord, we coasted over to a land and shallow of lowe sandes, which are about eight leagues Southwest from Brions Island, above which are large Champaines, full of trees and also an enclosed sea, whereas we could neither see, nor perceive any gappe or way to enter thereinto. On Friday following, being the 27 of the moneth, because the wind did change on the coast, we came to Brions Island againe, where wee stayed till the beginning of June, and toward the Southeast of this Island, wee sawe a lande, seeming unto us as an Island, we coasted it about two leagues and a halfe, and{n}by the way we had notice of three other high Islands, lying  toward the Sands: after wee had knowen these things we returned to the Cape of the sayd land, which doeth devide it selfe into two or three very high Capes: the waters there are very deepe, and the flood of the sea runneth so swift, that it cannot possibly be swifter. That day we came to Cape Loreine, which is in forty seven degrees and a halfe toward the South: on which cape there is a low land, and it seemeth that there is some entrance of a river, but there is no haven of any worth.{n}259{n}Above these lands we saw another cape toward the South, we named it Saint Paules Cape, it is at 47 degrees and a quarter.{n}The Sonday following, being the fourth of June, and Whitsonday, wee had notice of the coaste lying Eastsoutheast, distant from the Newfoundland about two and twenty leagues: and because the wind was against us, wee went to a Haven, which wee named S. Spiritus Porte, where we stayed till Tewesday that we departed thence, sayling along that coast until! wee came to Saint Peters Islands. Wee found along the sayd coast many very dangerous Islands and shelves, which lye all in the way Eastsoutheast and Westnorthwest, about three and twenty leagues into the sea. Whilest we were in the sayd Saint Peters Islands we met with many ships of France and of Britaine, wee stayed there from Saint Barnabas day, being the eleventh of the moneth, until the sixteenth that we departed thence & came to Cape Rase, and entred into a Port called Rognoso, where wee tooke in fresh water, and wood to passe the sea: there wee left one of our boates. Then upon Monday, being the nineteenth of June, we went from that Port, and with such good and prosperous weather we sailed along the sea, in such sorte, that upon the sixt of July 1536 we came to the Porte of S. Malo, by the grace of God, to whom we pray, here ending our Navigation, that of his infinite mercy he will grant us his grace and favour, and in the end bring us to the place of everlasting felicitie. Amen.{n}Here followeth the language of the countrey, and kingdomes of Hochelaga and Canada, of{n}us called New France: But first the names				{n}of their numbers.				{n}Secada	1		Indahir	6{n}Tigneni	2		Aiaga	7{n}Hasche	3		Addigue	8{n}Hannaion	4		Madellon	9{n}Oviscon	S	260	Assem	10{n}Here follow the names of the chiefest partes of man,					{n}and other words necessary to be knowen.					{n}the Head	aggonzi		God	cudragny	{n}the Browe the Eyes	hegueniascon higata		give me "| some drink 1	quazahoaquea	{n}the Eares	abontascon		give me to |	[ f quaso hoa	{n}the Mouth	esahe		breakfast j	I [quascaboa	{n}the Teeth	esgongay		give me my ]	1 J quaza hoa | J quatfriam	{n}the Tongue osnache			supper J		{n}the Throat	a	gonhon	let us goe ]	1 J casigno ag-[ ( nydahoa	{n}the Beard	hebelim		to bed j		{n}the Face	h	tegouascon	a Man	aguehum	{n}the Haires	aganiscon		a woman	agruaste	{n}the Armes	ajayascon		a Boy	addegesta	{n}the Flanckes aissonne			a Wench	agniaquesta	{n}theStomacke aggruascon			a Child	exiasta	{n}the Bellie	eschehenda		a Gowne	cabata	{n}the Thighes <		[ hetnegradas-l con	a Dublet Hosen	caioza hemondoha	{n}the Knees		1 agochine-[ godascon	Shooes a Shirt	atha amgoua	{n}the Legges		[agouguene-I honde	a Cappe Corne	castrua osizi	{n}the Feete	onchidascon		Bread	carraconny	{n}the Hands	aignoascon		Water	ame	{n}the Fingers	agenoga		Flesh	quahouascon	{n}the Nailes	a	gedascon	Reisins	queion	{n}a Mans 1			Damsons	honnesta	{n}member 1	> ainoascon		Figges	absconda	{n}a Womans 1			Grapes	ozoba	{n}member j	> castaigne		Nuttes	quahoya	{n}an Eele	esgueny		a Hen	sahomgahoa	{n}a Snaile	L	indeguezi	a Lamprey	zisto	{n}a Tortois	heuleuxima		a Salmon	ondacon	{n}Woods	conda		a Whale	ainne honne	{n}leaves of ]	I k	ioga	a Goose	sadeguenda	{n}Trees	J	r		a Streete 6i	adde	{n}		2			{n}Cucumber 1 seede J to Morrowe the Heaven the Earth the Sunne the Moone the Starres the Winde{n}good morrow aignag	{n}let us go to play	. come & J speak with me	J	1 1 casigno j (caudy I J assigniquad- [ (dadia{n}looke upon me	1	> quagathoma{n}hold your 1 peace	J let us go | with ye boat	J	> aista 1 f casigno cas-j (novy{n}give me a ] knife	j	1 (buazahca ag- 1 (oheda{n}a Hatchet a Bow	adogne ahenca{n}casconda{n}achide quenhia damga ysmay assomaha stagnehoham cohoha{n}quahetan H Casigno{n}donnascat aionnesta asquenondo Sourhanda{n}agaya Canada{n}agogasy coda{n}cohena agacha honnesca{n}camsa athau odazani azista{n}quea canoca sahe adhotathny addathy adanahoe addagrim adhoasseve{n}a Darte let us goe a hunting a Stagge a Sheepe a Hare a Dogge a Towne the Sea the waves of the sea an Island an Hill the yce Snow Colde Hotte Fier Smoke a House Beanes Cinnamom my Father my Mother my Brother my Sister{n}They of Canada say, that it is a moneths sayling to goe to a lande where Cinnamom and Cloves are gathered.{n}Here endeth the Relation of James Cartiers discovery and Navigation toi the Newfoundlands, by him named New France.{n}.