The Preface of M. Rene Laudonniere.
Here are two things, which according to mine opinion have bene the principali causes, in consideration whereof aswell they of ancient times, as those of our age have bene induced to travell into farre and remote regions. The first hath beene the natural desire which wee have
to search out the commodities to live happily, plentifully, and at ease: be it whither one abandon his natural Countrey altogether to dwell in a better, or bee it that men make voyages thither, there to search out and bring from thence such things as are there to be found, and are in greatest estimation and in most request in our Countreys. The second cause hath bene the multitude of people too fruitefull in generation, which being no longer able to dwell in their native soyles, have entred upon their neighbours limites, and oftentimes passing further have pearced even unto the uttermost regions. After this sort the North climate, a fruitfull father of so many nations hath oftentimes sent foorth this way and that way his valiant people, and by this meane hath peopled infinite Countreys: so that most of the nations of Europe drawe their originali from these parts. Contrariwise the more Southerne regions, because they bee too barren by reason of their insupportable heate which raigneth in them, neede not any such sending forth of their inhabitants, and have bene oftentimes constrained to receive other people more often by force of armes then willingly. All Afrike, Spaine, and Italie can also testifie the same, which never so abounded with people that they had neede to send them abroad to inhabite elsewhere: as on the contrary Scythia, Norway, Gotland, and France have done. The posterity of which nations remaineth yet not only in Italy, Spaine & Afrike, but also in fruitful and faire Asia. Neverthelesse I find 446
that the Romans proceeding further, or rather adding unto these two chiefe causes aforesaid, (as being most curious to plant not onely their ensignes and victories, but also their lawes, customes, & religion in those provinces which they had conquered by force of armes) have oftentimes by the decree of their soveraigne Senate Planting of sent forth inhabitants, which they called Colonies (think- Colomesing by this way to make their name immortali) even to the unfurnishing of their own Countrey of the forces which should have preserved the same in her perfection: a thing which hindred them much more, then advanced them to the possession of the universal monarchy, where-unto their intention did aspire. For it came to passe that their Colonies here and there being miserably sacked by strange people did utterly ruin and overthrow their Empire. The brinks of the river of Rhene are yet red, those of Danubius are no lesse bloody, and our France became fat with their blood which they lost. These are the effects and rewards of al such as being pricked forward with this Romane and tyrannical ambition will goe about thus to subdue strange people: effects, I say, contrary to the profit which those shall receive, which onely are affectioned to the common benefite, that is to say, to the general policie of all men, and endevour to unite them one with another as well by trafficke and civill conversations, as also by military vertues, and force of When force of armes, when as the Savages will not yeeld unto their a™s is t0 endevours so much tending unto their profit.	'
For this cause princes have sent forth out of their Dominions certaine men of good activity to plant themselves in strange Countreys, their to make their profite to bring the Countrey to civilitie, and if it might be, to reduce the inhabitants to the true knowledge of our God: an end so much more commendable, as it is farre from all tyrannical! and cruell governement: and so they have alwayes thrived in their enterprises, and by little and little gained the heartes of them which they have conquered or wonne unto them by any meanes. Hereof
447
wee may gather that sometimes it is good, yea very expedient to send forth men to discover the pleasure Twoconditions an(j commoditie of strange Countreys: But so, that the n^uests*? Countrey out of which these companies are to passe Countreys remaine not weakned, nor deprived of her forces: And newly dis- againe in such sort that the company sent forth be of covered. so just & sufficient number, that it may not be defeited ^°ta‘ by strangers, which every foote endevour nothing else but to surprise the same upon the sudden. As within these few daies past the French have proved to my great griefe, being able by no means possible to withstand the same, considering that the elements, men, and all the favours which might be hoped for of a faithfull and Christian alliance fought against us: which thing I purpose to discover in this present historic with so evident trueth, that the Kings Majesty my soveraigne prince shall in part be satisfied of the diligence which I have used in his service, and mine adversaries shall find themselves so discovered in their false reports, that they shall have no place of refuge. But before I begin, I will briefly set downe the situation and description of the land whereunto we have sailed and where we have inhabited from the yeere 1561. unto sixty five, to the ende that those things may the more easily be borne away, which I meane to describe in this discourse.
.