Laudonnieres A JY friends, you know the cause why our king sent 'muthtw ^oul us unto countrey; you know that he is our jurs ’ natural Prince, whom we are bound to obey according to the commandement of God, in such sort, that we ought neither to spare our goods nor lives to do those things that concerne his service: ye know, or at least you cannot be ignorant, that besides this general and natural obligation, you have this also joyned thereunto, that in receiving of him reasonable pay and wages, you are bound to follow those whom he hath established over you to be your governours, and to command you in his name, having for this purpose given him an oth of fidelitie, which you cannot by any meanes revoke for any faire apparance which you have to doe the contrary: for this is reason, that seeing you live upon his charges on this condition, (this is reason I say) that you should be faithfull unto him. Notwithstanding you have had more regard unto your unbridled affections then unto vertue, which invited you to the observance of your oth, in such sort that being become contemners of all honesty, you have passed your bonds, and thought that all things were lawfull for you. Whereupon it is fallen out, that while you thought to escape the justice of men, you could not avoid the judgement of God, which as a thing by no meanes to be avoided hath led you, and in spight of you hath made you to arrive in this place, to make you confesse 46{n}how true his judgements are, and that he never suffereth so foule a fault to escape unpunished.{n}After that I had used unto them these or the like speeches, following that which wee had agreed upon in councell, in respect of the crimes which they had committed, aswel against the kings Majesty as against mee which was their Captaine, I commanded that they should be hanged. Seeing therefore that there was no starting hole, nor meanes at all to save themselves from this arrest, they tooke themselves unto their prayers: yet one of the foure, thinking to raise a mutiny among my souldiers, sayd thus unto them: What, brethren and companions, will you suffer us to die so shamefully ? And taking the word out of his mouth, I sayd unto him, that they were not companions of authours of sedition and rebels unto the kings service. Heereupon the souldiers besought me not to hang them, but rather let them be shot thorow, & then afterward, if I thought good, their bodies might be hanged upon certaine gibbets along the havens mouth: which I caused presently to be put in execution. Loe here what was the end of my mutinous souldiers, without which I had alwayes lived peaceably, and enjoyed the good desire which I had to make an happy and quiet voyage. But because 1 have spoken of nothing but their accidentes and adventures which happened unto them after their departure, without making any mention of our fort, I will returne to the matters from which I digressed, to declare that which fell out after their departure. First I began to consider to the end I might confirme and make my selfe more constant in mine affliction, that these murmurers could not ground their sedition upon want of victuals : for from the time of our arrivall, every souldier dayly unto this day, and besides untill the eight and twentieth of February, had a loafe of bread weighing two and twenty ounces. Againe I recounted with my selfe that all new conquests by sea or by land are ordinarily troubled with rebellions, which are{n}A.D.{n}1565.{n}The sentence of death.{n}Execution.{n} The continuation of the history.{n}New conquests subject to re-{n}.	,	. r „ .	r , -	- bellionsand{n}easie to be raised, aswel! in respect or the distance of mutinies.{n}place, as in respect of the hope that the souldiers have to make their profit, as we may be well informed both by ancient histories and also by the troubles which lately happened unto Christopher Columbus, after his first discovery, to Francis Pizarro, & Diego de Almagro in Peru, & to Fernando Cortes. An hundred thousand other things came unto my minde, to incourage and con-firme me. My Lieutenant Ottigny, and my Sergeant of my band came to seeke me in the ship, where I was prisoner, and caried me from thence in a barke assoone Laudonniere as our rebels were departed. After I was come unto setteth things the fort, I caused all my company that remained, to be ^ismurne^ut assembled in the midst of the place before the Corps de of prison to the garde, and declared unto them the faults which they fort. that had forsaken us had committed, praying them to beare them in memory, to beare witnesse thereof when need should require. Foorthwith I ordained new Captaines to command the troups; and prescribed them an order, according whereunto they were to governe themselves from thence forward, and to enter into their watch : for the greatest part of the souldiers, of whom I had the best opinion, were gone away with them. My declaration ended, they promised mee all with one accord to obey mee most humbly, and to doe whatsoever I should command them, though it were to die at my feet for the Kings service ; wherein assuredly they never after failed : so that I dare say, after the departure of my mutinous companions I was as well obeyed as ever was Captaine in place where he commanded. The next day after my returne unto the fort, I assembled my men together againe, to declare unto them that our fort was not yet finished, and that it was needfull that all of us should put thereto our helping hands, to assure our selves against the Indians : wherein having willingly agreed unto mee, they raised _ it all with turfes from the gate unto the river which is the Westside on the West side- This done, I set my Carpenters on of the fort.	worke to make another barke of the same bignesse that{n}Fcuiddus mtadcus num Laudzonerus aide s' Florida, repnorunt conprendzc ^dmerica quar nunc (Jduid minimum cuius Francis dirt ate ydbadtumy. ' Ferfida quern si non sociorum turpiter ho's'ti CEdcdio prodp^ec (cuius tamen, omnibus vltis , Flapsus maxibus) quas, qualia., quantapatraflem t{n}RENE LAUDONNIERE{n}the others were of: I commanded the Sawyers that they should prepare plancks, the Smithes to prepare yron and nailes, and certaine others to make coales : so that the barke was finished in eighteene dayes. Afterward I made another lesser then the first, the better to discover up the river. In this meane space the Indians visited me, and brought me dayly certaine presents, as Fish, Deere, Turki-cocks, Leopards, little Beares, and other things according to the place of their habitation. I recompensed them with certaine Hatchets, Knives, Beads of glasse, Combes, and Looking-glasses. Two Indians came unto me one day to salute me on the behalfe of their King, whose name was Marracou, KingMarra-dwelling from the place of our fort some forty leagues cou.{n}toward the South, and tolde mee that there was one in{n}the house of King Onathaqua which was called Barbu King Onatha-or the bearded man, and in the house of King 9^ Mathiaca another man whose name they knew not, which was not of their nation : whereupon I conceived ' that these might be some Christians. Wherefore I sent to all the kings my neighbours to pray them, that if there were any Christian dwelling in their countreys, they would finde meanes that he might be brought unto mee, and that I would make them double recompense.{n}They which love rewards, tooke so much paine, that Twa Span-the two men, whereof we have spoken, were brought yards brought unto the fort unto me. They were naked, their haire long unto their hammes as the use to do, and were Spanyards borne, yet accustomed to the fashion of the countrey the first sight they found our maner of strange.	After that I had questioned of{n}matters with them, I caused them to be apparelled, and to cut their haire ; which they would not loose, but lapped it up in a linnen cloth, saying that they would cary it into their countrey to be a testimony of the misery that they had indured in the Indies. In the haire of one of them was found a little gold hidden, to{n}ix	49	D{n}unto Laudonniere by the Savages.{n}wearing Savages so well{n}that at apparell certaine{n}Calos a place upon ye Flats called The Martyres neere the Cape of Florida.{n}The King of Calos.{n}Great quanti-tie ofgolde and silver.{n}Plates of g>ld as broad as a savicer.{n}the value of five and twenty crownes, which he gave unto me. And examining them of the places where they had bene, and how they came thither, they answered me that fifteene yeeres past, three shippes, in one of which they were, were cast away over against a place named Calos upon the Flats which are called The Martyres, and that the king of Calos recovered the greatest part of the riches which were in the sayd shippes, travelling in such sort that the greatest part of the people was saved, and many women; among which number there were three or foure women married, remaining there yet, and their children also, with this king of Calos. I desired to learne what this king was. They answered me, that he was the goodliest and the tallest Indian of the country, a mighty man, a warrier, and having many subjects under his obedience. They tolde me moreover, that he had great store of golde and silver, so farre foorth that in a certaine village he had a pit full thereof, which was at the least as high as a man, and as large as a tunne : all which wealth the Spanyards fully perswaded themselves that they could cause me to recover, if I were able to march thither with an hundred shot, besides that which I might get of the common people of the countrey, which had also great store thereof. They further also advertised me, that the women going to dance, did weare about their girdles plates of golde as broad as a sawcer, and in such number ; that the weight did hinder them to dance at their ease ; and that the men ware the like also. The greatest part of these riches was had, as they sayd, out of the Spanish shippes, which commonly were cast away in this straight; and the rest by the traffique which this king of Calos had with the other kings of the countrey : Finally, that he was had in great reverence of his subjects ; and that hee made them beleeve that his sorceries and charmes were the causes that made the earth bring foorth her fruit: and that hee might the easier perswade them that it was so, he retired himselfe once or twise a yeere to a certaine{n}house, accompanied with two or three of his most familiar friends, where hee used certaine inchantments; and if any man intruded himselfe to goe to see what they did in this place, the king immediatly caused him to be put to death. Moreover, they tolde me, that One of these every yeere in the time of harvest^ this Savage king Spanyards sacrificed one man, which was kept expresly for this n^^at purpose, and taken out of the number of the Spanyards Qomes-which by tempest were cast away upon that coast.{n}One of these two declared unto me, that hee had served him a long time for a messenger; and that often times by his commandement he had visited a king named Oathcaqua, distant from Calos foure or King Oath-five dayes journey, which alwayes remained his faithfull friend : but that in the midway there was an Island Houat ca-situate in a great lake of fresh water, named Sarrope, Sampe an about five leagues in bignesse, abounding with many Island. sorts of fruits, specially in Dates, which growe on the Abundance of Palme trees, whereof they make a woonderfull traffique; Dates.{n}yet not so great as of a kinde of root, whereof they A root of great make a kinde of meale, so good to make bread of, t0 that it is unpossible to eate better, and that for fifteene brea leagues about, all the countrey is fed therewith : which is the cause that the inhabitants of the Isle gaine of their neighbours great wealth and profit: for they will not depart with this root without they be well payed for it. Besides that, they are taken for the most warlike men of all that countrey, as they made good proofe when the king of Calos, having made alliance with Oathcaqua, was deprived of Oathcaquaes daughter, which he had promised to him in manage. He tolde me the whole matter in this sort: As Oathcaqua well accompanied with his people caried one of his daughters, exceeding beautifull, according to the colour of the countrey, unto king Calos, to give her unto him for his wife, the inhabitants of this Isle advertised of the matter, layed an ambush for him in a place where he should passe, and so behaved themselves, that Oathcaqua{n}The g-eatest victory among the Floridians.{n}The situation of Calos.{n}Cannaveral in 28 degrees.{n}The Floridians great traitours and dissemblers.{n}was discomfited, the betrothed yoong spouse taken, and all the damosels that accompanied her ; which they caried unto their Isle ; which thing in all the Indians countrey they esteeme to be the greatest victory : for afterward they marry these virgins, and love them above all measure. The Spanyard that made this relation, tolde mee that after this defeat he went to dwell with Oathca-qua, and had bene with him full eight yeeres, even untill the time that he was sent unto me. The place of Calos is situate upon a river which is beyond the Cape of Florida, forty or fifty leagues towards the Southwest: and the dwelling of Oathcaqua is on this side the Cape toward the North, in a place which we call in the Chart Cannaveral, which is in 28 degrees.{n}About the five and twentieth of January Paracoussy Satourioua my neighbour sent me certaine presents by two of his subjects, to perswade me to joyne with him, and to make warre upon Ouae Utina which was my friend : and further besought me to retire certaine of my men which were with Utina ; for whom if it had not bene, he had often times set upon him, and defeited him. He besought me heerein by divers other kings his allies, which for three weekes or a moneths space sent messengers unto mee to this end and purpose: but I would not grant unto them that they should make warre upon him ; yea rather contrariwise I endevoured to make them friends ; wherein they condescended unto me, so farre foorth that they were content to allow of any thing that I would set downe : whereupon the two Spanyards which of long time knew well the nature of the Indians, warned me that in any case I should not trust unto them, because that when they shewed good countenance and the best cheere unto men, then was the time that they would surprise and betray them ; and that of their nature they were the greatest traitours and most deepe dissemblers of the world. Besides I never trusted them but upon good ground, as one that had discovered a thousand of their crafts and subtilties, aswell{n}by experience as by reading of the histories of late yeres. Our two barks were not so soone finished, but I sent Captaine Vasseur to discover along the coast lying toward the North, and commanded him to saile unto a river, the king whereof was called Audusta, which was lord of that place, where those of the yere 1562 inhabited. I sent him two sutes of apparell, with certaine hatchets, knives, and other small trifles, the better to insinuate my  selfe into his friendship. And the better to win him, I sent in the barke with captaine Vasseur a souldier called Aimon, which was one of them which returned home in the first voyage, hoping that king Audusta might remember him. But before they were imbarked{n}I commanded them to make inquiry what was become of another called Rouffi, which remained alone in those parts when Nicolas Masson and those of the first voyage imbarked themselves to returne into France. They understood at their arrivall there, that a barke passing that way had caried away the same souldier: and afterward I knew for a certainty that they were Spaniards which had caried him to Havana. The king Audusta sent me backe my barke full of mill, with a certaine quantity of beanes, two stags, some skinnes painted after their maner, and certaine pearles of small value, because they were burnt: and sent me word that if I would dwel in his quarters, he would give me a great countrey: and that after he had gathered his mill, he would spare me as much as I would have. In the meane while there came unto our fort a flocke of stocke-doves in so great number, and that for the space of seven weeks together, that every day wee killed with harquebush shot two hundred in the woods about our fort. After that Captaine Vasseur{n}'Nicolas Masson otherwise called Nicolas Barre.{n}King A adustas great humanity.{n}Pearles burned.{n}Peter Martyr write th cap. I. decad. 7. that the like flocks of pigeons are in the Isles oj{n}was returned, I caused the two barks to be furnished ikeLucayos.{n}againe with souldiers & mariners, and sent them to cary a present from me unto the widow of king Hiocaia, whose dwelling was distant from our fort about twelve legues Northward. She courteously received our men, sent me backe my barks full of mill and acornes with 53{n}The widow of King Hioa-caia,or Hihou-hacara.{n}certaine baskets full of the leaves of Cassine, wherwith they make their drinke. And the place where this widow dwelleth is the most plentifull of mill that is in This queenes all the coast, and the most pleasant. It is thought that name was Nia the queene is the most beautifull of all the Indians, and Cubacam. of they make most account: yea, and her subjects honour her so much, that almost continually they beare her on their shoulders, and will not suffer her to go on foot. Within a few dayes after the returne of my barks, she sent to visit me by her Hiatiqui, which is as much Thefift voyage to say, as her interpreter. Now while I thought I was up the river furnished with victuals untill the time that our ships of May.	might come out of France (for feare of keeping my{n}people idle) I sent my two barks to discover along the river, and up toward the head thereof, which went so far up that they were thirty leagues good beyond a Mathiaqua. place named Mathiaqua, and there they discovered the The discovery entrance of a lake, upon the one side whereof no land can be seene, according to the report of the Indians, ride °whererf6 which had oftentimes climed on the highest trees in no land can be the countrey to see land, and notwithstanding could not seene. discerne any : which was the cause that my men went no further, but returned backe ; and in comming home The Isle of went to see the Island of Edelano situated in the midst Edelano. of the river, as faire a place as any that may be seene thorow the world : for in the space of some three leagues, that it may conteine in length and bredth, a man may see an exceeding rich countrey, and marvellously peopled. At the comming out of the village of Edelano to go unto the rivers side a man must passe thorow an alley about three hundred paces long and fifty paces broad: on both sides wherof great tres are planted, the boughes An excellent whereof are tied together like an arch, and meet together worke of	so artificially that a man would thinke it were an arbour{n}nature.	made of purpose, as faire I say, as any in all christendome,{n}although it be altogether natural. Our men departing Patica '.	from this P^ace rowed to Eneguape, then to Chilily, from{n}Coya.	thence to Patica, & lastly they came unto Coya: where{n}leaving their barks in a litle creeke of the river with men to guard them, they went to visit Utina, which received them very courteously : and when they departed from his house, he intreated them so earnestly, that sixe of my men remained with him ; of which number there was one gentleman, named Groutaid, which after he had abode there about two moneths, and taken great paines to discover the countrey, with another which I had left a great while there to that intent, came unto me to the fort, and tolde me that he never saw a fairer countrey. Among other things, he reported unto me that he had seene a place named Hostaqua, and that the king thereof was so mighty, that he was able to bring three or foure thousand Savages to the field; with whom if I would joyne and enter into league, we might be able to reduce all the rest of the inhabitants unto our obedience : besides that this king knew the passages unto the mountaine of Apalatci, which the French men desired so greatly to atteine unto, and where the enemy of Hostaqua made his abode ; which was easie to be subdued, if so be wee would enter into league together. This king sent me a plate of a minerail that came out of this mountaine, out of the foote whereof there runneth a streame of golde or copper, as the Savages thinke, out of which they dig up the sand with an hollow and drie cane of reed untill the cane be full; afterward they shake it, and finde that there are many small graines of copper and silver among this sand: which giveth them to understand, that some rich mine must needs be in the mountaine. And because{n}The king of Hostaqua or Oustaca able to bring three or foure thousand Savages to the field.{n}The mountaine of Apalatci.{n}There is a mine of golde or rich coper in the mountaine of Apalatci.{n}the mountaine was not past five or sixe dayes journey from our fort, lying toward the Northwest, I determined assoone as our supply should come out of France, to  remoove our habitation unto some river more toward the North, that I might be nerer thereunto. One of my souldiers whose name was Peter Gamby, which had Peter Gamby remained a long space before in this countrey to learne the languages and traffique with the Indians, at the last The Mlage came to the village of Edelano, where having gotten Edelano.{n}Gold W together a certaine quantity of golde and silver, and silver. purposing to returne unto me, he prayed the king of the village to lend him a canoa (which is a vessel! made of one whole piece of wood, which the Indians use to fish withal, and to row upon the rivers) which this lord of Edelano granted him. 6ut being greedy of the riches which he had, he commanded two Indians, which he had charged to conduct him in the canoa, to murder him & bring him the merchandise and the gold which he had. Which the two traitours villanously executed : for they knockt him on the head with an hatchet, as he was blowing of the fire in the canoa to seethe fish.{n}Utina sendeth The Paracoussy Utina sent certeine dayes afterward, to Pray me tO lend a dozen or fifteene of my shot, to jor is pe. jnvaje ^-g enemy Potanou, and sent me word, that this enemy once vanquished, he would make me passage, yea, and would conduct me unto the mountaines in such sort, that no man should be able to hinder me. Then I assembled my men to demand their advice, as I was A good note, woont to do in all mine enterprises. The greater part was of opinion, that I should do well to send succour unto this Paracoussy, because it would be hard for me to discover any further up into the countrey without his helpe: and that the Spanyards when they were imployed in their conquests, did alwayes enter into alliance with some one king to ruine another. Notwithstanding, because I did alwayes mistrust the Indians, and that the more after the last advertisement that the Spanyards had given me, I doubted lest the small number which Utina demanded might incurre some danger ; wherefore I sent him thirty shot under the charge of my Lieutenant Ottigny, which stayed not above two dayes with Utina, while he prepared victuals for his voyage, which ordinarily and according to the custome of the countrey are caried by women and yoong boyes, and by hermaphrodites.{n}Threehundred Utina setting forward with three hundred of his subjects, Indians. having ech of them their bowe and quiver full of arrowes, caused our thirty shot to be placed in the foreward, and 56{n}1565-made them march all the day, until that the night approching, and having not gone past halfe the way, they were inforced to lie all night in the woods, nere a great lake, and there to incampe themselves: they separated themselves by sixe and sixe, making ech of them a fire about the place where their king lay, for whose guard they ordeined a certeine number of those archers, in whom he put most confidence. Assoone as day was come, the campe of the Indians marched within three leagues of Potanou: there king Utina requested my Lieutenant to grant him foure or five of his men to go and discover the countrey; which departed im-mediatly, and had not gone farre, but they perceived upon a lake, distant about three leagues from the village of A lake three Potanou, three Indians which fished in a canoa. Now leagues distant the custome is that when they fish in this lake, they/^^w‘ have alwayes a company of watchmen, armed with bowes potanou. and arrowes to guard the fishers. Our men being hereof advertised by those of the company, durst not passe any further, for feare of falling into some ambush: wherefore they returned towards Utina, which suddenly sent them backe with a greater company to surprise the fishers, before they might retire and advertise their king Potanou of the comming of his enemies. Which they could not execute so politikely, but that two of them escaped; the third also did the best he could to save himselfe by swimming, in which meane while he was stayed with shot of arrowes, and they drew him starke dead unto the banks side, where our Indians flayed off the skinne of his head, cut off both his armes in the high way, reserving his haire for the triumph, which their king hoped to make for the defeat of his enemy. Utina fearing least Potanou advertised by the fishers which were escaped, should put himselfe in armes to withstand him valiantly, asked counsell of his Jawa, which is asmuch to say in their language as his Magician, whether it were best to goe any further. Then his Magician. Magician made certeine signes, hidious and fearefull to{n}beholde, and used certeine words ; which being ended, he sayd unto his king, that it was not best to passe Potanou accom- any further, and that Potanou accompanied with two panied with thousand Indians at the least stayed in such and such Tndians^ a P^ace ^or to bidde him battell: and besides this, ' that all the sayd Indians were furnished with cords to binde the prisoners which they made full account to take.{n}This relation caused Utina to be unwilling to passe any further: whereupon my Lieutenant being as angry as ever he might be, because hee had taken so great paines without doing of any thing of account, sayd unto him, that hee would never thinke well of him nor of his people, if hee would not hazzard himselfe: and that if he would not doe it, at the least, that he would give him a guide to conduct him and his small company to the The prediction place where the enemies were encamped. Heereupon of the Ma- Utina was ashamed, and seeing the good affection of Monsieur de Ottigny determined to go forward: and ' he failed not to finde his enemies in the very place  which the Magician had named: where the skirmish beganne, which lasted three long houres: wherein without doubt Utina had beene defeated, unlesse our harque-busiers had not borne the burthen and brunt of all the battell, and slaine a great number of the souldiers of Potanou, upon which occasion they were put to flight. Wherewithal! Utina being content for the present, caused his people to retire and returne homeward to the great discontentment of Monsieur de Ottigny, which desired Utina hath 18 nothing more, then to pursue his victorie. After he or 20 ktngt to was Come home to his house he sent messengers to his Vassals. eighteene or twentie villages of other kings his vassals, and summoned them to be present at the feasts and dances which he purposed to celebrate because of his victorie. In the meane while Monsieur de Ottigny refreshed himselfe for two dayes: and then taking his leave of the Paracoussi, and leaving him twelve of his men to see that Potanou, bethinking himselfe of his late losse 58{n}should not come to burne the houses of Utina, he set forward on his way to come unto me unto our Fort, where he up and told me how every thing had passed: and withall that he had promised the twelve souldiers, that he would come backe againe to fetch them. Then the kings my neighbours all enemies to Utina, being advertised of the returne of my Lieutenant, came to visite me with presents and to enquire how things had passed, praying me all to receive them into my favour, and to become enemie to Utina, which notwithstanding I would not grant them for many reasons that mooved me.{n}The Indians are wont to leave their houses and to retire themselves into the woods the space of three moneths, to wit January, February, and March: during which time by no meanes a man can see one Indian. For when they goe on hunting, they make little cottages in the woods, whereunto they retire themselves, living upon that which they take in hunting. This was the cause that during this time, we could get no victuals by their meanes : and had it not beene that I had made good provision thereof, while my men had store, untill the end of Aprill (which was the time when at the uttermost, we hoped to have had succour out of France) I should have beene greatly amazed. This hope was the cause that the souldiers tooke no great care to looke well unto their victuals, although I devided equally among them that which I could get abroad in the countrey, without reserving unto my selfe any more then the least souldier of al the company. The moneth of May approching and no manner of succour come out of France, we fell into extreme want of victuals, constrained to eate the rootes of the earth and certaine sorrell which we found in the fields. For although the Savages were returned by this time unto their villages, yet they succoured us with nothing but certaine fish, without which assuredly wee had perished with famine. Besides they had given us before the greatest part of their maiz and of their beanes for our marchandise. This famine held us from the beginning 59{n}A custome of the Indians to leave their houses for 3 or 4 moneths and to live in the woods.{n}They looke for succour out of France by the end of April at the uttermost.{n}Extreme famine for sixe weekes space.{n}Promise broken.{n}of May untill the middest of June. During which time the poore souldiers and handicraftsmen became as feeble as might be, and being not able to worke did nothing but goe one after another in Centinel unto the clift of an hill, situate very neere unto the Fort, to see if they might discover any French ship. In fine being frustrated of their hope, they assembled altogether, & came to beseech me to take some order that they might returne into France, considering that if we let passe the season to em-barke our selves, we were never like to see our countrey, where it could not be chosen but that some troubles were fallen out, seeing they had broken their promise made unto us, and that no succour was come from thence. Thereupon it was consulted and resolved by all the company, that the barke Breton should be trimmed up, whereof Captaine Vasseur had charge. But because the ship was not bigge enough to receive us all, some thought good to build the Brigandine two deckes higher, which our mutinous souldiers had brought backe, and that 25 men should hazard themselves to passe therein into France. The rest being better advised said that it should be farre better to build a faire shippe upon the keele of the Galiote which I had caused to be made, promising to labour couragiously therupon. Then I enquired of my shipwrights to knowe in what space they could make this shippe readie. They assured the whole company that being furnished with all things necessarie, they would make it readie by the 8. of August. Immediatly I disposed of the time to worke upon it, I gave charge to Monsieur de Ottigny my Lieutenant to cause timber necessary for the finishing of both the vessels to be brought, and to Monsieur de Arlac my Standart-bearer to goe with a barke a league ofif from the Fort to cut downe trees fit to make plankes, and to cause the sawiers which he carried with him to saw them: and to my Sergeant of the company to cause fifteene or sixteene men to labour in making coales: and to Master Hance keeper of the Artillery, & to the gunner to gather{n}1565. store of rosen to bray the vessels: wherein he used such diligence, that in lesse then 3 weekes he gathered 2 hogs- Two hogsheads heads of the same together. There remained now but °frosen-the principal, which was to recover victuals to sustaine us while our worke endured : which I undertooke to doe with ye rest of my company & the Mariners of the ship.{n}To this end I embarked my selfe making up the thirtieth  in my great barke, to make a voyage of forty or fifty leagues, having with us no provision at all of victuals: whereby it may easily be gathered how simply those of our Fort were provided. True it is that certaine souldiers being better husbandes then the rest, and having made some provision of mast, solde a little measure thereof for fifteene and twentie sous unto their companions. During our voyage we lived of nothing else but raspices, of a certaine round graine little and blacke, and of the rootes of palmitos which we got by the river sides: wherein after we had sayled a long time in vaine, I was constrained to returne to the Fort: where the souldiers beginning to be wearie of working, because of the extreme famine which did consume them, assembled themselves and declared unto me, that seeing we could get no victuals of the Indians, it was expedient for the saving of their lives, to seaze upon the person of one of the Kings of the Countrie: assuring themselves that one being taken, the subjects would not suffer our men to want victuals. I made them answere that this enterprise was not rashly to be attempted: But that wee ought to have good regarde unto the consequence that might insue thereof. Hereupon they replyed unto me, that seeing the time was past of our succour from France, & that we were resolved to abandon the Countrie, that there was no danger to constraine the Savages to furnish us with victuals: which for the present T would not grant unto them, but promised them assuredly that I would send to advertise the Indians that they should bring me victuals for exchange of marchandise and apparell: which they also did for the space of certaine daies, during which{n}Pinocke a certaine kinde of fruit as bigge as cheries.{n}they brought of their mast and of their fish: which these Indians being traiterous, & mischievous of nature, and knowing our exceeding strange famine, sold us at so deere a price, that for lesse then nothing they had gotten from us al the rest of our marchandise which remained;. And which was worse, fearing to be forced by us and seeing that they had gotten all from us, they came no neerer to our Fort then the shot of an Harquebuze. Thither they brought their fish in their little boats, to which our poore souldiers were constrained to goe, and oftentimes (as I have seene) to give away the very shirts from their backs to get one fish. If at any time they shewed unto the Savages the excessive price which they tooke, these villaines would answere them roughly & churlishly : if thou make so great account of thy marchandise, eat it, and we will eat our fish : then fell they out a laughing and mocked Us with open throat. Wherupon our souldiers utterly impatient, were oftentimes ready to cut them in pieces, and to make them pay the price of their foolish arrogancie. Notwithstanding considering the importance hereof, I tooke paines to appease the impatient souldier : for I would not by any meanes enter into question with the Savages, & it suffised me to delay the time. Wherefore I devised to send unto Utina to pray him to deale so farre foorth with his subjects, as to succour me with mast and maiz: which he did very sparingly, sending me 12 or 15 baskets of mast, and two of pinocks, which are a kind of little greene fruits which grow among the weedes in the river, and are as big as cheries : yea, & this was not but by giving of them in exchange twise as much marchandise and apparell as they were worth. For the subjectes of Utina perceived evidently the necessitie wherein we were, & began to use the like speech unto us, as the others did: as it is commonly seene that neede altereth mens affections. While these things were in doing, a certain breathing space presented it selfe for Utina gave me to understand that there was a king his{n}1565. subject whose name was Astina, which he determined Astina a king. to take prisoner, and to chastise him for his disobedience: that for this cause, if I would give him aide with a certaine number of my souldiers, he would bring them to the village of Astina, where there was meanes to recover mast and maiz. In the meane season he excused himselfe unto me because he had sent me no more maiz, and sent me word that the little store that he had left, was scarsely sufficient for his seede-corne. Now being somewhat relieved, as I thought, by the hope which I had of this offer, I would not fade to send him the men which he desired of me, which neverthelesse were very evill intreated : for he deceived them, and in stead of leading them against Astina, he caused them to march against his other enemies. My Lieutenant which had the charge of this enterprise with Captaine Vasseur and my Sergeant was determined to be revenged of Utina and to cut him in pieces 8c his people : and had it not bene that they feared to do any thing against my wil, without all doubt they would have put their enterprise in execution. Therfore they would not passe any further without advertising me thereof. Wherefore being come backe againe unto the Fort, angry 8c pricked deepely to the quicke for being so mocked, they made their complaints unto me, declaring unto me that they were almost dead for hunger. They told the whole matter to the rest of the souldiers, which were very glad that they had not entred into that action, 8c resolved, assembling themselves againe together, to let me understand that they did persist in their first deliberation, which was, to punish the boldnesse and maliciousnes of the Savages, which they could no longer endure, 8c were determined to take one of their kings prisoner : which thing I was enforced to grant unto them, to ye end to avoid a greater mischiefe, and the sedition which I foresaw  would ensue, if I had made refusall thereof. For, sayd they, what occasion have you to deny us, considering the necessitie wherein we are, and the small account{n}that they make of us. Shall it not be lawfull for us to punish them for the wrongs which they doe unto us, besides that we know apparantly how little they respect us ? Is not this sufficient although there were no necessitie at all, since they thus delude us, and have broken promise with us ? After I had therefore resolved with them to seaze on the person of Utina, which besides that he had given us occasion hereof, was also most able to help us to recover victuals, I departed with fiftie of my best souldiers all embarked in two Barkes & we arrived in the dominions of Utina, distant from our Fort about 40 or 50 leagues: then going on shore we drew towards his village situated 6 great Utina taken leagues from the river, where we tooke him prisoner, prisoner in his howbeit not without great cries and alarmes, and led ^r^mniere awaY our barkes, having first signified unto and 50 of his ^is Father in law and his chiefe subjects, that in that soldiers. I had taken him, it was not for any desire that I had to doe him any harme, but onely to relieve my necessitie and want of victuals which oppressed me, and that in case they would helpe me to some, I would find meanes to set him againe at libertie: that in the meane space I would retire my selfe into my Barkes (for I feared least they would there assemble themselves together, and that some mischiefe might thereof insue) where I would stay for him two dayes to receive his answere : notwithstanding that my meaning was not to have any thing without exchange of marchandise. This they promised they would doe. And in very deede the very same evening, his wife accompanied with all the women of the village came unto the Rivers brinke, and cryed unto me to enter into the barke, to see her husband and her sonne, which I held both prisoners. I discovered the next Five os- sixe day five or sixe hundred Indian archers, which drew hundred In- neere unto the river side, and came to me to dians- signifie unto me how that during the absence of their king, their enemie Potanou, being thereof advertised, 64{n}1565. was entred into their village, and had set all on fire.{n}They prayed me that I would succour them : never- The deepe dis-thelesse in the meane while they had one part of their troope in ambush, with intent to set upon me if I ln ,ans‘ had come on land, which was easie for mee to discerne. For seeing that I refused so to doe, they greatly doubted that they were discovered, and sought by all meanes to remoove out of my minde that evill opinion which I had conceived of them. They brought mee therefore fish in their little boates and of their meale of Mast, they made also of their drinke which they call cassine, which they sent to Utina and me.{n}Now albeit I had gotten this point of them that I held their king prisoner, yet neverthelesse I could not get any great quantitie of victuals for the present: the reason was, because they thought that after I had drawen victuals from them, I would put their king to death. For they measured my will according to their custome, The Indians whereby they put to death all the men prisoners that hillallthemen they take in warre. And thus being out of all hope of his libertie, they assembled themselves in the great house, warre. and having called all the people together they proposed the election of a new King, at which time the Father The election in lawe of Utina set one of the kings young sonnes ofa	king.{n}upon the Royall throne : and tooke such paynes that every man did him homage by the major part of the voyces. This election had like to have bene the cause of great troubles among them. For there was a kinsman of the kings neere adjoyning, which pretended a Title to the kingdome, and in deede he had gotten one part of the subjects: notwithstanding this enterprise could not take effect, forasmuch as by a common consent of the chiefe, it was consulted and concluded, that the sonne was more meete to succeede the Father then any other. Now all this while I kept Utina with me, to whom I had given some of mine apparell to cloth him, as I had likewise done unto his sonne. But his subjects which before had an opinion that I would have killed him,{n}ix	65	e{n}The hatred among the Savage kings of Florida.{n}Note.{n}Note.{n}Rootes.{n}Esquine.{n}being advertised of the good entertainment which I used towards him, sent two men which walked along the river, and came to visite him, and brought us some victuals. These two men at their comming were received by me with all courtesie, and entertained according to the victuals which I had. While these things thus passed, there arrived from all quarters many Savages of the countries adjoyning, which came to see Utina, and sought by all meanes to perswade me to put him to death, offering that if I would do so, they would take order that 1 should want no victuals. There was also a King my neighbour whose name was Saturioua, a subtill and craftie man, and one that shewed by proofe that he was greatly practised in affaires. The King sent ordinarily messengers unto me, to pray me to deliver Utina unto him : and to win me the more easily, he sent twise seven or eight baskets of Maiz or of Mast, thinking by this way to allure me, & to make me come to composition with him: in the end notwithstanding when he saw he lost his time, he ceased to visite me with ambassages & victuals: 8c in the meane while I was not able with ye same store of victuals which I had, so well to proportion out the travaile upon the ships which we built to returne into France, but that in the end we were constrained to indure extreme famine, which continued among us all the moneth of May: for in this latter season, neither Maiz nor Beanes, nor Mast was to be found in the villages, because they had employed all for to sowe their fields, insomuch that we were constrayned to eate rootes, which the most part of our men punned in the morters which I had brought with me to beate gunnepowder in, and the graine which came to us from other places: some tooke the wood of Esquine, beate it, and made meale thereof, which they boyled with water, and eate it: others went with their harquebusies to seeke to kill some foule. Yea this miserie was so great, that one was found that gathered up among the filth of my house, all the fish bones that he could finde,{n}which he dried and beate into powder to make bread thereof. The effects of this hideous famine appeared incontinently among us, for our bones eftsoones beganne to cleave so neere unto the skinne, that the most part of the souldiers had their skinnes peirced thorow with them in many partes of their bodies: in such sort that my greatest feare was, least the Indians would rise up against us, considering that it would have bene very hard for us to have defended our selves in such extreme decay of all our forces, besides the scarsitie of all victuals, which fayled us all at once. For the very river had not such plentie of fish as it was wont, and it seemed that the land and water did fight against us. Now as we were thus upon termes of dispayre, about the end of the moneth of May, and the beginning of June, I was New corne by advertised by certaine Indians that were my neigh- en^ °f hours, that in the high Countrey up above the river, there was new Maiz, and that that countrey was most ' forward of all. This caused me to take upon me to go thither with a certaine number of my men, and I went{n}up the river to a place called Enecaque : where I met The village of the sister of Utina in a village where she made us very Enecaque. good cheere and sent us fish. We found that which was tolde us to be true: for the maiz was now ripe: but by this good lucke one shrewde turne happened unto me. For the most part of my souldiers fell sicke with eating more of it then their weakened stomackes could digest. We had also beene the space of foure dayes since we departed from our Fort, without eating any{n}thing, saving little pinockes, and a little fish, which we A little greene got of the fishers which wee met sometimes along the fruite that river. And yet this was so little that certaine souldiers eate privily little whelpes which were newly whelped, ^cheries The next day I purposed to go into ye lie of Edelano The He of to take the king which had caused one of my men to Edelano. be slaine, as I have mentioned before: but being advertised of my departing out of my Fort, and of the way which I tooke up the river, he feared that I went foorth{n}Two Carpen-ten killedfor gathering the Indians maiz. The village Athore.{n}Nia Cubacani a Queene.{n}with a purpose to be revenged of the evill turne which he played: so that when I came thither, I found the houses emptie, for he was retyred a little before with all his people: & I could not by any meanes keepe my souldiers, being angry because they had lost one of their companions, from setting the village on fire. At my departure from thence I passed backe againe by Enecaque, where I gathered as much maiz as I could possibly: which with great diligence I conveied to our Fort to succour my poore men, which I had left in great necessitie. They therefore seeing me a farre off comming, ranne to that side of the river where they thought I would come on land: for hunger so pinched them to the heart, that they could not stay untill the victuals were brought them to the Fort. And that they well shewed assoone as I was come, and that I had distributed that little maiz among them, which I had given to ech man, before I came out of the barke: for they eate it before they had taken it out of the huske. But seeing my selfe in this extreme neede, I tooke paines day by day to seeke some villages where there was some food. And as I travailed this way and that way, it happened that two of my Carpenters were killed by the two sonnes of king Emola, and by one whose name was Casti, as they went on walking to the village called Athore. The cause of this murder was, because they could not refraine themselves as they walked through the fields from gathering a little maiz, which as they were doing, they were taken in the maner : wherof I was presently advertised by an Indian which a little before had brought me a present from Nia Cubacani Queene of a village, and neighbour to our Fort. Upon receipt of this advertisement, I sent my Sergeant with a number of souldiers which found nothing else but the 2 dead corpses, which they buried and returned without doing any other exploit, because the inhabitants were fled away, fearing they should be punished for such a foule fact. As these things thus passed, & that by{n}this time we had almost driven out the moneth of May, two subjects of king Utina came unto me with an Hermaphrodite, which shewed mee that by this time the maiz was ripe in the greatest part of their quarters. Whereupon Utina signified unto me that in case I would carrie him home to his house, he would take such good order that I should have plentie of maiz & beanes: and withall, that the field which he had caused to be sowen for me, should be reserved to my use.{n}I consulted with my men concerning this matter, and found by the advice of all my company, that it was best to grant him his request, saying, that he had meanes to succour us with food sufficient to serve our turnes for [III. 34.5.] our embarkement, and that therefore I might do well to carry him home. Wherefore I caused the two barks forthwith to be made readie, wherin I sailed to Patica, a Patica a place distant from his village 8 or 9 leagues, where I village. found no bodie, for they were gotten into the woods, and would not shew themselves, albeit Utina shewed himselfe unto them, for as much as they imagined that I should be constrained to let him go. But seeing no body to shew themselves, I was constrained to hazard one of my men which had bene acquainted with the state of the countrie, to whom I delivered the young sonne of Utina, and commanded him to goe with diligence to the village of Utina, unto his father in law and his wife, to advertise them that if they would have their king againe, they should bring me victuals unto the side of the little river whither I was gone. At my mans comming every one made much of the little childe, neither was there a man that thought not himselfe well appaide to touch him. His father in law and his wife hearing of these newes came presently towards our barkes, and brought bread which they gave unto my souldiers, they held me there three dayes, and in the meane while did all that they could to take me: which presently I discovered, and therefore stood diligently upon my gard. Wherefore perceiving they could not have their purpose, and that they were already{n}Desire of revenge rooted in the savages.{n}discovered, they sent to advertise me that as yet they could not helpe me to victuals, and that the corne was not yet ripe. Thus I was constrained to returne and to carry backe Utina home, where I had much adoe to save him from the rage of my souldiers: which perceiving the maliciousnes of the Indians, went about to have murdered him. Moreover it seemed they were content that they had gotten the sonne, & that they cared not greatly for the father. Now my hope fayling me on this side, I devised to send my men to the villages where I thought the maiz was by this time ripe ; I went to divers places, and continued so doing 15 daies after, when as Utina besought me again to send him unto his village, assuring himselfe that his subjects would not sticke to give me victuals: and that in case they refused so to do, he was content that I should do what I thought good with him. I undertooke this voyage the second time with the two barkes furnished as before. At my comming unto the little river, we found his subjects there, which failed not to come thither with some quantitie of bread, beanes, and fish, to give my souldiers. Neverthelesse returning againe to their former practise they sought all meanes to entrap me, hoping to cry quittance for the imprisonment of their king, if they might have gotten the victorie of me. But after that they sawe the small meanes, which they had to annoy me, they returned to intreaties, and offered that if I would give them their king with certaine of my souldiers, they would conduct them unto the village, and that the subjects seeing him, would be more willing to give us victuals. Which thing notwithstanding I would not grant unto them (mistrusting their subtilitie, which was not so covert, but that one might espie day at a little hole) untill they had first given me two men in pledge with charge that by the next day they should bring me victuals. Which thing they granted, and gave mee two men which I put in chaines for feare they should escape away, as I knew well they were instructed to doe. Foure dayes were spent in these conferences, at the end{n}whereof they declared unto me, that they could not fully and wholly performe their promise: and that the uttermost that they could doe for the present, was to cause ech subject to bring his burthen of mill. To conclude, they were content to doe so on condition that I would send them their two pledges within ten dayes. As my Lieutenant was ready to depart, I warned him above all A necessarie things to take heede he fell not into the Indians hands: admonition. because I knew them to be very subtill and craftie to enterprize and execute any thing to our disadvantage. He departed therefore with his troope, and came to the small river whereinto we were accustomed to enter to approch as neere as we could unto the village of Utina, being sixe French leagues distant from thence. There he went on shore, put his men in good array, and drew streight towards the great house that was the kings, where the chiefe men of the countrey were assembled, which caused very great store of victuals to be brought now one and then another, in doing whereof they spent notwithstanding three or foure dayes : in which meane while they gathered men together, to set upon us in our retreit. They used therefore many meanes to holde The us still in breath. For one while they demanded their Floridians pledges, another while (seeing my Lieutenant would not Stt il yeeld to them, untill such time as they had brought the victuals unto the boats ; according to the agreement passed betwene us) they signified unto him that the women and young children were afiraide out of all measure to see fire in their matches so neere their harquebuses : and that therefore they most earnestly besought them to put them out, that they might more easily get people ynough to carry the victuals, and that they for their partes would leave their bowes and arrowes, and would be contented that their servants should carrie them. This second request was as flatly denied them as the former : For it was an easie matter to smel out their intention. But while these things{n}were thus in handling, Utina by no meanes was to be  71{n}seene, but hid and kept himselfe secret in a little house apart, where certaine chosen men of mine went to see him shewing themselves agreeved with him for the long delayes of his subjects: whereunto he answered, that his subjects were so much incensed against us, that by no meanes possible he was able to keepe them in such obedience as he willingly would have done, and that he could not hold them from waging of warre against Monsieur de Ottigny. That he also called to minde, that even while he was prisoner, at what time our men ledde him into his Country to obtaine some victuals, he saw along the high wayes arrowes stucke up, at the endes whereof long haires were fastened, which was a certaine signe of open warre proclaimed, which arrowes the Captaine also carried with him to the fort. He said further that in respect of the good will he bare to the Captaine, he forewarned his Lieutenant that his subjects were determined to cut downe the trees, and cause them to fall a thwart the little river where the boates were, to keepe them from departing thence, that they might fight with them at their ease, and that if it thus fell out, he assured him for his part he would not be there to meddle in the matter. And that which much more augmented the suspition of warre was, that as my messengers departed from Utina, they heard the voyce of one of my men, which during the voyage had alwayes beene among the Indians, and whom as yet they would never render, untill they had gotten their pledges home. This poore fellow cryed out a maine because two Indians would have carried him into the woods to have cut his throat: whereupon he was succoured and delivered. These admonitions being well under-stoode, after ripe deliberation thereof Monsieur de Ottigny resolved to retire himselfe the seven and twentieth of July. Wherefore he set his souldiers in order, and delivered to ech of them a sacke full of mill: and afterward hee marched toward his barkes, thinking to prevent the enterprise of the savages. There is at the{n}An alley of 3 or 4 Hundred paces long.{n}comming foorth of the village a great alley about three or foure hundred paces long, which is covered on both sides with great trees. My Lieutenant disposed his men in this alley and set them in such order as they desired to march : for he was well assured that if there were any ambush, it would be at the comming out of the trees. Therefore he caused Monsieur de Arlac mine Ensigne to march somewhat before with 8 harquebusiers to discover whether there were any danger: besides he commanded one of my Sergeants & Corporals to march on the out side of the alley with foure harquebusiers while he himselfe conducted the rest of his company through it. Now as he suspected, so it fell out : for Monsieur de Arlac met with two or three hundred Indians at the end of the alley, which saluted him with an infinite number of their arrowes, & with such furie that it was easie to see with what desire they sought to charge us. Howbeit they were so well sustained in the first assault which mine Ensigne gave them, that they which fell downe dead, did somewhat abate the choler of those which remained alive. This done my Lieutenant hasted to gaine ground in such sort as I have already said. After he had marched about foure hundred paces, he was charged afresh with a newe troope of Savages which were in number about 300, which assayled him before, while the rest of the former set upon him behind. This second assault was so valiantly sustayned, that I may justly say that Monsieur de Ottigny so well discharged his dutie, as was possible for a good Captaine to doe. And so it stood them upon : for he had to deale with such kind of men, as knewe well how to fight and to obey their head which conducted them, and which knewe so well to behave themselves in this conflict, as if Ottigny had not prevented their practise, he had beene in danger to have bene defeated. Their maner in this fight was, that when two hundred had shot, they retyred themselves and gave place to the rest that were behind, and all{n}A skirmish betwene the Savages and the French.{n}A second fresh charge of Savages.{n}TheFlorldians maner of fight.{n}the while had their eye and foot so quicke and readie, that assoone as ever they saw the harquebuze laide to the cheeke, so soone were they on the ground, and eftsoone up to answere with their bowes and to flie their way, if by chance they perceived we went about TheFloridians to take them : for there is nothing that they feare so Mefe feare. much, because of our swords and daggers. This conflict continued and lasted from nine of the clocke in the morning, untill the night departed them. And if Ottigny had not bethought himselfe to cause his men to breake the arrowes which they found in the way, & so to deprive the Savages of the means to beginne againe, without all doubt he should have had very much to do : for by this meane they lacked arrowes, and so were constrained to retire themselves. During the time of the conflict they cryed and made signes that they were the Captaines and Lieutenants friends : and that they fought for none other cause but to be revenged on the souldiers, which were their mortali enemies. My Lieutenant being come unto his boates tooke a re-Two slalne. view of his companie, and found two men wanting which were killed, of whom the one was called James Sale, and the others name was Mesureur. He found Two & twen- moreover 22 of them wounded, which with much adoe ty wounded. causecj to be brought unto the boates. All the mill that he found among his company came but to two mens burdens, which he devided equally among them. For [III. 34-7-] assoone as the conflict began, every man was constrained to leave his sacke to put his hand to his weapon. In this meane while I remained at the Forte, and caused every man diligently to travell, hoping that my Lieutenant would bring us victuals. But seeing the time consume away, I began to suspect the truth of that which fell out, whereof I was assured immediately after at their returne. Seeing therefore mine hope frustrate ant on ^at side, I made my prayer unto God, and thanked God for their him of his grace which hee had shewed unto my poore deliverance, souldiers which were escaped: Afterward I thought{n}upon new meanes to obtaine victuals, aswell for our re-turne into France, as to drive out the time untill our embarking. I was advertised by certaine of our company, which usually went on hunting into the woods and through the villages, that in the village Sarauahi situated on the other side of the river, and two leagues distant from the Forte, and in the village Emoloa there were fields wherein the mill was very forward, and that there was thereof in those partes in great abundance. Wherefore I caused my boates to be made ready, and sent my Sergeant thither with certaine souldiours, which used such diligence, that wee had good store of mill. I sent also to the river which the Savages call Iracana, named by Captaine Ribault the River of Somme, where Captaine Vasseur and my Sergeant arrived with two boates and their ordinary furniture, and found there a great assembly of the Lords of the countrey, among whome was Athore the sonne of Satourioua, Apalou, and Tacadocorou, which were there assembled to make merrie : because that in this place are the fairest maids and women of all the countrey. Captaine Vasseur in my name gave certaine small trifles to all the Lords, to the Queene, to the maids and women of the villages. Whereupon the boates were foorthwith laden with mill, after they had made our men as good cheere as they could devise. The Queene sent me two small Mats so artificially wrought as it was unpossible to make better. Nowe finding our selves by this meane sufficiently furnished with victuals, we began each of us in his place, to travaile and use such diligence, as the desire to see our native countrey might moove us. But because two of our Carpenters were slaine by the Indians (as heretofore I mentioned) John de Hais, master Carpenter, a man very worthy of his vocation, repaired unto me, and tolde me that by reason of want of men hee was not able to make me up the ship against the time that he had promised me : which speech caused such a mutinie among the souldiers that very hardly he escaped killing: howbeit I appeased them aswell as I{n}75{n}The village Sarauahi.{n}The village Emoloa.{n}The river of Iracana called by Ribault ye river of Somme.{n}Courtesie and liberalitie the best meanes to deale with the savages.{n}Most artificiali mattes.{n}The beating downe of the houses without the fort, y the Palisade.{n}The cause why the French lost Florida.{n}Eight kings Laudonniers friends and allies.{n}The principali scope of planters in strange countreys.{n}Florida a rich countrey.{n}could, and determined to worke no more from thence-foorth upon the shippe, but to content our selves to repaire the Brigandine which I had. So we began to beate downe all the houses that were without the Fort, and caused coles to be made of the timber thereof: likewise the souldiers beate downe the pallisade which was toward the waters side, neither was I ever able to keepe them from doing it. I had also determined to beat downe the Fort before my departure and to set it on fire, for feare least some new-come guest should have enjoyed and possessed it. In the meane while there was none of us to whom it was not an extreme griefe to leave a countrey, wherein wee had endured so great travailes and necessities, to discover that which we must forsake through our owne countreymens default. For if wee had bene succoured in time & place, & according to the promise that was made unto us, the warre which was between us and Utina, had not fallen out, neither should wee have had occasion to offend the Indians, which with all paines in the world I entertained in good amitie, aswell with merchandise and apparel, as with promise of greater matters, and with whom I so behaved myself, that although sometimes I was constrained to take victuals in some few villages, yet I lost not the alliance of eight Kings and Lords my neighbours, which continually succoured and ayded me with whatsoever they were able to afford. Yea this was the principali scope of all my purposes, to winne and entertaine them, knowing how greatly their amitie might advance our enterprise, and principally while I discovered the commodities of the countrey, and sought to strengthen my selfe therein. I leave it to your cogitation to thinke how neere it went to our hearts, to leave a place abounding in riches (as we were throughly enformed thereof) in comming whereunto, and doing service unto our Prince, we left our owne countrey, wives, children, parents, and friends, and passed the perils of the sea, and were therein{n}arrived, as in a plentifull treasure of all our hearts desire. As ech of us were much tormented in minde{n}with these or such like cogitations, the third of August dug. 1565. I descried foure sayles in the sea, as I walked upon a little hill, whereof I was exceeding well apaid: I sent immediately one of them which were with me to advertise those of the Fort thereof, which were so glad of those newes, that one would have thought them to bee out of their wittes to see them laugh and leape for joy. After these ships had cast anker, we descried that they sent one of their ship boates to land: whereupon I caused one of mine to be armed with diligence to send to meete them, and to know who they were. In the meane while, fearing lest they were Spaniards, I set my souldiers in order and in readi-nesse, attending the returne of Captaine Vasseur and my Lieutenant, which where gone to meete them, which brought me word that they were Englishmen: and in  trueth they had in their company one whose name was Martine Atinas of Diepe, which at that time was in their service, which on the behalfe of Master John Hawkins their general came to request mee that I Hawkins ye would suffer them to take fresh water, whereof they Qgnerau. stood in great neede, signifying unto me that they had bene above fifteene dayes on the coast to get some. Hee brought unto mee from the general two flagons of wine, and bread made of wheate: which greatly refreshed me, forasmuch as for seven moneths space I never tasted a drop of wine: neverthelesse it was all divided among the greatest part of my souldiers.{n}This Martine Atinas had guided the Englishmen unto our coast, wherewith he was acquainted: for in the yeere 1562 he came thither with me, and therefore the general sent him to me. Therefore after I had granted his request, hee signified the same unto the general, which the next day following caused one of his small shippes to enter into the river, and came to see me in a great shipboate, accompanied with gentle-{n}men honourably apparelled, yet unarmed. He sent for great store of bread and wine, to distribute thereof to every one : On my part I made him the best cheere Sheepe and I could possibly, and caused certaine sheepe and poultry ^int^FloFida^ to be killed, which untill this present I had carefully ' preserved hoping to store the countrey withall. For notwithstanding all the necessities and sicknesse that happened unto me, I would not suffer so much as one chicken to be killed: by which meanes in a short time I had gathered together above an hundred pullets. Nowe three dayes passed, while the English General remained with me, during which time the Indians came in from all parts to see him, and asked me whether he An advantage were my brother: I tolde them he was so, and signified wisely taken. unto that he was come to see me and ayde me with so great store of victuals, that from thence forward I should have no neede to take any thing of them. The bruite hereof incontinently was spread over all the countrey, in such sort as Ambassadours came unto me from all parts, which on the behalfe of the kings their masters desired to make alliance with me: and even they, which before sought to make warre against me, came to offer their friendship and service unto me: Whereupon I received them and gratified them with certaine presents. The General immediately understood the desire & urgent occasion which I had to returne into France: whereupon he offred to transport me and all my company home: whereunto notwithstanding I would not agree, being in doubt upon what occasion he made so large an offer. For I knewe not how the case stood betweene the French and the English: and although hee promised me on his faith to put mee on The Trench land in France, before hee would touch in England, yet mistrusted that j stood jn doubt least he would attempt somewhat in {men would' Fkrida in the name of his mistresse. Wherfore I flatly plant in refused his offer: whereupon there arose a great mutinie Florida. among my souldiers, which sayd that I sought to destroy{n}them all, and that the Brigandine, wherof I spake before, 78{n}was not sufficient to transport them, considering the season of the yeere wherein wee were. The bruite and mutiny increased more and more: for after that the general was returned to his ships, he told certaine gentlemen and souldiers which went to see him, partly to make good cheere with him, hee declared, I say unto them, that he greatly doubted that hardly we should be able to passe safely in those vessels which we had: and that in case we should enterprise the same, we should no doubt be in great jeopardy: notwithstanding, if I were so contented, he would transport part of my men in his ships, and that he would leave me a small ship to transport the rest. The souldiers were no sooner come home, but they signified the offer unto their companions, which incontinently consented together that in case I would not accept the same, they would embarke themselves with him and forsake mee, so that he would receive them according to his promise. They therefore assembled themselves all together and came to seeke me in my chamber, and signified unto me their intention, wherunto I promised to answere within one houre after. In which meane space I gathered together the principali members of my company, which after I had broken the matter with them, answered me all with one voyce, that I ought not to refuse this offer, nor contemne the occasion which presented it selfe, and that they could not thinke evill of it in France, if being forsaken, as we were, we aided our selves with such means as God had sent us. After sundry debatings of this matter, in conclusion I gave mine advise, that wee ought to deliver him the price of the ship which he was to leave us, and that for my part I was content to give him the best of my stuffe, and the silver which I had gathered Silver found in the countrey. Wherupon notwithstanding it was ™ determined that I should keepe the silver, for feare lest the Queene of England seeing the same, should the rather Note. bee encouraged to set footing there, as before she had desired: that it was far better to carie it into France{n}The great importance of this enterprise.{n}The great humanity and bounty of Master John Hawkins to the French.{n}to give encouragement unto our Princes not to leave off an enterprise of so great importance for our commonwealth, and that seeing wee were resolved to depart, it was farre better to give him our Artillerie, which otherwise we should be constrained to leave behind us, or to hide it in the ground by reason of the weakenesse of our men, being not able to embarke the same. This point being thus concluded and resolved on, I went my selfe unto the English general, accompanied with my Lieutenant, and Captaine Vasseur, Captaine Verdier, and Trenchant the Pilot, and my Sergeant, all men of experience in such affaires and knowing sufficiently how to drive such a bargaine. We therefore tooke a view of the ship which the general would sell, whom we drew to such reason, that he was content to stand to mine owne mens judgement, who esteemed it to be worth seven hundreth crowns, whereof we agreed very friendly. Wherefore I delivered him in earnest of the summe, two bastards, two mynions, one thousand of iron, & one thousand of powder. This bargaine thus made, he considered the necessity wherin we were, having for all our sustenance but mill and water: wherupon being moved with pitie, he offred to relieve me with 20 barels of meale, sixe pipes of beanes, one hogshead of salt, and a hundred of waxe to make candels. Moreover forasmuch as he sawe my souldiers goe barefoote, hee offred me besides fifty paires of shoes, which I accepted and agreed of a price with him, and gave him a bill of mine hand for the same, for which untill this present I am indebted to him. He did more then this: for particularly he bestowed upon my selfe a great jarre of oyle, a jarre of vineger, a barell of Olives, and a great quantitie of Rice, and a barell of white Biscuit. Besides he gave divers presents to the principali Officers of my company according to their qualities: so that I may say that we received as many courtesies of the general, as it was possible to receive of any man living. Wherein doubtlesse he hath wonne{n}the reputation of a good and charitable man, deserving to be esteemed asmuch of us all as if he had saved all our lives. Incontinent after his departure I spared The departure no paine to hasten my men to make biscuits of the meale which he had left me, and to hoope my caske ‘ to take in water needfull for the voyage. A man may well thinke what diligence we used, in respect of the great desire we had to depart, wherein we continued so well, that the fifteenth day of August the biscuit, the August it,. greatest part of our water, & all the souldiers stuffe was brought aboord: so that from that day forward wee did nothing but stay for good windes to drive us into France: which had freed us from an infinite number of mischiefes which afterward wee suffred, if they had come as we desired: but it was not Gods good pleasure, as shall appeare hereafter. Being thus in a readinesse to set sayle, we bethought our selves that it would doe well to bring certaine men and women of the countrey into France, to the end that if this voyage should be taken in hand againe they might declare unto their Kings the greatnesse of our King, the excellencie of our Princes, the goodnesse of our Countrey, and the maner of living of the Frenchmen: and that they might also learne our language, to serve our turnes thereby in time to come. Wherein I tooke so good order, that I found meanes to bring away with me the goodliest persons of all the countrey, if our intentions had succeeded as I hoped they would have done. In the meane season the Kings my neighbours came often to see and visite me: which, after that they understood that I would returne into France, demanded of mee whether I meant to returne againe or no, and whether it should be in short time.{n}I signified unto them that within tenne Moones (so they TheFloridians call their Moneths) I would visite them againe with measure their such force, that I would be able to make them Con-querours over all their enemies. They prayed me that the Moone.{n}I would leave them my house, that I would forbid my souldiers to beate downe the Fort and their lodg-{n}ix	81	F{n}ings, and that I would leave them a boate to ayde them withall in their warre against their enemies. Which I made as though I would grant unto them, to the end I might alwaies remaine their friend until my last departure.{n}.