A relation of the reverend father Frier Marco  de Nifa, touching his discovery of the king-dome of Cevola or Cibola, situate about 30. degrees of latitude, to the North of Nueva Espanna.{n}Chap. 1.{n}Frier Marco de Ni?a departeth from Saint Michael in the Province of Culiacan, standing in 24. degrees of Northerly latitude: and comming to the Towne of Petatlan, receiveth many courtesies of the Indians there. Departing from thence, he had information of many Islands, and of a great countrey inhabited with civil people; he commeth to Vacupa: where during his aboad, he heard newes of Cevola, and of the state of the 7. Cities, and of other provinces, & of the rich Islands of perles, which extent northward upon the coast.{n}Frier Marco de Ni?a of the order of S. Francis, for the execution of the instruction of the right honourable lord Don Antonio de Mendosa, Vice-roy and captaine general for the Emperors Majestie in New Spaine, departed from the towne of S. Michael in the province{n}of Culiacan on Friday the 7. of March, in the yeere 1539. having for my companion Frier Honoratus, and carying with me Stephan a Negro, belonging to Andrew Dorantez, and certaine of those Indians which the sayde lord Vice-roy had made free, and bought for this purpose: whom Francis Vazquez de Coronado governour of Nueva Galicia delivered me, and with many other Indians of Petatlan, and of the towne called Cuchillo, which is some 50. leagues from Petatlan, who came to the valley of Culiacan, shewing themselves to bee exceeding glad, because they were certified by the{n}I2S{n}Indians which had bin set free, whom the said governour had sent before to advertise them of their libertie, that none of them from thenceforth should be made slaves, and that no man should invade them, nor use them badly; signifying unto them, that the Emperors Majesty had willed and commanded that it should be so. With the foresaid company I went on my voyage untill I came to the towne of Petatlan, finding all the way great inter-tainment, and provision of victuals, with roses, flowres, and other such things, and bowers which they made for me of chalke and boughs platted together in all places where there were no houses. In this towne of Petatlan I rested 3. dayes, because my companion Honoratus fell so sicke, that I was constrained to leave him there behinde.{n}Then, according to my said instruction, I followed my journey as the holy Ghost did leade me, without any merit of mine, having in my company the said Stephan the Negro of Dorantez, and certaine of the Indians which had bin set at liberty, and many of the people of the countrey, which gave me great intertain-ment and welcome in all places where I came, and made mee bowers of trees, giving me such victuals as they had, although they were but small: because (as they said) it had not rained there in 3 yeres, and because the Indians of this countrey sought meanes rather to hide themselves, then to sowe corne, for feare of the Christians of the Towne of S. Michael, which were wont to make in-roades even to that place, and to warre upon them, and to cary them away captives. In all this way, which may be about 25. or 30. leagues from that part of Petatlan, I saw nothing worthy the noting, save that there came to seeke me certaine Indians from the Island, where Fernando Cortez the Marques of the valley had bin, of whom I was informed, that it was an island, & not firme land, as some suppose it to be. They came to ye firme land upon certaine rafts of wood: and from the maine to the island is but halfe a league by sea, litle more or lesse. Likewise cer-126{n}taine Indians of another island greater then this came A greatisland, to visit me, which island is farther off, of whom I was informed that there were 30. other smal islands, which{n}were inhabited, but had smal store of victuals, saving 2. new islands of which have Maiz or corne of the countrey. These In- California dians had about their necks many great shels which were rtchmpearles. mother of Pearle. I shewed them pearles which I carryed with me for a shew, and they told me that there were in the Islands great store of them, and those very great: howbeit I saw none of them. I followed my voyage through a desert of 4. dayes journey, having in my company both the Indians of the islands, & those of the mountaines which I had passed, and at the end of this desert I found other Indians which marvelled to see me, because they had no knowledge of any Christians, having no traffike nor conversation with those Indians which I{n}had passed, in regard of the great desert which was d desert fiure between them. These Indians interteined me exceeding daiesj°urne^-courteously, & gave me great store of victuals, & sought to touch my garments, and called me Hayota, which in their language signifieth A man come from heaven.{n}These Indians I advertised by my interpreter, according to my instructions, in the knowledge of our Lord God in heaven, & of the Emperor. In these countries & in all places els by all wayes and meanes possible, I sought in-  formation where any Countreys were of more Cities and people of civilitie and understanding, then those which I had found : and I could heare no newes of any such : howbeit they tolde mee, that foure or five dayes journey within the Countrey, at the foote of the mountaines, there is a large and mightie plaine, wherein they tolde mee, ™s was the that there were many great Townes, and people clad in{n}Cotton : and when I shewed them certaine Metals which I '{n}carryed with mee, to learne what riche Metals were in the Lande, they tooke the minerali of Golde and tolde mee, that thereof were vesselles among the people of that plaine, and that they carryed certaine round greene stones hanging at their nostrilles, and at their eares, 127{n}Vacupa a town 40. leagues from the Bay of California.{n}and that they have certaine thinne plates of that Golde, wherewith they scrape off their sweat, and that the walles of their Temples are covered therewith, and that they use it in all their houshold vessels. And because this Valley is distant from the Sea-coast, and my instruction was not to leave the Coast, I determined to leave the discovery thereof untill my returne; at which time I might doe it more commodiously.{n}Thus I travelled three dayes journey through Townes inhabited by the sayde people, of whome I was received as I was of those which I had passed, and came unto a Towne of reasonable bignesse, called Vacupa, where they shewed mee great courtesies, and gave mee great store of good victuals, because the soyle is very fruitfull, and may bee watered. This Towne is fortie leagues distant from the Sea. And because I was so farre from the Sea, it being two dayes before Passion Sunday, I determined to stay there untill Easter, to informe my selfe of the Islandes, whereof I sayde before that I had information. And so I sent certaine Indians to the Sea by three severall wayes, whom I commaunded to bring mee some Indians of the Seacoast and of some of those Islandes, that I might receive information of them : and I sent Stephan Dorantez the Negro another way, whom I commaunded to goe directly Northward fiftie or threescore leagues, to see if by that way hee might learne any newes of any notable thing which wee sought to discover, and I agreed with him, that if hee found any knowledge of any peopled and riche Countrey which were of great importance, that hee should goe no further, but should returne in person, or should sende mee certaine Indians with that token which wee were agreed upon, to wit, that if it were but a meane thing, hee should sende mee a white Crosse of one handfull long; and if it were any great matter, one of two handfuls long ; and if it were a Countrey greater and better then Nueva Espanna, hee should send mee a great crosse. So the{n}12S{n}sayde Stephan departed from mee on Passion-sunday after dinner: and within foure dayes after the messengers of Stephan returned unto me with a great Crosse as high as a man, and they brought me word from Stephan, that I should foorthwith come away after him, for hee had found people which gave him information of a very mighty Province, and that he had certaine Indians in his company, which had bene in the sayd Province, and that he had sent me one of the said Indians. This Indian told me, that it was thirtie dayes Fr°m Vacupa journey from the Towne where Stephan was, unto the ^ayes^6 first Citie of the sayde Province, which is called Cevola. jOumey. Hee affirmed also that there are seven great Cities in this Province, all under one Lord, the houses whereof are made of Lyme and Stone, and are very great, and the least of them with one lofte above head, and some of two and of three loftes, and the house of the Lorde of the Province of foure, and that all of them joyne one unto the other in good order, and that in the gates of the principali houses there are many Turques-stones cunningly wrought, whereof hee sayth they have there great plentie : also that the people of this Citie goe very well apparelled: and that beyond this there are other Provinces, all which (hee sayth) are much greater then these seven cities. I gave credite to his speach, because I found him to bee a man of good understanding : but I deferred my departure to follow Stephan Dorantes, both because I thought hee would stay for mee, and also to attend the returne of my messengers which I had sent unto the Sea, who returned unto me upon Easter day, bringing with them certaine inhabitants of the Sea-coast, and of two of the Islands. Of whom I understoode, that the Islandes above mentioned were scarce of victuals, as I had learned{n}before, and that they are inhabited by people, which weare Greatpearles shelles of Pearles upon their foreheads, and they say that tmd much gold they have great Pearles, and much Golde. They in- Isks °f formed mee of foure and thirtie Islandes, lying one neere ^ichare’^ unto another : they say that the people on the Sea-coast in number.{n}ix	129	1{n}have small store of victuals, as also those of the Islandes, and that they traffique one with the other upon raftes. This coast stretcheth Northward as is to bee seene. These Indians of the Coast brought me certaine Targets made of Cow-hydes very well dressed, which were so large, that they covered them from the head to the very foote, with a hole in the toppe of the same to looke out before: they are so strong, that a Crossebow (as I suppose) will not pierce them.{n}	Chap. 2.{n}He hath new information of the seven Cities by certaine Indians called Pintados, and of three other kingdomes called Marata, Acus, and Totonteac, being Countreys very rich in Turqueses and Hides of cattel. Following his voyage through those countries, he taketh possession thereof for the Emperors Majestie, and of the Indians is much honoured and served with victuals.{n}THe same day came three Indians of those which I called Pintados, because I saw their faces, breasts and armes painted. These dwel farther up into the countrey towards the East, and some of them border upon the seven cities, which sayd they came to see mee, because they had heard of me : and among other things, they gave me information of the seven cities, and of the other Provinces, which the Indian that Stephan sent me had tolde mee of, almost in the very same maner that Stephan had sent mee worde ; and so I sent backe the people of the sea-coast: and two Indians of the Islandes sayde they would goe with mee seven or eight dayes.{n}So with these and with the three Pintados above mentioned, I departed from Vacupa upon Easter tuesday, the same way that Stephan went, from whom I received new messengers with a Crosse of the bignesse of the first which he sent me : which hastened mee forward, 13°{n}and assured me that the land which I sought for, was the greatest and best countrey in all those partes. The sayd messengers told mee particularly without fayling in any one poynt, all that which the first messenger had tolde mee, and much more, and gave mee more plaine information thereof. So I travelled that day being Easter tuesday, and two dayes more, the very same way that Stephan had gone : at the end of which 3 dayes they tolde mee, that from that place a man might travell in thirtie dayes to the citie of Cevola, which is the first of the seven. Neither did one onely tell me thus much, but very many ; who tolde me very particularly of the greatnesse of the houses, and of the fashion of them, as the first messengers had informed me. Also they told me, that besides these seven Cities, there are 3. other kingdomes which are called Marata, Acus, and Totonteac. I enquired of them wherefore they travelled so farre from their houses ? They said that they went for Turqueses, and Hides of kine, and other things; and that of all these there was great abundance in this Countrey. Likewise I enquired how, and by what meanes they obteined these things ? They tolde me, by their service, and by the sweat of their browes, and that they went unto the first citie of the Province which is called Cevola, and that they served them in tilling their ground, and in other businesses, and that they give them Hydes of oxen, which they have in those places, and turqueses for their service, and that the people of this city weare very fine and excellent turqueses hanging at their eares and at their nostrils. They say also, that of these turqueses they make fine workes upon the principali gates of the houses of this citie. They tolde mee, that the apparell which the inhabitants of Cevola weare, is a gowne of cotten downe to the foote, with a button at the necke, and a long string hanging downe at the same, and that the sleeves of these gownes are as broad beneath as above. They say, they gyrd themselves with gyrdles of turqueses, and that over these{n}131{n}coates some weare good apparel, others hides of kine very well dressed, which they take to bee the best apparell of that countrey, whereof they have there great quantitie. Likewise the women goe apparelled, and covered downe to the foote. These Indians gave me very good intertainment, and curiously enquired the day of my departure from Vacupa, that at my returne they might provide me of foode and lodging. They brought certaine sicke folkes before mee, that I might heale them, and sought to touch my apparell, and gave mee certaine Cow-hydes so well trimmed and dressed, that by them a man might conjecture that they were wrought by civile people, and all of them affirmed, ithat they came from Cevola.{n}The next day I followed my journey, and carrying with mee the Pintados, I came to another Village where I was well received by the people of the same : who likewise sought to touch my garments, and gave mee as particular knowledge of the Lande aforesayde, as I had received of those which mette mee before : and also tolde mee, that from that place certaine people were gone with Stephan Dorantez foure or five dayes journey. And here I found a great crosse, which Stephan had left me for a signe, that the newes of the good Countrey increased, and left worde, that with all haste they should sende mee away, and that hee would stay for mee at the ende of the first Desert that he mette with. Heere I set up two Crosses, and tooke possession according to mine instruction, because that the Countrey seemed better unto mee then that which I had passed, and that I thought it meete to make an acte of possession as farre as that place.{n}In this maner I travailed five dayes, alwayes finding inhabited places with great hospitalitie and intertainments, and many Turqueses, and Oxe-hides, and the like report concerning the countrey. Heere I understood, that after two dayes journey I should finde a desert where there is no foode ; but that there were certaine gone before to 132{n}build mee lodgings, and to carrie foode for mee: whereupon I hastened my way, hoping to finde Stephan at the ende thereof, because in that place hee had left worde that hee would stay for mee. Before I came to the desert, I mette with a very pleasant Towne, by A pleasant reason of great store of waters conveighed thither to water the same. Heere 1 mette with many people both men and women clothed in Cotton, and some covered with Oxe-hydes, which generally they take for better apparell then that of cotton. All the people of this Village goe in Caconados, that is to say, with Turqueses hanging at their nostrilles and eares: which Turqueses they call Cacona. Amongst others, the Lord of this Village came unto me, and two of his brethren very well apparelled in Cotton, who also were in Caconados, each of them having his collar of Turqueses about his necke : and they presented unto mee many wilde beastes, as Conies, Quailes, Maiz, nuttes of Pine trees, and all in great abundance, and ofiered mee many Turqueses, and dressed Oxe-hydes, and very fayre vessels to drinke in, and other things: whereof I would receive no whit. And having my garment of gray cloth, which in Spaine is called farago^a, the Lord of this Village, and the other Indians touched my gowne with their handes, and tolde mee, that of such Cloth there was great store in Totonteac, and that the Store of woolpeople of that Countrey wore the same. Whereat I clot^and laughed, and sayde that it was nothing else but such fOfgnteac_ apparell of Cotton as they wore. And they replyed : We would have thee thinke that we understand, that that apparell which thou wearest, and that which we weare are of divers sortes. Understand thou, that in Cevola all the houses are full of that apparell which we weare, but in Totonteac there are certaine litle beasts, from whom they take that thing wherewith such apparell as thou wearest, is made. I prayed them to informe mee more playnely of this matter. And they tolde mee that the sayde beastes were about the bignesse of the two{n}133{n}Collars ofturqueses two or three times double.{n}braches or spaniels which Stephan caryed with him, and they say that there is great store of that cattell in Totonteac.{n}Chap. 3.{n}He entreth into a desert, and the Indians suffer him to want nothing necessary. Following his Voyage, he commeth into a fertile valley, and hath certaine knowledge given him (as he had before) of the state of Cevola and of Totonteac; and that the coast of the sea in 35. degrees trendeth much to the Westward : and also of the kingdomes of Marata and Acus.{n}THe next day I entred into the Desert, and where I was to dine, I found bowers made, and victuals in abundance by a rivers side: and at night I found bowers and victuals in like sort, and after that maner I found for 4. dayes travell: all which time the wildernesse continueth.{n}At the ende of these foure dayes, I entred into a valley very well inhabited with people. At the first Village there mette me many men and women with victuals, and all of them had Turqueses hanging at their nostrils and eares, and some had collars of turqueses like those which the Lord of the Village before I came to the Desert, and his two brethren wore : saving that they ware them but single about their neckes, and these people weare them three or foure times double, and goe in good apparell, and skinnes of Oxen : and the women weare of the sayd Turqueses at their nostrils and eares, and very good wast-coats and other garments. Heere there was as great knowledge of Cevola, as in Nueva Espanna of Temis-titan, and in Peru of Cuzco: and they tolde us particularly the maner of their houses, lodgings, streetes and marketplaces, as men that had bene oftentimes there, and as those which were furnished from thence with things necessary for the service of their housholde, as those also had done, which I already had passed. I tolde them it was impossible that the houses should be{n}134{n}made in such sort as they informed mee, and they for my better understanding tooke earth or ashes, and powred water thereupon, and shewed me how they layd stones upon it, and how the buylding grewe up, as they continued laying stones thereon, untill it mounted aloft. I asked them whether the men of that Countrey had wings to mount up unto those loftes : whereat they laughed, and shewed mee a Ladder in as good sort as I my selfe was able to describe it. Then they tooke a Staffe and helde it over their heads, and said that the lofts were so high one above another. Likewise heere I had information of the woollen cloth  of Totonteac, where they say are houses like those of Cevola, and better and more in number, and that it is a great Province, and hath no governour.{n}Here I understood that the coast of the sea trended much toward the West: for unto the entrance of this first desert which I passed, the coast still stretched Northward : and because the trending of the coast is a Thtsgradu-thing of great importance, I was desirous to knowe and see it: and I saw plainely, that in 35. degrees the ^e^e^ees'at coast stretcheth to the West, whereat I rejoyced no the least. lesse, then of the good newes within land, and so I returned backe to proceede on my journey.{n}Through the foresayd valley I travailed five dayes journey, which is inhabited with goodly people, and so aboundeth with victuals, that it sufficeth to feede above three thousand horsemen : it is all well watered and like a garden: the burroughs and townes are halfe and a quarter of a league long, and in all these villages, I found very ample report of Cevola, whereof they made such particular relation unto me, as people which goe yeerely thither to earne their living. Here I found a man borne in Cevola, who told me that he came thither, having escaped from the governour or Lieutenant of the towne; for the Lord of these seven Cities liveth and abideth in one of those townes called Ahacus, and in the rest he appoynteth lieu-tenants Ahacus.{n}135{n}under him. This townesman of Cevola is a white man of a good complexion, somewhat well in yeeres, and of farre greater capacitie then the inhabitants of this valley, or then those which I had left behind me. Hee sayde that hee would goe with mee, that I might begge his pardon: and of him I learned many particulars: he tolde me that Cevola was a great Citie, inhabited with great store of people, and having many Streetes and Market-places : and that in some partes of this Citie there are certaine very great houses of five stories high, wherein the chiefe of the Citie assemble themselves at certaine dayes of the yeere. He sayeth that the houses are of Lyme and Stone, according as others had tolde mee before, and that the gates, and small pillars of the principali houses are of Turqueses, and all the vessels wherein they are served, and the other ornaments of their houses were of golde : and that the other sixe Cities are built like unto this, whereof some are bigger : and that Ahacus is the chiefest of them. Hee sayth that toward the Southeast there is a kingdome called Marata, and that there were woont to be many, and those great Cities, which were all built of houses of Stone, with divers lofts ; and that these have and doe wage warre with the Lord of the seven cities, through which warre this kingdome of Marata is for the most part wasted, although it yet continueth and mainteineth warre against the other.{n}Likewise he saith, that the kingdome called Totanteac lyeth toward the West, which he saith is a very mightie Province, replenished with infinite store of people and riches: and that in the sayde Kingdome they weare woollen cloth like that which I weare, and other finer sorts of woollen cloth made of the fleeces of those beastes which they described before unto me : and that they are a very civile people. Moreover hee tolde me, that there is another great Province and kingdome called Acus ; for there is Acus, and Ahacus with an aspiration, which is the principali of the seven cities : and Acus without an aspiration is a kingdome and Province of it selfe. He told me 136{n}also, that the apparel which they weare in Cevola is after the same maner as they before had certified me, and that all the inhabitants of the Citie lie upon beddes raysed a good height from the ground, with quilts and canopies over them, which cover the sayde Beds : and hee tolde mee that he would goe with me to Cevola and farther also, if I would take him with me. The like relation was given unto me in this towne by many others, but not so particularly. I travelled three dayes journey through this valley : the inhabitants whereof made mee exceeding great cheere and intertainement. In this valley I saw above a thousand Oxe-hides most excellently trimmed and dressed. And here also I saw farre greater store of Turqueses and chaines made thereof, then in all places which I had passed ; and they say, that all commeth from the city of Cevola, whereof they have great knowledge, as also of the kingdome of Marata, and of the kingdomes of Acus and Totonteac.{n}Chap. 4.{n}Of a very great beast with one horne upon his forehead ; and of the courtesies which the Indians shewed Frier Marcus of Niga, in his Voyage. Also how cruelly Stephan Dorantez and his companions were used upon their arrivall at Cevola, by the Lorde thereof.{n}HEre they shewed me an hide halfe as bigge againe mlghtie as the hide of a great oxe, and tolde me that it{n}was the skin of a beast which had but one horne upon ' his forehead, 8c that this horne bendeth toward his  breast, and that out of the same goeth a point right forward, wherein he hath so great strength, that it will breake any thing how strong so ever it be, if he runne against it, and that there are great store of these beasts in that Countrey. The colour of the hide is of the colour of a great Goat-skin, and the haire is a finger thicke. Here I had messengers from Stephan which brought me word, that by this time he was come to{n}137{n}the farthest part of the desert, and that he was very joyfull, because the farther he went, the more perfect knowledge he had of the greatnesse of the countrey, and sent me word, that since his departure from me, hee never had found the Indians in any lye ; for even unto that very place he had found al in such maner as they had informed him, & hoped that he should find the like at his arrivall in the valley which he was going unto, as he had found in the villages before passed. I set up crosses, and used those acts and ceremonies, which were to be done according to my instructions. The inhabitants requested me to stay here three or foure daies, because that from this place there were foure dayes journey unto the desert, and from the first entrance into the same desert unto the Fifteene dales citie	of Cevola are 15 great dayes journey more ; also{n}that	they would provide victuals for me and other{n}the end of the	.J r . r	T ..	.	.	, ,{n}desert to	necessaries tor that voyage. Likewise they told me,{n}Cevola or	that	with Stephan the Negro were gone above 300{n}Clvola.	men	to beare him company, and to carry victuals after{n}him, and that in like sort many of them would go with me to serve me, because they hoped to returne home rich. I thanked them, and willed them to set things in order with speede, and so I rested there three dayes, wherein I alwayes informed my selfe of Cevola, and of as many other things as I could learne, and called many Indians unto mee, and examined them severally, and all of them agreed in one tale, and told me of the great multitude of people, and of the order of the streetes, of the greatnesse of the houses, and of the strength of the gates, agreeing altogether with that which the rest before had told me. After three dayes many assembled themselves to go with me, 30 of the principal of whom I tooke, being very well apparelled, and with chaines of turqueses, which some of them weare five or sixe times double, and other people to cary things necessary for them and me, and so set forward on my voyage.{n}138{n}Thus I entred into the second desert on the 9 of May, The second de-and travelled the first day by a very broad and beaten way, & we came to diner unto a water, where the Indians had made provision for me : and at night we came to another water, where I found a house which they had fully made up for me, and another house stood made where Stephan lodged when he passed that way, and many old cottages and many signes of fire which the people had made that travelled to Cevola by this way. In this sort I travelled 12 dayes journey being alway well provided of Twelve dayes victuals, of wild beasts, Hares, and Partridges of the doarney-same colour and tast with those of Spaine although they are not so big, for they be somewhat lesse.{n}Here met us an Indian the sonne of one of the chiefe men that accompanied mee, which had gone before with Stephan, who came in a great fright, having his face and body all covered with sweat, and shewing exceeding sadnesse in his countenance ; and he told mee that a dayes journey before Stephan came to Cevola he sent his great Mace made of a gourd by his messengers, as he was alwayes woont to send them before him, that hee might knowe in what sort hee came unto them, which gourd had a string of belles upon it, and two feathers one white and another red, in token that he demanded safe conduct, and that he came peaceably. And when they came to Cevola before the Magistrate, which the Lord of the ci tie had placed there for his Lieutenant, they delivered him the sayde great gourd, who tooke the same in his hands, and after he had spyed the belles, in a great rage and fury hee cast it to the ground, and willed the messengers to get them packing with speed, for he knew well ynough what people they were, and that they should will them in no case to enter into the citie, for if they did hee would put them all to death. The messengers returned and tolde Stephan how things had passed, who answered them, that it made no great matter, and would needes proceed on his voyage till he came to{n}139{n}the citie of Cevola : where he found men that would not let him enter into the towne, but shut him into a great house which stoode without the citie, and straightway tooke all things from him which hee caried to truck and barter with them, and certaine turqueses, and other things which he had received of the Indians by the way, and they kept him there all that night without giving him meate or drinke, and the next day in the morning this Indian was a thirst, and went out of the house to drinke at a river that was neere at hand, and within a little while after he saw Stephan running away, and the people followed him, and slew certaine of the Indians which went in his company. And when this Indian saw these things, he hid him-selfe on the banks of the river, and afterward crossed the high way of the desert. The Indians that went with me hearing these newes began incontinently to lament, and I thought these heavie and bad newes would cost mee my life, neither did I feare so much the losse of mine owne life, as that I should not bee able to returne  to give information of the greatnesse of that Countrey, where our Lord God might be glorified : and streightway I cut the cords of my budgets which I carried with me ful of merchandise for traffique, which I would not doe till then, nor give any thing to any man, and began to divide all that I carried with mee among the principali men, willing them not to be afraid, but to goe forward with me, and so they did. And going on our way, within a dayes journey of Cevola wee met two other Indians of those which went with Stephan, which were bloody and wounded in many places : and assoone as they came to us, they which were with mee began to make great lamentation. These wounded Indians I asked for Stephan, and they agreeing in all poynts with the first Indian sayd, that after they had put him into the foresayd great house without giving him meat or drinke all that day and all that night, they tooke from Stephan all the things which hee carried with him. The next day when{n}140{n}the Sunne was a lance high, Stephan went out of the house, and some of the chiefe men with him, and suddenly came store of people from the citie, whom assoone as hee sawe he began to run away and we likewise, and foorthwith they shot at us and wounded us, and certaine dead men fell upon us, and so we lay till night and durst not stirre, and we heard great rumours in the citie, and saw many men and women keeping watch and ward upon the walles thereof, and after this we could not see Stephan any more, and wee thinke they have shot him to death, as they have done all the rest which went with him, so that none are escaped but we onely.{n}Chap. 5.{n}The situation and greatnesse of the Citie of Cevola, and how frier Marcus tooke possession thereof and of other provinces, calling the same. The new kingdome of S. Francis, and how after his departure from thence being preserved by God in so dangerous a voyage, he arrived at Compostella in Nueva Galicia.{n}HAving considered the former report of the Indians, and the evill meanes which I had to prosecute my voyage as I desired, I thought it not good wilfully to loose my life as Stephan did : and so I told them, that God would punish those of Cevola, and that the Viceroy when he should understand what had happened, would send many Christians to chastise them : but they would not beleeve me, for they sayde that no man was able to withstand the power of Cevola. And herewithall I left them, and went aside two or three stones cast, and when I returned I found an Indian of mine which I had brought from Mexico called Marcus, who wept and sayde unto me : Father, these men have consulted to kill us, for they say, that through your and Stephans meanes their fathers are slaine, and that neither man nor woman of them shall remaine unslaine.{n}141{n}A.D.{n}1539-{n}Then againe I devided among them certaine other things which I had, to appease them, whereupon they were somewhat pacified, albeit they still shewed great griefe for the people which were slaine. I requested some of them to goe to Cevola, to see if any other Indian were escaped, with intent that they might learne some newes of Stephan ; which I could not obtaine at their handes. When I saw this, I sayd unto them, that I purposed to see the citie of Cevola, whatsoever came of it. They sayde that none of them would goe with me. At the last when they sawe mee resolute, two of the chiefe of them sayde they would goe with me ; with whome and with mine Indians and interpreters I followed my way, till I came within sight of Cevola, which is situate on a plaine at the foote of a round hill, and maketh shew to bee a faire citie, and is better seated then any that I have seene in these partes. The houses are builded in order, according as the Indians told me, all made of stone with divers stories, and flatte roofes, as farre as I could discerne from a mountaine, whither I ascended to viewe the citie. The people are somewhat white, they weare apparell, and lie in beds, their weapons are bowes, they have Emralds and other jewels, although they esteeme none so much as turqueses, wherewith they adorne the walles of the porches of their houses, and their apparell and vessels, and they use them in stead of money through all the Countrey. Their apparell is of cotton and of oxe hides, and this is their most commendable and honourable apparell. They use vessels of gold and silver, for they have no other mettall, whereof there is greater use and more abundance then in Peru, and they buy the Most rich same for turqueses in the province of the Pintados, where ”and der^n t^iere are saY^ to mines °f great abundance. Of other The province of kingdomes I could not obtaine so particular instruction. the Pintados. Divers times I was tempted to goe thither, because I knewe I could but hazard my life, and that I had offered unto God the first day that I began my journey : in the ende I began to bee afraid, considering in what danger I{n}142{n}should put my selfe, and that if I should dye, the knowledge of this Countrey should be lost, which in my judgement is the greatest and the best that hitherto hath beene discovered : and when I tolde the chief men, what a goodly citie Cevola seemed unto mee, they answered me  that it was the least of the seven cities, and that Toton- Totonteac the teac is the greatest and best of them all, because it hath so many houses and people, that there is no ende of them. pnv-tnCe. Having seene the disposition and situation of the place, I thought good to name that Countrey El Nuevo reyno de san Francisco : in which place I made a great heape of stones by the helpe of the Indians, and on the toppe thereof I set up a small slender crosse because I wanted meanes to make a greater, and sayd that I set up that crosse and heape in the name of the most honourable Lord Don Antonio de Mendosa Viceroy and Captaine general of Nueva Espanna, for the Emperour our Lord, in token of possession, according to mine instruction. Which possession I sayd that I tooke in that place of all the seven cities, 8c of the kingdomes of Totonteac, of Acus, and of Marata.{n}Thus I returned with much more feare then victuals, He retumeth. and went untill I found the people which I had left behind mee, with all the speede that I could make, whome I overtooke in two dayes travell, and went in their company till I had passed the desert, where I was A desert. not made so much of as before: for both men and women made great lamentation for the people which were slaine at Cevola, and with feare I hastened from the people of this valley, and travelled tenne leagues A valley. the first day, and so I went daily eight or ten leagues, without staying untill I had passed the second desert. A second And though I were in feare, yet I determined to go to desert. the great plaine, wherof I said before, that I had information, being situate at the foote of the mountaines, and in that place I understoode, that this plaine is inhabited for many dayes journey toward the East, but I durst not enter into it, considering, that if hereafter{n}!43{n}wee shoulde inhabite this other Countrey of the seven cities, and the kingdomes before mentioned, that then I might better discover the same, without putting my selfe in hazard, and leave it for this time, that I might give relation of the things which I had now seene. At the entrance of this plaine 1 sawe but seven Townes onely of a reasonable bignesse, which were a farre off in a lowe valley beeing very greene and a most fruitfull soyle, out of which ranne many Rivers. I was informed that there was much golde in this valley, and that the inhabitants worke it into vessels and thinne plates, wherewith they strike and take ofF their sweat, and that they are people that will not suffer those of the other side of the plaine to traffique with them, and they could not tell me the cause thereof. Here I set up two crosses, and tooke possession of the plaine and valley in like sort and order, as I did at other places before mentioned. And from thence I returned on my voyage with as much haste as 1 coulde make, untill I came to the citie of Saint Michael in the province of Culiacan, thinking there to have found Francis Vazquez de Coronado governour of Nueva Galicia, and finding him not there, I proceeded on my journey Compostella in till I came to the Citie of Compostella, where I found 21. degrees of i wr|te not here many other particularities, because latitude. ,	.	.	, .	r t i	i{n}they are impertinent to this matter : 1 only report that which I have seene, and which was told me concerning the Countreys through which I travelled, and of those which I had information of.{n}.