The relation of the navigation and discovery  which Captaine Fernando Alarchon made by the order of the right honourable Lord Don Antonio de Mendosa Vizeroy of New Spaine, dated in Colima, an haven of New Spaine.{n}Chap. 1.{n}Fernando Alarchon after he had suffered a storme, arrived with his Fleete at the haven of Saint Iago, and from thence at the haven of Aguaiaval : he was in great perill in seeking to discover a Bay, and getting out of the same he discovered a river on the coast with a great current, entring into the same, and coasting along he discried a great many of Indians with their weapons : with signes hee hath traffique with them, and fearing some great danger returneth to his ships.{n}N Sunday the ninth of May in the yeere 1540. I set saile with two ships, the one called Saint Peter being Admirall, and the other Saint Catherine, and wee set forward meaning to goe to the haven of Saint Iago of good hope: but before we arrived there wee had a terrible storme,{n}wherewith they which were in the ship called Saint Catherine, being more afraid then was neede, cast over boord nine pieces of Ordinance, two ankers and one cable, and many other things as needfull for the enterprise wherein we went, as the shippe it selfe. Assoone as we were arrived at the haven of Saint Iago I repaired The haven of my losse which I had received, provided my selfe of Stint Iag>. things necessary, and tooke aboord my people which looked for my comming, and directed my course toward the haven of Aguaiavall. And being there arrived I The haven of understood that the general Francis Vazquez de Coronado was departed with all his people: whereupon taking{n}279{n}the ship called Saint Gabriel which carried victuals for the armie I led her with mee to put in execution your Lordships order. Afterward I followed my course along the coast without departing from the same, to see if I could find any token or any Indian which could give me knowledge of him: and in sailing so neere the shore I discovered other very good havens, for the ships whereof Captaine Francis de Ullua was general for the Marquesse de Valle neither sawe nor found them. And These shoalds when we were come to the flats and shoalds from whence “ofmarBe^ f°resaid fleete returned, it seemed aswell to me as mrin nr th, to the rest, that we had the firme land before us, and Bay of Cali- that those shoalds were so perilous and fearefull, that it fimia. was a thing to be considered whither with our skiffes we could enter in among them: and the Pilotes and the rest of the company would have had us done as Captaine Ullua did, and have returned backe againe. But because your Lordship commanded mee, that I should bring you the secret of that gulfe, I resolved, that although I had knowen I should have lost the shippes, I would not have ceased for any thing to have seene the head thereof: and therefore I commanded Nicolas Zamorano Pilote major, and Dominico del Castello that eche of them should take a boate, and their lead in their hands, and runne in among those shoalds, to see if they could find out the chanell whereby the shippes might enter in: to whom it seemed that the ships might saile up higher (although with great travell and danger) and in this sort I and he began to follow our way which they had taken, and within a short while after wee found our selves fast on the sands with all our three ships, in such sort that one could not helpe another, neither could the boates succour us, because the current was so great that it was impossible for one of us to come unto another : whereupon we were in such great j eopardie that the decke of the Admirall was oftentimes under water, and if a great surge of the sea had not come & driven our ship right up, and gave her leave as it were to breath a while,{n}280{n}1540’ we had there bin drowned : and likewise the other two{n}shippes found themselves in very great hazard, yet because they were lesser and drewe lesse water, their danger was not so great as ours. Nowe it pleased God upon the returne of the flood that the shippes came on flote, and so wee went forward. And although the company would have returned backe, yet for all this I determined to goe forwarde, and to pursue our attempted voyage : and we passed forward with much adoe, turning our stemmes now this way, now that way, to seeke to find the chanel. And it pleased God that after this sort we came to the very bottome of the Bay ; where wee found a very mightie river, which ranne with so great fury of a streame, that we could hardly saile against it. In this sort I determined as wel as I could to go up this river, and with two boates, leaving the third with the ships, and twenty men, my selfe being in one of them with Roderigo Maldonado treasurer of this fleet, and Gaspar de Castilleia comptroller, and with certaine small pieces of artillerie I began to saile up the river, and charged all my company, that none of them should stirre nor use any signe, but he whom I appoynted, although wee found Indians. The same day, which was Thursday the sixe and twentieth of August, following our voyage with drawing the boats with halsers we went about some 6 leagues: and the next day which was Friday by the breake of day thus following our way upward, I saw certaine Indians which went toward cer{n}The bottome of the Bay of California.{n}They goe up the river of Buena guia the 26. of August.{n}taine cottages neere unto the water, who assoone as they saw us, ten or twelve of them rose up furiously, and crying with a loud voyce, other of their companions came running together to the number of 50 which with all haste carried out of their cottages such things as they{n}had, and layd them under certaine shrubs and many of them came running toward that part whether wee approched, making great signes unto us that we should goe backe againe, using great threatnings against us, one while running on this side and an other{n}281{n}He carried an interpreter with him.{n}A very good course taken to appease unknowen Savages.{n}while on that side. I seeing them in such a rage, caused our boates to lanch from the shore into the middes of the river, that the Indians might be out of feare, and I rode at anker, and set my people in as good order as I could, charging them that no man should speake, nor make any signe nor motion, nor stirre out of his place, nor should not be offended for any thing that the Indians did, nor should shewe no token of warre: And by this meanes the Indians came every foote neere the rivers side to see us: and I gate by little and little toward them where the river seemed to be deepest. In this meane space there were above two hundred and fiftie Indians assembled together with bowes and arrowes, and with certaine banners in warre-like sort in such maner as those of New Spayne doe use: and perceiving that I drewe toward the shore, they came with great cryes toward us with bowes and arrowes put into them, and with their banners displayed. And I went unto the stemme of my boate with the interpreter which I carried with me, whom I commanded to speake unto them, and when he spake, they neither understood him, nor he them, although because they sawe him to be after their fashion, they stayed themselves: and seeing this I drewe neerer the shore, and they with great cryes came to keepe mee from the shore of the river, making signes that I should not come any farther, putting stakes in my way betweene the water and the land: and the more I lingered, the more people still flocked together. Which when I had considered I beganne to make them signes of peace, and taking my sword and target, I cast them downe in the boate and set my feete upon them, giving them to understand with this and other tokens that I desired not to have warre with them, and that they should doe the like. Also I tooke a banner and cast it downe, and I caused my company that were with mee to sit downe likewise, and taking the wares of exchange which I carried with mee, I called them to give them some of them: yet for{n}282{n}all this none of them stirred to take any of them, but rather flocked together, and beganne to make a great murmuring among themselves: and suddenly one came out from among them with a staffe wherein certayne shelles were set, and entred into the water to give them unto mee, and I tooke them, and made signes unto him that hee should come neere me, which when he had done, I imbraced him, and gave him in recompence certaine beades and other things, and he returning with them unto his fellowes, began to looke upon them, and to parley together, and within a while after many of them came toward me, to whom I made signes to lay downe their banners, and to leave their weapons : which they did incontinently, then I made signes that they should lay them altogether, and should goe aside from them, which likewise they did: and they caused those Indians which newly came thither to leave them, and to lay them together with the rest. After this I called them unto me, and to all them which came I gave some smal trifle, using them gently, and by this time they were so many that came thronging about mee, that I thought I could not stay any longer in safety among them, and I made signes unto them that they should withdraw themselves, and that they should stand al upon the side of an hill which was there betweene a plaine & the river, and that they should not presse to me above ten at a time. And immediatly the most ancient among them called unto them with a loud voyce, willing them to do so : and some ten or twelve of them came where I was: whereupon seeing my selfe in some securitie, I determined to goe on land the more to put them out of feare : and for my more securitie, I made signes unto them, to sit downe on the ground which they did: but when they saw that ten or twelve of my companions came a shore after me, they began to be angry, and I made signes unto them that we would be friends, and that they should not feare, & herewithal they were pacified, and sate down as they did before, and I went 283{n}A.D. i54°-{n}unto them, & imbraced them, giving them certain trifles, commanding mine interpreter to speake unto them, for I greatly desired to understand their maner of speech, and the cry which they made at mee. And that I might knowe what maner of foode they had, I made a signe unto them, that wee would gladly eate, and they brought mee certaine cakes of Maiz, and a loafe of Mizquiqui, and they made signes unto mee that they desired to see an harquebuse shotte oflF, which I caused  to be discharged, and they were all wonderfully afraid, except two or three olde men among them which were not mooved at all, but rather cried out upon the rest, because they were afrayd: and through the speach of one of these olde men, they began to rise up from the ground, and to lay hold on their weapons: whom when I sought to appease, I would have given him a silken girdle of divers colours, and hee in a great rage bitte his nether lippe cruelly, and gave mee a thumpe with his elbowe on the brest, and turned in a great furie to speake unto his company. After that I saw them advance their banners, I determined to returne my selfe gently to my boates, and with a small gale of wind I set sayle, whereby wee might breake the current which was very great, although my company were not well pleased to goe any farther. In the meane space the Indians came following us along the shore of the river, making signes that I should come on land, and that they would give mee food to eate, some of them sucking their fingers, and others entred into the water with certaine cakes of Maiz, to give me them in my boate.{n}Chap. 2.{n}Of the habite, armour and stature of the Indians. A relation of many others with whom he had by signes traffique, victuals and many courtesies.{n}IN this sort we went up two leagues, and I arrived neere a clifle of an hill, whereupon was an arbour made newly, where they made signes unto me, crying 284{n}that I should go thither, shewing me the same with their handes, and telling mee that there was meate to eate. But I would not goe thither, seeing the place was Good forecast. apt for some ambush, but followed on my voyage, within a while after issued out from thence above a thousand armed men with their bowes and arrowes, and after that many women and children shewed themselves, toward whom I would not goe, but because the Sunne was almost set, I rode in the middest of the river. These Indians came decked after sundry fashions, some came with a painting that covered their face all over, some had their faces halfe covered, but all besmouched with Indians be-cole, and every one as it liked him best. Others carried visards before them of the same colour which had the ' shape of faces. They weare on their heads a piece of a Deeres skinne two spannes broad set after the maner of a helmet, and upon it certaine small sticks with some sortes of fethers. Their weapons were bowes and arrowes of hard wood, and two or three sorts of maces of wood hardened in the fire. This is a mightie people, well feitured, and without any grossenesse. They have holes bored in their nostrels whereat certaine pendents hang: and others weare shelles, and their eares are full of holes, whereon they hang bones and shelles. All of them both great and small weare a girdle about their waste made of diverse colours, and in the middle is fastened a round bunch of feathers, which hangeth downe behind like a tayle. Likewise on the brawne of their armes they weare a streit string, which they wind so often about that it becommeth as broad as ones hand.{n}They weare certaine pieces of Deeres bones fastened to their armes, wherewith they strike ofF the sweate, and at the other certaine small pipes of canes. They carry Pipes and also certaine little long bagges about an hand broade tyed to their left arme, which serve them also in stead of Da co' brasers for their bowes, full of the powder of a certaine herbe, whereof they make a certaine beverage. They have their bodies traced with coles, their haire cut before, 285{n}and behind it hangs downe to their wast. The women goe naked, and weare a great wreath of fethers behind them, and before painted and glued together, and their haire like the men. There were among these Indians three or foure men in womens apparell. Nowe the next day being Saturday very early I went forward on my way up the river, setting on shore two men for eache boate to drawe them with the rope, and about breaking foorth of the Sunne, wee heard a mightie crie of Indians on both sides of the river with their weapons, but without any banner. I thought good to attend their com-ming, aswell to see what they woulde have, as also to try whether our interpreter could understand them. When they came over against us they leapt into the river on both sides with their bowes and arrowes, and when they spake, our interpreter understoode them not: whereupon I beganne to make a signe unto them that they should lay away their weapons, as the other had done. Some did as I willed them, and some did not, and those which did, I willed to come neere me and gave them some things which we had to trucke withall, which when the others perceived, that they might likewise have their part, they layd away their weapons likewise. I judging my selfe to be in securitie leaped on shore with them, and stoode in the middest of them, who understanding that I came not to fight with them, Skels and began to give some of those shels and beades, and some beades. brought me certaine skinnes well dressed, and others{n}Maiz and a roll of the same naughtily grinded, so that none of them came unto me that brought mee not some- thing, and before they gave it me going a little way from mee they began to cry out amayne, and made a signe with their bodies and armes, and afterward they approched to give me that which they brought. And now that the Sunne beganne to set I put off from the shore, and rode in the middest of the river. The next morning before breake of day on both sides of the river wee heard greater cryes and of more Indians, which 286{n}leaped into the river to swimme, and they came to bring mee certaine gourdes full of Maiz, and of those wrethes which I spake of before. I shewed unto them Wheate and Beanes, and other seedes, to see whether they had any of those kindes : but they shewed mee that they had no knowledge of them, and wondred at all of them, and by signes 1 came to understand that the thing which they most esteemed and reverenced was the Sunne: and I signified unto them that I came from A notable the Sunne. Whereat they marveiled, and then they began to beholde me from the toppe to the toe, and shewed me more favour then they did before ; and when I asked them for food, they brought me such abundance that I was inforced twise to call for the boates to put it into them, and from that time forward of all the things which they brought me they flang up into the ayre one part unto the Sunne, and afterward turned towards me to give mee the other part: and so I was alwayes better served and esteemed of them as well in drawing of the boats up the river, as also in giving me food to eat: and they shewed me so great love, that when I stayed they would have carried us in their armes unto their houses : and in no kind of thing they would breake my com-mandement: and for my suretie, I willed them not to carry any weapons in my sight: and they were so carefull to doe so, that if any man came newly thither with them, suddenly they would goe and meete him to cause him to lay them downe farre from mee: and I shewed them that I tooke great pleasure in their so doing: and to some of the chiefe of them I gave certaine little napkins and other trifles ; for if I should have given somewhat to every one of them in particular, all the small wares in Swarmes of New Spayne would not have sufficed. Sometimes it fell M/'k out (such was the great love and good wil which they shewed me) that if any Indians came thither by chance with their weapons, and if any one being warned to leave them behind him, if by negligence, or because he understood them not at the first warning, he had not layd them{n}287{n}An exceeding great current of the river.{n}away, they would runne unto him, and take them from him by force, and would breake them in pieces in my presence. Afterward they tooke the rope so lovingly, and with striving one with another for it, that we had no need to pray them to doe it. Wherefore if we had not had this helpe, the current of the river being exceeding great, and our men that drew the rope being not well acquainted with that occupation, it would have beene impossible for us to have gotten up the river so against the streame. When I perceived that they understood mee in all things, and that I likewise understoode them, I thought good to try by some way or other to make a good entrance to find some good issue to obtaine my desire: And I caused certaine crosses to be made of certaine small sticks and paper, and among others when I gave any thing I gave them these as things of most price and kissed them, making signes unto them that they should honour them and make great account of them, and that they should weare them at their necks: giving them to understand that this signe was from heaven, and they tooke them and kissed them, and lifted them up aloft, and seemed greatly to rejoyce thereat when they did so, and sometime I tooke them into my boate, shewing them great good will, and sometime I gave them of those trifles which I caried with me. And at length the matter grew to such issue, that I had not paper and stickes ynough to make crosses. In this maner that day I was very well accompanied, untill that when night approched I sought to lanch out into the river, and went to ride in the middest of the streame, and they came to aske leave of me to depart, saying that they would returne the next day with victuals to visite me, and so by litle and little they departed, so that there stayed not above fiftie which made fires over against us, and stayed there al night calling us, and before the day was perfectly broken, they leapt into the water and swamme unto us asking for the rope, and we gave it them with a good will, thanking God for the good provision which{n}288{n}1540-hee gave us to go up the river: for the Indians were so many, that if they had gone about to let our passage, although we had bene many more then wee were, they might have done it.{n}Chap. 3.{n}One of the Indians understanding the language of the interpreter, asketh many questions of the originali of the Spaniards, he telleth him that their Captaine is the child of the Sunne, and that he was sent of the Sunne unto them, and they would have received him for their king. They take this Indian into their boat, and of him they have many informations of that countrey.{n}IN this maner we sailed until Tuesday at night, going as we were wont, causing mine interpreter to speak unto the people to see if peradventure any of them could understand him, I perceived that one  answered him, whereupon I caused the boates to be stayed, and called him, which hee understoode, charging mine interpreter that hee should not speake nor answere him any thing else, but onely that which I said unto A wise devise. him: and I saw as I stood still that that Indian began to speake to the people with great furie: whereupon all of them beganne to drawe together, and mine interpreter understood, that he which came to the boate sayd unto them, that he desired to knowe what nation we were, and whence wee came, and whither we came out of the water, or out of the earth, or from heaven: And at this speech an infinite number of people came together, which marvailed to see mee speake: and this Indian turned on this side and on that side to speake unto them in .another language which mine interpreter understood not. Whereas he asked me what we were, I answered that we were Christians, and that we came from farre to see them: and answering to the question, who had sent me, I said, I was sent by the Sunne, pointing unto him by signes as at the first, because they should{n}ix	289	T{n}not take mee in a lye. He beganne againe to aske mee, how the Sunne had sent me, seeing hee went aloft in the skie and never stoode still, and seeing these many yeeres neither he nor their olde men had ever seene such as we were, of whome they ever had any kind of knowledge, and that the Sunne till that houre had never sent any other. I answered him that it was true that the Sunne made his course aloft in the skie, and did never stand still, yet neverthelesse that they might well perceive that at his going downe and rising in the morning hee came neere unto the earth, where his dwelling was, and that they ever sawe him come out of one place, and that hee had made mee in that land and countrey from whence hee came, like as hee had made many others which hee sent into other partes, and that nowe hee had sent me to visite and view the same river, and the people that dwelt neere the same, that I should speake unto them, and shoulde joyne with them in friendshippe, and should give them things which they had not, and that I should charge them that they should not make warre one against another. Whereunto he answered, that I should tell him the cause why the Sunne had not sent mee no sooner to pacific the warres which had continued a long time among them, wherein many had beene slaine. I tolde him the cause hereof was, because at that time I was but a child. Then he asked the interpreter whether wee tooke him with us perforce having taken him in the war, or whether he came with us of his own accord. He answered him that he was with us of his owne accord, and was very wel appaid of our company. He returned to enquire, why we brought none save him onely that understood us, and wherefore wee understood not all other men, seeing we were the children of the Sunne: he answered, that the Sunne also had begotten him, and given him a language to understand him, and me, and others: that the Sunne knew well that they dwelt there, but that because he had many other businesses, and because{n}290{n}I was but yong hee sent me no sooner. And he turning unto me sayd suddenly: Comest thou therefore hither to bee our Lord, and that wee should serve thee ? I supposing that I should not please him if I should have said yea, answered him, not to be their Lord, but rather to be their brother, and to give them such things as I had. He asked me, whether the Sunne had begotten me as he had begotten others, and whether I was his kinsman or his sonne : I answered him that I was his sonne. He proceeded to aske me whether the rest that were with me were also the children of the Sunne, I answered him no, but that they were borne all with me in one countrey, where I was brought up. Then he cryed out with a loud voyce and sayd, seeing thou doest us so much good, and wilt not have us to make warre, and art the child of the Sunne, wee will all receive thee for our Lord, and alwayes serve thee, therefore wee pray thee that thou wilt not depart hence nor leave us : and suddenly hee turned to the people, and beganne to tell them, that I was the child of the Sunne, and that therefore they should all chuse me for their Lord. Those Indians hearing this, were astonied beyond measure, and came neerer still more and more to behold me. That Indian also asked mee other questions, which to avoyd tediousnesse I doe not recite: and in this wise we passed the day, and seeing the night approch, I began by all meanes I could devise to get this fellow into our boat with us : and he refusing to goe with us, the interpreter told him that wee would put him on the other side of the river, and upon this condition hee entred into our boate, and there I made very much of him, and gave him the best entertayne-ment I could, putting him alwayes in securitie, and when I judged him to be out of all suspition, I thought it good to aske him somewhat of that countrey. And among the first things that I asked him this was one, whether hee had ever seene any men like us, or had heard any report of them. Hee answered mee no, saving that hee{n}291{n}The Sunne worshipped as God.{n}had sometime hearde of olde men, that very farre from that Countrey there were other white men, and with beardes like us, and that hee knewe nothing else. I asked him also whether hee knewe a place called Cevola, and a River called Totonteac, and hee answered mee no. Whereupon perceiving that hee coulde not give mee any knowledge of Francis Vazquez nor of his company, I determined to aske him other things of that countrey, and of their maner of life : and beganne to enquire of him, whether they helde that there was one God, creator of heaven and earth, or that they worshipped any other Idol. And hee answered mee no: but that they esteemed and reverenced the Sunne above all other things, because it warmed them and made their croppes to growe: and that of all things which they did eate, they cast a little up into the ayre unto him. I asked him next whether they had any Lorde, and hee sayde no: but that they knewe well that there was a great Lorde, but they knewe not well which way hee dwelt. And I tolde him that hee was in heaven, and that hee was called Jesus Christ, and I went no farther in divinitie with him. I asked him whether they had any warre, and for what occasion. Hee answered that they had warre and that very great, and upon exceeding small occasions : for when they had no cause to make warre, they assembled together, and some of them sayd, let us goe to make warre in such a place, and then all of them set forward with their weapons. I asked them who commanded the armie : he answered the eldest and most valiant, and that when they sayd they should proceede no farther, that suddenly they retired from the warre. I prayed him to tell me what they did with those men which they killed in battell: he answered me that they tooke out the hearts of some of them, and eat them, and others they burned ; and he added, that if it had not bene for my comming, they should have bin now at warre: and because I commanded them that they should not war, and that they should cease{n}292{n}from armes, therefore as long as I should not command them to take armes, they would not begin to wage warre against others, & they said among themselves, that seeing I was come unto them, they had given over their intention of making warre, & that they had a good mind to live in peace. He complained of certaine people which dwelt behind in a mountaine Certaine war-which made great war upon them, and slew many of ^people bethem 1 1 answered hun} that from henceforward they taint should not need to feare any more, because I had commanded them to be quiet, & if they would not obey my commandement, I would chasten them and kill them.{n}He enquired of me how I could kill them seeing we were so few, and they so many in number. And because it was now late and that I saw by this time he was weary to stay any longer with me, I let him goe out of my boat, and therewith I dismissed him very well content.{n}Chap. 4.{n}Of Naguachato and other chiefe men of those Indians they receive great store of victuals, they cause them to set up a crosse in their countreys, and hee teacheth them to worship it. They have newes of many people, of their divers languages, and customes in matrimony, how they punish adultery, of their opinions concerning the dead, and of the sicknesses which they are subject unto.{n}THe next day betimes in the morning came the chiefe man among them called Naguachato, and wished me to come on land because he had great store of victuals to give me. And because I saw my selfe in securitie I did so without doubting; and incontinently an olde man came with rols of that Maiz, and certaine litle gourds, and calling me with a loud voyce and using many gestures with his body and armes, came neere unto me, and causing me to turne me unto that people, and hee himselfe also turning unto them sayd unto{n}293{n}[HL 431-1 These people are greatly inclined to learne the Christian faith.{n}them, Sagueyca, and all the people answered with a great voyce, Hu, and hee offred to the Sunne a little of every thing that he had there, and likewise a little more unto me (although afterward he gave me all the rest) and did the like to all that were with me : & calling out mine interpreter, by meanes of him I gave them thanks, telling them that because my boats were litle I had not brought many things to give them in exchange, but that I would come againe another time and bring them, and that if they would go with me in my boates unto my ships which I had beneath at the rivers mouth, I would give them many things. They answered that they would do so, being very glad in countenance. Here by the helpe of mine interpreter I sought to instruct them what the signe of the crosse meant, and willed them to bring me a piece of timber, wherof I caused a great crosse to be made, and commanded al those that were with mee that when it was made they should worship it, and beseech the Lord to grant his grace that that so great a people might come to the knowledge of his holy Catholike faith: and this done I told them by mine interpreter that I left them that signe, in token that I tooke them for my brethren, and that they should keepe it for me carefully untill I returned, and that every morning at the Sunne rising they should kneele before it. And they tooke it incontinently, & without suffring it to touch the ground they carried it to set it up in the middest of their houses, where all of them might beholde it; and I willed them alwayes to worshippe it because it would preserve them from evill. They asked me how deep they should set it in the ground, & I shewed them. Great store of people followed the same, and they that stayed behinde inquired of mee, how they should joyne their hands, and how they should kneele to worship the same; and they seemed to have great desire to learne it. This done, I tooke that chiefe man of the Countrey, and going to our boates with him, I followed my journey up the{n}294{n}River, and all the company on both sides of the shoare accompanied me with great good will, and served me in drawing of our boates, and in hailing us off the sands, whereupon we often fel: for in many places we	in{n}found the river so shoald, that we had no water for{n},	.	1	ri fall ofshelfes.{n}our boat. As wee thus went on our way, some or the Indians which I had left behind me, came after us to pray mee that I would throughly instruct them, how they should joyne their hands in the worshipping of the crosse : others shewed me whether they were well set in such & such sort, so that they would not let me be quiet. Neere unto the other side of the river was greater store of people, which called unto me very often, that I would receive the victuals which they had brought me. And because I perceived that one envied the other, because I would not leave them discontented, I did so. And here came	before	me another old man{n}like unto the former with the	like ceremonyes	&	Another olde{n}offrings : and I sought to	learne	something of him	as	man'{n}I had done of the other.	This	man said likewise	to{n}the rest of the people, This is our lord. Now you see how long ago our ancestors told us, that there were bearded & white people in the world, and we laughed them to scorne. I which am old and the rest which are here, have never seene any such people as these. And if you wil not beleeve me, behold these people which be in this river: let us give them therefore meate, seeing they give us of their victuals: let us willingly serve this lord, which wisheth us so well, and forbiddeth us to make warre, and imbraceth all of us: and they have mouth, handes and eyes as we have, and speake as we doe. 1 gave these likewise another crosse as I had done to the others beneath, and said unto them the selfe same words : which they listened unto with a better will, & used greater diligence to learne that which I said. Afterward as I passed farther up the river, I found another people, whom mine interpreter understood not a whit: wherefore I shewed them by signes the selfe-{n}Their ances-ters told them thattherewere bearded and white men In the world.{n}Another nation.{n}295{n}same ceremonies of worshipping the crosse, which I had taught the rest. And that principal old man which I tooke with me, told me that farther up the river I should find people which would understand mine interpreter: and being now late, some of those men called me to give me victuals, and did in all poynts as the others had done, dauncing and playing to shew me pleasure. I desired to know what people lived on the banks of this People of 23. river: and I understood by this man that it was inlanguages habited by 23 languages, and these were bordering upon Ms river the river> besides others not farre ofF, and that there were besides these 23. languages, other people also which hee knewe not, above the river. I asked him whether every people were living in one towne together: and he answered me, No: but that they had many houses standing scattered in the fieldes, and that every people had their Countrey severall and distinguished, and that in every habitation there were great store of people. JcueoasGo- He shewed me a towne which was in a mountaine, mara writeth an(j to|j me that fhere was there great store of people ^ouiuabse^ °f bad conditions, which made continual warre upon them: which being without a governour, and dwelling in that desert place, where small store of Maiz groweth, came downe into the playne to buy it in trucke of Deeres skinnes, wherewith they were apparelled with long garments, which they did cutte with rasors, and sewed with Great houses needles made of Deeres bones: and that they had great of stone. houses of stone. I asked them whether there were any there of that Countrey; and I found one woman which ware a garment like a little Mantle, which clad her from the waste downe to the ground, of a Deeres skin well dressed. Then I asked him whether the people which dwelt on the rivers side, dwelt alwayes there, or els sometime went to dwell in some other place: he answered mee, that in the summer season they aboade there, and sowed there; and after they had gathered in their croppe they went their way, and dwelt in other houses which they had at the foote of the mountaine farre from the 296{n}river. And hee shewed me by signes that the houses were of wood compassed with earth without, and I understood that they made a round house wherein the men Roundhouses. and women lived all together. I asked him whether their women were common or no: he tolde me no, and that hee which was married, was to have but one wife only. I desired to know what order they kept in marying: and he told me, that if any man had a daughter to marry, he went where the people kept, and said, I have a daughter to marry: is there any man here that wil have her ? And if there were any that would have her, he answered that he would have her: and so the mariage was made. And that the father of him which would have her, brought some thing to give the yong woman; and from that houre forward the mariage was taken to{n}be finished, and that they sang & danced: and that when Dancing and night came, the parents tooke them, and left them to- nn&ngatma-gether in a place where no body might see them. And	6{n}I learned that brethren, and sisters, and kinsfolks married not together: and that maydes before they were married conversed not with men, nor talked not with them, but{n}kept at home at their houses and in their possessions,  and wrought: and that if by chance any one had company with men before she were maried, her husband forsooke her, and went away into other Countreyes: and that those women which fell into this fault, were accompted naughty packs. And that if after they were maried, any man were taken in adultery with another woman, they put him to death: and that no man might have more then one wife, but very secretly. They tolde mee that{n}they burned those which dyed: and such as remayned They bume widowes, stayed halfe a yeere, or a whole yeere before their dead-they married. I desired to know what they thought of such as were dead. Hee told me that they went to another world, but that they had neither punishment nor glory. The greatest sicknesse that this people dye of, is vomiting of blood by the mouth : and they have Physicions which cure them with charmes and blowing{n}297{n}which they make. The apparell of these people were Pipes to drinke like the former : they carried their pipes with them to Tobacco with. perfume themselves, like as the people of New Spaine use Tabacco. I inquired whether they had any governour, and found that they had none, but that every family had their severall governour. These people have besides Maiz, gourds, their Maiz certaine gourds, and another corne like unto Mill: they have grindstones & earthen pots, wherein earthenpots, they boyle those gourds, and fish or the river, which goodfish.	are very good. My interpreter could goe no farther then{n}this place: for he said that those which we should find farther on our way, were their enemies, and therefore I sent him backe very well contented. Not long after I espied many Indians to come crying with a loude voice, and running after me. I stayed to know what they would have; and they told me that they had set up the crosse which I had given them, in the midst of their dwellings as I had appointed, but that I was to This river wit, that when the river did overflow, it was wont to ‘banks^fcer*1 reac^ to P^aceJ therefore they prayed mee to give them taine seasons. ^eave to remove it, and to set it in another place where the river could not come at it, nor carry it away: which I granted them.{n}Chap. 5.{n}Of an Indian of that countrey they have relation of the state of Cevola, and of the conditions and customes of these people, and of their governour: and likewise of the countreys not farre distant from thence, whereof one was called Quicoma, and the other Coama: of the people of Quicoma, and of the other Indians not farre distant they receive courtesie.{n}THus sayling I came where were many Indians, and another interpreter, which I caused to come with Colde and	me in my boat.	And	because it	was	cold, & my{n}raine-	people were wet,	I leapt	on shore,	and	commanded a{n}fire to be made,	and as	we stood	thus	warming our{n}298{n}W-selves, an Indian came and strooke me on the arme, pointing with his finger to a wood out of which I saw two companies of men come w‘ their weapons, & he told me that they came to set upon us: & because I meant not to fall out with any of them, I retired my company into our boats, & the Indians which were with me swam into the water, and saved themselves on the other side of the river. In the meane season I inquired of that Indian which I had with me, what people they were that came out of ye wood: and he told me that they were their enemies, and therefore these others at their approch without saying any word leapt into the water: and did so, because they meant to turne backe againe, being without weapons, because they brought none with them, because they understood my wil & pleasure, that they should cary none. I inquired the same things of this interpreter which I had done of the other of the things of that countrey, because I understood that among some people one man used to have many wives, and among others but one. Now I understood by him, that he had bin at Cevola, and that it was a moneths journey from his country, and that from that place by a path that went along that river a man Cevola 40 might easily travel thither in xl. daies, and that the occasion that moved him to go thither, was only to see tk^river* ? Cevola, because it was a great thing, & had very hie houses of stone of 3. or 4. lofts, and windowes on ech side; that the houses were compassed about with a wall conteining the height of a man & an halfe, and that aloft & beneath they were inhabited with people, and that they used the same weapons, that others used, which we had seene, that is to say, bowes & arrowes, maces, staves & bucklers: and that they had one governor, & that they were apparelled with mantles, and with oxe-hides, & that their mantles had a painting about them, and that their governour ware a long shirt very fine girded unto him, and over the same divers mantles: and that the women ware very long garments, and that they were{n}299{n}white, and went all covered: and that every day many Indians wayted at the gate of their governor to serve Turqueses in him, & that they did weare many Azure or blew stones, Cevola. which were digged out of a rocke of stone, and that they had but one wife, with whom they were maried, and that when their governors died, all the goods that they had were buried with them. And likewise all the while they eate, many  of their men waite at their table to court them, and see them eate, and they eate with napkins, and that they have bathes. On thursday morning at breake of day the Indians came with the like cry to the banke of the river, and with greater desire to serve us, bringing me meat to eat, and making me the like good cheere, which the others had done unto me, having understood what I was: & I gave them crosses, with the self same order which I did unto the former. And going farther up the river, I came to a country where I found better government: for the inhabitants are wholy obedient unto one only. But returning againe to conferre with mine interpreter touching the dwellings of those of Cevola, he tolde me, that the lord of that countrey had a dog like that which I caried with me. Afterward when I called for dinner, this interpreter saw certaine dishes caried in the first and later service, whereupon he told me that the lord of Cevola had also such as those were, but that they were greene, and that none other had of them saving their governour, and that they were 4. which he had gotten together This was the with that dogge, and other things, of a blacke man ^wentwlth which had a beard, but that he knew not from what ™rier Marco Quarter he came thither, and that the king caused him de Niza. afterward to be killed, as he heard say. I asked him whether he knew of any towne that was neere unto that place : he tolde me that above the river he knew some, & that among the rest there was a lord of a Quicoma.	towne called Quicoma, and another of a towne called{n}Coama.	Coama : and that they had great store of people under{n}them. And after he had given me this information, he{n}300{n}i54°-craved leave of me to returne unto his companions. From hence I began againe to set saile, and within a dayes sayling I found a towne dispeopled: where assoone as I was entred, by chance there arrived there 500. Indians with their bowes & arrowes, and with them was that principali Indian called Naguachato, which I had left behind, and brought with them certaine conies Conies and & yucas : and after I had friendly interteined them all, departing from them, I gave them license to returne to their houses. As I passed further by the desert, I came to certain cotages, out of which much people came toward me with an old man before them, crying in a language which mine interpreter wel understood, and he said unto those men : Brethren, you see here that lord; let us give him such as we have, seeing he dooth us pleasure, and hath passed through so many discourteous people, to come to visit us. And having thus said, he ofired to the Sunne, and then to me in like sort as the rest had done. These had certaine great bags & well made of the skins of fishes called Sea-bremes. And I understood that this was a towne belonging unto the lord of Quicoma, which people came thither onely to gather the fruit of their harvest in summer ; and among them I found one which understood mine interpreter very well: whereupon very easily I gave them the like instruction of the crosse which I had given to others behind. These people had cotton, but Cotton. they were not very carefull to use the same : because there was none among them that knew the arte of weaving, & to make apparel thereof. They asked me how they should set up their crosse when they were come to their dwelling which was in the mountaine, and whether A mountaine. it were best to make an house about it, that it might not be wet, & whether they should hang any thing upon the armes thereof. I said no ; & that it sufficed to set it in a place where it might be seene of all men, until I returned : and lest peradventure any men of warre should come that way, they ofired mee more men to goe with{n}301{n}me, saying that they were naughty men which I should finde above; but I would have none : neverthelesse 20. of them went with me, which when I drew neere unto those which were their enemies, they warned mee thereof: and I found their centinels set upon their guarde on their borders. On Saturday morning I found a great squadron of people sitting under an exceeding great arbour, & another part of them without: and when I saw that they rose not up, I passed along on my voyage: when they beheld this, an old man rose up which said unto me, Sir, why doe you not receive victuals to eate of us, seeing you have taken food of others ? I answered, that I tooke nothing but that which was given me, & that I went to none but to such as requested me. Here without any stay they brought me victuals, saying unto me, that because I entred not into their houses, and stayed all day and all night in the river, and because I was the sonne of the Sunne, all men were to receive me for their lord. I made them signes to sit down, and called that old man which mine interpreter understood, and asked him whose that countrey was, and whether the lord thereof were there, he said, yea: and I called him to me; and when he was come, I imbraced him, shewing him great love: & when I saw that all of them tooke great pleasure at the friendly interteinment which I gave him, I put a shirt upon him, and gave him other trifles, and willed mine interpreter to use the like speaches to that lord which he had done to the rest; and that done, I gave him a crosse, which he received with a very good wil, as the others did: and this lord went a great way with me, untill I was called unto from the other side of the river, where the former old man stood with much people : to whom I gave another crosse, using the like speach to them which I had unto the rest, to wit, how they should use it. Then following my way, I mette with another great company of people, with whom came that very same olde man whom mine interpreter under-{n}302{n}stood; and when I saw their lord which he shewed unto me, I prayed him to come with me into my boat, which he did very willingly, and so I went still up the river, and the olde man came and shewed me who were the chiefe lords : and I spake unto them alwayes with great courtesie, 8c all of them shewed that they rejoyced much thereat, 8c spake very wel of my com-ming thither. At night I withdrew my selfe into the midst of the river, 8c asked him many things concerning that country: and I found him as willing 8c wel disposed to shew them me, as I was desirous to know them. I asked him of Cevola: and he told me he had bin there, and that it was a goodly thing, 8c that the lord thereof was very wel obeyed: and that there were other lords thereabout, with whom he was at continual warre. I asked him whether they had silver 8c gold, and he beholding certaine bels, said they had metal of their colour. I inquired whether they made it there, and he answered me no, but that they brought it from a certain mountaine, where an old woman dwelt. I demanded whether he had any knowledge of a river called Totonteac, he answered me no, but of another exceeding mighty river, wherein there were such huge Crocodiles, that of their hides they made bucklers, and that they worship the Sunne neither more nor lesse then those which I had passed: and when they offer unto him the fruits of the earth, they say: Receive hereof, for thou hast created them, and that they loved him much, because he warmed them; and that when he brake not foorth, they were acolde. Herein reasoning with him, he began somewhat to complaine, saying unto me, I know not wherefore the Sunne useth these termes with us, because he giveth us not clothes, nor people to spin nor to weave them, nor other things which he giveth to many other, and he complayned that those of that country would not suffer them to come there, and would not give them of their corne. I tolde him that I would remedie this, whereat he remayned very well satisfied.{n}3°3{n}A.D.{n}1540.{n}Cevola a goodly thing.{n}Gold and silver in a mountaine neere Cevola.{n}A mighty river.{n}This river seemeth to bee Northward by the colde.{n}They are advertised by the Indians, wherefore the lorde of Cevola killed the Negro, which went with Frier Marco, and of many other things : And of an old woman called Guatazaca, which liveth in a lake and eateth no food. The description of a beast, of the skinne whereof they make targets. The suspition that they conceive of them, that they are of those Christians which were seene at Cevola, and how they cunningly save themselves.{n}THe next day which was Sunday before breake of day, began their cry as they were woont: and this was the cry of 2. or 3. sorts of people, which had lyen all night neere the rivers side, wayting for me : and they tooke Maiz & other corne in their mouth, and sprinkled me therewith, saying that that was the fashion which they used when they sacrificed unto the Sunne : afterward they gave me of their victuals to eat, and among other things, they gave me many white peason. I gave them a crosse as I had done to the rest: and in the meane season that old man tolde them great matters of my doing, and poynted me out with his finger, saying, this is the lord, the sonne of the Sunne : and they made me to combe my beard, & to set mine apparell handsomely which I ware upon my backe. And so great was the confidence that they had in me, that all of them told me what things had passed, & dick passe among them, & what good or bad mind they bare one toward another. I asked them wherefore they imparted unto me all their secrets, and that old man answered mee : Thou art our lord, & we ought to hide nothing from our lord. After these things, following on our way, I began againe to inquire of him the state of Cevola, & whether he knewe that those of this countrey had ever seene people like unto us : he answered me no, saving one Negro which ware about his legs & armes certain things which did ring. Your lordship 3°4{n}is to cal to mind how this Negro which went with frier 2% Negro Marco was wont to weare bels, & feathers on his armes & legs, & that he caried plates of divers colours, and that it was not much above a yeere agoe since he came into those parts. I demanded upon what occasion he was killed; and he answered me, That the lord of Cevola inquired of him whether he had other brethren : he answered that he had an infinite number, and that they had great store of weapons with them, and that they were not very farre from thence. Which when he had heard, many of the chiefe men consulted together, and resolved to kil him, that he might not give newes unto cause these his brethren, where they dwelt, &-that for this w^refire^te-cause they slew him, and cut him into many pieces, the Negro was which were divided among all those chiefe lords, that slalne. they might know assuredly that he was dead ; and also that he had a dogge like mine, which he likewise killed a great while after. I asked him whether they of Cevola{n}had any enemies, and he said they had. And he reckoned They of unto me 14. or 15. lords which had warre with them: C^^have and that they had mantles, and bowes like those above ^d^their mentioned: howbeit he told me that I should find going enemies. up the river a people that had no warre neither with their neighbors, nor with any other. He told me that they had 3. or 4. sorts of trees bearing most excellent{n}fruite to eate : and that in a certaine lake dwelt an olde Anoldewoman woman, which was much honoured and worshipped of cAled Guatu-them : and that shee remayned in a litle house which ^or-e was there, and that she never did eate any thing : and shipped.{n}that there they made things which did sound, and that  many mantles, feathers and Maiz were given unto her. Antonio d^Es-I asked what her name was, and he tolde me that she was called Guatuzaca, and that thereabout were many 1^ lords which in their life & death, used the like orders which they of Cevola did, which had their dwelling in the summer with painted mantles, and in the winter dwelt in houses of wood of 2. or 3. lofts hie: and that he had seene all these things, saving the old woman.{n}ix	305	u{n}This might be the crooke backed oxe of Quivira.{n}The sea side.{n}And when againe I began to aske him more questions, he would not answere me, saying that he was wearie of me : and many of those Indians comming about me, they said among themselves : Let us marke him well, that we may knowe him when he commeth backe againe. The Monday following, the river was beset with people like to them, and I began to request the old man to tell me what people were in that countrey, which told me he thought I would soone forget them: and here he reckoned up unto me a great number of lords, and people at the least 200. And discoursing with him of their armour, he said that some of them had certaine very large targets of lether, above two fingers thicke. I asked him of what beasts skinne they made them : and he described unto me a very great beast, like unto an Oxe, but longer by a great handfull, with broad feete, the legs as bigge as the thigh of a man, and the head seven hand-fulls long, the forehead of three spannes, and the eyes bigger then ones fist, and the homes of the length of a mans leg, out of which grew sharpe poynts, an handfull long, the forfeete and hinderfeete above seven handfuls bigge, with a wrethed tayle, but very great; and holding up his armes above his head, he said the beast was higher then that. After this hee gave mee information of another olde woman which dwelt toward the sea side. I spent this day in giving crosses to those people as I had done unto the former. This old man that was with me leapt on shore, 8c fell in conference with another which that day had often called him ; and here both of them used many gestures in their speach, mooving their armes, and poynting at me. Therefore I sent mine interpreter out, willing him to drawe neere unto them, and listen what they said; and within a while I called him, and asked him whereof they talked, and he sayd, that he which made those gestures said unto the other, that in Cevola there were others like unto us with beards, and that they said they were Christians, and that both of them sayd that we were all of one company, 306{n}and that it were a good deede to kill us, that those others might have no knowledge of us, lest they might come to doe them harme: and that the old man had answered him, this is the sonne of the Sunne, & our lord, he doth us good, and wil not enter into our houses, although we request him thereunto : he will take away nothing of ours, he wil meddle with none of our women, and that to be short, he had spoken many other things in my commendation and favour : and for all this the other stedfastly affirmed that we were all one, and that the old man said, Let us goe unto him, and aske him whether he be a Christian as the other{n}1540.{n}The Savages treasons to be taken heede of.{n}be, or els the sonne of the Sunne : and the old man{n}came unto me, and sayd : In the countrey of Cevola whereof you spake unto me doe other men like unto you dwell. Then I began to make as though I wondred, and answered him, that it was impossible; and they assured me that it was true, and that two men had seene them which came from thence, which reported that they had things which did shoote fire, and swords as we had. I asked them whether they had seene them with their owne eyes? and they answered no; but that certaine of their companions had seene them. Then he asked mee whether I were the sonne of the Sunne, I answered him yea. They said that those Christians of Cevola said so likewise. And I answered them that it might well be. Then they asked mee if those Christians of Cevola came to joyne themselves with me, whether I would joyne with them : and I answered them, that they needed not to feare any whit at all, for if they were the sonnes of the Sunne as they said, they must needes be my brethren, and would use towards all men the like love{n}Certaine news of the Span yards at Cevola.{n}and courtesie which I used: whereupon hereat they seemed to be somewhat satisfied.{n}307{n}[Chap. 7{n}It is tolde him that they are ten dayes journey distant from Cevola, and that there be Christians there, which make warre against the lords of that countrey. Of the Sodomie which those Indians use with foure yong men appoynted for that service, which weare womens apparel. Seeing they could not send newes of their being there to them of Cevola, they went backe againe downe the river to their ships.{n}Cevola tenne r ■ ^en I prayed them to tel me how many dayes that ^fromMs^lace kingdom of Cevola, which they spake of, was distant A desert of fr°m that river : and that man answered, that there was ten dayesjour- the space of tenne dayes journey without habitation, ne3- and that he made none accompt of the rest of the way, because there were people to be found. Upon this advertisement I was desirous to certifie Captaine Francis Vazquez of my being there, and imparted my mind  with my souldiers, among whom I found none that was willing to goe thither, although I offered them many rewards in your lordships name, onely one Negro slave though with an evil wil offr ed himselfe unto me to go thither: but I looked for the comming of those two Indians which they told me of, and herewithall we went on our way up the river against the streame in such sort as we had done before. Here that olde man shewed me as a strange thing a sonne of his clad in womans apparel, exercising their office : I asked him how many there were of these among them, and he told me there were foure ; & that when any of them died, there was a search made of all the women with child which were in the country, and that the first sonne which was borne of them, was appoynted to doe that duetie belonging unto women, and that the women clad him in their apparell, saying, that seeing he was to doe that which belonged to them, he should weare their apparel: these yong men may not have carnail copulation with any woman : but all the yong men of the countrey which are to marrie, 308{n}may company with them. These men receive no kind of reward for this incestuous act of the people of that countrey, because they have libertie to take whatsoever they find in any house for their food. I saw likewise certaine women which lived dishonestly among men : and I asked the old man whether they were married, who answered me noe, but they were common women, which lived apart from the married women. I came at length after these discourses to pray them to send for those Indians, which they said had bin at Cevola, & they told me that they were eight dayes journey distant from that place, but that notwithstanding there was one among them which was their companion and which had spoken with them, as he met them on the way, when they went to see the kingdome of Cevola, and that they told him that he were not best to goe any farther, for he should find there a fierce nation like us, and of the same qualities and making, which had fought much with the people of Cevola, because they had killed a Negro of their company, saying, Wherefore, have yee killed him ? what did he to you ? did he take any bread from you, or do you any other wrong ? and such like speach. And they said moreover, that these people were called Christians, which dwelt in a great house, & that many of them had oxen like those of Cevola, and Oxen of other litle blacke beasts with wooll and homes, & that ^evola-some of them had beasts which they rode upon, which ran very swiftly; & that one day before their departure, from sunne rising untill sunne setting these Christians were all day in comming thither, & all of them lodged in that place where others had lodged, & that these two met with two Christians, which asked them whence they were, & whether they had fields sowen with corne; and they told them that they dwelt in a farre country, and that they had corne, and that then they gave each of them a litle cap, and they gave them another to cary to their other companions, which they promised to do, & departed quickly. When I understood this, I spoke{n}3°9{n}againe with my company, to see if any one of them would go thither, but I found them unwilling as at the first, and they layd against me greater inconveniences. Then I called the old man to see if he would give me any people to goe with me, & victuals to travel through A desert, that wildernes, but he laid before me many inconveniences & dangers, which I might incurre in that voyage, shewing me the danger that there was in passing by a Cumana, lord of Cumana, which threatned to make warre upon them, because his people had entred into the others countrey to take a stagge, and that I should not therefore depart thence without seeing him punished. And when I replied that in any wise I must needes goe to Cevola, he willed me to surcease from that purpose, for they looked that that lord without al doubt would come to annoy them, 8c that therefore they could not leave their countrey naked to goe with me, and that it would be better, that I would make an end of that warre betweene them, and that then I might have their company to Cevola. And upon this point we grew to such variance, that we began to grow into choler, and in a rage he would have gone out of the boat, but I stayed him, and with gentle speeches began to pacific him, seeing that it imported mee much to have him my friend: but for all my courtesies which I shewed him, I could not alter him from his mind, wherein he stil remained obstinate. In this meane while I sent a man away unto my ships to give them knowledge of the journey that I had determined to make. After this I prayed the old man that he would fetch him backe againe, because I had determined, that seeing I saw no meanes to be able to go to Cevola, 8c because I would stay no longer among those people, because they should not discover me, and likewise because I meant in person to visit my ships, with determination to returne againe up the river, carying with me other companions, 8c leave there some which I had sicke, and telling the olde man and the rest that I would returne, and leaving them satisfied the best I{n}310{n}could (although they alwayes said that I went away for feare) I returned downe the river: and that way which I had gone against the streame up the river in 15. dayes and an halfe, I made in my returne in 2. dayes and an halfe, because the streame was great and very swift. In this wise going downe the river, much people came to the banks, saying, Sir, wherefore doe you leave us ? what discourtesie hath bin done unto you ? did you{n}He returneth in 2. dayes and an halfe to his ships.{n}not say that you would remayne continually with us, and be our Lord ? And turne back againe ? if any  man above the river hath done you any wrong we will goe with our weapons with you and kill him; and such like words ful of love and kindnes.{n}Chap. 8.{n}When they came to their shippes the Captaine named that coast La Campanna de la Cruz, and builded a Chapel unto our Lady, and called the river El Rio de Buena Guia, and returned up the same againe: when he came to Quicona and Coama the Lords of those places used him very courteously.{n}UPon mine arrivall at my ships I found all my people in health, although very heavie for my long stay, and because the current had fretted fower of their cables, and that they had lost two ankers which were recovered. After we had brought our ships together, I caused them to bring them into a good harbour, & to give the carena to the shippe called Sanct Peter, & to mend all things that were needfull. And here assembling all my company together, I opened unto them what knowledge I had received of Francis Vasquez; and how it might be that in those sixteene dayes space which I was in sayling up the river he might peradventure have some knowledge of me, and that I was minded to returne up the river once againe to try if I could finde any meanes to joyne my selfe with him: and although some spake against my determination, I caused al my boates to bee made ready, because the ships had no need of{n}311{n}Marke what them. I caused one of them to be filled with wares things the of exchange, with corne and other seedes, with hennes Spamardes & cockes of Castile, and departed up the river, leaving in newe dis- order that in that province called Campanna de la Cruz emeries. they should build an Oratorie or Chapell, and called it the Chappell of our Lady de la Buena Guia, and that Rio de buena they should call this river Rio de Buena Guia because Guia- that is your Lordships Devise: I carried with me Nicolas Zamorano Pilote mayor, to take the height of the pole. And I departed on tuesday the fourteenth of September, & on Wednesday I came unto the first dwellings of the first Indians, which came running to hinder my passage, supposing that we had bene other people, for we caried with us a fifer, & a drummer, and I was clad in other apparell then I went in before, when they saw me first of all: and when they knew me they stayed, though I could not grow unto perfect friendship with them, whereupon I gave them some of those seedes which I brought with mee ; teaching them how they should sow them: and after I had sayled 3 leagues, my first interpretour came even to my boat to seeke me with great joy, of whom I demanded wherefore he had left me, he tolde me that certaine companions of his had led him away. I made him good countenance and better intertainment, because he should beare me companie againe, considering howe much it did importe me to have him with me. He excused himselfe because he{n}Parrats in stayed there to bring mee certaine feathers of Parrats, these parts.	which he{n}gave me. I asked him what people these were, and whether they had any Lord: hee answered me, yea; and named three or foure unto me, of foure or 25 names of people which he knew and that they had houses painted within, and that they had trafficke with Two moones those of Cevola, and that in two moones hee came into to Cevola. the countrey. He told me moreover many other names Lords, and other people, which I have written downe particulars of in a b°oke ot mine, which 1 will bring my selfe unto that countrey. your Lordship. But I thought good to deliver this{n}312{n}. . . . . . I54°‘ briefe relation to Augustine Guerriero in this haven of Colima, that he might send it overland to your Lord-shippe, to whom I have many other things to imparte.{n}But to returne to my journey, I arrived at Quicama, Quicoma. where the Indians came forth with great joy and gladnes to receive me, advertizing me that their Lord waited for my comming; to whom when I was come I found that he had with him five or sixe thousand men without weapons, from whom he went aparte with some two hundred onely, all which brought victuals with them, and so he came towards me, going before the rest with great authoritie, and before him and on each side of him were certaine which made the people stande aside, making him way to passe. Hee ware a garment close before and behind and open on both sides, fastened with buttons, wrought with white and blacke checker worke, it was very soft and well made, being of the skinnes of certaine delicate fishes called Sea breams. Assoone as he was come to the waters side his servants tooke him up in their armes, and brought him into my boate, where I embraced him and received him with great joy, shewing unto him much kindnesse: upon which intertainment his people standing by and beholding the same seemed not a litle to rejoyce. This Lord turning himselfe to his people willed them to consider my courtesie, and that he being of his owne accord come unto me with a strange people, they might see how good a man I was, and with how great love I had entertained him, and that therefore they should take me for their Lord, and that all of them should become my servants, and doe whatsoever 1 would  command them. There I caused him to sit downe, and to eat certaine conserves of sugar which I had brought with mee, and willed the interpreter to thanke him in my name for the favour which he had done me in vouchsafing to come to see mee, recommending unto him the worshipping of the crosse, and all such other things as I had recommended to the{n}313{n}rest of the Indians; namely that they should live in peace, and should leave off warres, and should continue alwayes good friendes together: he answered that of long time they had continued in warres with their neighbours, but that from thence forward he would command his people that they should give food to all strangers that passed through his kingdome, and that they should doe them no kinde of wrong, and that if any nation should come to invade him, he said he would tell them howe I had commanded that they should live in peace, and if they refused the same, he would defend himselfe, and promised me, that he would never goe to seeke warre, if others came not to invade him. Then I gave him certaine trifles, as well of the seedes which I brought, as of the hens of Castile, wherewith he was not a litle pleased. And at my departure I caryed certaine of his people with me, to make friendship betweene them and those other people which dwelt above the River: and here the interpreter came unto me, to crave leave to returne home; and I gave him certaine gifts wherewith he departed greatly satisfied.{n}Coama. The next day I came to Coama, and many of them knew me not, seeing me clad in other aparrel, but the old man which was there as soone as he knew me leapt into the water, saying unto me, Sir, lo here is the man which you left with me, which came forth very joyfull & pleasant declaring unto me the great courtesies which that people had shewed him, saying that they had stroven together who should have him to his house, and that it was incredible to thinke what care they had at the rising of the Sunne to hold up their hands and kneele before the Crosse. I gave them of my seedes, and thanked them hartily for the good entertainement which they had shewed my man, and they besought me that I would leave him with them, which I granted them untill my return, and he stayed among them very willingly. Thus I went forward up the River, taking that olde man in my companie, which told mee, that two{n}314{n}Indians came from Cumana to enquire for the Christians, Cumana. & that he had answered them that he knew none such, but that he knew one which was the sonne of the Sunne, and that they had perswaded him to joyne with them Treason of the to kill mee and my companions. I wished him to lend me two Indians, and I would send word by them, that I would come unto them, and was desirous of their friendship, but if that they on the contrary would have warre, I would make such a warre with them, that should displease them. And so I passed through all that people, and some came and asked me, why I had not given them Crosses as well as the rest, and so I gave them some.{n}Chap. 9.{n}They goe on land, and see the people worship the Crosse which they had given them. The Captaine causeth an Indian to make a draught of the countrey : hee sendeth a Crosse to the Lord of Cumana, and going down the River with the streame, he arriveth at his ships. Of the error of the Pilots of Cortez as touching the situation of this Coast.{n}THe next day I went on land to see certaine cottages, and I found many women and children holding up their hands and kneeling before a Crosse which I had given them. When I came thither I did the like my self; and conferring with the old man, he began to informe me of as many people and Provinces as he knew. And when evening was come I called the old man to come and lodge with mee in my boate; hee answered that hee would not goe with mee because I would wearie him with asking him questions of so many matters: I told him that I would request him nothing else but that he would set me downe in a charte as much as he knew concerning that River, and what maner of people those were which dwelt upon the banckes thereof on both sides : which he did willingly. And then he requested me that I would describe my countrey unto him, as he had done his unto me. And for to{n}315{n}content him, I caused a draught of certaine things to be made for him. The next day I entred betweene certaine very high mountaines, through which this River passeth with a streight chanel, and the boats went up against the streame very hardly for want of men to draw the same. Here certaine Indians came and told me, that in the same place, there were certaine people of Cumana, An Inchanter, and among the rest an enchanter, who enquired which way we would passe; & they telling him that we meant to passe by the River, he set certaine canes on both sides thereof, through which wee passed, without receiving any kinde of domage which they intended against us. Thus going forward I came unto the house of the olde man which was in my company, and here I caused a very high Crosse to be set up, wherupon I engraved certaine letters to signifie that I was come thither: and this I did, that if by chance any of the people of the  generail Vasquez de Coronado should come thither, they might have knowledge of my being there. At length seeing I could not attaine to the knowledge of that which I sought for, I determined to returne backe unto my ships. And being ready to depart there arrived two Indians, which by meanes of the interpreters of the old man, told me that they were sent to me, and that they were of Cumana, and that their Lord could not come himselfe, because he was farre from that place, but desired me to signifie unto him what my pleasure was. I told them, that I wished that he would alwayes imbrace peace, and that I was comming to see that countrey, but being inforced to returne backe downe the River I could not now doe it, but that hereafter I would returne, and that in the meane season they should give that Crosse unto their Lorde, which they promised me to do, and they went directly to cary him that Crosse with certaine This River feathers which were on the same. Of these I sought to ^he^up^n' understand what people dwelt upward upon the bankes he^tra^ the &iverJ which gave me knowledge of many people, veiled. and told me that the River went farre more up into the{n}316{n}land then I had yet seene, but that they knew not the head thereof, because it was very far into the countrey, and that many other Rivers fell into the same.{n}Having learned thus much the next day morning I returned downe the River, and the day following I came where I had left my Spaniard, with whom I spake, and told him that all things had gone well with me, and that at this time and the former I had gone above 30 leagues into the countrey. The Indians of that place inquired of me what the cause was of my departure, and when I would returne; to whom I answered, that I would returne shortly. Thus sayling downe the streame, a woman leapt into the water crying unto us to stay for her, and shee came into our boate, and crept under a bench, from whence we could not make her to come out: I understood that shee did this, because her husband had taken unto him another wife, by whom hee had children, saying that she ment not to dwell any longer with him, seeing he had taken another wife. Thus shee and another Indian came with me of their owne accord, and so I came into my ships, and making them ready we proceeded home on our voyage, coasting and oftentimes going on land, and entering a great way into the countrey, to see if I could learne any newes of Captaine Francis Vasquez and his companie; of whom I could have no other knowledge, but such as I learned in the aforesaide River. I bring with me many actes of taking possession of all that Coast. And by the situation of the River, and the height which I tooke, I finde that that which the Masters and Pilots of the Marquesse tooke is false, & that they were deceived by 2 degrees, and I have sayled beyond them above 4 degrees. I sayled up He sayled it, the River 8 5 leagues, where I saw and learned all the	the{n}particulars before mentioned, and many other things; ' whereof when it shall please God to give mee leave to kisse your Lordships hands, I will deliver you the full and perfect relation. I thinke my selfe to have had{n}317{n}very good fortune, in that I found Don Luis de Castilia, The port of and Augustine Ghenero in the port of Colima : for the Colima. Galiot of the Adelantado came upon mee, which was there with the rest of his fleet, and commanded me to strike sayle, which seeming a strange thing unto me, and not understanding in what state things were in Nueva Espanna, I went about to defend my selfe, and not to doe it. In the meane while came Don Luis de Castilia in a boate and conferred with mee, and I lay at anchor on the other side of the haven where the saide fleete road, and I gave unto him this relation (and to avoyd striffe I determined to sayle away by night) which relation I caryed about me briefly written; for I alwayes had a purpose to send the same, as soone as I should touch upon Nueva Espanna, to advertize your Lordship of my proceedings.{n}.