A Letter written by the most honourable Lord Don Antonio de Mendosa, Vice-roy of Nueva Espanna, to the Emperors Majestie.
Of certaine Noblemen which sought to discover the end of the firme land of Nueva Espanna toward the North. The arrivall of Vazquez de Coronado with Frier Marco at S. Michael of Culiacan, with commission to the Governors of those partes, to pacific the Indians, and not to make them slaves any more.
N the ships that went last from hence (wherof Michael de Usnago was Admiral) I wrote unto your Majestie, how I had sent two Franciscan Friers to discover the end of this firme land, which stretcheth to the North. And because their journey fell out to greater purpose then was
looked for, I will declare the whole matter from the beginning. It may please your Majestie to call to mind how often I wrote unto your Highnesse, that I desired to know the ende of this Province of Nueva Espanna, because it is so great a countrey, and that we have yet no knowledge thereof. Neither had I onely this desire ; for Nunno de Guzman departed out of this city of Mexico with 400. horsemen, and 14000. Indians footemen borne in these Indias, being the best men, & the best furnished, which have bene seene in these parts : and he did so litle with them, that the most part of them were consumed in the enterprize, & could not enter nor discover any more then already was discovered. After this the saide Nunno Guzman beeing Governour of Nueva Galicia, sent Cap-taines and Horsemen foorth divers times, which sped no better then he had done. Likewise the Marques de valle Hernando Cortez sent a captaine with 2. ships to discover the coast: which 2. ships and the captaine perished. After that he sent againe 2. other ships, one of the which
121
This was the Port of Santa Cruz, in the Isle of California.
was divided from her consort, and the Master and cer-taine mariners slue the captaine, & usurped over the ship. After this they came to an Island, where the Master with certaine mariners going on land, the Indians of the country slew them, and tooke their boat: and the ship with those that were in it, returned to the coast of Nueva Galicia, where it ran on ground. By the men which came home in this ship, the Marques had knowledge of the countrey which they had discovered : and then, either for the discontentment which hee had with the bishop of Saint Domingo, and with the Judges of this royal audience in Mexico, or rather because of his so prosperous successe in all things here in Nueva Espanna, without seeking any farther intelligence of the state of that Island, he set forward on that voyage with 3. Ships, and with certaine footemen and horsemen, not throughly furnished with things necessary; which fell out so contrary to his expectation, that the most part of the people which he carryed with him, dyed of hunger. And although he had ships, and a Countrey very neere him abounding with victuals, yet could hee never finde meanes to conquer it, but rather it seemed, that God miraculously did hide it from him: and so he returned home without atchieving ought else of moment. After this, having heere in my company Andrew Dorantez, which is one of those who were in the voyage of Panphilo Narvaez, I often was in hand with him, supposing that he was able to doe your Majestie great service, to imploy him with fortie or fiftie horses, to search out the secret of those parts: and having provided all things necessary for his journey, and spent much money in that behalfe, the matter was broken ofF, I wot not how, and that enterprise was given over. Yet of the things which were provided for that purpose, I had left mee a Negro, which returned from the foresayde voyage of Narvaez, with Dorantez, and certaine slaves which I had bought, and certaine Indians which I had gathered together, who were borne in those North partes, whome I sent with
122
Frier Marco de Ni^a, and his companion a Franciscan Frier, because they had bene long travelled, and exercised in those partes, and had great experience in the affaires of the Indies, and were men of good life and conscience, for whom I obtained leave of their superiours: and so they went with Francis Vazquez de Coronado, governour of Nueva Galicia unto the Citie of Saint Michael of Culiacan, which is the last Province subdued by the Spaniards towarde that quarter, being two hundred leagues distant from this Citie of Mexico. Assoone as the governour, and the Friers were come unto that Citie, hee sent certaine of those Indians which I had given him, home into their Countrey, to signifie, and declare to the people of the same, That they were to understand, that your Majestie had commaunded they should not hereafter bee made slaves, and that they should not be afrayd any more, but might returne unto their houses, and live peaceably in them, (for before that time they had bin greatly troubled by the evill dealings which were used toward them) and that your Majestie would cause them to be chastened, which were the causes of their vexation. With these Indians about twentie dayes after returned about 400 men; which comming before the governour said unto him, that they came on the behalfe of al their Countrey-men, to tell him, that they desired to see and know those men which did them so great a pleasure as to suffer them to returne to their houses, and to sow Maiz for their sustenance: for by the space of many yeres they were driven to flee into the mountaines, hiding themselves like wild beasts, for feare lest they should be made slaves, and that they and all the rest of their people were ready to doe whatsoever should bee commaunded them. Whom the governour comforted with good wordes, and gave them victuals, and stayed them with him three or foure dayes, wherein the Friers taught them to make the signe of the Crosse, and to learne the name of our Lorde Jesus Christ, and they with great diligence sought to learne
123
A.D.
1539-
Valle de lot Corazones mentioned by Vazquez de Coronado cap. i.
the same. After these dayes hee sent them home againe, willing them not to be afraid, but to be quiet, giving them apparel, beades, knives, and other such like things, which I had given him for such purposes. The sayde Indians departed very well pleased, and said, that whensoever hee would send for them, they and many others would come to doe whatsoever he would command them. The entrance being thus prepared, Frier Marco and his companion, with the Negro and other slaves, and Indians which I had given him, went forward on their voyage io. or 12. dayes after. And because I had likewise advertisement of a certaine Province called Topira situate in the mountaines, and had appoynted the governour Vazquez de Coronado, that he should use meanes to learne the state thereof; he supposing this to be a matter of great moment, determined himselfe to goe and search it, having agreed with the sayd Frier, that he should returne by that part of the mountaine, to meete with him in a certaine valley called Valle de los Corazones, beeing 120. leagues distant from Culiacan. The governour travelling into this province (as I have written in my former letters) found great scarcity of victuals there, and the mountaines so craggy, that he could finde no way to passe forward, and was inforced to returne home to Saint Michael : so that aswell in chusing of the entrance, as in not being able to finde the way, it seemeth unto all men, that God would shut up the gate to all those, which by strength of humane force have gone about to attempt this enterprise, and hath reveiled it to a poore and bare-footed Frier. And so the Frier beganne to enter into the Land, who because he found his entrance so well prepared, was very well received; and because he wrote the whole successe of his voyage, according to the instruction which I had given him to undertake the same, I wil not write any more at large, but send your Majestie this copy of all such things as he observed in the same.
.