A voyage made by M. Roger Bodenham to S.  John de Ullua in the bay of Mexico, in the yeere 1564.{n}Roger Bodenham having a long time lived in the city of Sivil in Spaine, being there married, and by occasion thereof using trade and traffique to the parts of Barbary, grew at length to great losse and hinderance by that new trade begun by me in the city of Fez: whereupon being{n}returned into Spaine, I began to call my wits about mee, and to consider with my selfe by what meanes I might recover and renew my state; and in conclusion, by the ayde of my friends, I procured a ship called The Barke Fox, perteining to London, of the burden of eight or nine score tunnes; and with the same I made a voyage to the West India, having obteined good favour with the Spanish merchants, by reason of my long abode, and marriage in the countrey. My voyage was in the company of the general Don Pedro Melendes for Nova Hispania: who being himselfe appointed general for Terra Firma and Peru, made his sonne general for New Spaine, although Pedro Melendes himselfe was the principali man and directer in both fleets. We all departed from Cadiz together the last day of May in the yere 1564: and I with my ship being under the conduct of the sonne of Don Pedro aforesayd, arrived with him in Nova Hispania, where immediatly I tooke order for the discharge of my merchandise at the port of Vera Cruz, otherwise called Villa Rica, to be transported thence to the city of Mexico, which is sixty and odde leagues distant from the sayd port of Villa Rica. In the way are many good townes, as namely, Pueblo de los Angeles, and another called Tlaxcalan. The city of Mexico hath three great causeyes to bring men to it, compassed with a lake, so that it needeth no walles, 359{n}A nevi trade begun in the city of Fez. by Roger Bodenham.{n}The place where Cochi-nilla groweth, and the price thereof.{n}being so defended by the water. It is a city plentifull of all necessary things, having many faire houses, churches, and monasteries. I having continued in the countrey the space of nine moneths, returned againe for Spaine with the Spanish fleet, and delivered the merchandise and silver which I had in the ship into the Contractation house, and there received my fraight, which amounted outwards and homewards to the value of 13000 ducats and more. I observed many things in the time of my abode in Nova Hispania, aswell touching the commodities of the countrey as the maners of the people both Spanyards and Indians : but because the Spanish histories are full of those observations, I omit them, and referre the readers to the same : onely this I say, that the commodity of Cochinilla groweth in greatest abundance about the towne of Pueblo de los Angeles, and is not there woorth above forty pence the pound.{n}.