An abstract taken out of certaine Spaniards letters concerning Guiana and the countries lying upon the great river Orenoque : with certaine reports also touching the same.{n}An advertisement to the Reader.{n}Hose letters out of which the abstracts following are taken, were surprised at sea as they were passing for Spaine in the yeere 1594. by Captaine George Popham: who the next yeere, and the same that Sir Walter Ralegh discovered Guiana, as he was in a voyage for the{n}West Indies, learned also the reports annexed. All which, at his returne, being two moneths after Sir  Walter, as also so long after the writing of the former discourse, hearing also of his discoverie : he made knowen and delivered to some of her Majesties most honourable privie Councell & others. The which seeing they con-firme in some part the substance, I meane, the riches of that countrey: it hath bene thought fit that they should be thereunto adjoyned. Wherein the Reader is to be advertised, that although the Spaniards seeme to glorie much of their formali possession taken before Morequito the Lord of Aromaya, and others thereabouts, which throughly understood them not at that time, whatsoever the Spaniards otherwise pretend: yet, according to the former discourse, and as also it is related by Cayworaco, the sonne of Topiawary now chiefe Lord of the said Aromaya, who was brought into England by Sir Walter Ralegh, and was present at the same possession and discoverie of the Spaniards mentioned in these letters; it appeareth that after they were gone out of their countrey, the Indians then having farther consideration of the matter, and more then conjecture of their intent, having knowen and heard of their former 432{n}cruelties upon their borderers and others of the Indians elsewhere: At their next comming, there being ten of them sent and imployed for a farther discovery, they were provided to receive and entertaine them in an other maner of sort then they had done before; that is to say, they slew them and buried them in the countrey so much sought. They gave them by that meanes a full and complete possession, the which before they had but begunne. And so they are minded to doe, to as many Spaniards as come after. Other possession they have had none since. Neither doe the Indians meane, as they protest, to give them any other. One other thing to be remembred is that in these letters the Spaniards seeme to call Guiana and other countries neere it, bordering upon the river of Orenoque, by the name of Nueva Dorado, because of the great plentie of golde there in most places to be found. Alluding also to the name of El Dorado which was given by Martinez to the great citie of Manoa, as is in the former treatise specified. This is all I thought good to advertise. As for some other matters, I leave them to the consideration and judgement of the indifferent Reader.	W. R.{n}.