A letter of M. Thomas Candish to the right honourable the Lord Hunsdon, Lord Chamber-laine, one of her Majesties most honourable Privy Councell, touching the successe of his voyage about the world.{n}Right honourable, as your favour heretofore hath bene most greatly extended towards me, so I humbly desire a continuance thereof: and though there be no meanes in me to deserve the same, yet the uttermost of my services shall not be wanting, whensoever it shall please your honour to{n}dispose thereof. I am humbly to desire your honour to make knowen unto her Majesty the desire I have had to doe her Majesty service in the performance of this voyage. And as it hath pleased God to give her the victory over part of her enemies, so I trust yer long to see her overthrow them all. For the places of their wealth, whereby they have mainteined and made their warres, are now perfectly discovered: and if it please her Majesty, with a very small power she may take the spoile of them all. It hath pleased the Almighty 376{n}to suffer mee to circompasse the whole globe of the world, entring in at the Streight of Magellan, and returning by the cape de Buena Esperanza. In which voyage I have either discovered or brought certeine intelligence of all the rich places of the world that ever were knowen or discovered by any Christian. I navigated alongst the coast of Chili, Peru, and Nueva Espanna, where I made great spoiles: I burnt and sunke 19 sailes of ships small and great. All the villages and townes that ever I landed at, I burnt and spoiled: and had I not bene discovered upon the coast, I had taken great quantitie of treasure. The matter of most profit unto me was a great ship of the kings which I tooke at California, which ship came from the Philippinas, being one of the richest of merchandize that ever passed those seas, as the kings register and merchants accounts did shew: for it did amount in value to * in Mexico to be solde. Which goods (for that my ships were not able to conteine the least part of them) I was inforced to set on fire. From the cape of California, being the uttermost part of all Nueva Espanna, I navigated to the Islands of the Philippinas hard upon the coast of China; of which countrey I have brought such intelligence as hath not bene heard of in these parts. The statelinesse and riches of which countrey I feare to make report of, least I should not be credited: for if I had not knowen sufficiently the incomparable wealth of that countrey, I should have bene as incredulous thereof, as others will be that have not had the like experience. I sailed along the Hands of the Malucos, where among some of the heathen people I was well intreated, where our countrey men may have trade as freely as the Portugals, if they will themselves. From thence I passed by the cape of Buena Esperanza, and found out by the way homeward the iland of S. Helena, where the Portugals use to relieve themselves: and from that iland God hath suffered me to returne into{n}377{n}England. All which services with my selfe I humbly prostrate at her Majesties feet, desiring the Almighty long to continue her reigne among us: for at this day she is the most famous and victorious prince that liveth in the world.{n}Thus humbly desiring pardon of your honour for my tediousnesse, I leave your lordship to the tuition of the Almighty. Plimmouth this ninth of September 1588.{n}Your honours most humble to command,{n}Thomas Candish.{n}.