under king John) in his booke of the miracles of Ireland, hath certaine words altogether alike with these, videlicet:

Not farre from these Islands (namely the Hebrides, Island &c.) towards the North there is a certaine woonderful whirlpoole of the sea, whereinto all the waves of the sea from farre have their course and recourse, as it were without stoppe: which, there conveying themselves into the secret receptacles of nature, are swallowed up, as it were, into a bottomlesse pit, and if it chance that any shippe doe passe this way, it is pulled, and drawen with such a violence of the waves, that eftsoones without remedy, the force of the whirlepoole devoureth the same.

The Philosophers describe foure indraughts of this Ocean sea, in the foure opposite quarters of the world, from whence many doe conjecture that as well the flowing of the sea, as the blasts of the winde, have their first originali.

A.D.

1360.

There is a notable whirlepoole on the coast of Norway, called Malestrande, about the latitude of 68.

A Testimonie of the learned Mathematician master John Dee, touching the foresaid voyage of Nicholas De Linna.

Nno 1360. (that is to wit, in the 34. yeere of the reigne of the triumphant king Edward the third) a frier of Oxford, being a good Astronomer, went in companie with others to the most Northren Islands of the world, and there leaving his company together, hee travailed alone, and

purposely described all the Northerne Islands, with the indrawing seas: and the record thereof at his returne he delivered to the king of England. The name of which booke is Inventio Fortunata (aliter fortunae) qui liber Inventio incipit a gradu 54. usque ad polum. Which frier for ^»rtunata-sundry purposes after that did five times passe from England thither, and home againe.

It is to be noted, that from the haven of Linne in Norfolke (whereof the foresaid Francisan frier tooke his 303

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

name) to Island, it is not above a fortnights sailing with an ordinarie winde, and hath bene of many yeeres a very common and usuall trade : which further appeareth by the privileges granted to the Fishermen of the towne of Blacknie in the said Countie of Norfolke, by king Edward the third, for their exemption and freedome from his ordinary service, in respect of their trade to Island.

The voyage of Henry Earle of Derbie, after Duke of Hereford, and lastly king of England, by the name of Henry the fourth, An. Dom. 1390. into Prussia and Lettowe, against the infidels, recorded by Thomas of Walsingham.

Ominus Henricus Comes de Derbie per idem tempus profectus est in le Pruys, ubi cum adjutorio marescalli dictae patriae, & cujusdam Regis vocati Wytot devicit exercitum Regis de Lettowe, captis qua-tuor ducibus, & tribus peremptis, & amplius quam trecentis, de valentioribus

exercitus supradicti pariter interemptis. Civitas quoque vocatur II Will, in cujus castellum Rex de Lettowe nomine Skirgalle confugerat, potenti virtute dicti Comitis maxime, atque suorum capta est. Namque qui fuerunt de familia sua primi murum ascenderant, & vexillum ejus super muros, caeteris vel torpentibus vel ignorantibus, posuerunt. Captaque sunt ibi vel occisa quatuor millia plebanorum, fratre Regis de Poleyn inter caeteros ibi perempto, qui adversarius nostri fuit. Obsessumque fuit castrum dictae Civitatis per quinque hebdomadas: Sed propter infirmitates, quibus vexabatur exercitus magistri de Pruys & de Lifland noluerunt diutius expectare. Facti sunt Christiani de gente de Lettowe octo. Et magister de Lifland duxit secum in suam patriam tria millia captivorum.

fl Alias Vilna.

[I. 123.]

An. Dorn.

139°.

3°4
