lished, and proclaimed in your bailiwicke, & firmely to be observed, permitting them to goe & come, without The ancient impediment, according to the due, right and ancient c™tomes of customes used in your said Bailiwicke. Witnesse arc ants. Qeofry Fitz-Peter Earle of Essex at Kinefard the 5. day of April.

The same forme of writing was sent to the sherife of Sudsex, to the Maior and communal tie of the Ci tie of Winchester, to the Baily of Southampton, the Baily Lenne, the Baily of Kent, the sherife of Norfolke and Suffolke, the sherife of Dorset and Sommerset, the Barons of the Cinque-ports, the sherife of Southamptonshire, the sherife of Hertford and Essex, the sherife of Cornewal and Devon.

|| 1216.

Literae regis Henrici tertii ad Haquinum Regem Norwegiae de pacis foedere & intercursu mer-candisandi || Anno 1. Henrici 3.

Enricus Dei gratia &c. Haquino eadem gratia Regi Norwegiae salutem. Immensas nobilitati vestrae referimus gratiarum actiones de his quae per literas vestras & prudentem virum Abbatem de Lisa, nobis significastis, volentes & desiderantes foedus pacis & dilectionis libenter nobiscum inire,

& nobiscum confoederari. Bene autem placet & placebit

nobis quod terrae nostrae communes sint, & Mercatores & homines qui sunt de potestate vestra libere & sine impedimento terram nostram adire possint, & homines & Mercatores nostri similiter terram vestram. Dum tamen

literas vestras patentes super hoc nobis destinetis, & nos vobis nostras transmittemus. Interim autem bene volumus & concedimus, quod Mercatores tam de terra vestra quam nostra eant, veniant, & recedant per terras nostras. Et si quid vestrae sederit voluntati, quod facere valeamus, id securi nobis significetis. Detinuimus autem adhuc Abbatem praedictum, ut de navi vestra & rebus in

320

ea contentis pro posse nostro restitutionem fieri faceremus : per quern de statu nostro & Regni nostri vos certificare curabimus, & quam citius &c. Teste me ipso apud Lamhithe decimo die Octobris.

Eodem modo scribitur S. Duci Norwegiae ibidem & eodem die.

The letters of King Henry the third unto [I. 130.] Haquinus King of Norway concerning a treatie of peace and mutuall traffique of marchandize, &c.

HEnry by the grace of God, &c. unto Haquinus by the same grace King of Norway, sendeth greeting.

Wee render unto your highnesse unspeakeable thanks for those things which by your letters, and by your discreete subject the Abbat of Lisa, you have signified unto us, and also for that you are right willing and desirous to begin and to conclude betweene us both, a league of peace and amitie. And wee for our part both nowe are, and hereafter shalbe well contented, that both our lands be common, to the ende that the Marchants and people of your dominions may freely and without impediment resort unto our land, and our people and Marchants may likewise have recourse unto your territories. Provided, that for the confirmation of this matter, you send unto us your letters patents, and wee will send ours also unto you. Howbeit in the meane while wee doe will and freely graunt, that the Marchants both of our and your lands, may goe, come, and returne to and from both our Dominions. And if there be ought in your minde, whereby we might stand you in any stead, you may boldly signifie the same unto us. Wee have as yet deteined the foresaid Abbat, that wee might, to our abilitie, cause restitution to be made for your ship, and for the things therein contained : by whome wee will certifie you of our owne estate, and of the estate of our

1	321	x

|| Antiqua consuetudo Gildhalla Coloniensium Londini.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

kingdome so soone, &c. Witnesse our selfe at Lamhith the tenth of October.

Another letter in the same forme and to the same effect was there and then sent unto S. Duke of Norway.

Mandatum pro Coga Regis Norwegiae Anno 13.

Henrici 3.



Andatum est omnibus Ballivis portuum in quos ventura est Coga de Norwegia, in qua venerint in Angliam milites Regis Norwegiae & Mercatores

Saxoniae, quod cum praedictam Cogam in portus suos venire contigerit, salvo permittant ipsam Cogam in portubus suis morari, quamdiu necesse habuerit, & libere sine impedimento inde recedere quando voluerint. Teste Rege.

The same in English.

A Mandate for the King of Norway his Ship called the Cog.

WEe will and commaund all bailifes of Portes, at the which the Cog of Norway (wherein certaine of the king of Norwaie his souldiers, and certaine Marchants of Saxonie are comming for England) shall touch, that, when the foresaid Cog shall chance to arrive at any of their Havens, they doe permit the said Cog safely to remaine in their said Havens so long as neede shall require, and without impediment also freely to depart thence, whensoever the governours of the sayd ship shall thinke it expedient. Witnesse the King.

Carta pro Mercatoribus de Colonia anno 20. Henrici 3. Confirmata per Regem Edwardum primum 8. Julii Anno Regni 18. prout extat in rotulo cartarum de Anno 18. Regis Edwardi primi.

SEx Archiepiscopis &c. salutem. Sciatis nos quietos clamasse pro nobis & haeredibus nostris dilectos ------nostros, Cives de Colonia, & mercandisam suam de illis duobus solidis, || quos solebant dare de Gildhalla sua 322
