Malmesb. de gestis font. Anglorum lib.

2.

honourably interteined me, and welcomed mee with rich and magnificent gifts: but especially the Emperour bestowed divers costly presents and rewards upon mee, both in vessels of golde and silver, and also in cloakes and garments of great value. Wherefore I conferred with the Emperour himselfe and the Pope, and with the other Princes who were there present, concerning the necessities of all my subjects both Englishmen and Danes; that a more favourable law & secure peace in their way to Rome might bee graunted unto them, and that they might not bee hindered by so many stops & impediments in their journey, and wearied by reason of injust exactions. And the Emperour condescended unto my request, and King Rodulphus also, who hath greatest authoritie over the foresaid stops and streights, and all the other princes confirmed by their Edicts, that my subjects, as well Marchants, as others who travailed for devotions sake, should without all hinder-

ance and restraint of the foresaid stops and customers,

goe unto Rome in peace, and returne from thence in

safetie.

The flourishing state of Marchandise in the Citie of London in the dayes of Willielmus Mal-mesburiensis, which died in the yeere 1142. in the reigne of K. Stephen.

Aud longe a Rofa quasi viginti quinque milliariis est Londonia Civitas nobilis, opima civium divitiis, constipata negociatorum ex omni terra,

& maxime ex Germania venientium, commerciis. Unde

fit ut cum ubique in Anglia caritas victualium pro sterili proventu messium sit, ibi necessaria distrahantur & emantur minore, quam alibi, vel vendentium compendio, vel ementium dispendio. Peregrinas invehit merces Civitatis finibus Tamesis fluvius famosus, qui citra urbem ad 80. milliaria fonticulo fusus, ultra plus 70. nomen profert.

314

Ot farre from Rochester, about the distance of five and twenty miles, standeth the Noble Citie of London, abounding with the riches of the inhabitants, and being frequented with the traffique of Marchants resorting thither out of all nations, and especially out of Germanie. Whereupon it commeth to passe, that Germanie. when any generail dearth of victuals falleth out in England, by reason of the scarcitie of corne, things necessary may there be provided and bought with lesse gaine unto the sellers, and with lesse hinderance and losse unto the buyers, then in any other place of the Realme. Outlandish wares are conveighed into the same Citie by the famous river of Thames: which river springing out of a fountaine 80. miles beyond the Citie, is called by one and the selfe same name. 70. miles beneath it.

The aforesaid William of Malmesburie writeth of traffike in his time to Bristowe in his fourth booke de gestis pontificum Anglorum, after this maner.

N eadem valle est vicus celeberrimus Bristow nomine, in quo est navium portus ab Hibernia & Norwegia & caeteris transmarinis terris venientium receptaculum, ne scilicet genitalibus divitiis tam fortunata regio peregrinarum opum frauderetur commercio.

The same in English.

IN the same valley stands the famous Towne of Bristow, with an Haven belonging thereunto, which

is a commodious and safe receptacle for all ships directing their course for the same, from Ireland, Norway, and Norway. other outlandish and foren countreys: namely that a region so fortunate and blessed with the riches that nature hath vouchsafed thereupon should not bee destitute of the wealth and commodities of other lands.

315
