A briefe Treatise of the great Duke of Moscovia his genealogie, being taken out of the Moscovites manuscript Chronicles written by a Polacke.

T hath almost ever bene the custome of nations, in searching out the infancie and first beginnings of their estate, to ascribe the same unto such authors as lived among men in great honour and endued mankinde with some one or other excellent benefite. Nowe, this inbred

desire of all nations to blaze and set foorth their owne petigree hath so much prevayled with the greater part, that leaving the undoubted trueth, they have betaken themselves unto meere fables and fictions. Yea and the Chronicles of many nations written in divers and sundrie ages doe testifie the same. Even so the Grecians boasted that they were either Autocthones, that is earth-bredde, or els lineally descended from the Gods. And the Romans affirme that Mars was father unto their first founder Romulus. Right well therefore and judicially sayth Titus Livius : Neither meane I to avouch (quoth he) ne to disable or confute those thinges which before the building and foundation of the Citie have beene reported, being more adorned and fraught with Poeticall fables then with incorrupt and sacred monuments of trueth : antiquitie is it to be pardoned in this behalfe, namely in joyning together matters historicall and poeticall, to make the beginnings of cities to seeme the more honourable. For sith antiquity it selfe is accompted such a notable argument of true nobility, even private men in all ages have contended thereabout. Wherefore citizens of Rome being desirous to make demonstration of their Gentrie, use to have their aun-cestours armes painted along the walles of their houses : in which regarde they were so puffed up, that oftentimes 182

1580. they would arrogantly disdaine those men, which by their owne vertue had attained unto honour. In like sorte Poets, when the originali of their worthines and brave champion was either utterly unknowen or somewhat obscure, would ofte referre it unto their Gods themselves. So in these our dayes (to lette passe others) the Turkish Emperour with great presumption boasteth himselfe to bee descended of the Trojan blood. Likewise the great duke of Moscovie, to make himselfe and his predecessours seeme the more sovereigne, deriveth the beginnings of his parentage from the Romane Emperours, yea even from Augustus Caesar. Albeit therefore no man is so fonde as to accept of this report for trueth, yet will wee briefly set downe what the Moscovites have written in their Chronicles as touching this matter.

Augustus (beleeve it who listeth) had certaine brethren or kinsfolkes which were appoynted governours over divers provinces. Amongst the rest one Prussus (of whome Prussia was named) had his place of government assigned unto him upon the shore of the eastern or Baltick sea, and upon the famous river of Wixel. This mans graund children or nephewes of the fourth generation were Rurek, Sinaus, and Truvor, who likewise inhabited in the very same places. Whereas therefore at the very same time the Russians or the Moscovites without any civill regiment possessed large and spacious territories towards the north, the foresayd three brethren, upon the perswasion of one Gostomislius the chiefe citizen of Novogrod, in the yeare since the worldes creation (according to the computation of the Greekes) 6370, which was in the yeare of our Lord 572> were Russia became sent for, to beare rule. And so joyning their kinsman mW in ye Olechus unto them, and dividing these huge countreys among themselves, they laboured to reduce the barbarous 57 ' and savage people unto a civill kinde of life.

Sinaus and Truvor deceasing without issue, Rurek succeeded and lefte a sonne behinde him named Igor ;

183

who not being of sufficient yeres to beare rule, was committed unto the protection of his kinsman Olechus. The sayde Igor begate of Olha daughter unto a citizen of Plesco (who, after her husbande was slaine by his enemies, taking her journey to Constantinople, was there baptized by the name of Helena) a sonne called Stoslaus, who fought many battels with the neighbour countreys. Howbeit at length Stoslaus was slayne by his foe, who making a drinking cup of his skull, engraved therupon in golden letters this sentence : Seeking after other mens, he lost his owne. He left [I. 222.] behind him three sonnes, namely Teropolchus, Olega, and Vulodimir. The which Vulodimir having slaine his two brethren, became sole governour of Russia, or (as the Moscovites call it) Rosseia, his owne selfe. This man beginning at length to loath and mislike the ethnik religon, and the multitude of false gods, applyed his minde unto the religion of Christ, and having taken to wife Anna sister unto Basilius and Constantinus Emperours of Constantinople, was together with his whole nation, in the yeare of Christ 988. baptized, and imbraced the Christian religion, with the rites and ceremonies of the Greeke Church, and his name being changed, he was called Basilius.

Howbeit Zonaras reporteth that before the time of Vulodimir, Basilius Emperour of Constantinople sent a bishop unto the Russians, by whose meanes they were converted unto the Christian faith. He reporteth moreover that they would not be perswaded unlesse they might see a miracle : whereupon the said bishop having made his prayers unto almighty God, threwe the booke of the Evangelists into the fire, which remained there unconsumed. And that by this miracle they were mooved to give credite unto the doctrine of Christ, and to conforme themselves thereunto.

The sonnes of Vulodimir were Vuiseslaus, Isoslaus, Jaroslaus, Suatopolcus, Borissus, Glebus, Stoslaus, Vulzevolodus, Stanislaus, Sudislaus, and Podius who 184

died in his childhood. Amongst the residue all Russia was divided by their father, who not being contented with their portions, but invading each other, were most of them slaine by their mutuall contentions. Borissus and Glebus in regard of their holy conversation were registred for Saints, whose feasts are every yeere celebrated with great solemnitie upon the twelfth of November.

At length Jaroslaus only got the Sovereigne authoritie into his owne hands, and left behind him foure sonnes, Vulodimir, Isoslauus, Weceslauus, and Vuszevolodus.

The foresaid Vulodimir sonne of Jaroslaus kept his residence at the ancient citie of Kiow standing upon Kioto. the river of Boristhenes, and after divers conflicts with his kinsmen, having subdued all the provinces unto himselfe, was called Monomachos, that is, the onely champoin. This man (for I thinke it not amisse to report those things which their owne Manuscript Chronicles make mention of) waged warre against Constantine the Emperour of Constantinople, and when he had wasted & overrun Thracia, being returned home with great and rich spoyles, and making preparation for new wars, Constantine sent Neophytus the Metropolitane of Ephesus and two Bishops, with the governour of Antiochia, and Eustaphius the Abbat of Jerusalem, to present rich and magnificent gifts unto him; as namely, part of the crosse of our Saviour Christ, a crowne of gold, a drinking cup curiously made of Sardonyx stone, a cloake set all over with precious stones, and a golden chaine; commaunded them to salute him by the name of Czar (which name, as it may be prooved by many arguments, signifieth a king, and not an Emperour) and concluded a most inviolable league of amity and friendship with him.

The foresayd Vulodimir begate Vuszevolodus the second. This Vuszevolodus lefte eight sonnes behind him, Miscislaus, Isoslaus, Stoslaus, Teropolcus, Weceslaus, Romanus, Georgius, and Andrew. The sonnes of George were Roseslaus, Andrew, Basilius, and Demetrius.

185

Demetrius begat George, who in the yere 1237. was slaine by one Bathy, a Tartarian duke, which Bathy wasted Moscovia, and subdued the same unto himselfe. Since which time the Russians were tributary to the Tartars, and were governed by such dukes as they pleased to set over them. Howbeit the Tartars so greatly abused that authoritie, that when they sent their ambassadours unto the prince of Moscovie, he was constrained to goe forth and meete with them, and (as Herbortus Fulstinius in his Polonian historic reporteth) to offer them a bason full of mares milk, and if they had spilt any whit thereof upon their horses maines, to licke it off with his toung, and having conducted them into his princely court, to stand bareheaded before them while they sate downe, and with all reverence to give eare and attendance unto them. But by what meanes they shooke off at the length this yoake of servitude, I will forthwith declare.

About the same time almost all Polonia, and the dukedome of Silesia were overrun by the Tartars with fire and sword. Who having burnt Presla the chiefe citie of Silesia, & being come before the citie of Legnitz, they fought there a most cruel and bloody field, wherin was slain duke Henrie himselfe being sonne unto the most holy and devout lady Hedvice, with many others, whose monuments and graves be as yet extant in sundry places, and with an infinite multitude of common souldiers, insomuch that the Tartars filled nine great sackes with the eares of them which they had slaine. The Tartars to the end they might obtaine the victorie, presented unto the view of our souldiers the portrature of a mans head placed by arte magique upon a banner, wherein the letter X. was painted, which being shaken and mooved up and downe breathed foorth a most loathsome stench, & strooke such a terrour into the hearts of our men, that being as it were astonished with the snaky visage of Medusa, they were utterly daunted and dismayed.

186

From thence Bathy and his company with the same bloodthirstie intent marched into Hungarie, and had almost slaine king Bela the fourth, who together with his sonne escaping by flight did scarcely ridde themselves out of the enemies hand. And when the whole world almost was exceedingly terrified at the cruell invasions of this most barbarous nation, at length Pope Innocentius the fourth sending ambassadours unto Bathy obtained peace for five yeeres : but to forsake his heathenish superstitions and to become a Christian, hee would by no meanes bee perswaded. For he was by the instigation of the Saracens infected with devilish opinions of Mahomet, as being more agreeable unto his barbarous rudenes, which even unto this day the Tartars do maintaine, like as the prophane Turkes also.

This Bathy had a sonne called Tamerlan, whome the Moscovites call Temirkutla, who likewise, as it is recorded in histories, attained unto great renoume. For he caried about with him in a cage Bajazet the Turkish Emperour being fettered in golden chaines, and made him a laughing stocke unto all men.

Let us now returne unto the Russians. George being slaine, Jaroslaus his brother succeeded in his roome, and left behinde him three sonnes, Theodorus, Alexander and Andreas. Daniel the sonne of Alexander first established his royall seate in the citie of Mosco, and magnificently building the castle which before time had bene obscure, he tooke upon him the title of the great Duke of Russia. He had five sonnes, namely, George, Alexander, Borissus, Ophonias, and John. This John succeeded his father, and because he continually caried a scrippe about with him to bestow almes, he was sirnamed Kaleta, which word signifieth a scrippe. His sonnes were, Simeon, John, and Andrew. He gave unto his sonne Simeon the provinces of Vulodimiria and Moscovia: which Simeon deceasing without issue his brother John succeeded, who begate a sonne called Demetrius. This Demetrius had seven sonnes, namely 187

A.D.

1580.

[I. 223.]

These ambassadours were Johan, de Plano Carpini y Frier Benedict a Polonian.

The citie of Mosco first made the seate of the great Duke.

The name of the Moscovites first advanced.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Daniel, Basilius, George, Andrew, Peter, John, & Constantine. Basilius reigned after his fathers death. This man dishinheriting his sonne which was called after his owne name, because he suspected his mother of adulterie, at his death surrendred his Dukedome unto his brother George, who kept his nephewe a long time in prison. Howbeit at his death, though himselfe had two sonnes namely Andrew and Demetrius, yet being stricken perhaps with remorse of conscience, he bestowed the Dukedome upon his nephew Basilius. Against whom his two cousins bearing a grudge waged warre, and at length having taken him by a wyly stratageme they put out his eyes. Notwithstanding the Boiarens (for so the Moscovites call their nobles) continued their duetifull alleageance unto this their blinde Duke, whom for his blindnes they called Cziem-nox, that is to say, darke or darkened. He left a sonne behinde him called Ivan Vasilowich who brought the Russian common wealth, being before his time but obscure, unto great excellende and renowme. Who that he might the better get all the superiority into his owne hands put to death so many sonnes and nephewes of the former Dukes as he could lay hold on, and began to take upon him the title of the great Duke of Vulodimiria, Moscovia, and Novogardia, and to call himselfe the Monarch or Czar of all Russia. He brought under his subjection two principali cities, namely Plesco being the only walled citie in all Mos-covie, and Novogrod, both of them being in regard of traffike most riche and flourishing cities, and having bin subject unto the Lithuanians for the space of 50. yeeres before. The treasure of Novogrod was so exceeding, that the great Duke is reported to have carried home from thence 300. carts laden with gold and silver.

He also was the first man that waged warre against the Polonians and the Livonians: against Polonia he pretended a quarell, alleaging that his daughter Helena (whome hee had married unto Alexander the great 188

Duke of Lithuania, which was afterward king of Polonia) was evil intreated, and was withdrawen from the Greekish religion unto the ceremonies of the Church of Rome. But against the Livonians for none other cause, but onely for an incredible desire of enlarging his dominions. Howbeit what impulsive causes of litle or no moment happened in the mean season, we will in another place more plainely declare. Notwithstanding he was very often and in divers battels vanquished by Plettebergius the great master of the Dutch knights: but it is not to the purpose to stand any longer upon this discourse.

He was married first unto Marie the Duke of Tyversky his daughter, and of her hee begate John, unto whom in his life time he surrendred his Dukedome, and married him unto the daughter of Stephan the Palatine of Moldavia: which John, after he had begotten his sonne Demetrius, deceased before his father.

Afterward Ivan Vasilowich aforesaide married a wife called Sophia being daughter unto Thomas Palaelogus, which is reported to have had her dowry out of the Popes treasury, because the Moscovite had promised to conforme himselfe unto the Romish Church. This Sophia being a woman of a princely and aspiring minde, and often complaining that she was married unto the Tartars vassal, at length by her instant intreatie and [I- 224-] continual perswasions, and by a notable stratageme she cast off that slavish yoke very much unbeseeming so mighty a prince. For whereas the Tartarian Duke had his procuratours and agents in the Moscovites court, who dwelt in their owne houses built within the very castle of Mosco, and were eye witnesses of all affaires which were there performed: Sophia said she was admonished from heaven to builde a Temple in the selfe same place where the Tartars house stoode, and to consecrate it unto Saint Nicholas. Being therfore delivered of a sonne she invited the Tartarian Duke unto the solemne baptizing of him, and beeing come, shee requested him to give her his house, and obtained it at

189

The yoke of the Tartars shaken of.

Basilius.

Ivan Vasilowich.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

his hands. Which house being razed and those Tartarian espials beeing excluded, the Tartars at length were quite bereaved and utterly dispossessed of their authoritie which they had exercised over the Russians for many yeres, and could never yet recover it; albeit they have given sundry attempts. Of his wife Sophia he begate sixe children, namely, a daughter called Helena, & five sonnes, that is to say, Gabriel, Demetrius, George, Simeon, and Andrew.

The Dukedome of right appertayned unto Demetrius the sonne of John, which was the sonne of Vasilowich by his first marriage. Howbeit Sophia prevailed so with her husband, that neglecting his graund-childe Demetrius, hee bestowed his Dukedome upon Gabriel his sonne.

Andrew the younger had a sonne called Vulodimir, of whom Mary was borne, which in the yeere of Christ 1573. was maried unto Magnus the Duke of Holst.

Gabriel having obtained the great dukedome of Russia, changed his name calling himselfe Basilius, and applied his minde to the atchieving of high and great enterprises. For hee reduced a great part of the dukedome of Mos-covie, which Vitoldus the great Duke of Lithuania helde in possession, under his owne jurisdiction, and wonne upon the river of Boristhenes (which the Russians call Neiper) many cities and especially Smolensco, in the yeere of our Lord 1514. Having divorced his first wife, hee begate of Helena daughter unto Duke Glinskie, Ivan Vasilowich, which now this present 1580. reigneth as great Duke. Hee was borne in the yeere of our Lorde 1528. the 25. of August, sixe houres after the rising of the sonne. The great dukedome of Russia fell unto the said Ivan Vasilowich in the fifth yeere of his age, having his uncle George for his great protector: being 25. yeeres of age, and being of a strong body and of a couragious mind he subdued the Tartars of Cazan and Astracan upon the river of Volgha, carrying their Dukes and chief-taines into captivitie.

190

But by what wayes and meanes (after the league which by the intercession of the most sacred Roman Emperour, continued from the yeere 1503. for the space of fifty yeeres, was expired) having renewed warres against Livonia, hee brought that most flourishing province into extreame miserie, using for the same purpose a new pretense, and alleadging that it belonged unto him by right of inheritance, I tremble to recount: and it requireth a large historic, which perhaps in time and place convenient some more learned then my selfe will take upon them to addresse.

He is exceedingly addicted unto piety and devotion, and doth oftentimes observe very strict fastings and abstinence with his monks : and wheras the Russes in doing reverence & adoration unto God doe beate their foreheads against the ground, this Ivan Vasilowich with performing of the same ceremonie causeth his forehead to be ful of boines and swellings, and sometimes to be black and blew, and very often to bleed. He is much delighted with building of Churches & spareth no cost for that purpose. Whether therfore by nature, or (which hee pretendeth to be the cause) by reason of his subjects malice & treacherie, he be so addicted unto all rigour and cruelty, I dare not determine, especially sithens he hath not an illiberal or mishapen countenance, as Attila is reported to have had. Of his first wife which was sister unto Mikita Romanowich, beeing nowe great steward of his houshold, he begate two sonnes, namely Ivan and Theodore. And albeit he was five times married, yet had Theodore. he not one childe more.

Whereas this Ivan Vasilowich upon certaine frivolous reasons calleth himselfe the naturali lord of Livonia, I thought it not amisse to adde an Epistle hereunto, which was written by a certaine honourable man concerning the same matter.

S. All wee which inhabite this Province with all seemely reverence and submission of mind, do offer most humble thanks unto the Emperors most sacred and peere-

191

lesse majesty our most gracious lord, in that according to his fatherly affection which he beareth towards all Chris-tendome, and for the good 8c commodity of this our distressed and afflicted countrey, which these many yeres hath bin in stead of a bulwarke against the invasion of barbarous nations, he hath sent his ambassadors unto the great duke of Moscovia. In regard of which his fatherly love and great benefite vouchsafed on us, wee are ready when occasion shall serve, to adventure our lives and goods : praying in the meane season unto Almightie God, [I. 225.] who is the onely establisher and confounder of common wealths, to bring this excellent woorke, the foundation whereof is already laide unto a prosperous conclusion. But as touching the title which the Moscovite maketh to this province, to say the very trueth, we greatly wondred and were astonished at the declaration thereof. For it is most apparant, not onely out of all ancient and credible histories, but even from the experience and state of these regions, that the said title and allegations are fabulous and fained. For out of all auncient monuments, by what names soever they bee called (whereof there are divers extant among us) it cannot be proved by any mention, nor yet by any likelihoode or conjecture, that those things which the Moscovite affirmeth concerning the people which were governors of these regions in times past, and concerning the right and title of his ancestors unto this province, are grounded upon truth.

The commodi- For it is not unknowen by what meanes this province, ties of traffike partiy through the industry of marchants, and partly by tion. the benente or navigation, was first discovered : neither is it unknowen howe the inhabitants thereof beeing wholly addicted unto heathenish superstitions and idolatrie, were by the croised knights (who drew other knights professing the same order in Prussia to aide and accompanie them in this their enterprise) and that with great labour and diffi-cultie, converted unto the Christian faith : when as at the same time the Livonians had no knowledge at all of the jurisdiction, religion, maners, or language of Moscovie :

192

IVAN VASILOWICH, EMPEROR OF RUSSIA

who had not onely no conversation nor dealings with the Moscovites, but were estranged also from all other nations whatsoever: for leading a miserable, poore, barbarous, and heathenish life, in savage maner among wilde beastes, and in the desert and solitary woods, they were utterly ignorant of God and destitute of civil magistrates. Howbeit this kind of government was peculiar unto them, namely that all of one familie and society used a kinde of reverence unto their elders more then to any other, whom also, that their authoritie might be the greater, they called by the name of kings, and (albeit one of their families consisted of a 100. persons) they obeyed them in al respects, and after their rude and barbarous maner did them loyal service. At the very same time the Moscovites had received the religion, and the Ecclesiasticall ceremonies of the Greeke and Easterne Church, which religion they published and dispersed throughout all provinces subject to their dominion, using their owne proper letters and characters for the same purpose. Of all which things the Livonians which very barbarously inhabited a lande beeing environed with Russia, Lithuania, Samogitia, Prussia, and the Balthic sea, never heard any report at all. It is moreover to be noted that never at any time heretofore either within the earth, or in other places of Livonia, there have bene found any monuments at all of the anti-quitie or letters of the Russes: which verily must needs have come to passe, if the Moscovites, Russes, or any other nations which use the foresaid particulars, had borne rule and authority over the Livonians : yea there had beene left some remainder and token, either of their religion and divine worship, or of their lawes and cus-tomes, or at the least of their maners, language, and letters. This indeed we can in no wise deny, that even in Livonia it selfe, there have bin in times past and at this present are many and divers languages spoken by the people. Howbeit no one language of them all hath any affinity either with the Moscovian tongue, or with the tongues of any other nations. But whereas the Mosco-

II	193	n

vite pretendeth that there hath bin usually paide a pension or tribute unto himselfe and his predecessours out of the whole province, it is as incredible as the former..

About the beginning of this tragicall warre, the Moscovite, to cloke his tyranny and ambition under some faire pretense, amongst other of his demaunds, made mention also of a tribute which should be due unto him out of the bishop of Dorpat his jurisdiction, whereof notwithstanding hee could neither bring any just account, nor affirm any certainty : howbeit there is no man living to be found which either can tell of his owne remembrance, or from the relation of others, that any such tribute was ever paid unto the Moscovite. What time therefore he referred al this negotiation unto the master of the Livonian order, and commanded him to get what knowledge hee could therof from the men of Dorpat, & urged the tribute, saying if it were worth but one haire, that he would not remit it : at length it was found recorded in the ancient Chronicles of Dorpat, that beyond the memory of man, when the territory of Plesco contained nothing but woods and forrests for wilde beastes, that the pesaunts of the liberty of Dorpat called Neuhus, by the consent of the Russian borderers, enjoyed Beehives in the said woods, and paid every yeere in lieu thereof unto the Russian governours, sixe shillings of Livonian coine. But so soone as the Russians had felled the woods and had built townes and villages in their place, the saide pension ceased together with the trees which were cut downe. Wherefore the saide sixe shillings were never since that time either demanded by the Russes or paid by the Livonians. These things which I knew concerning the causes of the Livonian warres I thought good to signifie unto you. Given the 22. of May, in the yeere of our Lord 1576.

194
