A note touching the mighty ships of King Henry the fift, mentioned hereafter in the treatie of keeping the Sea, taken out of a Chronicle in the Trinitie Church of Winchester.

Odem Anno quo victoria potitus est videlicet Anno Domini 1415. & regni sui Anno tertio, post bellum de Agencourt, conducti a Francis

venerunt cum multis Navibus recuperaturi Harfletum. Sed Rex Angliae misit fratrem suum Johannem Ducem Bedfordiae & Andegaviae, qui pugnavit cum eis & vicit, & Naves cepit, & quasdam submersit: caeteri fugerunt cum Hispanis navibus qui venerant cum eis Anno gratiae 1416. Sequenti vero Anno redierunt potentiores, & iterum devicti perpetuam pacem cum Rege composuerunt, & propter eorum naves fecit Rex fieri naves quales non erant in mundo. De his sic conductis a Francis ita metrice scribitur.

Regum belligero trito celeberrimus arvo Gallos, Hispanos, Janos, devicit, & Urget, Vastat; turbantur castera regna metu. Navali bello bis devicti quoque Jani.

A branch of a Statute made in the eight yeere of Henry the sixt, for the trade to Norwey, Sweveland, Denmarke, and Fynmarke.

I Tern because that the kings most deare Uncle, the king of Denmarke, Norway & Sweveland, as the same our soveraigne Lord the king of his intimation hath understood, considering the manifold & great losses, perils, hurts and damage which have late happened aswell to him and his, as to other foraines and strangers, and also friends and speciali subjects of our said soveraigne Lord the king of his Realme of England, by ye going in, entring & passage of such forain & strange persons into his realme of Norwey & other in

[I. 186.]

Naves maxima Henrici quinti.

dominions, streits, territories, jurisdictions & places subdued and subject to him, specially into his Iles of Fynmarke, and elswhere, aswell in their persons as their things and goods: for eschuing of such losses, perils, hurts & damages, and that such like (which God forbid) should not hereafter happen: our said soveraigne Lord the king hath ordeined and statuted, that all and singular strangers, aswell Englishmen and others willing to apply by Ship and come into his Realme of Norwey and other dominions, streits, territories, jurisdictions, Isles & places aforesaid with their ships, to the intent to get or have fish or any other Marchandises, or goods, shall apply and come to his Towne of North-berne, where the said king of Denmarke hath specially ordained and stablished his staple for the concourses of strangers and specially of Englishmen, to the exercise of such Marchandises : granting to the said Englishmen that they shall there injoy in and by all things the same favour, privileges and prerogatives which they of the Hans did enjoy. Therefore our said soveraigne Lord the king willing the love, affinitie and amities to be firmely observed, which betwixt his said Uncle and his noble progenitors of good memory, their Realmes, lands, dominions, streites, territories, jurisdictions and their said places, and the same our soveraigne Lord the king & his noble progenitours of famous memory, his great men, subjects, Realmes, lands & dominions hath bene of old times hitherto continued, nor nothing by our said soveraigne Lord the king or his people to be attempted or done whereby such amities by reason of any dissensions, enemities or discords might be broken: by the advise of the Lords spirituali & temporali & of the commons of his said Realme of England, assembled in this present Parliament, hath ordained, prohibiting that none of his liege people nor subjects of his Realme of England by audacitie of their follie presume to enter the Realmes, lands, dominions, straits, territories, jurisdictions & places of the said king of

112

Denmarke against ye ordinance, prohibition & interdiction of ye same his Uncle above remembred, & in contempt of the same, upon paine of forfeiture of all their moveable goods & imprisonment of their persons at the kings will.

Another branch of a statute made in the tenth yeere of the reigne of Henry the sixt concerning the state of the English Marchants in the dominions of the king of Denmarke.

ITem because that our soveraigne Lord the king at the grievous complaint to him made in this Parliament by the commons of his realme of England being in this Parliament is informed, that many of his faithfull liege people be greatly impoverished, undone, & in point to be destroyed by the king of Denmarke & his lieges, which be of the amitie of the king our soveraigne Lord, because that they do daily take of his said faithful subjects their goods, so that they have taken of marchants of York and Kingston upon Hui goods & marchandises to the valour of v.M.li. within a yeere, and of other lieges & marchants of ye Realme of England goods & cattals to the valour of xx.M.li. wherof they have no remedie of the said king of Denmarke, nor of none other, forasmuch as none of them commeth within the Realme of England, nor nothing have in the same Realme of England, & that ye goods be taken out of the same Realme: The king willing to provide remedy for his said liege people, hath ordeined & established, that if ye goods of any of ye said his lieges be or shalbe taken by the said king of Denmarke or any of his said lieges, the keeper of the privie seale for ye time being, shall have power to make to ye partie grieved letters of request under the privie seale, w‘out any other pursuite to be made to any for restitution to be had of ye goods so taken & to be taken. And if restitution be not made by [I. 187.]

n	113	H
