Denmarke against ye ordinance, prohibition & interdiction of ye same his Uncle above remembred, & in contempt of the same, upon paine of forfeiture of all their moveable goods & imprisonment of their persons at the kings will.

Another branch of a statute made in the tenth yeere of the reigne of Henry the sixt concerning the state of the English Marchants in the dominions of the king of Denmarke.

ITem because that our soveraigne Lord the king at the grievous complaint to him made in this Parliament by the commons of his realme of England being in this Parliament is informed, that many of his faithfull liege people be greatly impoverished, undone, & in point to be destroyed by the king of Denmarke & his lieges, which be of the amitie of the king our soveraigne Lord, because that they do daily take of his said faithful subjects their goods, so that they have taken of marchants of York and Kingston upon Hui goods & marchandises to the valour of v.M.li. within a yeere, and of other lieges & marchants of ye Realme of England goods & cattals to the valour of xx.M.li. wherof they have no remedie of the said king of Denmarke, nor of none other, forasmuch as none of them commeth within the Realme of England, nor nothing have in the same Realme of England, & that ye goods be taken out of the same Realme: The king willing to provide remedy for his said liege people, hath ordeined & established, that if ye goods of any of ye said his lieges be or shalbe taken by the said king of Denmarke or any of his said lieges, the keeper of the privie seale for ye time being, shall have power to make to ye partie grieved letters of request under the privie seale, w‘out any other pursuite to be made to any for restitution to be had of ye goods so taken & to be taken. And if restitution be not made by [I. 187.]

n	113	H

such letters, the king our soveraigne lord by the advise of his counsel shal provide to the partie grieved his covenable remedy, according as ye case requireth.

Incipit liber de custodia Maris praserAm arcti inter Doveram 13 Galisiam.

Sigismond died •438-He was here 14.16.

Videns imperator Sigismun-dus duas villas inter cateras singlice scilicet Cait st am i3 Doveream, ponens suos duos digitos super duos suos oculos, ait reg: Frater, custodite istas duas villas sicut duos vestros oculos.

The Noble was coined by Edward the third .Anno

Here beginneth the Prologue of the processe of the Libel of English policie, exhorting all England to keepe the sea, and namely the narrowe sea: shewing what profite commeth thereof, and also what worship and salvation to England, and to all English-men.

THe true processe of English policie

Of utterward to keepe this regne in

Of our England, that no man may deny, Ner say of sooth but it is one of the best, Is this, that who seeth South, North, East and West, Cherish Marchandise, keepe the admiraltie;

That we bee Masters of the narrowe see.

For Sigismond the great Emperour, Wich yet reigneth, when he was in this land With king Henry the fift, Prince of honour, Here much glory, as him thought, he found, A mightie land which had take in hand To werre in Francej and make mortalitie, And ever well kept round about the see.

And to the king thus hee sayd: My brother, (When hee perceived two Townes Caleis and Dover) Of all your Townes to chuse of one and other, To keepe the sea and soone to come over To werre outwards and your regne to recover: Keepe these two Townes sure, and your Majestee As your tweyne eyne: so keepe the narrowe see.

For if this sea bee kept in time of werre, Who can heere passe without danger and woe? Who may escape, who may mischiefe differre? What Marchandie may forby bee agoe ?

For needs hem must take trewes every foe:

114
