BURROUGH’S EPISTLE DEDICATORIE o.

C. 1598. furthermore when it shal please God that the ship shal returne to come to discharge at Hull, which will be HaU the best the most for your profit for the sales of all such like commoditie as comes from that place, as for fish, oyle, saieoffish. and Salmon chiefly, hee that will seeke a better market for the sales then at Hull, he must seeke it out of England, for the like is not in England. This is the best way that I can devise, and most for your profite, [I. 417.] and if you will, I will also set you downe all the commodities that are necessarie for such a voyage, and which way also that the Hollanders may within two or three yeeres be forced to leave ofF the trade of Cola which may easily be done. For if my abilitie were to my will, I would use the matter so that they should either leave off the trade, or els cary light ships with them home againe.

A dedicatorie Epistle unto the Queenes most excellent Majestic, written by Master William Burrough late Comptroller of her High-nesse navie, and annexed unto his exact and notable mappe of Russia, briefly containing (amongst other matters) his great travailes, observations, and experiments both by sea and land, especially in those Northeastern parts.

To the most high and renowmed Princesse Elizabeth by the grace of God Queene of England, France and Ireland, &c.

Y minde earnestly bent to the knowledge of navigation and Hydrographie from my youth (most excellent my dread Soveraigne) hath eftsoones beene moved by diligent studie to search out the chiefest points to them belonging : and not therewith sufficed hath also sought

by experience in divers discoveries and other voyages and travailes to practise the same. I was in the first in	209	o

voyage for discoverie of the partes of Russia, which begun in anno 1553. (being then sixteene yeeres of age) also in the yeere 1556. in the voyage when the coastes of Samoed and Nova Zembla, with the straightes of Vaigatz were found out: and in the yeere 1557, when the coast of Lappia, and the bay of S. Nicholas were more perfectly discovered. Since which time, by my continuall practise in the voyages made yeerely to S. Nicholas in Russia, or to the Narve, and to some other countreys also by Sea : as likewise in passing from S. Nicholas to Mosco, and from Mosco to Narve, and from thence backe againe to S. Nicholas by land, in the yeeres 1574. and 1575. (being then Agent in those countreis for the companie of English merchants for discoveries of new trades) setting downe alwayes with great care and diligence, true observations & notes of al those countreys, Islands, coasts of the sea, and other things requisite to the artes of Navigation and Hydrographie : and with like diligence gathering exact notes and descriptions of the wayes, rivers, cities, townes, &c. as I passed by land : I finde my selfe sufficiently furnished to give report unto your Majesty, and to make description of those North parts of the world in forme and maner of every leagues distance that I have passed & seene in all those my travels. The places herein described, which I have not seene and tried my selfe, I have set downe by the best authorities that I could finde, and therein may erre with the learned Gerardus Mercator, Abraham Ortelius, and the rest: but for the maine part which is from Rochel in France hither to London, and from hence Eastward to Narve by sea, and from thence to Mosco and to S. Nicholas by land : also from hence Northwards and Northeastwards by Sea to Saint Nicholas, and to the straight of Vaigatz (first craving humbly your high-nesse pardon) I dare boldly affirme (and that I trust without suspect of arrogancie, since truely I may say it) I have here set it open to the view, with such exact-nesse and trueth, and so placed every thing aright in

210

BURROUGH’S EPISTLE DEDICATORIE a.d.

. . . . c- I598'

true latitude and longitude, (accompting the longitudes from the meridian of London, which I place in 21. degrees) as till this time no man hath done the like : neither is any man able by learning onely, except he travaileth, as I have done. For as it may be truely saide of navigation and Hydrographie, that no man can be cunning in the one which wanteth convenient knowledge in the other : and as neither of them can be had without the helpes of Astronomic and Cosmographie, much lesse without these two grounds of all artes, Arithmetike and Geometric : so none of the best learned in those sciences Mathematical!, without convenient practise at the sea can make just proofe of the profite in them : so necessarily dependeth art and reason upon practise and experience. Albeit there are divers both learned and unlearned, litle or nothing experienced, which in talke of navigation will enter deeply and speake much of and against errours used therein, when they cannot reforme them. Such also have written therof, pretending singular great knowledge therein, and would so be accompted of, though in very deede not worthy the name of good and sufficient pilots. To whom I thinke it shall not be amisse in defence of rules budded upon reason, and in practise allowed, thus much to say for answere. It is so, that there are rules used in navigation which are not perfectly true : among which the streight lines in sea-cardes, representing the 32. points of the compasse or windes, are not holden to be the least, but noted of such talkers for principali, to condemne the occupiers thereof for ignorant: yet hath the famous and learned Gerardus Mercator used them in his universal mappe.

But such as condemne them for false, and speake most [I. 418.] against their use cannot give other that should serve for navigation to better purpose and effect. Experience (one of the keyes of knowledge) hath taught mee to say it. Wherein with my abilitie, together with some part of my studie, I am the rather moved (in this my plot) to make some triall unto your majestie : for that

211

I perceive that such attempts of newe discoveries (where-unto this noble Island is most aptly situated) are by your royall maintenance so willingly furthered : beseeching your highnesse so to accept of these my travailes, as a pledge of my well willing to my countrey, and of my loyall service to your majestie, whose healthfull happie life and reigne God continue which is Almightie. Amen.

Your Majesties most humble subject William Burrough.

The Queenes Majesties letters to Shaugh Thamas the great Sophi of Persia, sent by Arthur Edwards, William Turnbull, Matthew Tailbois, and -Peter Gerard appointed Agents for the Moscovie companie, in their sixt voyage to Persia, begun in the yeere 1579.

To the most noble and invincible Emperour of Persia, King of Shirvan, Gilan, Grosin, Corassan, and great Governour of the Indies.

Lizabeth by the grace of God Queene of England, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, &c. To the most noble and invincible Emperour of Persia, King of Shirvan, Gilan, Grosin, Corassan, and great governour even unto the Indies, sendeth greeting. Most noble and in-

Il 1568 vincible Prince, it is now II tenne yeeres since, or

394- thereabouts, wherein (after the honourable ambassade of

the noble man Anthony Jenkinson our welbeloved subject, to your most noble and invincible father performed) we laboured to bring to passe by Thomas Bannister and Gefferey Ducket merchants, our subjects, that throughout all the kingdomes subject to his empire, free power might be given to Will. Garrard, Thomas Ofley, William Chester knights, Rowland Haiward, Lionel Ducket,

212
