The greatest danger unto you in that place will be while you shall shift your ships : therefore you are to consider of it, but the fittest time for you to doe the same, will bee when the winde is Southerly off the shore, or calme, and at such time you may the better doe it without danger. You must take such order among you, that your companies may be alwaies willing and ready to helpe one the other, and appoint among your selves such ships to shift first, and such after, in such sort and forme as you shall thinke best and most convenient. And while they shall be in discharging, shifting, and lading, let the rest of your companies which have not then to doe in lading or discharging, helpe those ships that shall have labour to doe, as well for carying the barkes from ships to the shoare, or from shore to the shippe with your boates, as also for any other helpe that they shall have neede of.

[I. 455.]	12 Remember what hath bene said unto you touching

the moring of your ships, &c. for using advantage against the enemie, if you shall be assaulted in that place.

13	See that you serve God, abolish swearing and gaming, be carefull of fire and candles, &c.

14	You are to consult and agree among your selves upon signes, tokens, and good orders for the better keeping of company together, and also the maner how and by what meanes, rescue, ayde, or helpe may be given by one to the other in fight, if you happen to come to it.

Thus we pray God to send you a prosperous voyage and safe returne.

The opinion of Master William Burrough sent to a friend, requiring his judgement for the fittest time of the departure of our ships towards S. Nicholas in Russia.

WHereas you request me to perswade the company not to send their shippes from hence before the fine of May, I do not thinke the same so good a course for them to observe : for you know that the sooner wee 306

sende them hence, the sooner we may looke for their returne. If wee sende them in the beginning of May, The Russian then may they be at Saint Nicholas by the fine of the same moneth : and by that time the greatest parte or beaming of your lading of necessitie must bee come downe, especially May. the flaxe : but if it should fall out so lateward a breaking up of the river of Duyna, that by the ende of May the goods cannot be brought to Saint Nicholas, yet this is alwayes to be accounted for certaine, that before our ships can come thither, the goods may be brought downe to that place : and if through ice the shippes be kept backe any time, the losse and charge of that time toucheth not the companie at all, but the owners of the shippes, and yet will the Owners put that in adventure, rather then tarie longer time before their going hence.

Now seeing by sending our shippes hence in the beginning of May, their arrivall at S. Nicholas may be at the ende of the same moneth, and remaining thirtie dayes there, they may bee laden and come thence by the last of June, and returne home hither by the 10 of August with commodities to serve the market then, it cannot bee denied but we should reape thereby great commodi tie.

But it may be objected, that if all our shippes be sent then to returne as aforesaid, you shall not be able to send us in so much cordage, Waxe and Oyles, as otherwise you should doe if they remained a moneth longer, neither could you by that time perfect your accounts to be sent in them as you would doe.

For answere thereunto this is my meaning : though I wish the greatest part of our shipping to go as aforesaid, yet would I have one good ship or two at the most well furnished in al points that should depart alwaies from hence, betweene the beginning and the 10 day of June : and the same to be conditioned withall to remaine at S. Nicholas from the first arrivall there untill the middest of August, or to be dispatched thence sooner, 3°7

at the will and liking of our factors for the same : by this order these commodities following may ensue

1	You may have our commodities there timely to send up the river before it waxe shallow, to be dispersed in the countrey at your pleasure.

2	The greatest part of our goods may be returned hither timely to serve the first markets.

3	Our late ships remaining so long here may serve to good purpose, for returning answere of such letters as may be sent over land, and received here before their departure.

4	Their remaining so late with you shal satisfie your desire for perfecting your accounts, and may bring such cordage, Waxe, Oile, & other commodities, as you can provide before that time : and chiefly may serve us in

stead to bring home our goods that may be sent us

from Persia.

Now seeing it may be so many wayes commodious to the company to observe this order, without any charge unto them, I wish that you put to your helping hand to further the same.

A copie of the Commission given to Sir Jerome Bowes, authorizing him her Majesties Am-bassadour unto the Emperour of Russia, Anno

1583-

ELIZABETHA Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae, & Hyberniae Regina, fidei defensatrix, &c. Universis & singulis praesentes literas visuris & inspecturis, salutem. Cum Serenissimus Princeps, Joannes Basilius, Rex, & magnus Dux Russiae, Volodimerae, Moscoviae, & Novo-grodiae, Rex Cazani, & Astracani, Dominus Plescoae, & magnus Dux Smolenscoae, Tueri, Ugori, Permiae, Valeae, Bolharae, & aliarum ditionum : Dominus & magnus

[I. 456.] Dux Novogrodiae in inferiori regione Chernigae, Rezanae,

Polotscoae, Ratsaviae, Yeraslavae, Bealozeri, Liflandiae, Oudori, & Condensae, & gubernator in tota provincia

308
