A letter to the right worshipfull M. John Dee Esquire, conteyning the summe and effect of M. Edward Garland his message, delivered to Master Dee himselfe, (Letterwise) for a more perfect memoriali thereof. Anno 1586.

Ight worshipfull, it may please you to understand, that I was sent unto you from the most mightie Prince Feodor Ivanowich, Lord, Emperour and great duke of Russia, &c. As also from the most excellent prince Boris Feodorowich, Lord Protector of Russia : to give your

worship to understand the great good will and heartie desire they beare unto you ; for that of long time they have had great good report of your learning & wisedom, as also of your good counsel unto Princes : whereupon his Majesties most earnest desire and request is unto you ; that you would take the paines to come unto his Citie of Mosco, to visite his Majesties Court : for that hee is desirous of your company, and also of your good counsell in divers matters that his Majestie shall thinke needfull. And for the great goodwill that his Majestie beareth unto you, he will give you yeerely toward your mainteinance 2000. pound starling; and the Lord Protectour will give you a thousand rubbles, as also your provision for your table you shall have free out of his Majesties kitchin : And further whatsoever you shall thinke needefull or convenient for you, in any part or parts of his dominion, it shall be at your worships commaundement. And this is the summe and effect of my message and commandement given me by his Majestie and the Lord Protectour.

In witnesse whereof I have written this with my owne hand, the 17. of December 1586.

By me Edward Garland.

In Trebona Castel otherwise called Wittingaw in 447

BoSmia: to which place this M. Edward Garland came to M. Dee with two Moscovites to serve him, &c. He had sixe more, which by M. Dees counsell were sent backe.

Witnesse M. Edward Kelley, and M. Francis Garland, brother to the foresaid Edward, and divers others.

IT seemeth that this princely offer of the Emperour Pheodor Ivanowich, and of the L. Boris Pheodorowich Protectour to his Majestie, was made unto the learned and famous Mathematitian M. John Dee, partly to use his counsell & direction about certaine discoveries to the Northeast; and partly for some other weighty occasions : but because their conquest to Siberia was not as then fully settled, & for divers other secret reasons, it was for y‘ time with al thankfulnes refused.

A branch of a letter from M. John Merick, Agent unto the Moscovie company in Russia, closed up in the Mosco the 14. of March, Anno 1597. touching the death of Pheodor Ivanowich late Emperour of all Russia, &c.

10. Febr.

1597-

Aving thus farre proceeded with this my answere unto the chiefest points of your worships letters received, my desire was to have sent one unto you long since, as you may perceive by || the first date : but by reason I could not get leave, I have deferred it of till this instant, for

that there was none suffered to passe out of the land. The causes may be judged, for that it pleased God to call out of this world, the Emperour his Majestie, who departed about the 7. of January: and ever since hath bene a mourning time, & no suites for any matter could be heard. But it hath bene a very dead season. Yet (thankes be to God) through the wise government of Lord Boris Pheodorowich the Lord Protector

448
