The Gentlewomans apparell may differ in the stufFe, but is all one for the making or fashion.

As for the poore Mousick and his wife they goe poorely cladde. The man with his Honoratkey, or loose gowne to the small of the legge, tyed together with a lace before, of course white or blew cloth, with some Shube or long wastcoate of furre, or of sheepe-skinne under it, and his furred cappe, and buskins. The poorer sort of them have their Honoratkey, or upper garment, made of Kowes haire. This is their winter habite. In the sommer time, commonly they weare nothing but their shirts on their backes, and buskins on their legges. The woman goeth in a red or blewe gowne, when she maketh the best shewe, and with some warme Shube of furre under it in the winter time. But in the sommer, nothing but her two shirts (for so they call them) one over the other, whether they be within doores, or without. On their heads, they weare caps of some coloured stufFe, many of velvet, or of cloth of gold : but for the most part kerchiefs. Without earings of silver or some other mettall, and her crosse about her necke, you shall see no Russe woman, be she wife, or maide.

A.D.

1590.

The Mousicks or common mans attire.

The Lord Boris Pheodorowich his letter to the [I. 498.] Right Honorable William Burghley Lord high Treasurer of England, &c.

Y the grace of God the great Lord Emperor, and great Duke Theodore Ivano-wich, great Lord, King, and great Duke of all Russia, of Volodemer, Mosco, and Novogorod, king of Cazan, and Astracan, Lord of Vobsko, and great Duke of Smolensco, Tver, Ughori, Permi, Viatsko,

Bolgorie, and other places, Lorde and great Duke of Novogrod in the Lowe Countrey, of Chernigo, Rezan, The Emperors Polotsky, Rostove, Yeroslave, Bealozera, and Liefland, stile increased.

419

of Oudorski, Obdorski, Condinski, and commander of all Sibierland, and the North coasts, great Lorde over the Countrey of Iverski, Grisinski, Emperor of Kabar-dinski, and of the Countrey Charchaski, and the Countrey of Gorsky, and Lord of many other regions.

From Boris Pheodorowich his Majesties brother in law, master of his horses, governour of the territories of Cazan and Astracan, to William Lord Burghley, Lord high Treasurer to the most vertuous Ladie Elizabeth, Queene of England, France, and Ireland, and other dominions : I received your Lordships letters, wherein you write that you have received very joyfully my letters sent unto you, and advisedly read them, and imparted the same unto her Majestie : and that your Merchants finde themselves agreeved, that when they approch these parts, and are arrived here, they are not permitted to enter into a free and liberali course of barter, traffike, and exchange of their commodities, as heretofore they have done, but are compelled before they can enter into any traffike to accept the Emperours waxe, and other goods, at high rates farre above their value, to their great losse : and that they are by reason of this restraint long holden upon these coasts to the danger of wintering by the way. Hereafter there shalbe no cause of offence given to the Marchants of the Queenes Majestie Queene Elizabeth: they shall not be forced to any thing, neither are there or shall be any demands made of custome or debts. Such things as have beene heretofore demaunded, all such things have beene already upon their petition and supplication commaunded to be discharged. I have sollicited his Majestie for them, that they be not troubled hereafter for those matters, and that a favourable hand be caried over them. And according to your request I will be a meane to the Emperour for them in all their occasions, and will my selfe shew them my favorable countenance. And I pray you (William Burghley) to signifie to her Majesties Merchants that I promise to have a care of

420

LETTER FROM BORIS PHEODOROWICH a.d.

159°.

them, and for the Queenes Majestie of Englands sake, I will take her Merchants into my protection, and will defend them as the Emperours selected people under the Emperors commission : and by mine appointment all his Majesties officers and authorized people shall be carefull over them. The Emperors gracious favor towards them was never such as it is now. And where you write that at the port the Emperors Officers sell their waxe by commission at a set rate given them, farre above the value, and that they enforce your Marchants to accept it, they deny that they take any such course, but say they barter their waxe for other wares, and also put their waxe to sale for readie money to your Merchants, according to the worth thereof, and as the price goeth in the custome house here. It hath beene heretofore deare, and now is sold as good cheape as in any other place, and as they can best agree : they enforce no man to buy it, but rather kepe it : therefore your Marchants have no just cause to make any such report. I have expressely given order, that there shall be no such course used to enforce them, but to buy according to their owne willes, and to tarrie at the port or to depart at their pleasure. And as touching the customes alreadie past, and debts demanded at your Merchants hands, whereof you write : Our Lord great Emperour and great Duke Theodore Ivanowich of all Russia of famous memory hath shewed his Majesties especial favour and love, for the great love of his welbeloved sister Queene of England, and by my petition and mediation, whereas there was commandement given to take Marshes whole debt of your Merchants and factors, it is moderated to the halfe, and for the other halfe, commandement given it should not be taken, and the Merchants billes to be delivered them. And to the end hereafter that her Majesties Marchants move no contention betwixt our Lord the Emperor and great Duke of Russia, and his welbeloved sister Queene Elizabeth, his Majestie desireth order to be given, that

English Marchants in great favour with the Emperor.

Halfe the debt of Antony Marsh remitted.

421

your Marchants doe deale justly in their traffike, and plainely without fraud or guile. And I will be a favourer of them above all others, under his Majesties authoritie : Ann. Dam. themselves shall see it. Written in our great Lorde the I59O> Emperours citie of Mosco in the moneth of July, 7°99-

[L 499-]

1590.

The Queenes Majesties letter to Theodore Ivanovich Emperour of Russia, 1591.

Lizabeth by the grace of God Queene of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, &c. to the right high, mighty, and right noble prince Theodore Ivanovich great Lord, King, and great Duke of all Russia, Volodemer, Mosco, Novogrod, King of Cazan, and Astracan,

Lord of Vobsko, and great Duke of Smolensko, Otver, Ughory, Perme, Viatski, Bolgory, and other places: Lord and great Duke of Novogrod in the low countrey, of Chernigo, Rezan, Polotsky, Rostove, Yeraslave, Bealozero, and Lifland, of Oudorsky, Obdorsky, Con-dinsky, and commander of all Sibierland and the North coasts, great Lord over the countrey of Iversky, Grisinsky, Emperor of Kabardinsky, and of the countrey of Charkasky, and of the countrey of Gorsky, and Lord of many other countreys, our most deare and loving brother, greeting. Right noble and excellent prince, we have received your Majesties letters brought over by our merchants in their returne of their || last voyage from your port of S. Nicholas ; which letters we have advisedly read and considered, and thereby perceive that your Majesty doth greatly mislike of our late imploy-ment of Jerome Horsey into your dominions as our messenger with our Highnesse letters, and also that your Majesty doth thinke that we in our letters sent by the sayd messenger have not observed that due order or respect which apperteined to your princely majesty, in the forme of the same letter, aswel touching the 422
