thing availe to thine honour or defence, I will thinke my travaile right well bestowed. Yea, if by this my slender attempt I may but onely excite other of thy children, and my native Countreymen, being farre my superiours both in learning and industrie to take thy cause in hand, either nowe or hereafter, what reason is there why any man should say that it is not worth my labour ? Nowe, if they addresse themselves to write, howsoever my fame shalbe obscured, yet will I comfort my selfe with their excellencie, who are like to impaire my credite : for albeit a man ought to have speciali regard of his name and fame, yet is he to have more of his Countrey, whose dignitie being safe and sound, we also must needes esteeme our selves to be in safetie.

Written at Holen Hialtedale in Island, the yeere of our Lord 1592. the 17. of the Kalends of May.

A letter written by the grave and learned Gud-brandus Thorlacius Bishop of Holen in Island, concerning the ancient state of Island and Gronland, &c.

Reverendissimo viro, eruditione & virtute conspicuo, D. Hugoni Branham, Ecclesiae Harevicensis in Anglia pastori vigilantissimo, fratri & symmystae observando.

Irabar equidem (ut conjicis, reverende domine pastor) primo literarum tuarum intuitu, ignotum me, ab ignoto, scriptis salutari. Caeterum, cum ulterius progrederer, comperi me, si non aliter, certi nomine teniis, tibi (quae tua est humanitas) innotuisse: Simiilque quod te nominis

Islandorum studiosum experirer, ex animo gavisus sum. Undi etiam faciam, ut tua pietas, tuiimque nomen, de Evangelio Jesu Christi nobis congratulantis, ddque gente nostra tam benigne tamque honorifici sentientis & scribentis, apud nos ignotum esse desinat.

194

Quid verb ad antiquitatis monimenta attinet, quae hie extare creduntur, nihil sand est (praeter illa, quorum in Commentario isto de Islandia, quem vidisse te scribis, fit mentio) de hac nostra insula lectu scriptuve dignum, quod cum humanitate tua communicem. De vicinis itidem terris pauca, praeter historiam Regum Noruegiae, seu veriiis ejusdem historiae fragmenta ; quae aliis aliter descripta sunt: sunt tamen talia, quae Krantzius non attigerit, aut eorum certe pauca. De vicina quoque Gron-landia, id veterum opinione habemus, eam magno circuitu ab extrema Noruegia, ubi || Biarmlandia nuncupatur, & a qua haud vasto intervallo sita sit, circum quasi Island-iam exporrigi. Illic nostrates aliquando commercia exercuisse, & eam terram tempore Pontificiorum suos Episcopos habuisse annales nostri testantur. Caetera nobis incognita. At hodid fama est, vestris Britannis (quos ego prope maris dominos appellarim) quotannis esse in Gronlandia negotiationes : de qua re, si me certiorem feceris, non erit injucundum. Etiam velim quaecunque nova erunt de rebus vestratium aut vicinorum regnorum, ea non omittas.

Vale foeliciter (reverende Dom. pastor) Deo, musis, & commisso gregi quam diutissime superstes, Arnen. Ex Islandia in festo visitationis D. Mariae Anno 1595.

Human, tuae studiosus Gudbrandus Thorlacius Episcopus Holensis in Islandia.

A.D.

1595-

Commentarius brevis de Islandia: per Amgpimum Jonam Islandum editus, 1593.

|| Biarmia.

Gronlandis olim suos habuit Episcopos.

The same in English.	[I. 591.]

To the reverend, learned, and vertuous, Master Hugh Branham minister of the Church of Harewich in England, his brother and felow-pastour. &c.

I Much marvelled (even as your selfe, reverend sir, conjectured that I would) at the first sight of your letters, that being a stranger I should be saluted in writing by one altogether unknowen unto mee. Howbeit, reading a litle further, I found my selfe, if not otherwise, yet by name at least (which proceedeth of

195

This is the briefe Commentarie of Jonas Arn-grimus immediacy going before.

|| Biarmia.

Gronland in old time had Christian Bishops.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

your courtesie) knowen unto you : And also, for that I sawe you desirous of the credite and honest report of us Islanders, I greatly rejoyced. Wherefore I my selfe will be a meane, that your vertue and good name (because you congratulate with us for the Gospel of Christ here published, and doe thinke and write so lovingly and honourably of our nation) may cease hereafter to be unknowen amongst us.

As touching the monuments of antiquitie which are here thought to be extant, there is, in very deede, nothing (except those particulars, whereof mention is made in the Commentary of Island, which you write unto me that you have seene) worthy to be read or written, which I may communicate with you. And as concerning our neighbour Countreys we have litle to shewe, besides the history of the Kings of Norway, (or rather some fragments of the same history) which others have otherwise described : howbeit they are all in a maner such things as Krantzius never mentioned : unlesse it be some fewe relations. Moreover, as touching Gronland, we holde this from the opinion of our auncestours; that, from the extreeme part of Norway, which is called II Biarmlandia, and from whence the saide Gronland is not farre distant, it fetcheth about the Northren coast of Island with an huge circuit in maner of an halfe Moone. Our Chronicles likewise doe testifie that our owne countreymen in times past resorted thither for traffique, and also that the very same countrey of Gronland had certaine Bishops in the dayes of Poperie. More then this we cannot avouch. But now it is reported that your Englishmen (whom I may almost call the lordes of the Ocean sea) make yeerely voyages unto Gronland: concerning which matter if you please to give me further advertisement, you shall doe me an especial favour. Moreover, whatsoever newes you heare concerning the affaires of England or of other Countreys thereabout, I pray you make us acquainted therewith. Thus (reverend sir) wishing you long life, for the service of God, for

196

the increase of learning, and the benefit of the people committed to your charge, I bid you farewel. From Island upon the feast of the visitation of the blessed Virgine Mary, Anno Dom. 1595.

Yours Gudbrandus Thorlacius Bishop of Hola in Island.

The miraculous victory atchieved by the English Fleete, under the discreet and happy conduct of the right honourable, right prudent, and valiant lord, the L. Charles Howard, L. high Admirall of England, &c. Upon the Spanish huge Armada sent in the yeere 1588. for the invasion of England, together with the wofull and miserable successe of the said Armada afterward, upon the coasts of Norway, of the Scottish Westerne Isles, of Ireland, of Spaine, of France, and of England, &c. Recorded in Latine by Emanuel van Meteran in the 15. booke of his history of the low Countreys.

Aving in part declared the strange and wonderfull events of the yeere eightie eight, which hath bene so long time foretold by ancient prophesies; we will now make relation of the most notable and great enterprise of all others which were in the foresaid yeere atchieved, in order

as it was done. Which exploit (although in very deed it was not performed in any part of the low Countreys) was intended for their ruine and destruction. And it

was the expedition which the Spanish king, having a long time determined the same in his minde, and having consulted thereabout with the Pope, set foorth and under-tooke against England and the low Countreys. To the end that he might subdue the Realme of England, and reduce it unto his catholique Religion, and by that

197
