1130. tum demum revertebatur. Claruit anno virginei partus, 1130. Henrico primo regnante.

The same in English.

AThelard a Monke of the Abbie of Bathe was so diligent a searcher of the secrets, and causes of naturali things, that he deserveth worthely to be compared with some of the auncient Philosophers. This man although young, yet being of a good wit, and being desirous to increase and enrich the same with the best things, and to prepare himselfe as it were for greater matters, left his Countrey for a time, and travailed into forreine Regions. He went through Egypt, and Arabia, and found out many things which he desired to his owne private contentment, and the profite of good letters generally, and so being satisfied, returned againe into his Countrey : he flourished in the yeere 1130. Henry the first being then king of England.

The life and travailes of one William of Tyre, an Englishman. Centur. 13.

Hic etiam Guilielmus Tyrensis claruit sub Henricoprimo.

Ulielmus, Ecclesiae Dominici sepulchri Hierosolymae Regularium Canonicorum prior, natione Anglicus vir vita & moribus commendabilis, Anno Dom. 1128. postquam Tyrorum Civitas fidei Christianae restituta est a Guimundo Hierosolymorum patriarcha, eidem urbi primus

Archiepiscopus praeficiebatur. Est autem Tyrus civitas antiquissima, Phoeniciae universae Metropolis, quae inter Syriae provincias, & bonorum omnium pen^ commoditate, & incolarum frequentia primum semper obtinuit locum : post conscripta quaedam opuscula, & Epistolas, ad Dominum migravit, An. Christi 1130. quum duobus tantum sedisset annis, & in Tyrensi Ecclesia sepelitur.

3°7

William the Prior of the Canons Regular in the Church of Jerusalem, called the Lords Sepulchre, was an Englishman borne, and of a vertuous and good behaviour. After that the Citie of Tyre was restored againe to the Christian faith, Guimunde the Patriarke of Jerusalem made him the first Archbishop of Tyre, in the yeere 1128. Which Tyre is a very ancient Citie, the Metropolis of all Phoenicia, and hath bene accompted the chiefest Province of Syria, both for fruitful commodities and multitude of inhabitants. This William having in his life written many Bookes and Epistles, died at last in the yeere 1130. having bene Archbishop the space of two yeeres, and was buried in the Church of Tyre.

The travailes of Robertus Ketenensis.

Obertus Ketenensis natione & cognomine Anglus, degustatis primum per Anglorum gymnasia humanarum artium elementis literariis, ultramarinas statim visitare provincias in animo constituit: Peragratis ergo Galliis, Italia, Dalmatia, & Graecia, tum demum pervenit in Asiam, ubi non

parvo labore, ac vitae suae periculo inter Saracenos truculentissimum hominum genus, Arabicam linguam ad amussim didicit. In Hispaniam postea navigio traductus, circa fluvium Hiberum Astrologicae artis studio, Claruit sub cum Hermanno quodam Dalmata, magni sui itineris Stephana. eomite se totum dedit. Claruit anno servatoris nostri, 1143 Stephano regnante, & Pampilonae sepelitur.

The same in English.

THis Robert Ketenensis was called an Englishman by surname, as he was by birth : who after some time spent in the foundations of humanitie, and in the 308
