consent. Which princes and messengers standing aloofe off from the kings sonne, worshipping him, fell flat upon the ground : you (sayd the prince) do reverence me, but yet you love me not. But they understood him not, because he spake in English unto them, speaking by an Interpreter: neverthelesse he honourably entertained them, and sent them away in peace.

Thus when prince Edward had beene eighteene moneths in Aera, he tooke shipping about the Assumption of our Lady, as we call it, returning homeward, and after seven weekes he arrived in Sicilia at Trapes, and from thence travailed thorow the middes of Apulia, till he came to Rome, where he was of the Pope honorably entertained.

From thence he came into France, whose fame and noble prowesse was there much bruted among the common people, and envied of the Nobility, especially of the earle of Chalons, who thought to have intrapped him and his company, as may appeare in the story: but Prince Edward continued foorth his journey to Paris, and was there of the French king honourably entertained: and after certaine dayes he went thence into Gascoine, where he taried till that he heard of the death of the king his father, at which time he came home, and was crowned king of England, in the yere of our Lord 1274.

The travaile of Robert Turneham.

[II. i. 39 ]

Obertus Turneham Franciscanus, Theologiae prong^ fessor insignis, Lynnae celebri Irenorum ad ripas ■- —I Isidis emporio, collegio suorum fratrum magnifice praefuit. Edwardus Princeps, cognomento Longus, Henrici tertii filius, bellicam expeditionem contra Sara

cenos Assyriam incolentes, anno Dom. 1268. parabat. Ad quam profectionem quaesitus quoque Orator vehemens, qui plebis in causa religionis animos excitaret, Turnehamus principi visus vel dignissimus est, qui munus hoc obiret. Sic tanquam signifer constitutus 366

1415-

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

Assyrios una cum Anglico exercitu petiit, ac suum non sine laude praestitit officium. Claruit anno salutiferi partus, 1280, varia componens, sub eodem Edwardo

ejus nominis primo post Conquestum.

The same in English.

RObert Turneham Franciscan, a notable professour of Divinity, was with great dignity Prior of the Coiledge of his Order in the famous Mart towne of Linne, situate upon the river of Isis in Norfolke. Prince Edward surnamed the Long, the sonne of Henry the third, prepared his warlike voyage against the Saracens dwelling in Syria, in the yeere of our Lord, 1268. For the which expedition some earnest preacher was sought to stir up the peoples minds in the cause of religion. And this Turneham seemed to the Prince most worthy to performe that office: so that he being appointed as it were a standerd bearer, went into Syria with the English army, and performed his duety with good commendation. He flourished in the yeere of Christ 1280, setting foorth divers works under the same king Edward the first of that name after the Conquest.

368

VIEW OF TYRE IN THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY

IV

369

2 A
