both at his conquest of Barbarie, and at his siege at Tunis, as also in other places. Who had given him by the sayd Emperour for his valiant deedes the order of Barbary. Who dyed the 29 day of December, in the yeere of our Lord God 1566.

The voyage of Sir Thomas Chaloner to Alger with Charles the lift 1541, drawen out of his booke De Republica Anglorum instauranda.

Homas Chalonerus patria Londinensis, studio Cantabrigensis, educatione aulicus, religione pius, vereque Christianus fuit. Itaque cum juvenilem aetatem, mentemque suam humanioribus studiis roborasset, Domino Henrico Knevetto a potentis-simo rege Henrico ejus nominis octavo

ad Carolum quintum imperatorem transmisso legato, una cum illo profectus est, tanquam familiaris amicus, vel eidem a consiliis. Quo quidem tempore Carolo quinto navali certamine a Genua & Corsica in Algyram in Africa contra Tureas classem solvente ac hostiliter proficiscente, ornatissimo illo Knevetto legato regis, Thoma Chalo-nero, Henrico Knolleo, & Henrico Isamo, illustribus viris eundem in illa expeditione suapte sponte sequentibus, pariterque militantibus, mirifice vitam suam Chalonerus tutatus est. Nam triremi illa, in qua fuerat, vel scopulis allisa, vel gravissimis procellis conquassata, naufragus cum se diu natatu defendisset, deficientibus viribus, brachiis manibusque languidis ac quasi enervatis, prehensa dentibus cum maxima difficultate rudenti, quae ex altera triremi jam propinqua tum fuerat ejecta, non sine dentium aliquorum jactura ac fractura sese tandem recuperavit, ac domum integer relapsus est.

The same in English.

THomas Chaloner was by birth a Londiner, by studie a Cantabrigian, by education a Courtier, by religion a devout and true Christian. Therfore after he had

confirmed his youth and minde in the studies of good learning, when Sir Henry Knevet was sent ambassadour from the mighty Prince Henry the 8. to the Emperour Charles the fift, he went with him as his familiar friend, or as one of his Councell. At which time the said Charles the 5. passing over from Genoa and Corsica to Alger in Africa in warlike sort, with a mighty army by sea, that honorable Knevet the kings ambassadour, Thomas Chaloner, Henry Knolles, and Henry Isham, right worthy persons, of their owne accord accompanied him in that expedition, & served him in that warre, wherin Thomas Chaloner escaped most wonderfully with his life. For the gaily wherein he was, being either dashed against the rockes, or shaken with mighty stormes, and so cast away, after he had saved himselfe a long while by swimming, when his strength failed him, his armes & hands being faint and weary, with great difficulty laying hold with his teeth on a cable, which was cast out of the next gaily, not without breaking and losse of certaine of his teeth, at length recovered himselfe, and returned home into his countrey in safety.

The voyage of M. Roger Bodenham with the great Barke Aucher to Candia and Chio, in the yeere 1550.

N the yeere 1550. the 13 of November I Roger Bodenham Captaine of the Barke Aucher entered the said ship at Gravesend, for my voiage to the Hands of Candia and Chio in the Levant. The master of my ship was one William Sherwood. From thence we departed to The Barke

Tilbery hope, and there remained with contrarie windes Aucher g>eth untill the 6. of January 1551. The 6 of Januarie, the f°rLevant-M. came to Tilbery, and I had provided a skilfull pylot to cary me over the lands end, whose name was M. Wood, and with all speede I valed downe that night

71
