An ambassage from Don Ferdinando, brother to the emperor Charles the 5. unto king Henry the 8. in the yere 1527. desiring his aide against Solyman the great Turke. Holin-shed. pag. 894.

N the 14. day of March, 1527. were con-veied from London to Greenwich by the earle of Rutland and others, the lord Gabriel de Salamanca, earle of Ottonburge, John Burgrave of Sylverberge, and John Faber a famous clerke, after bishop of Vien, as ambassadours from Don Ferdi

nando, brother to Charles the emperor, newly elect king of Hungarie and Beame, after the death of his brother in law king Lewes, which was slaine by Solyman the Turke the last Sommer. This company was welcommed of the high officers, and after brought into the kings presence, all the nobilitie being present; and there after great reverence made, M. Faber made a notable oration, taking his ground out of the Gospell, Exiit seminator seminare semen suum: and of that hee declared how Christ and his disciples went foorth to sowe, and how their seed was good that fel into the good ground, and brought foorth good fruite, which was the Christian faith. And then he declared how contrary to that sowing, Mahomet had sowen seed, which brought foorth evil! fruit. He also shewed from the beginning, how the Turkes have increased in power, what realmes they had conquered, what people they had subdued even to that day. He declared further what actes the great Turke then living had done; and in especiall, he noted the getting of Belgrade and of the Rhodes, and the slaying of the king of Hungarie, to the great rebuke (as he [IL i. 96.] sayd) of all the kings christened. Hee set foorth also what power the Turke had, what diversities of companies, what capitaines he had, so that he thought, that without

a marvellous great number of people, hee could not be overthrowen. Wherefore he most humbly besought the king as S. Georges knight, and defender of the faith, to assist the king his master in that godly warre and vertuous purpose.

To this oration the king by the mouth of Sir Thomas Moore answered ; that much hee lamented the losse that happened in Hungarie, and if it were not for the warres He meaneth which were betweene the two great princes, he thought the Emperor that the Turke would not have enterprised that acte : e Frenc wherefore he with all his studie would take paine, first, to set an unitie and peace throughout all Christendome, and after that, both with money and men he would be readie to helpe toward that glorious warre, as much as any other prince in Christendome. After this done, the ambassadours were well cherished, and divers times resorted to the court, and had great cheere and good rewards, and so the third day of May next following, they tooke their leave & departed homeward.

The antiquitie of the trade with English ships into the Levant.

N the yeeres of our Lord, 1511. 1512. &c. till the yeere 1534. divers tall ships of London, namely, The Christopher Campion, wherein was Factor one Roger Whitcome; the Mary George, wherein was Factor William Gresham; the great Mary Grace, the Owner whereof, was

William Gunson, and the master one John Hely; the Trinitie Fitz-williams, whereof was master Laurence Arkey; the Mathew of London, whereof was master William Capling, with certaine other ships of Southampton and Bristow, had an ordinarie and usuall trade to Sicilia, Candie, Chio, and somewhiles to Cyprus, as also to Tripolis and Barutti in Syria. The commodities which they caried thither were fine Kersies of divers colours, course Kersies, white Westerne dozens, Cottons, 62
