A COMMANDMENT TO PATRAS aa .	.	.	*584-

and unjustly molesting our nation, contrarie to the kings commandement, which they disdainefully contemned, as also that the said Mahomet restore and pay unto ours thirtie	for 300 sackes of currants nowe taken

forcibly out of a barke, comming thither from the hither partes of Morea, to pay the king his custome, and that from hence forth, neither the said Mahomet, Azon Agon, nor any other officer or person whatsoever doe hinder or trouble any of ours going thither or to any other place about ther affaires.

6 That whereas certaine Jewes of Lepanto owing money to our marchants for commodities solde them, have not hitherto satisfied them, notwithstanding ours had from the king a commandement for the recovery of the same debts, but fled and absented themselves out of the Towne at the comming of the same, another more forcible commaundement may be graunted ours, that for nonpaiment, whatsoever may be found of theirs in goods, houses, vineyards, or any other thing, may be sold, and ours satisfied of their said debt, according to equitie and reason.

A commandement to Patrasso in Morea.

WHen this commandement shall come unto you, know you, that the Consuli of the English Nation in our port of Patrasso, hath given us to understand, that formerly we granted him a commandement that having paied once custome for the currants bought to lade in their ships, they shall not pay it againe: according to which they bringing it to the port of Petrasso, informing thereof Mahomet the Nadir of Lepanto, he contrary to the tenor thereof and former order, doth againe take another custome of him, and requiring him to know why he so did contrary to our commandement, he answered us, he tooke it not for custome, but for a present. Moreover the sayd Consuli certified us how that the said Nadir contrary to ancient custome doth not take for the kings right as he ought currents, but will have of the 285

poore men money at his pleasure, and therewith buyeth currents at a very low price, which after he doth forcibly sell to us at a much higher price, saying it is remainder of the goods of the king, and by this meanes doth hurt the poore men and do them wrong. Wherefore I com-[II. i. 182.] mand you by this my commandement, that you looke to this matter betweene this Consuli, the Nadir, and this people, and do therein equally according to right. And see that our commandement in this matter be observed in such sort, as they having once in the port paied full custome, do not pay it againe, neither that this Nadir do take any more money of them by the way of present, for that therein it is most certaine he doth them injurie contrary to the Canon. And if with you shall be found to the value of one Asper taken heretofore wrongfully of them, see it presently restored to them, without any default. And from hencefoorth see that he doe neither him nor his people wrong, but that he deale with them in all things according to our Canon, that the Consuli and his hereafter have no occasion any more to complaine here in our Court, and that the Nadir proceed in gathering corants of the people after the old order and not otherwise. This know you for certaine, and give credit to this my commaundement, which having read deliver againe into the Consuls handes. From Constantinople the yeere of Mahomet 993.

A commandement for Chio.

VObis, Beg & Cadi & Ermini, qui estis in Chio, significamus: quod serenissimae Reginae Majestatis Angliae orator, qui est in excelsa porta per literas significavit nobis, quod ex navibus Anglicis una navis venisset ad portum Chio, & illinc Constantinopolim recto cursu voluisset venire, & contra privilegium detinuistis, & non sivistis venire. Haec praedictus orator significavit nobis: & petivit a nobis in hoc negocio hoc mandatum, ut naves Anglicae veniant & redeant in nostras ditiones Caesareas. Privilegium datum & concessum est ex parte 286
