speedy returne, and for that which may be recovered, make over the same either to Richard Rowed for Patrasso in Morea, or otherwise hither to John Bate in the surest maner you may, if the registring of that your privilege and these commandements will not suffer you in person to returne with the same. From my Mansion Rapamat in Pera this 24. of June 1584.

The commaundement obtained of the Grand Signior by her Majesties ambassador M. Will. Hareborne, for the quiet passing of her subjects to and from his dominions, sent in An. 1584. to the Viceroyes of Algier, Tunis & Tripolis in Barbary.

To our Beglerbeg of Algier.

E certifie thee by this our commandement, that the right honorable Will. Hareborne ambassador to the Queenes majestie of England hath signified unto us, that the ships of that countrey in their comming and returning to and from our Empire, on the one part of the Seas have the

Spaniards, Florentines, Sicilians and Malteses, on the other part our countreis committed to your charge: which abovesaid Christians will not quietly suffer their egresse and regresse, into, and out of our dominions, but doe take and make the men captives, and forfeit the [II. i. 178.] shippes and goods, as the last yeere the Malteses did one, which they tooke at Gerbi, and to that end do continually lie in wait for them to their destruction, whereupon they are constrained to stand to their defence at any such time as they might meet with them. Wherefore considering by this means they must stand upon their guard, when they shall see any gallie afarre off, whereby if meeting with any of your gallies and not knowing them, in their defence they do shoot at them, and yet after when they doe certainly know them, do not shoote any more, but

275

require to passe peaceably on their voiage, which you would deny, saying, the peace is broken because you have shot at us, and so make prize of them contrary to our privileges, and against reason: for the preventing of which inconvenience the said ambassador hath required this our commaundement. We therefore command thee, that upon sight hereof thou doe not permit any such matter in any sort whatsoever, but suffer the sayd Englishmen to passe in peace according to the tenour of our commandement given, without any disturbance or let by any means upon the way, although that meeting with thy gallies, and not knowing them afarre off, they taking them for enemies should shoote at them, yet shall you not suffer them to hurt them therfore, but quietly to passe. Wherefore looke thou that they may have right, according to our privilege given them, & finding any that absenteth himself, & wil not obey this our commandement, presently certify us to our porch, that we may give order for his punishment, and with reverence give faithfull credite to this our commandement, which having read, thou shalt againe returne it unto them that present it. From our palace in Constantinople, the 1. of June, 1584.

A letter of the honorable M. Wil. Hareborne her majesties ambass. with the grand Signior to M. Tipton, appointing him Consul of the English in Algier, Tunis, & Tripolis of Barbarie.

Aster Tipton, I have received among others, yours of the 10. of November 1584. by Soliman Sorda, certifying the receipt of mine of the 24. of June 1584. with the 3. commandements, which not' being registred, let it now be done. Where you write the force of the privi-

lege to be broken by our ships in shooting, & therfore be lawfully taken, you are deceived, for of those taken 276
