Ginger for 14. ducats. You must take canvas to make bags to put your commoditie in from Alexandria, for there is none. There is also fine flaxe, and good store of Buffe hides.

A letter of the English ambassador to M. Edward Barton.

Aster Barton I send you 3. commande-ments in Turkish, with a copy thereof in English, to the ende our ships might not come in danger of breach of league, if they should shoote at the gallies of those of Algier, Tunis, and Tripolis in the West: which after you

have shewed the Bassas, receive againe into your hands, and see them registred, and then deliver one of them to our friend M. Tipton, & the like you are to do with the privilege which you cary with you, and see them jointly registred in the Cadies booke, delivering the copy of the said privilege sealed by the Cadi, also to the sayd our friend M. Tipton, taking a note of his hand for the receipt thereof, and for deliverie at all times to us or our assignes. And require them in her majesties and the grand Signors name, that they will have our ships passing too and fro under licence and safeconduct for recommended in friendly maner. Touching your proceedings in Tripolis with Romadan, as I have not received any advise thereof, since your departure, so must I leave you to God and my former direction. The ship patronised of Hassan Rayes, which you wrote to be ours, prooved to be a Catalonian. As for ours, by report of that Hassan and other Jewes in his ship, it was affirmed to be sold to the Malteses, which with the rest you are to receive there. And having ended these affaires and registred our privilege, and these three commande-ments, in Tripolis, Tunis, and Alger, I pray you make 274

speedy returne, and for that which may be recovered, make over the same either to Richard Rowed for Patrasso in Morea, or otherwise hither to John Bate in the surest maner you may, if the registring of that your privilege and these commandements will not suffer you in person to returne with the same. From my Mansion Rapamat in Pera this 24. of June 1584.

The commaundement obtained of the Grand Signior by her Majesties ambassador M. Will. Hareborne, for the quiet passing of her subjects to and from his dominions, sent in An. 1584. to the Viceroyes of Algier, Tunis & Tripolis in Barbary.

To our Beglerbeg of Algier.

E certifie thee by this our commandement, that the right honorable Will. Hareborne ambassador to the Queenes majestie of England hath signified unto us, that the ships of that countrey in their comming and returning to and from our Empire, on the one part of the Seas have the

Spaniards, Florentines, Sicilians and Malteses, on the other part our countreis committed to your charge: which abovesaid Christians will not quietly suffer their egresse and regresse, into, and out of our dominions, but doe take and make the men captives, and forfeit the [II. i. 178.] shippes and goods, as the last yeere the Malteses did one, which they tooke at Gerbi, and to that end do continually lie in wait for them to their destruction, whereupon they are constrained to stand to their defence at any such time as they might meet with them. Wherefore considering by this means they must stand upon their guard, when they shall see any gallie afarre off, whereby if meeting with any of your gallies and not knowing them, in their defence they do shoot at them, and yet after when they doe certainly know them, do not shoote any more, but

275
