deliverance aforesaide : and also for her honourable privie Counsell, and I especiall for the prosperitie and good estate of the house of the late deceased, the right honourable the Earle of Bedford, whose honour I must confesse, most diligently at the suite of my father now departed, travelled herein : for the which I rest continually bounden to him, whose soule I doubt not, but is already in the heavens in joy, with the Almightie, unto which place he vouchsafe to bring us all,- that for our sinnes suffered most vile and shameful death upon the Crosse, there to live perpetually world without ende, Amen.

The Queenes letters to the Turke 1584. for the restitution of the shippe called the Jesus, and the English captives detained in Tripolie in Barbarie, and for certaine other prisoners in Argier.

LIZABETHA, Dei ter maximi & unici coeli terraeque conditoris gratia, Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae Regina, fidei Christianae contra omnes omnium inter Christianos degentium, Christique nomen falso profitentium idololatrias, invictissima & potentissima defensatrix : augustissimo,

invictissim6que principi, Zultan Murad Can, Musulmanici regni dominatori potentissimo, imperiique Orientis Monarchae, supra omnes soli & supremo salutem, & multos cum summa rerum optimarum affluentia foelices & fortunatos annos.

Augustissime & potentissime Imperator, biennio jam peracto, ad Caesaream vestram Majestatem scripsimus, ut dilectus noster famulus Guilielmus Harebornus, vir ornatissimus pro legato nostro Constantinopoli, aliisque Musulmanici imperii ditionibus, sublimi vestra autho-ritate reciperetur: simul etiam Angli subditi nostri commercium & mercaturam, in omnibus illis provinciis exerceant, non miniis liberi, quam Galli, Poloni, Veneti, 3”

Germani, caeterique vestri confcederati, qui varias Orientis partes peragrant, operam navantes, ut mutuis commerciis conjungatur Oriens cum Occidente.

Quae privilegia, cum nostris subditis Anglis invictissima vestra Majestas literis & diplomate suo liberalissime in-dulserit, facere non potuimus, quin quas maximas animus noster capere potest gratias, eo nomine ageremus: sperantes fore, ut haec instituta commerciorum ratio maximas utilitates, & commoda utrinque, tam in imperii vestri ditiones, quam regni nostri provincias secum adferat.

Id ut plane fiat, ciim nuper subditi nostri nonnulli Tripoli in Barbaria & Argellae ab ejus loci incolis voluntatem vestram forte nescientibus male habiti fuerint, & immaniter di vexati, Caesaream vestram Majestatem benevole rogamus, ut per Legatum nostrum eorum causam cognoscas, & postremd earum provinciarum pros ac praefectis imperes, ut nostri libere in illis sine vi aut injuria deinceps versari, & negotia

gerere possint.

Et nos omni opera vicissim studebimus ea omnia praestare, quae Imperatoriae vestrae Majestati ullo pacto grata fore intelligemus: quam Deus unicus mundi conditor optimus maximus diutissime incolumem & florentem servet. Datae in palatio nostro Londini, [II. i. 192.] quinto die Mensis Septembris: anno Jesu Christi Servatoris nostri, 1584. Regni vero nostri vicessimo sexto.

regibu locis,

The same in English.

Lizabeth, by the grace of the most high God, and onely maker of heaven and earth, of England, France and Ireland Queene, and of the Christian

faith, against all the Idolaters and false professors of the Name of Christ dwelling among the Christians, most invincible and puissant defender: to the most valiant and invincible Prince, Zultan Murad Can, the most mightie ruler of the kingdome of Musulman, and of the East

312

Empire the onely and highest Monarch above all, health, and many happy and fortunate yeres, with great aboundance of the best things.

Most noble and puissant'Emperour, about two yeeres nowe passed, wee wrote unto your Imperial! Majestie, that our welbeloved servant, William Hareborne, a man of great reputation and honour, might be received under your high authoritie, for our Ambassadour in Constantinople, and other places, under the obedience of your Empire of Musulman: And also that the Englishmen, being our Subjects, might exercise entercourse and marchandize in all those Provinces, no lesse freely then the French, Polonians, Venetians, Germanes, and other your confederats, which traveile through divers of the East parts: endevouring that by mutuall trafique, the East may be joyned and knit to the West.

Which privileges, when as your most puissant Majestie, by your letters and under your dispensation most liberally and favourably granted to our Subjects of England, wee could no lesse doe, but in that respect give you as great thankes, as our heart could conceive, trusting that it wil come to passe, that this order of trafique, so well ordeined, will bring with it selfe most great profits and commodities to both sides, as well to the parties subject to your Empire, as to the Provinces of our kingdome. . Which thing that it may be done in plaine and efFectuall maner, whereas some of our Subjects of late at Tripolis in Barbarie, and at Argier, were by the inhabitants of those places (being perhaps ignorant of your pleasure) evill intreated and grievously vexed, wee doe friendly and lovingly desire your Imperiali Majestie, that you will understand their causes by our Ambassadour, and afterward give commaundement to the Lieutenants and Presidents of those Provinces, that our people may henceforth freely, without any violence, or injurie, traveile, and do their businesse in those places.

And we againe with all endevour, shall studie to performe all those things, which we shall in any wise 313

A.D.

1584.

understand to be acceptable to your Imperiali Majestie, which God, the onely maker of the world, most best and most great, long keepe in health, and flourishing. Given in our pallaice at London, the fift day of the moneth of September, in the yeere of Jesus Christ our Saviour, 1584. And of our raigne, the 26.

The Turkes letter to the King of Tripolis in Barbarie, commanding the restitution of an English ship, called the Jesus, with the men, and goods, sent from Constantinople, by Mahomet Beg, a Justice of the Great Turkes, and an English Gentleman, called Master Edward Barton. Anno 1584.

Onourable, and worthy Bassa Romadan Beglerbeg, most wise and prudent Judge of the West Tripolis, wee wish the ende of all thy enterprises happie, and prosperous. By these our highnesse letters, wee certifie thee, that the right honourable, William Hareborne, Ambassadour

in our most famous Porch, for the most excellent Queenes Majestie of England, in person, and by letters hath certified our highnesse, that a certaine shippe, with all her furniture, and artillerie, worth two thousand duckets, arriving in the port of Tripolis, and discharged of her lading and marchandize, paide our custome according to order, and againe, the marchants laded their shippe with oyle, which by constraint they were inforced to buy of you, & having answered in like maner the custome for the same, determined to depart: a Frenchman assistant to the Marchant, unknowen to the Englishmen, caried away with him another Frenchman indebted to a certaine Moore in foure hundred duckets, and by force caused the Englishmen, and shippe to depart: who neither suspecting fraude, nor deceite, hoised sailes. In the meane time, this man, whose debter the Frenchman had

314
