PRINCE OF MOLDAVIA’S PRIVILEGE a.d.

1588.

sundry sorts of their best wine and fresh fish, every of them with a long discourse, congratulating, in the names of their whole Senate, her Majesties victory over the Spaniard, and my safe returne, concluding with offer of their ready service to her future disposing. Yet the Dantziks after my departure thence caused the Marchants to pay custome for the goods they brought with them in my company, which none other towne neither Infidels nor Christians on ye way ever demanded. And notwithstanding the premisses, I was most certainly informed of sundry of our nation there resident that most of the [II. i. 290.] Hanse-towns upon the sea coasts, especially Dantzik, Lubeck, and Hamborough have laden and were shipping for Spaine, great provision of corne, cables, ropes, powder, saltpeter, hargubusses, armour, iron, leade, copper, and all other munition serving for the warre. Whereupon I gather their fained courtesie proceeded rather for feare then of any good affection unto her Majesties service, Elbing and Stoad onely excepted, which of duetie for their commoditie I esteemed well affected.

The privilege of Peter the Prince of Moldavia graunted to the English Marchants.

Etrus Dei gratia princeps Valachiae & Moldaviae; significamus praesentibus, universis & singulis quorum interest ac intererit, quod cum magnifico domino Guilielmo Hareborne oratore Serenissimae ac potentissimae dominae, dominae Eliza-bethae Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, ac

Hiberniae Reginae apud Serenissimum ac potentissimum Turearum Imperatorem hanc constitutionem fecerimus: Nimirum ut dehinc suae Serenitatis subditis, omnibusque mercatoribus integrum sit hic in provincia nostra commorandi, conversandi, (nercandi, vendendi, contrahendique, imo omnia exercendi, quae mercaturae ac vitae humanae societas ususque requirit, sine ulla alicujus contradictione,

aut inhibitione: salvo ac integro tamen jure Telonii nostri; hoc est, ut a singulis rebus centum ducatorum pretii, tres numerent. Quod ratum ac firmum constitutione nostra haberi volumus. In cujus rei firmius testimonium, sigillum nostrum appressum est. Actum in castris nostris die 27. mensis Augusti, anno Domini 1588.

The same in English.

PEter by the grace of God prince of Valachia and Moldavia ; we signifie by these presents to all and singuler persons, whom it doth or shall concerne, that we have made this agreement with the worthy gentleman William Hareborne Ambassador of the right high and mighty prince, the Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God Queene of England, France and Ireland, with the most puissant and mightie Emperour of the Turkes: To witte, that from hencefoorth it shalbe lawfull for her highnesse subjects and all her Marchants, to remaine, converse, buy, sei, bargaine and exercise all such things, as the trade of marchandise, and humane societie and use requireth, without any hinderance or let: the right of our Custome alwayes reserved; That is, that they pay three ducats upon all such things as amount to the price of one hundred ducats. Which by this our ordinance we command to be surely and firmely observed; For the more assured testimony whereof, our seale is hereunto annexed. Given in our Campe the 27. of the moneth of August in the yeere of our Lord 1588.

60
