This note following, concerning the ayde and assistance of the English Marchants, given to King John the first of Portugall, for the winning of Ceuta in Barbarie, which was the first occasion of all the Portugall discoveries, is taken out of Thomas Walsingham his Latine Chronicle. Anno 1415.

Oc anno Joannes primus Rex Portugalliae fretus auxilio Mercatorum Angliae quim maxime, & Alemannorum, vicit Agarenos in terra Regis Betinarinorum, multis eorum millibus ad generum Cereris destinatis: cepitque civitatem eorum quam amplissimam supra mare sitam, vocatam Ceut eorum lingua.

The same in English.

[II. ii. 2.]

THis yere John the first king of Portugall, being principally assisted by the helpe of the English Marchants, and Almaines, overcame the Moores in the dominion of the king of Barbary, putting many thousands of them to the sword, and he tooke their city which was very mighty, seated upon the sea, which is called Ceuta in their language.

[Confirmatio

121

Confirmatio treugarum inter Regem Anglia? Eduardum quartum, & Joannem secundum Regem Portugalliae, datarum in oppido montis Majoris 8 Februarii, & apud Westmonasterium 12 Septembris, 1482, anno regni 22 Regis Eduardi quarti, lingua Lusitanica ex opere sequenti excerpta.

Libro das obras de Garcia de Resende, que tracta da vida e feitos dei Rey dom Joham secundo.

Embaixada que el Rey mandov a el Rey d’Inglaterra, cap. 33.

Da qui de Monte Mor mandov el Rey por embaixadores a el rey dom Duarte de Inglaterra Ruy de Sousa pessoa principal e de muyto bon saber k credito, de que el Rey muyto confiava, e ho doutor Joam d’Elvas, e Fernam de Pina por secretario. E foram por mar muy

|| These writings are in the Tower.

honradamente com muy boa companhia: hos quaes foram en nome del Rey confirmar as ligas antiquas com Inglaterra, que polia condisan deltas ho novo Rey de hum reyno 6 do outro era obrigado a mandar confirmar: 6 tambien pera mostrarem ho titolo que el rey tinha no senhorio de Guinee, pera que depois de visto el rey d’Inglaterra defendesse em todos seus reynos, que nin-guen armasse nem podesse mandar a Guinee: e assi mandasse desfazer huna armada, que pera laa faziam, per mandado do Duque de Medina Sidonia, hum Joam Tintam e hum Guilherme Fabiam Ingreses. Com ha qual embaixada el rey d’Inglaterra mostrov receber grande contentamento, £ foy delle com muyta honra recebida, 6 em tudo fez inteiramente ho que pellos embaixadores Ihe foy requerido. De que elles trouxeran || autenticas escrituras das diligencias que con pubricos pregones fizeram: e assi as provisones das aprovasones que eran

122

necessarias: 6 com tudo muyto ben acabado, e ha vontade del rey se vieram.

The Ambassage which king John the second, king of Portugall, sent to Edward the fourth king of England, which in part was to stay one John Tintam, and one William Fabian English men, from proceeding in a voyage which they were preparing for Guinea, 1481, taken out of the booke of the workes of Gracias de Resende, which intreateth of the life and acts of Don John the second, king of Portugall. Chap. 33.

Nd afterwards the king sent as Ambas-sadours from the towne of Monte major to king Edward the fourth of England, Ruy de Sousa, a principali person, and a man of great wisedome and estimation, and in whom the king reposed great trust, with doctor John d’Elvas, and Fer-

dinand de Pina, as secretarie. And they made their voyage by sea very honourably, being very well accompanied. These men were sent on the behalfe of their king, to confirme the ancient leagues with England, wherein it was conditioned that the new king of the one and of the other kingdome, should be bound to send to confirme the olde leagues. And likewise they had order to shew and make him acquainted with the title which the king held in the segneury of Ginnee, to the intent that after the king of England had seene the same, he should give charge thorow all his kingdomes, that no man should arme or set foorth ships to Ginnee: and also to request him, that it would please him to give commandement to dissolve a certaine fleet, which one John Tintam and one William Fabian, English men, were making, by commandement of the duke of Medina Sidonia, to goe to the aforesayd parts of Ginnee. With 123

The first cause of this ambassage.

The second cause.

The third cause.
