displeasure conceived by Mahumet then Viceroy, it was reduced to sixe crownes the day, beside the provision of his Esquier of his stable.

The Ambassadours of Poland, and for the state of Venice are not Ligiers as these two abovesaid. The said Polack is allowed 12. French crownes the day during his abode, which may be for a moneth. Very seidome do the state of Venice send any Ambassador otherwise, then enforced of urgent necessity: but in stead thereof keepe their Agent, president over other Marchants, of them termed a bailife, who hath none allowance of the Grand Signior, although his port & state is in maner as magnifical as the other aforesaid ambassadors. The Spanish Ambassador was equall with others in Janizaries: but for so much as he would not according to custome folow the list of other ambassadors in making presents to ye Grand Signior, he had none alowance. His abode there was 3. yeres, at the end wherof, having concluded a truce for 6. yeres, taking place from his first comming in November last past 1580. he was not admitted to the presence of the Grand Signior.

The letters of Sinan Bassa chiefe counsellour to Sultan Murad Can the Grand Signior, to the sacred Majestie of Elizabeth Queene of England, shewing that upon her request, and for her sake especially, hee graunted peace unto the King and kingdome of Poland.

Loriosissima & splendore fulgidissima foeminarum, selectissima Princeps magnanimorum Jesum sectantium, regni inclyti Angliae Regina Serenissima Elizabetha, moderatrix rerum & negotiorum omnium plebis & familiae Nazarenorum sapientis-sima; Origo splendoris & gloriae dulcis

sima ; nubes pluviarum gratissima, heres & domina beatitudinis & gloriae regni inclyti Angliae; ad quam 69

omnes supplices confugiunt, incrementum omnium rerum & actionum Serenitatis vestras beatissimum, exitusque felicissimos a Creatore omnipotente optantes, mutuique & perpetua familiaritate nostra digna vota & laudes sempiternas offerentes: Significamus Ser. vestrae amicissime ; Quia sunt anni aliquot, a quibus annis potentissima Caesarea celsitudo bella ineffabilia cum Casul-bas, Principe nempe Persarum gessit; ratione quorum bellorum in partes alias bellum movere noluit, ob eamque causam in partibus Poloniae latrones quidam Cosaci nuncupati, & alii facinorosi in partibus illis existentes, subditos Caesaris potentissimi turbare & infestare non desierunt. Nunc autem partibus Persicis compositis & absolutis, in partibus Poloniae & aliis partibus exurgentes facinorosos punire constituens, Beglerbego Graeciae exercitu aliquo adjuncto, & Principi Tartarorum mandato Caesaris misso, anno proxime praeterito pars aliqua Regni Poloniae infestata, turbata & devastata fuit, & Cosaci aliique facinorosi juxta merita sua puniti fuerunt. Quo rex Poloniae viso duos legatos ad Caesaream celsitudinem mittens, quod facinorosos exquirere, & poena perfecta punire, & ab annis multis ad portam Caesareae celsitudinis missum munus augere vellet, significavit. Caesarea autem celsitudo (cui Creator omnipotens tantam suppeditavit potentiam, & quae omnes supplices exaudire dignata est) supplicatione Regis Poloniae non accepta, iterum in regem Poloniae exercitum suum mittere, & Creatoris omnipotentis auxilio regnum ejus subvertere constituerat. Verum Legato Serenitatis vestrae in porta beata & fulgida Caesareae celsitudinis residente sese interponente, Et quod Serenitati vestrae ex partibus Poloniae, fruges, pulvis, arbores navium, tormenta, & alia necessaria suppeditarentur significante, & pacem pro regno & rege Poloniae petente, nev^ regnum Poloniae ex parte Caesareae celsitudinis turbaretur vel infestaretur intercedente, Serenitatisque vestrae hanc singularem esse voluntatem exponente, Legati serenitatis vestrae significatio & intercessio cum Caesareae celsitudini significata fuisset, In favorem sereni-

tatis vestrae, cui omnis honos & gratia debetur, juxta modum praedictum, ut Cosaci facinorosi exquirantur & poena perfecta puniantur, aut ratione muneris aliquantuli eorum delicta condonentur, hac inquam conditione literae Caesareae celsitudinis ad Regem Poloniae sunt datae. Si autem ex parte Serenitatis vestrae foedus & pax sollicitata non fuisset, nulla ratione Caesarea celsitudo foedus cum regno Poloniae injisset. In favorem autem Serenitatis vestrae regno & Regi Poloniae singularem gratiam Caesarea celsitudo exhibuit. Quod tim Serenitas vestra, quim etiam Rex & regnum Poloniae sibi certd persuadere debent. Serenitatem vestram ben^ foelicissim^que valere cupimus. Datum Constantinopoli in fine mensis Sabaum nuncupati, Anno prophetae nostri sacrati Mahumedi nongentesimo, nonagesimo, octavo. Jesu vero Anno millesimo quingentesimo nonagesimo, die duodecimo mensis Junii.

The same in English.	[ii. i. 295.J

MOst glorious, and the most resplendent of women, most select Princesse, most gratious Elizabeth Queene of the valiant followers of Jesus in the famous kingdom of England, most wise governesse of all the affaires and businesses of the people and family of the Nazarens, most sweet fountaine of brightnesse and glory, most acceptable cloud of raine, inheritresse & Ladie of the blessednesse and glory of the renowmed kingdome of England, to whom in humble wise all men offer their petitions: wishing of the almightie Creator most happie increase and prosperous successe unto all your Majesties affaires and actions, and offering up mutuall & perpetuali vowes worthy of our familiarity, with eternall prayses: In most friendly manner we signifie unto your princely Highnesse, that certaine yeeres past the most mightie Cesarlike majestie of the Grand Signor waged unspeakeable warres with Casul-bas the Prince of the Persians, in regarde of which warres he would not goe in battell against any other places; and for that cause

certaine theeves in the partes of Polonia called Cosacks, and other notorious persons living in the same partes ceased not to trouble and molest the subjects of our most mightie Emperour. But now having finished and brought to some good issue his affaires in Persia, determining to punish the saide malefactors of Poland, and for that purpose committing an army unto the Beglerbeg of Grecia, and the yeere last past, sending his imperiali commaundement unto the Prince of the Tartars, he hath forraged, molested, and layed waste some part of the kingdome of Poland, and the Cosacks and other notorious offenders have received condigne punishment. Which the king of Poland perceiving sent two Embassadours to his imperiali Highnesse signifying, that he would hunt out the said malefactors, and inflict most severe punishments upon them, and also that he would better his gift, which he hath for many yeeres heretofore ordinarily sent unto the porch of his imperiali Highnesse. Howbeit his imperiali majestie (upon whom the almightie creator hath bestowed so great power, and who vouchsafeth to give eare unto all humble suppliants) rejecting the supplication of the King of Poland, determined againe to send his armie against the said king, and by the helpe of the Almightie creator, utterly to subvert and overthrowe his kingdome. By your Majesties Embassadour resident in the blessed and glorious porch of his imperiali Highnesse interposing himselfe as a mediatour, signifying that from the partes of Poland you were furnished with corne, gun-powder, mastes of ships, guns, and other necessaries, and craving peace on the behalfe of the kingdome and king of Poland, and making intercession, that the said king might not be molested nor troubled by the meanes of the Grand Signor, & declaring that this was your Majesties most earnest desire; so soone as the report and intercession of your Majesties Embassadour was signified unto the Grand Signor, for your sake, unto whom all honour and favourable regard is due, upon the condition aforesaid, namely, that the wicked Cosacks

might be sought out and grievously punished, or that their offences might be remitted for the value of some small gift, upon this condition (I say) the letters of his imperiali Highnesse were sent unto the king of Poland. Howbeit had not this conclusion of league and amitie beene sollicited on the behalfe of your Majestie, his imperiali Highnesse would never have vouchsafed the same unto the kingdome of Poland. But for your Majesties sake his imperiali Highnesse hath exhibited this so singular a favour unto the said king and kingdome of Poland. And hereof your Majestie and the king of Poland ought certainely to be perswaded. We wish your Majestie most happily and well to fare. Given at Constantinople in the ende of the moneth called Sabaum, in the yeare of our sacred prophet Mahomet 998, and in the yeere of Jesus 1590, the 12 of June.

The second letters Patents graunted by the Queenes Majestie to the Right worshipfull companie of the English Marchants for the Levant, the seventh of Januarie 1592.

Lizabeth by the grace of God Queene of England, France, and Irelande, defender of the faith &c. To all our Officers, ministers and subjects, and to all other people aswell within this our Realme of England, as else where under our obey-sance and jurisdiction or otherwise unto

whom these our letters shalbe seene, shewed, or read, greeting.

Where our welbeloved subjects Edward Osborne knight Aiderman of our citie of London, William Hare-borne Esquire, and Richard Staper of our saide citie Marchant, have by great adventure and industrie with their great cost and charges by the space of sundry late [II. i. 296.] yeeres travelled, and caused travell to be taken aswell by secrete and good meanes, as by daungerous wayes

73
