The second voyage to Barbary in the yeere 1552. Set foorth by the right worshipfull Sir John Yorke, Sir William Gerard, Sir Thomas Wroth, Master Frances Lambert, Master Cole, and others; Written by the relation of Master James Thomas then Page to Master Thomas Windham chiefe Captaine of this voyage.

He shippes that went on this voyage were three, whereof two were of the River of Thames, That is to say, the Lyon of London, whereof Master Thomas Windham was Captaine and part owner, of about an hundred & fiftie tunnes: The other was the Buttolfe about fourescore

tunnes, and a Portugall Caravel bought of certaine Portu-gals in Newport in Wales, and fraighted for this voyage, of summe sixtie tunnes. The number of men in the Fleete were an hundred and twentie. The Master of the Lyon was one John Kerry of Mynhed in Somersetshire, his Mate was David Landman. The chiefe Captaine of this small Fleete was Master Thomas Windham a Norffolke gentleman borne, but dwelling at Marshfield-parke in Somerset shire. This Fleete departed out of King-rode neere Bristoll about the beginning of May 1552. being on a Munday in the morning: and the Munday fortnight next ensuing in the evening came to an ancker at their first port in the roade of Zafia, or Asafi on the coast of Barbarie, standing in 32. degrees of latitude, and there put on land part of our marchandise to be conveied by land to the citie of Marocco: which being done, and having refreshed our selves with victuals and water, we went to the second port called Santa Cruz, where we discharged the rest of our goods, being good quantitie of linnen and woollen cloth, corail, amber, Jet, and divers other things well accepted by the Moores. In which road we

found a French ship, which not knowing whether it were warre or peace betweene England and France, drewe her selfe as neere under the towne wals as she could possible, craving aide of the towne for her defence, if need were, which in deed seeing us draw neere, shot at us a piece from the wals, which came over the Lion our Admirall, between the maine mast & her foremast. Whereupon we comming to an anker, presently came a pinnes aboord us to know what we were, who understanding that we had bene there the yere before, & came with the good English leave of their king in marchant wise, were fully satisfied, and gave us good leave to bring our goods peaceably yere before on shore, where the Viceroy, whose name was Sibill being xyfo. Manache, within short time after came to visite us, and used us with all curtesie. But by divers occasions we spent here very neere three moneths before we could get in our lading, which was Sugar, Dates, Almonds, and Malassos or sugar Syrrope. And for all our being here in the heate of the Sommer, yet none of our company perished by sicknesse. Our ships being laden, wee drew into the Sea for a Westerne wind for England. But being at sea, a great leake fell upon the Lion, so that we were driven to Lancerota, and Forteventura, where, betweene the two Hands, we came to a road, whence wee put on land out of our sayd ship 70. chestes of Sugar upon Lancerota, with some dozen or sixteene of our company, where the inhabitants supposing we had made a wrongfull prize of our caravell, suddenly came with force upon our people, among whom I my selfe was one, tooke us prisoners, and spoiled the sugars:

which thing being perceived from our ships, they manned [II. ii. 9.] out three boates, thinking to rescue us, and drave the Spaniards to flight, whereof they slew eighteene, and tooke their governour of the Hand prisoner, who was a very aged gentleman about 70. yeeres of age. But chasing the enemie so farre, for our recoverie, as pouder and arrowes wanted, the Spaniardes perceiving this, returned, and in our mens retire they slew sixe of them.

139

Then a Parle grew, in the which it was agreed, that we the prisoners should be by them restored, and they receive their olde governour, giving us a testimonie under his and their hands, what damages wee had there received, the which damages were here restored, and made good by the king of Spaine his marchants upon our returne into England. After wee had searched and mended our leake, being returned aboord, we came under saile, and as wee were going to the sea on the one side of the Hand, the Cacafuego and other ships of the king of Portugals Armada entered at the other, and came to anker in the road from whence we were but newly departed, and shot off their great ordinance in our hearing. And here by the way it is to bee understood that the Portugals were much offended with this our new trade into Barbarie, and both in our voiage the yeere before, as also in this they gave out in England by their marchants, that if they tooke us in those partes, they would use us as their mortali enemies, with great threates and menaces. But by God and good providence wee escaped their handes. From this Hand shaping our course for England, we were seven or eight weekes before we could reach the coast of England. The first port wee entered into was the haven of Plim-mouth, from whence within short time wee came into the Thames, and landed our marchandise at London, about the ende of the moneth of October, 1552.

140
