The voyage of Richard Rainolds and Thomas Dassel to the rivers of Senega and Gambra adjoyning upon Guinea, 1591, with a discourse of the treasons of certain of Don Antonio his servants and followers.

The names of the chiefe places of traffike be-twene Senega y Gambra.

[II. ii. 189.]

Y vertue of her Majesties most gracious charter given in the yeere 1588, and in the thirtieth yeere of her Highnesse reigne, certaine English marchants are granted to trade, in and from the river of Senega to and in the river of Gambra, on the Westerne coast of Africa. The

chiefest places of traffique on that coast betweene these rivers, are these:

1	Senega river: The commodities be hides, gumme, elephants teeth, a few graines, ostrich feathers, amber-griece, and some golde.

2	Beseguiache, a towne by Capo Verde * leagues from Senega river: The commodities be small hides, and a few teeth.

3	Refisca Viejo, a towne 4 leagues from Beseguiache: The commodities be small hides, and a few teeth now and then.

4	Palmerin, a towne 2 leagues from Refisca: The commodities be small hides, and a few elephants teeth now and then.

5	Porto d’Ally, a towne 5 leagues from Palmerin: The commodities be small hides, teeth, amber-griece, and a little golde: and many Portugals are there.

6	Candimal, a towne halfe a league from Porto d’Ally: The commodities be small hides, and a few teeth now and then.

7	Palmerin, a towne 3 leagues from Candimal: The commodities be small hides, and a few teeth now and then.

8	Joala, a towne 6 leagues from Palmerin: The

commodities be hides, waxe, elephants teeth, rice, and some golde: and many Spaniards and Portugals are there.

9	Gambra river: The commodities are rice, waxe, hides, elephants teeth, and golde.

The Frenchmen of Diepe and New-haven have traded trade thither above thirty yeres: and commonly with foure or five ships a yere, whereof two small barks go into the ' river of Senega. The other were woont (untill within these foure yeres, that our ships came thither) to ride with their ships in the road of Porto d’Ally and so sent their small shaloups of sixe or eight tunnes to some of these places on the Sea coast before repeated. Where in all places generally they were well beloved and as courteously entertained of the Negros, as if they had bene naturally borne in the countrey. And very often the Negros come into France and returne againe, which is a further increasing of mutuall love and amity. Since our comming to that coast the Frenchmen ride with their shippes at Refisca Viejo, and suffer us to ancre with our shippes at Porto d’Ally. The Frenchmen never use to go into the river of Gambra : which is a river of secret Gambra d trade and riches concealed by the Portugals. For long since one Frenchman entred the river with a small barke conceaied. which was betrayed, surprised, and taken by two gallies of the Portugals.

In our second voyage and second yeere there were by vile trecherous meanes of the Portugals and the king v°3a&-of the Negros consent in Porto d’Ally and Joala about forty Englishmen cruelly slaine and captived, and most Forty English or all of their goods confiscated : whereof there returned mentraMr-onely two, which were the marchants. And also by pro- and captived. curement of Pedro Gonsalves, one of Don Antonio the kings servants, Thomas Dassel and others had bene betrayed, if it had not pleased almighty God to reveale the same, whereby it was prevented.

From the South side of Senega river on the Sea coast unto about Palmerin is all one kingdome of Negros.

The kings name is Melick Zamba, who dwelleth two dayes journey within the land from Refisca.

The 12 of November 1591, I Richard Rainolds & Thomas Dassel factors in a ship called the Nightingale of London of 125 tunnes, and a pinnesse called the Cape Verde. Messenger of 40 tunnes arrived neere unto Capo Verde at a litle Hand called The Hand of liberty. At this Hand we set up a small pinnesse, with which we cary our marchandise on land when wee traffique. And in the meane time Thomas Dassel went with the great pinnesse to traffike with Spaniards or Portugals in Porto d’Ally or Joala. Over against the sayd Iland on the maine Besegueache. is an habitation of the Negros called Besegueache. The alcaide or governor thereof with a great traine came aboord in their canoas to receive the kings dueties for ankerage and permitting the quiet setting up of our pinnesse: who liked passing well that no Portugall came in the shippe, saying, we should be better thought of by the king and people, if we never did bring Portugall, but come of our selves as the Frenchmen ever did and doe. And to purchase the more love, I Richard Rainolds gave him and all his company courteous entertainment. Also upon his intreaty, having sufficient pledge aboord, I and others went on land with him. At this instant there was great warre betweene this alcaide and another governor of the next province. Neverthelesse upon our arrivall truce was taken for a space; and I with our company conducted among both enemies to the governors Besegueache. house in Besegueache, and were gently and friendly feasted after their maner, and with some presents returned safe aboord againe. The next day the alcaide came aboord againe, to wil me to send some yron and other commodities in the boat to traffike with the Negros, and also requested me that I would go to Refisca with the ship; which I did. And one thing I noted, that a number of Negros attended the alcaides landing in warlike maner with bowes and poisoned arrowes, darts poisoned, and swords, (because that the enemies by 92

1591. reason of the truce taken were there also to view the ship) who for the most part approched to him kneeling downe and kissed the backe of his hand.

The 17 of November we weyed anker; and by reason no French ship was yet come, I went to the road of Refisca: where I sent for the alcaides interpreters, who came thither aboord, and received of me the kings duties for to have free traffike with the Negros, with whom dayly I exchanged my yron & other wares for hides and some elephants teeth, finding the people very friendly and tractable. And the next day after our arrival! I went up into the land about three miles to the towne of Refisca, where I was friendly used and well entertained Refisca. of the alcaide, and especially of a yoong nobleman called Conde Amar Pattay, who presented me with an oxe for my company, goats and some yoong kids, assuring me that the king would be glad to heare of the arrivall of a Christians ship, whom they called Blancos, that is, [II. ii. 190.] white men: especially of an English ship. And so dayly the yong Conde came with a small company of horsemen to the sea side, feasting me very kindly and courteously.

And the fift of December he with his traine came aboord to see the ship; which to them seemed woonderfull, as people that seidome had seene the like: who tolde me that his messenger from the king was returned; and the king rejoyced much to heare that English men were come with a ship to trade in his ports; and being the first Englishman that ever came with a ship, I was the better welcome; promising that I or any Englishman hereafter should be wel intreated & find good dealing at their hands. And further the Conde on the kings behalfe and his owne, earnestly requested, that before my departure off the coast I would returne againe to his road to conferre with him for the better continuance and confirming of amity betweene them and Englishmen: which I agreed unto. And so shewing him and his company the best friendship and courtesie I could, he went on shore, and should have had the honor of our 93

ordinance but that he desired the contrary, being amazed at the sight of the ship and noise of the gunnes, which they did greatly admire.

The 13 of December at night we weighed anker, and Port» Dally, arrived the 14 day at the road of Porto d’Ally, which is another kingdome: the king thereof is called Amar Meleck, & sonne to Meleck Zamba the other king, and dwelleth a dayes journey and an halfe from Porto d’Ally. When we had ankered, the kings kinsmen being governors, with all the officers of that towne came aboord to receive all duties for the ship & licence to traffike due to the king; who there generally seemed to be very glad that no Portugall was come in our ship out of England; saying it was the kings pleasure we should bring none hereafter; for that the king did esteeme them as people of no truth; and complained of one Francisco de Costa servant to Don Antonio, how he had often and the last yere also abused and deluded their king Amar Meleck in promising to bring him certaine things out of England, which he never performed, and deemed that to be the cause of his staying behinde this voyage, and that neither Spaniard nor Portugall could abide us, but reported very badly and gave out hard speeches tending to the defamation & great dishonor of England: and also affirmed that at the arrivall of an English ship called The Comanda The Command, of Richard Kelley of Dartmouth, one ^rd^Kd^' Pedro Gonsalves a Portugall that came in the sayd ship The monstrous fr°m Don Antonio reported unto them, that we were lies of a Por- fled out of England and come away upon intent to rob tugall. and do great spoile upon this coast to the Negros and Portugals, and that Thomas Dassel had murdered Francisco de Acosta since our comming from England, who was comming to their king in our ship with great presents from Don Antonio, and desired that at our arrivall stay might be made of our goods and our selves in secret maner; which they denied, not giving credit to his report, having bene often abused by such frivolous and slanderous speeches by that nation; telling me their

king was sory for the former murder and captivity of our nation, and would never yeeld to the like, having the Portugals and Spaniards in generail hatred ever since, and conceiveth much better of our countrey, and us, then these our enemies report of. For which I yeelded them hearty thanks, assuring them they should finde great difference betweene the loyalty of the one and disloyalty of the other: and so payed their dueties: and for that Port Dally the it was the chiefe place of trade, I shewed them how'T was resolved to goe to their king with certaine presents ’ which we had brought out of England; which we determined for the more honor and credit of our countrey, and augmenting of their better affection toward us.

All this while Thomas Dassel was with our great pinnesse at the towne of Joala, being in the kingdome of Joala. king Jocoel Lamiockeric, traffiking with the Spaniards & Portugals there. And the forenamed Pedro Gonsalves, which came out of England, was there also with other English marchants about the busines of Rich. Kelley; and as it should seeme, for that he could not obtaine his mischievous pretended purpose against Thomas Dassel and others at the towne of Porto d’Ally, where I Richard Rainolds remained, he attempted with consent of other Portugals which were made privy to his intent to betray the sayd Thomas Dassel at this towne, & had with bribes seduced the chiefe commanders and Negros to effect his wicked & most villanous practise: which as God would, was revealed to the sayd Thomas Dassel by Rich. Cape an Englishman and servant to the forenamed Rich. Kelley; to whom this sayd Pedro Gonsalves had disclosed his secret treachery, willing him with all expedition to stand upon his guard. Whereupon Thomas Dassel went aboord a small English barke called The Cherubin The Cherubin of Lime, and there one John Payva a Portugall and at servant of Don Antonio declared, that if he & one Garcia ' a Portugall of the sayd towne would have consented with Pedro Gonsalves, the sayd Thomas Dassel had bene betrayed long before. And upon this warning Thomas

Dassel the next day having gotten three Portugals aboord, advised for our better securities to send two on land, & detained one with him called Villa nova, telling them that if the next day by eight of the clocke, they would bring Pedro Gonsalves aboord to him, he would release the sayd Villa nova, which they did not. And Thomas Dassel having intelligence that certaine Negros and Portugals were ridden post over-land to Porto d’AIly with intent to have Richard Rainolds and his company stayd on land, being doubtfull what friendship soever the unconstant Negros professed (by reason they be often wavering being overcome with drinking wine) how they would deale, to prevent the dangerous wiles that might be effected in the road by Portugals, and for better strength, the 24 of December he came with his pinnesse & Portugall to ride in the road of Porto d’Ally, where our great shippe the Nightingall was: who was no sooner arrived but he had newes also from the shore from John Baily Anthony Dassels servant, who was there with our goods detained by the Portugals means, that above 20 Portugals and Spaniards were come from Joala by land, and Pedro Gonsalves in their company, to take order for the releasing of Villa nova. So having had conference two or three dayes with the Commanders, the Negros, some Spaniards, and some Portugals, in the end by due examination of the matter the Negros seeing how vilely Pedro Gonsalves had delt, he being in their power, sayd he should suffer death or be tortured, for an example to others. But we in recompense of his cruelty pitied him and shewed mercy, desiring the Negros to intreat him well though undeserved: and thereupon the Commanders brought him aboord the pinnesse to Thomas Dassel to do with him what he would: where at his comming from the shore, for lavish speeches which he used of Princes, he was well buffetted by a Spaniard, and might have bene slaine, if for our sakes he had not bene rescued.

While I went on shore with Villa nova, the sayd Pedro Gonsalves confessed unto Thomas Dassel that he did 96

enquire of some Negros and Portugals if he might not stay him and his goods in the land, and that he did nothing but by commission from his king by his letters which he received from London in Dartmouth after we were departed from London, for that we presumed to come to Guinea to traffike without a servant of his: and further, that he had power or procuration from Francisco de Costa the Portugall that stayed behinde in England to detaine the goods of Anthony Dassel in Guinea.

By consent of M. Francis Tucker, John Browbeare, and the rest of the factours of Richard Kelley, with whom this Pedro Gonsalves came, for avoiding further mischiefe that might be practised, we agreed that the sayd Pedro Gonsalves should stay aboord our shippe, and not goe any more on land untill they departed. So the ninth of January he was delivered aboord to goe for England in the same ship wherein he came: who was all the time of his abode in our shippe both courteously and friendly used at my hands, much against the mariners willes, who could not abide such a wicked creature and caitive, that is nourished and relieved in our countrey, and yet by villanous meanes sought the destruction of us all.

The Spaniards and Portugals though they be dissemblers and not to be trusted, when they perceived how king Amar Melicks Negros befriended and favored us, and that it would be prejudicial! to their trade for divers respects, if we should any way be injuried, renounced the sayd practises, detesting the author, and protested to defend us in such cases with all faithfulnesse: desiring we would, as the king of Negros had commanded us, never bring Portugal with us more: using this phrase in disdaine of such as came out of England, let your Portugals be barres of yron: for in trueth in regard of the rich trade maintained by Frenchmen and by us of late, they esteeme more of one barre of yron then of twenty Portugals which we should bring out of England: who at their comming thither very subtilly disadvantage us, and doe great hurt to every party.

vn	97	g

[II. ii. 192.] San Domingo. Rio grande. Note this trade.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

At the beginning of these broiles the king Amar Melick had sent his chiefe secretary and three horses for me Richard Rainolds: but I denied to goe by reason of the hurley burley, though I might have had Negros of account for pledges aboord: yet we sent the presents unto the king; who so soone as he understood the cause why I came not to him, being sory and offended thereat, commanded presently by proclamation, that no injury should be offered us in his dominions by his owne people, or suffered to be done by Spaniards or Portugals. And if the Negros joyning to his kingdome should confederate with the Spaniards and Portugals to molest or trouble us; that his subjects the Negros should be ready to ayde, succor and defend us. In which people appeared more confident love and goodwill towards us, then ever we shall finde either of Spaniards or Portugals, though we should relieve them of the greatest misery that can be imagined.

In the river of Senega no Spaniard or Portugall use to trade: and onely one Portugall called Ganigoga dwelleth farre within the river, who was maried to a kings daughter.

In the townes of Porto d’Ally and Joala, being townes of chiefest trade, and in the townes of Canton and Cassan in the river of Gambra are many Spaniards and Portugals resident by permission of the Negros; who have rich trades there along the coast, especially to San Domingo and Rio grande, not far distant from Gambra river; whither they transport the yron which they buy of Frenchmen and us, and exchange it for Negros; which be caried continually to the West Indies in such ships as came from Spaine. Also by the governors order and Renters of Castel de Mina and other places, where golde is, upon the coast of Guinea, they have a place limited how farre they must go to trade within the river of Gambra; and further they may not go upon paine of confiscation of their goods, and losse of life: for that the Renters themselves send at certaine times their owne

■	98

'594-barks within the river to such places, where as they have great store of golde. And in all these places hereabouts,	mb tr^e

where we use to trade, they have no Fort, Castle, or ™ place of strength, but onely trading by the Negros safe-	'

conduct and permission. And the most part of the Spaniards and Portugals that be resident in these places be banished men or fugitives, for committing most hainous crimes and incestuous acts, their life & conversation being agreeable; and they are of the basest behaviour that we have ever seene of these nations in any other countrey.

A briefe relation concerning the estate of the cities and provinces of Tombuto and Gago written in Marocco the first of August 1594, and sent to M. Anthony Dassel marchant of London.

Y hearty commendations premised: your letter of late I received, and found that you would have me discover unto you the estate & quality of the countreyes of Tombuto and Gago. And that you may not thinke me to slumber in this action, wherin you would be truely and

perfectly resolved, you shall understand, that not ten dayes past here came a Cahaia of the Andoluzes home from Gago, and another principali Moore, whom the king sent thither at the first with Alcaide Hamode, and they brought with them thirty mules laden with gold. I saw the same come into the Alcasava with mine owne eies: and these men themselves came not poore, but with such wealth, that they came away without the kings commandement: and for that cause the king will pay them no wages for the time they have beene there. On the other side they dare not aske the king for any wages. And when Alcaide Hamode saw that the Cahaia of the Andoluzes would not stay in Gago with him, he thought 99
