Principali Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Discoveries of the English Nation

made to the Northwest, West, and Southwest parts of the world, with the Letters, Privileges, Discourses, Observations, and other necessary things concerning the same

The most ancient Discovery of the West Indies [in. i.] by Madoc the sonne of Owen Guyneth Prince of North-wales, in the yeere 1170: taken out of the history of Wales, lately published by M. David Powel Doctor of Divinity.

B'ter the death of Owen Guyneth, his sonnes fell at debate who should inherit after him: for the eldest sonne borne in matrimony, Edward or Jorweth Drwy-dion, was counted unmeet to governe, because of the maime upon his face: and Howell that tooke upon him all the

rule was a base sonne, begotten upon an Irish woman. Therefore David gathered all the power he could, and came against Howel, and fighting with him, slew him; and afterwards injoyed quietly the whole land of Northwales, until his brother Jorwerths sonne came to age. Madoc another of Owen Guyneth his sonnes left the land in contention betwixt his brethren, & prepared

T33

Madoc the son of Owen Guyneth.

certaine ships, with men and munition, and sought adventures by Seas, sailing West, and leaving the coast of Ireland so farre North, that he came unto a land un-knowen, where he saw many strange things.

Humf. Lloyd. This land must needs be some part of that Countrey of which the Spanyards affirme themselves to be the first finders since Hannos time. Whereupon it is manifest that that countrey was by Britaines discovered, long before Columbus led any Spanyards thither.

Of the voyage and returne of this Madoc there be many fables fained, as the common people doe use in distance of place and length of time rather to augment then to diminish: but sure it is there he was. And after

he had returned home, and declared the pleasant and fruitfull countreys that he had seene without inhabitants, and upon the contrary part, for what barren & wild The second ground his brethren and nephewes did murther one voyage of Ma- another, he prepared a number of ships, and got with doc the sonne of , .	. r	, 1.	°	.

Owen him such men and women as were desirous to live in Gu^neth. quietnesse: and taking leave of his friends, tooke his journey thitherward againe. Therefore it is to be supposed that he and his people inhabited part of those Gomara. lib. countreys: for it appeareth by Francis Lopez de Gomara, »• cap. 16. that in Acuzamil and other places the people honored the crosse. Wherby it may be gathered that Christians had bene there before the comming of the Spanyards. But because this people were not many, they followed the maners of the land which they came unto, & used the language they found there.

M. Powels This Madoc arriving in the Westerne country, unto addition. the whjch he cameJn the yere 1170, left most of his people there, and returning backe for more of his owne nation, acquaintance & friends to inhabit that faire &

large countrey, went thither againe with ten sailes, as Gutyn Owen. I find noted by Gutyn Owen. I am of opinion that the land whereunto he came was some part of the West Indies.

134

OFFER OF CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS a.d.

1488.

Carmina Meredith filii Rhesi mentionem facientia de Madoco filio Oweni Guynedd, & de sua navigatione in terras incognitas. Vixit hic Meredith circiter annum Domini 1477.

MAdoc wyf, mwyedic wedd,	verses 1

lawn genau Owyn Guynedd:	TaZdfrZ

Ni tynnum dir, ry enaid oedd	7^, William

Na da mawr, ond y moroedd.	Camden.

The same in English.

Madoc I am the sonne of Owen Gwynedd With stature large, and comely grace adorned: No lands at home nor store of wealth me please, My minde was whole to search the Ocean seas.

The offer of the discovery of the West Indies [HI. 2.] by Christopher Columbus to king Henry the seventh in the yeere 1488 the 13 of February: with the kings acceptation of the offer, & the cause whereupon hee was deprived of the same: recorded in the thirteenth chapter of the history of Don Fernand Columbus of the life and deeds of his father Christopher Columbus.

Hristophoro Colon temendo, se parimente i Re di Castiglia non assentissero alia sua impresa, non gli bisognasse proporla di nuovo a qualche altro principe, & cosi in cio passasse lungo tempo; mando in Inghilterra un suo fratello, che haveva appresso di se, chiamato Bartholomeo

Colon: il qual, quantunque non havesse lettere Latine, era perd huomo prattico, & giudicioso nelle cose del mare, & sapea molto bene far carte da navigare, & sphere, & altri instrumenti di quella professione, come 135
