The third and last voyage unto Meta Incognita, made by M. Martin Frobisher, in the yeere 1578. Written by Thomas Ellis.

Hese are to let you know, that upon the 25. of May, the Thomas Allen being Viceadmirall whose Captaine was M. Yorke, M. Gibbes Master, Christopher Hall Pilot, accompanied with the Reare-admiral named the Hopewel, whose Captaine was M. Henrie Carewe, the

M. Andrewe Dier, and certaine other ships came to Gravesend, where wee ankred and abode the comming of certaine of our Fleete which were not yet come.

The 27. of the same moneth our Fleete being nowe come together, and all things prest in a readinesse, the wind favouring, and tide serving, we being of sailes in number eight, waied ankers and hoised our sailes toward Harwich to meete with our Admirall, and the residue which then and there abode our arrivall: where we safely arrived the 28. thereof, finding there our Admirall, whom we with the discharge of certaine pieces saluted, acording to order and duety, and were welcommed with the like courtesie: which being finished we landed: where our Generali continued mustering his souldiers and Miners, and setting things in order appertaining to the voyage untill the last of the said moneth of May, which day we hoised our sailes, and committing our selves to the conducting of Almightie God, we set forward toward the west Countrey in such luckie wise and good successe, that by the fift of June we passed the Dursies, being the utmost part of Ireland to the Westward.

And here it were not much amisse nor farre from our purpose, if I should a little discourse and speake of our adventures and chances by the way, as our landing at Plimmouth, as also the meeting certaine poore men, which were robbed and spoyled of all that they had by

231

Master forks. Christopher Hall.

The Hopewel. Captaine Carew.

Andrew Dier.

[III. +o.J

Harwich.

Dursies.

Ireland.

Plimmouth.

Pirates and Rovers: amongst whom was a man of Briitote. Bristow, on whom our Generali used his liberality, and sent him away with letters into England.

But because such things are impertinent to the matter, I will returne (without any more mentioning of the same) to that from the which I have digressed and swarved, I meane our ships now sailing on the surging seas, sometime passing at pleasure with a wished Easterne wind, sometime hindered of our course againe by the Westerne blasts, untill the 20. day of the foresayd moneth of June, Frizeland. on which day in the morning we fell with Frizeland, which is a very hie and cragged land and was almost cleane covered with snow, so that we might see nought but craggie rockes and the tops of high and huge hilles, sometimes (and for the most part) all covered with foggie mists. There might we also perceive the great Isles of yce lying on the seas, like mountaines, some small, some big, of sundry kinds of shapes, and such a number of them, that wee could not come neere the shore for them.

Thus sailing alongst the coast, at the last we saw a place somewhat voyd of yce, where our Generali (accompanied with certaine other) went a shore, where they sawe certaine tents made of beasts skinnes, and boates much the like unto theirs of Meta Incognita. The tents were furnished with flesh, fish, skins, and other trifles: amongst the which was found a boxe of nailes: whereby we did conjecture, that they had either Artificers amongst them, or els a traffike with some other nation. The men ran away, so that wee could have no conference or communication with them. Our Generali (because hee would have them no more to flee, but rather incouraged The curtesie of to stay through his courteous dealing) gave commaunde-our Generali. ment that his men should take nothing away with them, saving onely a couple of white dogs, for the which he left pinnes, poynts, knives, and other trifling things, and departed without taking or hurting any thing, and so came abord, and hoysed sailes, and passed forwards.

232

But being scarce out of the sight thereof, there fell such a fogge and hidious mist that we could not see one another: whereupon we stroke our drums, and sounded our trumpets, to the ende we might keepe together: and so continued all that day and night till the next day that the mist brake up: so that we might easily perceive all the ships thus sailing together all that day, until the next day, being the 22. of the same: on which day wee sawe an infinite number of yce, from the which we cast about to shun the danger thereof.

But one of our small Barkes named the Michael, whose Master Captaine was Master Kinderslie, the Master Bartholomew Bull, lost our company, insomuch that we could not ° mew ■obteine the sight of her many dayes after, of whom 1 meane to speake further anon when occasion shall be ministred, and opportunitie serve. Thus we continued in our course until! the second of July, on which day we fell with the Queenes foreland, where we saw so much yce, that we thought it unpossible to get into the Straights: yet at the last we gave the adventure and entred the yce.

Being amongst it wee sawe the Michael, of whom I Michael. spake before, accompanied with the Judith, whose Cap-taine was Master Fenton, the Master Charles Jackman, Charles bearing into the foresayd yce, farre distant from us, who Jackman. in a storme that fell that present night, (whereof I will at large God willing, discourse hereafter) were severed from us, and being in, wandred up and downe the Straights amongst the yce many dayes in great perill, till at the last, (by the providence of God) they came safely to harbor in their wished Port. In the Countesse Countesse of Warwicks sound, the 20. of July aforesayd, tenne dayes before any of the other shippes: who going on ' shore found where the people of the Countrey had bene, and had hid their provision in great heapes of stones being both of flesh and fish, which they had killed;

whereof wee also found great store in other places after [III. 41.j our arrival. They found also divers engins, as bowes,

233

Narow shifts fir safetie.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

slings, and darts. They found likewise certaine pieces of the Pinnesse which our Generali left there the yeere before, which Pinnesse he had sunke, minding to have it againe the next yeere.

Now seeing I have entreated so much of the Judith and the Michael: I will returne to the rest of the other ships, and will speake a little of the storme which fell, with the mishaps that we had, the night that we put into the yce: whereof I made mention before.

At the first entring into the yce in the mouth of the Straights, our passage was very narrow, and difficult but being once gotten in, we had a faire open place without any yce for the most part, being a league in compasse, the yce being round about us and inclosing us, as it were, within the pales of a parke. In which place, (because it was almost night) we minded to take in our sailes, and lie a hull all that night. But the storme so increased, and the waves began to mount aloft, which brought the yce so neere us, and comming on so fast upon us, that we were faine to beare in and out, where we might espie an open place. Thus the yce comming on us so fast, we were in great danger, looking every houre for death. And thus passed we on in that great danger, seeing both our selves and the rest of our ships so troubled and tossed amongst the yce, that it would make the strongest heart to relent.

At the last the Barke Dionyse being but a weake ship, and bruised afore amongst the yce, being so leake that no longer she could tarry above the water, sanke without saving any of the goods which were within her: which sight so abashed the whole Fleete, that we thought verily we should have tasted of the same sauce. But neverthelesse we seeing them in such danger, manned our boates and saved all the men in such wise, that not one perished: God be thanked.

The storme still increased and the yce inclosed us, so that we were faine to take downe top and top mastes: for the yce had so invironed us, that we could see neither 234

i578-land nor sea, as farre as we could kenne: so that we were faine to cut our cables to hang over boord for fenders, somewhat to ease the ships sides from the great and driry strokes of the yce: some with Capstan barres, some fending ofF with oares, some with plancks of two ynches thicke, which were broken immediatly with the force of the yce, some going out upon the yce to beare it off with their shoulders from the ships. But the rigorousnes of the tempest was such, and the force of the yce so great, that not onely they burst and spoyled the foresaid provision, but likewise so rased the sides of the ships, that it was pitifull to behold, and caused the hearts of many to faint.

Thus we continued all that dismall and lamentable night plunged in this perplexity, looking for instant death: but our God (who never leaveth them destitute Godsprwi-which faithfully call upon him, although he often punisheth dence' for amendements sake) in the morning caused the winds to cease, and the fogge which all that night lay on the face of the water to cleare: so that we might perceive about a mile from us, a certaine place cleare from any yce, to the which with an easie breath of wind which our God sent us, we bent our selves. And furthermore, hee provided better for us then we deserved or hoped for: for when we were in the foresaid cleare place, he sent us a fresh gale at West or at West Southwest, which set us cleare without all the yce. And further he added more: for he sent us so pleasant a day as the like we had not of a long time before, as after punishment consolation.

Thus we joyfull wights being at libertie, tooke in all our sailes and lay a hull, praysing God for our deliverance, and stayed to gather together our Fleete: which once being done, we seeing that none of them had any great hurt, neither any of them wanted, saving onely they of whom I spake before and the ship which was lost, then at the last wee hoised our sailes, and lay bulting off and on, till such time as it would please God to take away the yce that wee might get into the Straights.

235

1578. A mountaine of yce appearing in sundry figures.	And as we thus lay off and on we came by a marvellous huge mountaine of yce, which surpassed all the rest that ever we saw: for we judged it to be neere fourescore fathomes above water, and we thought it to be a ground for any thing that we could perceive, being there nine score fathoms deepe, and of compasse about halfe a mile.

A fog of long continuance.	Also the fift of July there fell a hidious fogge and mist, that continued till the nineteenth of the same: so that one shippe could not see another. Therefore we were faine to beare a small sayle and to observe the time:

A current to the'Northwest.	but there ran such a current of a tide, that it set us to the Northwest of the Queenes foreland the backside of all the Straights: where (through the contagious fogge having no sight either of Sunne or Starre) we scarce knew where we were. In this fogge the tenth of July we lost the company of the Viceadmirall, the Anne Francis, the Busse of Bridgewater, and the Francis of Foy. The 16. day one of our small Barkes named the

The Gabriel.	Gabriel was sent by our Generali to beare in with the land to descrie it, where being on land, they met with

[HI. 42.] The people offer to traffike with us.	the people of the Countrey, which seemed very humane and civill, and offered to traffike with our men, profering them foules and skins for knives, and other trifles: whose courtesie caused us to thinke, that they had small conversation with other of the Straights. Then we bare backe againe to goe with the Queenes foreland: and the eighteenth day wee came by two Islands whereon we went on shore, and found where the people had bene: but we saw none of them. This day wee were againe in the yce, and like to be in as great perill as we were at the first. For through the darknesse and obscuritie of the foggie mist, we were almost run on rocks and Islands before we saw them: But God (even miraculously) provided for us, opening the fogges that we might see clearely, both where and in what danger we presently were, and also the way to escape: or els without fade we had ruinously runne upon the rocks. 236

When we knew perfectly our instant case, wee cast about to get againe on Sea-bord, which (God be thanked) by night we obtained and praised God. The cleare continued scarce an houre, but the fogge fell againe as thicke as ever it was.

Then the Rearadmirall and the Beare got themselves cleare without danger of yce and rocks, strooke their sailes and lay a hull, staying to have the rest of the Fleete come forth: which as yet had not found the right way to cleare themselves from the danger of rockes and yce, untill the next morning, at what time the Rearadmirall discharged certaine warning pieces to give notice that she Warning had escaped, and that the rest (by following of her) might set themselves free, which they did that day. ^charnd *

Then having gathered our selves togither we proceeded on our purposed voyage, bearing off, and keeping our selves distant from the coast till the 19. day of July: at which time the fogges brake up and dispersed, so that we might plainely and clearely behold the pleasant ayre, which so long had bene taken from us, by the obscuritie of the foggie mists: and after that time we were not much encombred therewith untill we had left the con

fines of the Countrey.

Then we espying a fayre sound, supposed it to goe A faire sound into the Straights betweene the Queenes foreland and betweene the Jackmans sound, which proved as we imagined. For our Generali sent forth againe the Gabriel to discover it, who jackmans passed through with much difficulty: for there ran such sound. an extreme current of a tide, with such a horrible gulfe, that with a fresh gale of wind they were scarce able to stemme it: yet at the length with great travaile they passed it, and came to the Straights, where they met with the Thomas Allen, the Thomas of Ipswich, and the Busse of Bridgewater: who altogether adventured to beare into the yce againe, to see if they could obtaine their wished Port. But they were so incombred that with much difficultie they were able to get out againe, yet at the last they escaping, the Thomas Allen, and the Gabriel

237

The time of our setting forward, &c.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

bare in with the Westerne shore, where they found harbour, and there moared their ships untill the fourth of August, at which time they came to us in the Countesse of Warwicks sound. The Thomas of Ipswich caught a great leake which caused her to cast againe to Seabord and so was mended.

We sailed along still by the coast untill we came to the Queenes foreland, at the point whereof we met with part of the gulfe aforesayd, which place or gulfe (as some of our Masters doe credibly report) doeth flow nine houres, and ebs but three. At that point wee discovered certaine lands Southward, which neither time nor opportunitie would serve to search. Then being come to the mouth of the Straights we met with the Anne Francis, who had laine bulting up and downe ever since her departure alone, never finding any of her company. We met then also the Francis of Foy, with whom againe we intended to venture and get in : but the yce was yet so thicke, that we were compelled againe to retyre and get us on Sea-bord.

There fell also the same day being the 26. of July, such an horrible snow, that it lay a foot thick upon the hatches which frose as it fell.

We had also at other times divers cruell stormes both of snow and haile, which manifestly declared the dis-temperature of the Countrey: yet for all that wee were so many times repulsed and put backe from our purpose, knowing that lingering delay was not profitable for us, but hurtfull to our voyage, we mutually consented to our valiant Generali once againe, to give the onset.

The 28. day therefore of the same July we assayed, and with little trouble (God be praysed) we passed the dangers by day light. Then night falling on the face of the earth, wee hulled in the cleare, til the chearefull light of the day had chased away the noysome darkenesse of the night: at which time we set forward towards our wished Port: by the 30. day wee obteined our expected desire, where we found the Judith, and the Michael:

238

which brought no smal joy unto the General, and great consolation to the heavie hearts of those wearied wights.

The 30. day of July we brought our ships into the [III. 43.] Countesse of Warwicks sound, and moared them, namely these ships, The Admirall, the Rearadmiral, the Francis of Foy, the Beare Armenel, the Salomon, and the Busse of Bridgewater: which being done, our Generali com-maunded us all to come a shore upon the Countesses Hand, where he set his Miners to worke upon the Mine, giving charge with expedition to dispatch with their lading.

Our Generali himselfe, accompanied with his Gentlemen, divers times made rodes into sundry partes of the Countrey, as well to finde new Mines, as also to finde out and see the people of the Countrey. He found out one Mine upon an Island by Beares sound, and named it the Countesse of Sussex Island. One other was found in Countesse Winters Fornace, with divers others, to which the ships °f^sJex were sent sunderly to be laden. In the same rodes winters he mette with divers of the people of the Countrey at Fornace. sundry times, as once at a place called Davids sound: who Davids Sound. shot at our men, and very desperately gave them the onset, being not above three or foure in number, there being of our Countrey men above a dosen: but seeing themselves not able to prevaile, they tooke themselves to flight: whom our men pursued, but being not used to such craggie cliffes, they soone lost the sight of them, and so in vaine returned.

We also saw of them at Beares sound, both by Sea The politic of and land in great companies : but they would at all times the people fir keepe the water betweene them and us. And if any of our ships chanced to be in the sound (as they came divers times, because the Harbor was not very good) the ship laded, and departed againe: then so long as any ships were in sight, the people would not be seene.

But when as they perceived the ships to be gone, they would not only shew themselves standing upon high clifles, and call us to come over unto them: but also

239

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

would come in their Botes very neere to us, as it were to brag at us: whereof our Generali having advertisement, sent for the Captaines and Gentlemen of the Ships, to accompany and attend upon him, with the Captaine also of the Anne Francis, who was but the night before come unto us. For they, and the Fleebote having lost us the 26. day in the great snowe, put into an harbour in the Queenes foreland, where they found good Oare, wherewith they laded themselves, and came to seeke the Generali: so that now we had all our Shippes, saving one Barke, which was lost, and the Thomas of Ipswich, who (compelled by what furie I knowe not) forsooke our company, and returned home without lading.

Our Generali accompanied with his Gentlemen, (of whom I spake) came all together to the Countesse of Sussex Island, neere to Beares sound: where he manned out certaine Pinnisses, and went over to the people: who perceiving his arrivall, fledde away with all speede, and in haste left certaine dartes and other engines behinde them, which we found: but the people we could not finde.

The next morning our Generali perceiving certaine of them in botes upon the Sea, gave chase to them in a Pinnesse under saile, with a fresh gale of winde, but could by no meanes come neere unto them: for the longer he sailed, the further off he was from them: which well shewed their cunning and activitie. Thus time wearing away, and the day of our departure approching, our Generali commaunded us to lade with all expedition, that we might be againe on Seaboard with our ships: for whilest we were in the Countrey, we were in continual danger of freezing in: for often snow and haile often falling, the water was so much frosen and congealed in the night, that in the morning we could scarce rowe our botes or Pinnesses, especially in Diers sound, which is a calme and still water: which caused our Generali to make the more haste, so that by the 30. day of August we were all laden, and made all things ready to depart.

240

But before I proceede any further herein, to shew what Gentlemen fortune befell at our departure, I will turne my penne a litle to M. Captaine Fenton, and those Gentlemen which 'c^^gy* ' should have inhabited all the yeere in those Countries, whose valiant mindes were much to be commended: For doubtlesse they had done as they intended, if lucke had not withstoode their willingnesse.

For the Barke Dionyse which was lost, had in her much of their house which was prepared and should have bene builded for them, with many other implements. Also the Thomas of Ipswich which had most of their provision in her, came not into the Streights at all: neither did we see her since the day we were separated in the great snow, of which I spake before. For these causes, having not their house, nor yet provision, they were disappointed of their pretence to tarie, and therefore laded their ships, and so came away with us.

But before we tooke shipping, we builded a litle house An house in the Countesse of Warwicks Island, and garnished it tricked and with many kinds of trifles, as Pinnes, Points, Laces, ^iverstrin^s Glasses, Kombes, Babes on horsebacke and on foote, with innumerable other such fansies and toyes: thereby to allure and entice the people to some familiaritie against other yeeres.

Thus having finished all things we departed the [III. 44.J Countrey, as I sayd before: but because the Busse had not lading enough in her, she put into Beares sound to take in a little more. In the meane while the Admirall, and the rest without at Sea stayed for her.

And that night fell such an outragious tempest, beating An outragwus on our ships with such vehement rigor, that anchor and temfest-cable availed nought: for we were driven on rockes and Islands of yce, insomuch that (had not the great goodnesse of God bene miraculously shewed to us) we had bene cast away every man. This danger was more doubtfull and terrible, then any that preceded or went before: for there was not any one shippe (I thinke) that escaped without damage. Some lost anchor and

vn	241	Q

Our entring the coastes dangerous.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

also cables, some botes, some Pinnisses: some anchor, cables, boates and Pinnisses.

This boystrous storme so severed us from one another, that one shippe knewe not what was become of another. The Admirall knewe not where to finde the Viceadmirall or Rearadmirall, or any other ship of our company. Our Generali being on land in Beares sound could not come to his Shippe, but was compelled to goe aboord the Gabriel where he continued all the way homeward: for the boystrous blasts continued so extreamely and so long a time, that they sent us homewarde (which was Gods favour towardes us) will we, nill we, in such haste, as not any one of us were able to keepe in company with other, but were separated. And if by chance any one Shippe did overtake other, by swiftnesse of sayle, or mette, as they often did: yet was the rigour of the wind so hidious, that they could not continue company together the space of one whole night.

Thus our journey outward was not so pleasant, but our comming thither, entering the coasts and countrey, by narrow Streights, perillous yce, and swift tides, our times of aboade there in snowe and stormes, and our departure from thence the 31. of August with dangerous blustering windes and tempests, which that night arose, was as uncomfortable: separating us so as wee sayled, that not any of us mette together, untill the 28. of September, which day we fell on the English coastes, betweene Sylley and the landes ende, and passed the channell, untill our arrivall in the river of Thames.

242

The report of Thomas Wiars passenger in the Emanuel, otherwise called the Busse of Bridgewater, wherein James Leech was Master, one of the ships in the last Voyage of Master Martin Frobisher 1578. concerning the dis-coverie of a great Island in their way homeward the 12. of September.

He Busse of Bridgewater was left in Beares sound at Meta incognita, the second day of September behinde the Fleete in some distresse, through much winde, ryding neere the Lee shoare, and forced there to ride it out upon the hazard of her cables and anchors, which

were all aground but two. The third of September being fayre weather, and the winde North northwest she set sayle, and departed thence, and fell with Frisland on the 8. day of September at sixe of the clocke at night, and then they set off from the Southwest point of Frisland, the wind being at East, and East Southeast, but that night the winde veared Southerly, and shifted oftentimes that night: but on the tenth day in the morning, the wind at West northwest faire weather, they steered Southeast, and by south, and continued that course until the 12. day of September, when about 11. a clocke before noone, they descryed a lande, which was from them about five leagues, and the Southermost part of it was Southeast by East from them, and the Northermost next, North Northeast, or Northeast. The master accompted that the Southeast poynt of Frisland was from him at that instant when hee first descryed this new Islande, Northwest by North, 50. leagues. They account this Island to be 25. leagues long, and the longest way of it Southeast, and Northwest. The Southerne part of it is in the latitude of 57. degrees and 1. second part, or there about. They continued in sight of it, from the 12. day at a 11. of the clocke, till the 243

The Island in length z 5. leagues.

This Hand is in the latitude of^. degrees and 1 second pars.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

13. day three of the clocke in the after noone, when they left it: and the last part they saw of it, bare from them Northwest by North. There appeared two Har-boroughs upon that coast : the greatest of them seven leagues to the Northwards of the Southermost poynt, the other but foure leagues. There was very much yce neere the same land, and also twentie or thirty leagues from it, for they were not cleare of yce, till the 15. day of September after noone. They plyed their Voyage homewards, and fell with the West part of Ireland about Galway, and had first sight of it on the 25. day of September.

Notes framed by M. Richard Hakluyt of the middle Temple Esquire, given to certaine Gentlemen that went with M. Frobisher in his Northwest discoverie, for their directions: And not unfit to be committed to print, considering the same may stirre up considerations of these and of such other things, not unmeete in such new voyages as may be attempted hereafter.

Hat the first Seate be chosen on the seaside, so as (if it may be) you may have your owne Navie within Bay, river or lake, within your Seate safe from the enemie: and so as the enemie shalbe forced to lie in open rode abroade without, to be dispersed with all windes and

tempests that shall arise. Thus seated you shall be least subject to annoy of the enemie, so may you by your Navie within passe out to all parts of the world, and so may the Shippes of England have accesse to you to supply all wants, so may your commodities be caryed away also. This seat is to be chosen in a temperate Climat, in sweete ayre, where you may possesse alwayes sweete water, wood, seacoles or turfe, with 244

fish, flesh, graine, fruites, herbes and rootes, or so many of those as may suffice very necessitie for the life of such as shall plant there. And for the possessing of mines of golde, of silver, copper, quicksilver, or of any such precious thing, the wants of those needfull things may be supplyed from some other place by sea, &c.

Stone to make Lyme of, ' Slate stone to tyle withall, or such clay as maketh tyle, Stone to wall withall, if

Brycke may not bee made, Timber for buylding easely to * be conveied to the place, Reede to cover houses or such like, if tyle or slate be not.

are to be looked for as things without which no Citie may be made nor people in civil sort be kept together.

The people there to plant and to continue are eyther to live without traffique, or by traffique and by trade of marchandise. If they shall live without sea traffique, at the first they become naked by want of linnen and woollen, and very miserable by infinite wants that will otherwise ensue, and so will they be forced of themselves to depart, or else easely they will be consumed by the Spanyards, by the Frenchmen, or by the naturali inhabitants of the countrey, and so the enterprize becomes reprochfull to our Nation, and a let to many other good purposes that may be taken in hand.

And by trade of marchandise they can not live, except the Sea or the Land there may yeelde commoditie. And therefore you ought to have most speciali regard of that poynt, and so to plant, that the naturali commodities of the place and seate may draw to you accesse of Navigation for the same, or that by your owne Navigation you may cary the same out, and fetch home the supply of the wants of the seate.

Such Navigation so to be employed shall, besides the supply of wants, be able to encounter with forreine force.

245

And for that in the ample vent of such things as are brought to you out of England by Sea, standeth a matter of great consequence, it behoveth that all humanitie and curtesie and much forbearing of revenge to the Inland people be used: so shall you have firme amitie with your neighbours, so shall you have their inland commodities to mainteine traffique, and so shall you waxe rich and strong in force. Divers and severall commodities of the inland are not in great plenty to be brought to your hands, without the ayde of some portable or Navigable river, or ample lake, and therefore to have the helpe of such a one is most requisite: And so is it of effect for the dispersing of your owne commodities in exchange into the inlands.

Nothing is more to be indevoured with the Inland people then familiarity. For so may you best discover all the natural commodities of their countrey, & also all their wants, al their strengths, all their weaknesse, and with whom they are in warre, and with whom confederate in peace and amitie, &c. which knowen you may worke many great effects of greatest consequence.

And in your planting the consideration of the clymate and of the soyle be matters that are to be respected. For if it be so that you may let in the salt sea water, not mixed with the fresh into flats, where the sunne is of the heate that it is at Rochel, in the Bay of Portugal, or in Spaine, then may you procure a man of skill, and so you have wonne one noble commoditie for the fishing, and for trade of marchandize by making

[III. 46.] Or if the soyle and clymate be such as may yeeld you the Grape as good as that at Burdeaux, as that in Portugal, or as that about Sivil in Spaine, or that in the Islands of the Canaries, then there resteth but a workeman to put in execution to make Wines, and to dresse Resigns of the sunne and other, &c.

Or if ye finde a soyle of the temperature of the South part of Spaine or Barbarie in the which you 246

finde the Olive tree to growe: Then you may be assured of a noble marchandize for this Realme, considering that our great trade of clothing doeth require oyle, and weying how deere of late it is become by the vent they have of that commoditie in the West Indies, and if you finde the wilde Olive there it may be graffed.

Or if you can find the berrie of Cochenile with which we colour Stammelles, or any Roote, Berrie, Fruite, wood or earth fitte for dying, you winne a notable thing fitte for our state of clothing. This Cochenile is naturali in the West Indies on that firme.

Or if you have Hides of beasts fitte for sole Lether, &c. It will be a marchandize right good, and the Savages there yet can not tanne Lether after our kinde, yet excellently after their owne manner.

Or if the soyle shall yeeld Figges, Almonds, Sugar Canes, Quinces, Orenges, Lemonds, Potatos, &c. there may arise some trade and traffique by Figs, Almonds, Sugar, Marmelade, Sucket, &c.

Or if great woods be found, if they be of Cypres, chests may be made, if they be of some kinde of trees, Pitch and Tarre may be made, if they be of some other, then they may yeeld Rosin, Turpentine, &c. and all for trade and traffique, and Caskes for wine and oyle may be made, likewise ships and houses, &c.

And because traffique is a thing so materiali, I wish that great observation be taken what every soyle yeeldeth naturally, in what commoditie soever, and what it may be made to yeelde by indevour, and to send us notice home, that thereupon we may devise what meanes may be thought of to raise trades.

Now admit that we might not be suffered by the Savages to enjoy any whole country or any more then the scope of a citie, yet if we might enjoy traffique, and be assured of the same, we might be much inriched, our Navie might be increased, and a place of safetie might there be found, if change of religion or civil

247

warres should happen in this realme, which are things of great benefit. But if we may enjoy any large terri-torie of apt soyle, we might so use the matter, as we should not depend upon Spaine for oyles, sacks, resignes, orenges, lemonds, Spanish skins, &c. Nor upon France for woad, baysalt, and Gascoyne wines, nor on Eastland for flaxe, pitch, tarre, mastes, &c. So we should not so exhaust our treasure, and so exceedingly inrich our doubtfull friends, as we doe, but should purchase the commodities that we want for halfe the treasure that now wee doe: and should by our owne industries and the benefites of the soyle there cheaply purchase oyles, wines, salt, fruits, pitch, tarre, flaxe, hempe, mastes, boords, fish, golde, silver, copper, tallow, hides and many commodities: besides if there be no flatts to make salt on, if you have plentie of wood you may make it in sufficient quantitie for common uses at home there.

If you can keepe a safe Haven, although you have not the friendship of the neere neighbours, yet you may have traffique by sea upon one shore or other, upon that firme in time to come, if not present.

If you find great plentie of tymber on the shore side or upon any portable river, you were best to cut downe of the same the first winter, to be seasoned for ships, barks, boates and houses;

And if neere such wood there be any river or brooke upon the which a sawing mill may be placed, it would doe great service, and therefore consideration would be had of such places.

And if such port & chosen place of setling were in possession and after fortified by arte, although by the land side our Englishmen were kept in, and might not enjoy any traffique with the next neighbours, nor any victuals: yet might they victuali themselves of fish to serve very necessitie, and enter into amitie with the enemies of their next neighbours, and so have vent of their marchandize of England & also have victual, or by meanes hereupon to be used, to force the next neigh-248

hours to amitie. And keeping a navy at the setling place, they should find out along the tract of the land to have traffique, and at divers Islands also. And so this first seat might in time become a stapling place of the commodities of many countreys and territories, and in time this place might become of all the provinces round about the only governour. And if the place first chosen should not so well please our people, as some other more lately found out : There might be an easie remove, and that might be rased, or rather kept for others of our nation to avoyd an ill neighbour.

If the soyles adjoyning to such convenient Haven and setling places be found marshie and boggie, then men [III. 47.] skilful in drayning are to be caryed thither. For arte may worke wonderful effects therein, and make the soyle rich for many uses.

To plant upon an Island in the mouth of some notable river, or upon the point of the land entring into the river, if no such Island be, were to great end. For if such river were navigable or portable farre into the land, then would arise great hope of planting in fertil soyles, and traffike on the one or on the other side of the river, or on both, or the linking in amitie with one or other pettie king contending there for dominion.

Such rivers found, both Barges and Boates may be made for the safe passage of such as shall pierce the same. These are to be covered with doubles of course linnen artificially wrought, to defend the arrow or the dart of the savage from the rower.

Since every soile of the world by arte may be made to yeeld things to feede and to clothe man, bring in your returne a perfect note of the soile without and within, and we shall devise if neede require to amend the Same, and to draw it to more perfection. And if you finde not fruites in your planting place to your liking, we shall in five drifats furnish you with such kindes of plants to be carryed thither the winter after your planting, as shall the very next summer following yeeld you some fruite, and

249

the yeere next following, as much as shall suffice a towne as bigge as Calice, and that shortly after shall be able to yeeld you great store of strong durable good sider to drinke, and these trees shall be able to encrease you within lesse then seven yeeres as many trees presently to beare, as may suffice the people of divers parishes, which at the first setling may stand you in great stead, if the soile have not the commoditie of fruites of good-nesse already. And because you ought greedily to hunt after things that yeeld present reliefe, without trouble of carriage thither, therefore I make mention of these thus specially, to the end you may have it specially in minde.

A true discourse of the three Voyages of discoverie, for the finding of a passage to Cathaya, by the Northwest, under the conduct of Martin Frobisher Generali: Before which, as a necessary Preface is prefixed a twofold e discourse, con-teining certaine reasons to prove all partes of the World habitable. Penned by Master George Best, a Gentleman employed in the same voyages.

What commodities and instructions may be reaped by diligent reading this Discourse.

i Thirst, by example may be gathered, how a Dis-J? coverer of new Countries is to proceede in his first attempt of any Discoverie.

2	Item, how he should be provided of shipping, victuals, munition, and choice of men.

3	How to proceede and deale with strange people, be they never so barbarous, cruell and fierce, either by lenitie or otherwise.

4	How trade of Merchandize may be made without money.

5	How a Pilot may deale, bqing invironed with moun-taines of yce in the frozen Sea.

25°
