MY Lord Admirall of Chastillon, a noble man more desirous of the publique then of his private bene-fite, understanding the pleasure of the King his prince, which was to discover new and strange Countreys, caused vessels fit for this purpose to be made ready with all diligence, and men to bee levied meete for such an enterprise: Among whom hee chose Captaine John Ribault, a man in trueth expert in sea causes: which having received his charge, set himselfe to Sea the yeere 1562. the eighteenth of Februarie, accompanied onely with two of the kings shippes, but so well furnished with Gentlemen, (of whose number I my selfe was one) and with olde Souldiers, that he had meanes to atchieve some notable thing and worthy of eternall memorie. Having therefore sayled two moneths, never holding the usuall course of the Spaniards, hee arrived in Florida, landing neere a Cape or Promontorie, which is no high lande, because the coast is all flatte, but onely rising by reason of the high woods, which at his arrivall he called Cape Francois in honour of our France. This Cape is distant from the Equator about thirtie degrees. Coasting from this place towards the North, he discovered a very faire and great River, which gave him occasion to cast anker that hee might search the same the next day very early in the morning: which being done by the breake of day, accompanied with Captaine Fiquinville and divers other souldiers of his shippe, he was no sooner arrived on the brinke of the shoare, but straight hee perceived many Indians men and women, which came of purpose to that place to receive the Frenchmen with all gentlenesse and amitie, as they well declared by the Oration which their king made, and the presents of Chamois skinnes wherewith he honoured our Captaine, which the day following caused a pillar of hard stone to be planted within the sayde River, and not farre from the mouth of the same upon a little sandie knappe, in which pillar the

457

A.D.

1587.

[HI. 308.]

The first voyage of John Ri-baulttoFlorida 1562.

The course of the Spaniards not altogether necessary.

Cape Francois in 30. degrees.

Apillar setup.

Armes of France were carved and engraved. This being done hee embarked himselfe againe, to the ende alwayes to discover the coast toward the North which was his chiefe desire. After he had sayled a certaine time he crossed over to the other side of the river, and then in the presence of certaine Indians, which of purpose did attend him, hee commaunded his men Prayer and to make their prayers, to give thankes to GOD, for thankestoGod. tjjat of grace hee had conducted the French nation unto these strange places without any danger at all. The prayers being ended, the Indians which were very attentive to hearken unto them, thinking in my judgement, that wee worshipped tbe Sunne, because wee alwayes had our eyes lifted up toward heaven, rose all up and came to salute the Captaine John Ribault, promising to shew him their King, which rose not up as they did, but remained still sitting upon greene leaves of Bayes and Palmetrees: toward whom the Captaine went and sate downe by him, and heard him make a long discourse, but with no great pleasure, because hee could not understand his language, and Presents given much lesse his meaning. The King gave our Captaine to Ribault. at h-s departure a plume or fanne of Hernshawes feathers died in red, and a basket made of Pa{me-boughes after the Indian fashion, and wrought very artificially, and a great skinne painted and drawen throughout with the pictures of divers wilde beasts so lively drawen and portrayed, that nothing lacked but life. The Captaine to shew himselfe not unthankfull, gave him pretie tinne bracelets, a cutting hooke, a looking glasse, and certaine knives: whereupon the King shewed himselfe to be very glad and fully contented. Having spent the most part of the day with these Indians, the Captaine imbarked himselfe to passe over to the north side of the River, whereat the king seemed to bee very sorie. Neverthelesse being not able to stay us, hee commaunded that with all diligence they should take fish for us : which they did 458

with all speede. For being entred into their Weares Their fish-or inclosures made of reedes and framed in the fashion of a Labirynth or Mase, they loaded us with Troutes, great Mullets, Plaise, Turbuts, and marveilous store of other sortes of fishes altogether different from ours.

This done, we entred into our Boates and went They passe toward the other shore. But before we came to the shore, we were saluted with a number of other Indians, which entring into the water to their armepits, brought us many litle baskets full of Maiz, and goodly Mui- Goodly mulberries both red and white : Others offered themselves to beare us on shoare, where being landed we per- ’ ceived their King sitting upon a place dressed with boughes, and under a little Arbour of Cedars and Bay trees somewhat distant from the waters side. He was accompanied with two of his sonnes which were exceeding faire and strong, and with a troope of Indians who had all their bowes and arrowes in marveilous good order. His two sonnes received our Captaine very graciously : but the king their father, representing I wot not what kinde of gravitie, did nothing but shake his head a little : then the Captaine went forward to salute him, and without any other moving of himselfe he reteined so constant a kind of gravitie, that hee made it seeme unto us that by good and lawfull right hee bare the title of a King. Our Captaine knowing not what to judge of this mans behaviour, though he was jelous because wee went first unto the other king, or else that he was not well pleased with the Pillar or Columne which he had planted. While thus he knew not what hereof to [III. 309.] thinke, our Captaine shewed him by signes, that he was come from a farre Countrey to seeke him, to let him understand the amitie which he was desirous to have with him: for the better confirmation whereof, hee drewe out of a budget certaine trifles, as certaine bracelets covered as it were with silver and guilt, which hee presented him withall, and gave his sonnes certaine

459

other trifles. Whereupon the King beganne very lovingly to intreate both our Captaine and us. And after these gentle intertainments, wee went our selves into the woods, hoping there to discover some singularities: where were great store of Mulberrie trees white and red, Great store of on the toppes whereof there was an infinite number of silkewormes. sjlkewormes. Following our way wee discovered a faire and great medowe, divided notwithstanding with divers Marishes, which constrained us by reason of the water, which environed it about, to returne backe againe towarde the Rivers side. Finding not the King there, which by this time was gone home to his house, wee entred into our Boates and sayled towarde our shippes: The river of where after we arrived, we called this River The River of

May, because we discovered it the first day of the sayde moneth.

Soone after we returned to our shippes, wee weighed our ankers and hoysed our sailes to discover the coast farther forward, along the which wee discovered another faire River, which the Captaine himselfe was minded to search out, and having searched it out with the king and The river of inhabitants thereof, hee named it Seine, because it is very ^ke unto the River of Seine in France. From this River wee retired toward our shippes, where being arrived, we trimmed our sailes to saile further toward the North, and to descry the singularities of the coast. But wee had not sayled any great way before wee discovered another very faire River, which caused us to cast anker over against it, and to trimme out two Boates to goe to search it out. Wee found there an He The River of anJ a king no lesse affable then the rest, afterwarde we r named this River Somme. From thence wee sayled about sixe leagues, after wee discovered another River, The Rivers of which after wee had viewed was named by us by the Cherente, name of Loyre. And consequently we there discovered Grande $ve ot^ers: whereof the first was named Cherente, the Belle ’	second Garonne, the third Gironde, the fourth Belle, the

Grande.	fift Grande: which being very well discovered with such

460

things as were in them, by this time in lesse then the space of threescore leagues wee had found out many singularities along nine Rivers. Neverthelesse not fully satisfied wee say led yet further to warde the North, following the course that might bring us to the River of Jordan one of the fairest Rivers of the North, and holding our wonted course, great fogges and tempests came upon us, which constrained us to leave the coast to beare toward the maine Sea, which was the cause that we lost the sight of our Pinnesses a whole day and a night untill the next day in the morning, what time the weather waxing faire and the Sea calme, wee discovered a River which wee called Bellei a veoir. After wee had	.

sayled three or foure leagues, wee began to espie our a veoir. Pinnesses which came straight toward us, and at their arrivall they reported to the Captaine, that while the foule weather and fogges endured, they harboured themselves in a mightie River which in bignesse and beautie exceeded the former: wherewithal! the Captaine was exceeding joyfull, for his chiefe desire was to finde out an Haven to harbour his shippes, and there to refresh our selves for a while. Thus making thitherward wee arrived athwart the sayde River, (which because of the fairenesse and largenesse thereof wee named Port Royall) River °f wee strooke our sailes and cast anker at ten fathom of water : for the depth is such, namely when the Sea	°

beginneth to flowe, that the greatest shippes of France, yea, the Arguzes of Venice may enter in there. Having cast anker, the Captaine with his Souldiers went on shoare, and hee himselfe went first on land : where we found the place as pleasaunt as was possible, for it was all covered over with mightie high Oakes and infinite store of Cedars, and with Lentiskes growing underneath them, smelling so sweetly, that the very fragrant odor only made the place to seeme exceeding pleasant. As we passed thorow these woods we saw nothing but ,	,

Turkeycocks flying in the Forrests, Partridges gray and porridges*' red, little different from ours, but chiefly in bignesse. gray and red.

461

Wee heard also within the woods the voyces of Stagges, of Beares, of Lusernes, of Leopards, & divers other sortes of Beastes unknowen unto us. Being delighted with this place, we set our selves to fishing with nets, & Fish in abun- we caught such a number of fish, that it was wonderful!. dance. And amongst other wee tooke a certaine kind of fish which we call Sallicoques, which were no lesse then Crevises, so that two draughts of the net were sufficient to feede all the companie of our two ships for a whole The River 3. day. The River at the mouth thereof from Cape to leaguesat	Cape is no lesse then 3. French leagues broad ; it is

m°u ’	divided into two great armes, whereof the one runneth

toward the West, the other towards the North : And I beleeve in my judgement that the arme which stretcheth .	towarde the North runneth up into the Countrey as

A passage by farre as the River Jordan, the other arme runneth into a river into g as was knowen anj understoode by those of [III. 310] our company, which were left behind to dwell in this place. These two armes are two great leagues broad : and in the middest of them there is an He, which is poynted towardes the opening of the great River, in which Hand there are infinite numbers of all sortes of Store of rare strange beasts. There are Simples growing there of so simples.	rare prOpertieS) anJ in so great quantitie, that it is an

excellent thing to behold them. On every side there is nothing to be seene but Palmetrees, and other sorts of trees bearing blossoms and fruite of very rare shape and very good smell. But seeing the evening approch, and that the Captaine determined to returne unto the shippes, wee prayed him to suffer us to passe the night in this place. In our absence the Pilots and chiefe Mariners advertised the Captaine that it was needefull to bring the shippes further up within the River, to avoyde the dangers of the windes which might annoy us, by reason of our being so neere to the mouth of the River : and for this cause the Captaine sent for us. Being come to our shippes, wee sayled three leagues further up within the River, and there we cast anker. A little while 462

after, John Ribault accompanied with a good number Gibault salleth of souldiers imbarked himselfe, desirous to sayle further

•	*	J	th a RtVfgf

up into the arme that runneth toward the West, and to ' search the commodities of the place. Having sayled twelve leagues at the least, we perceived a troope of Indians, which assoone as ever they espied the Pinnesses, were so afrayd that they fled into the woods leaving behind them a yong Lucerne which they were a turning upon a spit: for which cause the place was called Cape Cape Lucerne. Lucerne: proceeding foorth on our way, we found another arme of the River, which ranne toward the East, up which the Captaine determined to sayle and to leave the great current. A little while after they began to espie divers other Indians both men and women halfe hidden within the woods : who knowing not that wee were such as desired their friendship, were dismayed at the first, but soone after were emboldened, for the Captaine caused store of marchandise to bee shewed them openly whereby they knew that we meant nothing but well unto them : and then they made a signe that we should come on lande, which wee would not refuse. At our comming on shoare divers of them came to salute our Generali according to their barbarous fashion. Some of them gave him skins of Chamois, others little baskets made of Chamois. Palme leaves, some presented him with Pearles, but no Pearles. great number. Afterwards they went about to make an arbour to defend us in that place from the parching heate of the Sunne. But wee would not stay as then. Wherefore the Captaine thanked them much for their good will, and gave presents to each of them: wherewith hee pleased them so well before hee went thence, that his suddaine departure was nothing pleasant unto them. For knowing him to bee so liberali, they would have wished him to have stayed a little longer, seeking by all meanes to give him occasion to stay, shewing him by signes that he should stay but that day onely, and that they desired to advertise a great Indian Lorde which had ^toreofpearies Pearles in great abundance, and Silver also, all which and silver.

463

things should bee given unto him at the Kings arrivall: saying further that in the meane time while that this great Lord came thither, they would lead him to their houses, and shewe him there a thousand pleasures in shooting, and seeing the Stagge killed, therefore they prayed him not to denie them their request. Notwithstanding wee returned to our shippes, where after wee had bene but one night, the Captaine in the morning commanded to put into the Pinnesse a pillar of hard stone fashioned like a columne, wherein the Armes of the king of France were graven, to plant the same in the fairest place that he could finde. This done, wee imbarked our selves, and sayled three leagues towards the West: where we discovered a little river, up which we sayled so long, that in the ende we found it returned into the great current, and in his returne to make a litle Hand separated from the firme land, where wee went on shore: and by commandement of the Captaine, because it was exceeding faire and pleasant, there wee planted the A Pillar of Pillar upon a hillock open round about to the view, and free stone invironed with a lake halfe a fathom deepe of very good Armes of and sweete water. In which Hand wee sawe two Stagges France were of exceeding bignesse, in respect of those which we had graven, set up seene before, which we might easily have killed with our ^he^lvertf11 harguebuzes, if the Captaine had not forbidden us, Port Royal. mooved with the singular fairenesse and bignesse of them.

But before our departure we named the little river which The river of environed. this He, The River of Liborne. Afterward 1 orne-	imbarked our selves to search another He not farre

distant from the former: wherein after wee had gone a land, wee found nothing but tall Cedars, the fairest that The lie of were seene in this Countrey. For this cause wee called Cedars. it jie of Ceciars: so wee returned into our Pinnesse to go towards our shippes.

A few dayes afterward John Ribault determined to returne once againe toward the Indians which inhabited that arme of the River which runneth toward the West, and to carrie with him good store of souldiers. For 464

his meaning was to take two Indians of this place to bring them into France, as the Queene had commaunded him. With this deliberation againe wee tooke our former course so farre foorth, that at the last wee came to the selfe same place where at the first we found the Indians, from thence we tooke two Indians by the permission of the king, which thinking that they were more favoured [III. 311.] then the rest, thought themselves very happy to stay with us. But these two Indians seeing we made no Two Indians shew at all that we would goe on land, but rather that taken awa^ wee followed the middest of the current, began to be somewhat offended, and would by force have lept into the water, for they are so good swimmers that immediatly they would have gotten into the forrestes. Neverthelesse being acquainted with their humour, wee watched them narrowly and sought by all meanes to appease them: which we could not by any meanes do for that time, though we offered them things which they much esteemed, which things they disdained to take, and gave backe againe whatsoever was given them, thinking that such giftes should have altogether bound them, and that in restoring them they should be restored unto their libertie. In fine, perceiving that all that they did avayled them nothing, they prayed us to give them those things which they had restored, which we did incontinent:

then they approched one toward the other and began to sing, The dolefull agreeing so sweetely together, that in hearing their song it seemed that they lamented the absence of their friendes. ' They continued their songs all night without ceasing: all which time we were constrained to ly at anker by reason of the tyde that was against us, but we hoysed sayle the next day very earely in the morning, and returned to our ships. Assoone as we were come to our ships, every one sought to gratifie these 2 Indians, & to shew them the best countenance that was possible: to the intent that by such courtesies they might perceive the good desire and affection which we had to remaine their friends in time to come. Then we offered them meate to eate, but they

vin	465	2 g

The Indians eat not before the sun be set.

Laudonniers putting down in writing the words and phrases of the Indians speech.

The feast of Toya.

This seemeth to be La grand Gopal,

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

refused it, and made us understand that they were accustomed to wash their face and to stay untill the Sunne were set before they did eate, which is a ceremonie common to all the Indians of Newe France. Neverthelesse in the end they were constrained to forget their superstitions, and to apply themselves to our nature, which was somewhat strange unto them at the first. They became therfore more jocunde, every houre made us a 1000 discourses, being merveilous sory that we could not understand them. A few daies after they began to beare so good wil towards mee, that, as I thinke, they would rather have perished with hunger & thirst, then have taken their refection at any mans hand but mine. Seeing this their good wil, I sought to learne some Indian words, & began to aske them questions, shewing them the thing wherof I desired to know the name, how they called it. They were very glad to tell it me, and knowing the desire that I had to learne their language, they encouraged me afterward to aske them every thing. So that putting downe in writing the words and phrases of the Indian speech, I was able to understand the greatest part of their discourses. Every day they did nothing but speak unto me of the desire that they had to use me wel, if we returned unto their houses, and cause me to receive all the pleasures that they could devise, aswell in hunting as in seeing their very strange and superstitious ceremonies at a certaine feast which they call Toya. Which feast they observe as straightly as we observe the Sunday. They gave me to understand, that they would bring me to see the greatest Lord of this countrey which they called Chiquola, which exceedeth them in height (as they tolde me) a good foote and a halfe. They said unto me that he dwelt within the land in a very large place and inclosed exceeding high, but I could not learne wherewith. And as farre as I can judge, this place whereof they spake unto me, was a very faire citie. For they said unto me that within the inclosure there was great store of houses which were built very high, wherein there was an infinite number of men like

466

unto themselves, which made none account of gold, of silver, nor of pearles, seeing they had thereof in abundance. I began then to shew them al the parts of heaven, to the intent to learne in which quarter they dwelt. And straightway one of them stretching out his hand shewed me y‘ they dwelt toward the North, which makes me thinke that it was the river of Jordan. And now I remember, that in the raigne of the Emperour Charles the fift, certaine Spaniards inhabitants of S. Domingo (which made a voyage to get certaine slaves to work in their mines) stole away by subtilty the inhabitants of this river, to the number of 40, thinking to cary them into their new Spaine. But they lost their labour: for in despite they died al for hunger, saving one that was brought to the Emperor, which a litle while after he caused to be baptised, and gave him his own name & called him Charles of Chiquola, because he spake so much of this Lorde of Chiquola whose subject hee was. Also, he reported continually, that Chiquola made his abode within a very great inclosed citie. Besides this proof, those which were left in the first voyage have certified me, that the Indians shewed them by evident signes, that farther within the land toward the North, there was a great inclosure or city, where Chiquola dwelt. After they had staied a while in our ships, they began to be sory, and stil demanded of me when they should re-turne. I made them understand that the Captaines will was to send them home againe, but that first he would bestow apparell of them, which fewe dayes after was delivered unto them. But seeing he would not give them licence to depart, they resolved with themselves to [III. 312.] steale away by night, and to get a litle boat which we had, and by die help of the tyde to saile home toward their dwellings, and by this meanes to save themselves.

Which thing they failed not to doe, and put their enter- The 2 Indians prize in execution, yet leaving behinde them the apparel escafe awa3-which the Captaine had given them, and carrying away nothing but that which was their owne, shewing well 467

hereby that they were not void of reason. The Captaine cared not greatly for their departure, considering they had not bene used otherwise then well: and that therefore they woulde not estrange themselves from the Frenchmen. Captaine Ribault therefore knowing the singular fairenes of this river, desired by all meanes to encourage some of his men to dwell there, well foreseeing that this thing might be of great importance for the Kings service, and the reliefe of the Common wealth of France. Therfore proceeding on with his intent, he commanded the ankers to bee weighed and to set things in order to returne unto the opening of the river, to the ende that if the winde came faire he might passe out to accomplish the rest of his meaning. When therefore we were come to the mouth of the river, he made them cast anker, whereupon we stayed without discovering any thing all the rest of the day. The next day he commanded that all the men of his ship should come up upon the decke, saying that he had somewhat to say unto them. They all came up, and immediatly the Captaine began to speake unto them in this maner.

I thinke there is none of you that is ignorant of how his compete ° great consequence this our enterprize is, and also how acceptable it is unto our yong King. Therefore my

friendes (as one desiring your honour and benefite) I would not faile to advertise you all of the exceeding good happe which should fall to them, which, as men of valure and worthy courage, would make tryall in this our first discoverie of the benefits and commodities of this new land: which should be, as I assure my selfe, the greatest occasion that ever could happen unto them, to arise unto the title and degree of honour. And for this cause I was desirous to propose unto you and set downe before your eyes the eternall memorie which of right they deserve, which forgetting both their parents and their countrey have had the courage to enterprize a thing of such importance, which even kings themselves understanding to be men aspiring to so high degree of 468
