1586. wages at all of him, if he will give them leave to discover this citie, and the rich mountaines, and the passage to a sea or mighty Lake which they heare to be within foure and twenty dayes travel from Saint Helena, which is in 32. degrees of latitude : and is that river which the French called Port-royal.

He saith also that he hath seene a rich Diamond which was brought from the mountaines that lye up in the countrey Westward from S. Helena. These hils seeme wholy to be the mountaines of Apalatci, whereof the Savages advertised Laudonniere, and it may bee they are the hils of Chaunis Temoatam, which Master Lane had advertisement of.

The relation of Nicholas Burgoignon, alias Holy, whom sir Francis Drake brought from Saint Augustine also in Florida, where he had re-mayned sixe yeeres, in mine and Master Heriots hearing.

His Nicholas Burgoignon sayth, that betweene S. Augustine and S. Helen there is a Casique whose name is Casicola, which is lord of ten thousand Indians, and another casique whose name is Dicasca, and another called Touppekyn toward the North, and a

fourth named Potanou toward the South, and another called Moscita toward the South likewise. Besides these

he acknowledgeth Oristou, Ahoia, Ahoiaue, Isamacon, alledged by the Spaniard.

He further affirmeth, that there is a citie Northwestward from S. Helenes in the mountaines, which the Spaniards call La grand Copal, and is very great and rich, and that in these mountains there is great store of Christal, golde, and Rubies, and Diamonds: And that a Spaniard brought from thence a Diamond which was worth five thousand crownes, which Pedro Melendes

ix	i13	H

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the marques nephew to olde Pedro Melendes that slew Ribault, & is now governer of Florida, weareth. He saith also, that to make passage unto these moun-taines, it is needefull to have store of Hatchets to give unto the Indians, and store of Pickaxes to breake the mountaines, which shine so bright in the day in some places, that they cannot behold them, and therefore they travell unto them by night. Also corslets of Cotton, which the Spanyards call Zecopitz, are necessary to bee had against the arrowes of the Savages.

He sayth farther, that a Tunne of the sassafras of Florida is solde in Spaine for sixtie ducates : and that they have there great store of Turkie cocks, of Beanes, of Peason, and that there are great store of pearles.

The things, as he reporteth, that the Floridians make most account of, are red Cloth, or redde Cotton to make baudricks or gyrdles: copper, and hatchets to cut withall.

The Spaniards have all demaunded leave at their owne costs, to discover these mountaines, which the King denyeth, for feare lest the English or French would enter into the same action, once knowen.

All the Spaniards would passe up by the river of Saint Helena unto the mountaines of golde and Chrystall.

The Spaniards entring 50. leagues up Saint Helena, found Indians wearing golde rings at their nostrels and eares. They found also Oxen, but lesse then ours.

Sixe leagues from Saint Helena toward the North, there is a poynt that runneth farre into the sea, which is the marke to the Seamen to finde Saint Helena and Waterin.

Waterin is a river fortie leagues distant Northward from Saint Helena, where any fleete of great ships may ride safely. I take this river to be that which we call Waren in Virginia, whither at Christmasse last 1585. the Spaniards sent a barke with fortie men to discover where we were seated : in which barke was Nicholas Burgoignon the reporter of all these things.

114

The Spaniards of S. Augustine have slaine three hundred of the subjects of Potanou. One Potassi is neighbour to Potanou. Oratina is he which the French history calleth Olata Outina.

Calauai is another casique which they knowe.

Sundry Voyages made from Nueva Galicia, and Nueva Viscaia in new Spaine, to the 15. Provinces of new Mexico, and to Quivira and Cibola, all situate on the backeside of Guastecan, Florida, and Virginia, as farre as 37. degrees of Northerly latitude: with a description of the rivers, lakes, cities, townes, nations, fertile soyle, and temperate ayre in those partes; and most certaine notice of many exceeding rich silver mines, and other principali commodities.

A discourse of the famous Cosmographer John Baptista Ramusius, concerning the three voyages of Frier Marco de Nica, Francis Vasquez de Coronado, and Ferdinando Al-orchon next following: taken out of his third volume of Navigations and Voyages.

He right honourable Don Antonio de Mendoga being sent by Charles the Emperour to be viceroy of Mexico and Nueva Espanna, and having understood that Don Ferdinando Cortez had sent many ships along the coast of Nueva Espanna to discover countries, and to

find out the Isles of the Malucos, began himselfe to desire to do the like, as viceroy of Nueva Espanna; and hereupon they fell out: for Cortez said that he was general and discoverer of the South sea, and that it belonged to him to set forth those voyages. On ”5
