the other side, the lord Don Antonio alledged that it belonged to him to make that discovery, as being viceroy of Nueva Espanna. So that they fell at great variance, and Cortez returned into Spaine to complaine unto the Emperour. Don Antonio in the meane season having obteined knowledge of the voiage, which Andrew Dorantez (who was one of the company of Pamphilo Narvaez that escaped, as you may reade in the relation of Alvaro Nunnez, called Cabe^a de Vaca) made; sent Frier Marco de Ni?a with a Negro of the said Dorantez to discover that country. Which Frier Marco de Ni?a being returned, & having informed his lordship of all his discovery, he sent captain Francis Vasquez de Coronado with many Spaniards on horsebacke and Indians on foot: likewise he sent a fleete by sea, whereof Ferdinando Alorchon was captaine, as may be seene in the relations following.

An extract of a letter of captaine Francis Vasques de Coronado, written to a Secretary of the right noble Don Antonio de Mendosa, viceroy of Nueva Espanna. Dated in Culiacan, the 8. of March 1539.

HE saith that Frier Marcus de Ni$a arrived in the Province of Topira, where he found all the Indians fled unto the mountaines for feare of the Christians, and that for his sake they came all downe to see him, with great joy & boldnesse. They are men of good making, and whiter then others, and their women are more beautifull then others of the neighbourprovinces. There are no great cities there, yet are the houses built of stone, and are very good, and in them Store of golde, they have great store of gold, which is as it were silver, and [ost} because they know not what use to put it to. ^inTopira^5 The people weare Emeralds and other precious jewels [III. 363.] upon their bodies: they are valiant, having very strong armour made of silver, fashioned after divers shapes 116

of beasts. They worship for their gods such things as they have in their houses, as namely hearbes, and birdes, and sing songs unto them in their language, which differeth but litle from that of Culiacan. They told the Frier that they were willing to become Christians, and the Emperors subjects, for they were without a governour; with condition that no man should hurt them: and that they would change their golde for such things as they wanted. Commandement was given, that they should bee received without doing them any displeasure. Neere unto this countrey there is another Province heretofore discovered by our men, where the people go naked without any thing before them: they are very hardly reduced to Christianitie, and they are valiant and stoute. Their houses are covered with straw: They seeke no other riches but to feede cattel. They goe at certaine seasons to their sacrifices into a valley situate in that Province, which is inhabited with people, esteemed by those of the countrey as saints and priests, whom they call Chichimecas, which dwell in the woods without houses: and they eate such things as they of the countrey give them of almes. They goe naked, and are tanned in the smoke, and tye their privie member with a string unto their knee, and the women likewise goe starke naked. They have certain temples covered with strawe, with small round windowes full of the skuls of dead men; before their temple is a great round ditch, the brim whereof is compassed with the figure of a serpent made of gold and silver, and with another mixture of unknowen metals : and this serpent holdeth his tayle in his mouth. They of this valley from time to time cast lots, whose lucke it shal be to be sacrificed, and they make him great cheere, on whom the lotte falleth, and with great joy they crowne him with flowers upon a bed prepared in the sayd ditch all full of flowres and sweete hearbes, on which they lay him along, and lay great store of dry wood on both sides of him, and set it on fire on eyther part, and so

117

he dyeth. Where he continueth so quietly without being bound, as though hee did something, wherein he tooke great pleasure. And they say that hee is a Saint, and doe worshippe him for that yeere, and sing prayses, and Hymnes unto him, and afterward set up his head with the rest in order within those windowes. Also they sacrifice their prisoners, whom they burne in another deeper ditch, and not with the foresayde ceremonies. The Spanyards which are in Xalisco write, that having good assistance, they hope that those people will become Christians. The Countrey is very good and fruitfull, and hath great store of good and wholesome waters.

A Letter of Francis Vazquez de Coronado, Governour of Nueva Galicia, to the lord Don Antonio de Mendosa, Viceroy of Nueva Espanna. Dated in Saint Michael of Culiacan the 8. of March, 1539.

Of the hard passage from Saint Michael of Culiacan to Topira. The description of that Province, and of another neere unto the same, very rich in gold and precious stones. The number of the people which Vazquez caried with him in his journey thither ; and how greatly Frier Marcus of Ni^a is honoured by the Indians of Petatlan.

Y the helpe of God I meane to set forward from this City of S. Michael of Culiacan toward Topira the 10. of April: neither can I any sooner set forward, because the powder and match which your Lordship sendeth mee, cannot be brought thither before that time, and I thinke it be now

in Compostella. Besides this, I am to passe many leagues over mightie high mountaines, which reach up to the skyes, and over a River, which at this present is so bigge and swolne, that it can in no place be waded over.

118
