The foresayd Francis Lopez de Gomara in his generali historic or the West Indies, Chap. 215. writeth in maner following of certaine great and strange beasts never seene nor heard of in our knowen world of Asia, Europe, and Africa : which somewhat resembling our oxen, having high bunches on their backes like those on the backes of Camels, are therefore called by him Vacas corcobados, that is to say, Crooke-backed oxen, being very deformed & terrible in shewe, and fierce by nature : which notwithstanding for foode, apparell, and other necessarie uses, are most serviceable and beneficiall to the inhabitants of those countreys. He reported also in the same chapter of certaine strange sheepe as bigge as horses, and of dogs which use to carie burthens of 50. pound weight upon their backes.

A LI the way betweene Cicuic and Quivira is a most plaine soyle, without trees and stones, and hath but fewe and small townes. The men clothe and shooe themselves with lether ; and the women which are esteemed Captain Fro-for their long lockes, cover their heads and secrets with bisher brought the same. They have no bread of any kinde of graine, int0 England as they say: which I account a very great matter. Mita Their chiefest foode is flesh, and that oftentimes they 5 ' eate rawe, either of custome or for lacke of wood.

They eate the fatte as they take it out of the Oxe, and drinke the blood hotte, and die not therewithal!, though the ancient writers say that it killeth, as Empedocles and others affirmed, they drinke it also colde dissolved in water. They seeth not the flesh for lacke of pots, but rost it, or to say more properly, warme it at a fire of Oxe-dung: when they eate, they chawe their meate but little, and raven up much, and holding the flesh with their teeth, they cut it with rasors of stone, which seemeth to be great bestialitie: but such is their maner of living and fashion. They goe together in companies, and moove from one place to 167

The description of the oxen ofQuivira.

Sheepe as big as horses.

Mightie dogs carrying 50. pound weight.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

another, as the wilde Moores of Barbarie called Alarbes doe, following the seasons and the pasture after their Oxen.

These Oxen are of the bignesse and colour of our Bulles, but their homes are not so great. They have a great bunch upon their fore shoulders, and more haire on their fore part then on their hinder part: and it is like wooll. They have as it were an horse-mane upon their backe bone, and much haire and very long from the knees downeward. They have great tuffes of haire hanging downe their foreheads, and it seemeth that they have beardes, because of the great store of haire hanging downe at their chinnes and throates. The males have very long tailes, and a great knobbe or flocke at the end : so that in some respect they resemble the Lion, and in some other the Carnell. They push with their homes, they runne, they overtake and kill an horse when they are in their rage and anger. Finally, it is a foule and fierce beast of countenance and forme of bodie. The horses fledde from them, either because of their deformed shape, or else because they had never seene them. Their masters have no other riches nor substance: of them they eat, they drinke, they apparel, they shooe themselves: and of their hides they make many things, as houses, shooes, apparell and ropes : of their bones they make bodkins : of their sinewes and haire, threed : of their homes, mawes, and bladders, vessels : of their dung, fire : and of their calves-skinnes, budgets, wherein they drawe and keepe water. To bee short, they make so many things of them as they have neede of, or as many as suffice them in the use of this life.

There are also in this countrey other beastes as big as horses, which because they have homes and fine wool, they cal them sheepe, and they say that every home of theirs weigheth is fiftie pound weight.

There are also great dogs which will fight with a bull, and will carrie fiftie pound weight in sackes when they 168

goe on hunting, or when they remoove from place to place with their flockes and heards.

El Viaje que Hizo Antonio de Espejo en el [HI. 38? ] anno de ochenta y tres: el qual con sus com-panneros descubrieron una tierra en que hallaron quinze Provincias todas llenas de pueblos, y de casas de quatro y cinco altos, a quien pusieron por nombre El Nuevo Mexico, por parecerse en muchas cosas al viejo. Esta a la parte del norte, y se cree que por ella, y por poblado, se puede venir hasta Hegar a la tierra que Haman del Labrador.

Del Nuevo Mexico, y de su descubrimiento, y lo que del se sabe.

A dixe en el titulo del libro, que el anno Nuevo de mil y quinientos y ochenta y tres, se Mexic0-avian descubierto quinze Provincias, aquien los inventores llamaron El nuevo Mexico en la tierra firme de Nueva Espanna, y prometi de dar noticia del descubrimiento, como lo hare con la

mayor brevedad que sea possible, porque si uviera de poner diffusamente todo lo que vieron y supieron, fuera menester hazer dello nueva historia. La substancia dello es, que el anno de mil y quinientos y ochenta y uno, teniendo noticia un Religioso de la Orden de sant Francisco, que se llamava fray Augustin Ruyz, que Augustin morava en el valle de sant Bartholome, por relation ^z. de ciertos Indios. Conchos que se comunicavan con otros sus convezinos llamados Passaguates : que hazia la parte del Norte (caminando siempre por tierra) avia ciertas poblaciones grandes, y nunca sabidas de nuestros Espannoles, ni descubiertas, con zelo de caridad, y de salvacion de las almas, pidio licencia al

169
