The tenth and last is, for that hee hath brought his yeerely revenues to two millions of gold.

By these courses and meanes, wee are in good hope that firme peace will bee established in all these king-domes, and also that a fit way will be prepared, for the conversion of all the great lordes unto Christian religion.

A briefe note concerning an extreme Northerne province of Japan called Zuegara, situate thirtie dayes journey from Miac6, which argueth the Isle of Japan to be of greater extension Northward, then it is ordinarily described in maps, or supposed to be: together with mention of a certaine nation of Tartars called Jeza inhabiting on the maine to the North of China, never heard of in these parts before: taken out of an Epistle written 1596 from Japan by Fryer Luis Frois unto Claudius Aquaviva, &c. Printed in Latine at Mentz in Germanic 1599.

Ot many dayes ago was baptized a certaine honourable personage called John Vongui the sonne of Taigarandono, who is gover-nour of a certaine princedome situate on the borders of Japan towardes the North, being distant from Miac6 thirtie dayes journey.

And after a few lines it followeth.

This Taigorandono being the most Northerly gover-nour in all Japan hath traffique with the Jezi, who are a nation of Tartars, which from the maine continent resort unto the Isle of Mateumai, being about twelve or Bf fifteene leagues distant from the foresayd Northerly Mateumai-princedome of Zuegara; where they sell fishes, the skinnes of beasts, and certaine herbes of the sea used by [III. 862.]

441

Jezi a nation of ‘Tartars dweUingonthe continent to the North of China using cloth.

The Master.

THE ENGLISH VOYAGES

the Japonians for foode, with other such like commodities. On the other side the said Jezi Tartari buy of the Japonians, cloth to make them garments, with weapons and other instruments. These Tartars (they say) are a most barbarous kinde of people, of a browne colour, with long haire on their heads and beardes like the Moscovites: they live by hunting and fishing, and neglect husbandry. This Northerly princedome of Zuegara (as the sayd governour reported to our Fathers) aboundeth with excellent grapes both black and white, which without the labour of man grow naturally in all places, and he promised the Fathers to bring some of these vines to Miac6, that they might be planted there.

Advertisements touching the shippes that goe from Sivil to the Indies of Spaine ; together with some notes of the Contractation house in Sivil.

The Pilot.

Our Pilot must be examined in the Contractation house, and allowed by such as be appointed for the examination of Pilots, that hee be a sufficient man to take the charge in hand, and that which belongeth thereunto, and to governe and lead the same ship directly by his onely commande-

ment to such ports as are convenient for the voyage that hee taketh in hand.

You must have a Master, that must give in sureties to the value of 6000 dukats: and such as be his sureties must be landed men, and their lands worth to the value of that summe aforesayd, if the sayd ship be betweene three or foure hundred tunnes. And if shee be more or lesse of burthen, then he must give sureties of a greater summe or lesse, according to the proportion of her burden.

He shall in all his voyage give a just and true accompt of all such goods, and marchandizes, as shall in all that 442
