a view of the present state of Ireland Edmund Spenser a note on the renascence edition text : this html etext of a veue of the present state of Ireland [ 1596 ] be prepare from the text find in Grosart [ 1894 ] and check with renwick edition of the Rawlinson mrs. [ scholartis , 1934 ] by Risa S. bear at the university of Oregon . this edition be copyright © the university of Oregon , January , 1997. it be make available for nonprofit use only . a veue of the present state of Ireland . discourse by way of a dialogue between Eudoxus and IRENIUS . Eudoxus . but if that country of Ireland whence you late come , be so goodly and commodious a soil as you report , i wonder that no course be take for the turn thereof to good use , and reduce that savage nation to better government and civility . Irenius : mary , so there have be diverse good plot devise , and wise counsel cast already about reformation of that realm , but they say it be the fatal destiny of that land , that no purpose , whatsoever be mean for her good , will prosper and take good effect : which , whether it proceed from the very genius of the soil , or influence of the star , or that almighty god have not yet appoint the time of her reformation , or that he reserve she in this unquiet state still , for some secret scourge , which shall by she come unto England , it be hard to be know , but yet much to be fear . Eudox : sure i suppose this but a vain conceit of simple man , which judge thing by their effect , and not by their cause ; for i will rather think the cause of this evil , which hang upon that country , to proceed rather upon the unsoundness of the counsel , and plot , which you say have be oftentimes lay for her reformacon , or of faintness in follow and effect the same , then of any such fatal course or appointment of god , as you misdeme ; but it be the manner of man , that when they be fall into any absurdity , or their action succeed not as they will , they be ready always to impute the blame thereof unto the heaven , so to excuse there own folly and imperfection : so have i also hear it often wish , ( even of some whose great wisdom in [ my ] opinion shall seem to judge more sound of so weighty a consideracon ) that all that land wear a sea-poole ; which kind of speech , be the manner rather of desperate man far drive , to wish the utter ruin of that which they can redress , then of grave counsellor , which ought to think nothing so hard , but that through wisdom it may be master and subdue ; since the poet say , that the wiseman shall rule even over the star , much more over the earth : for be it not the part of a desperate physician to wish his disease patient dead , rather than to employ the best endeavour of his skill for his recovery : but since we be so far enter , let we i pray you , devise of those evil , by which that country be hold in this wretched case , that it can , as you say , be recure . and if it be not painful to you , to tell we what thing during your late continuance there , you observe , to be most offensive , and impeachfull unto the good rule and government thereof . iron : sure , Eudox . , the evil which you desire to be recount be very many , and almost countable with those which be hide in the basket of Pandora : but since you so please , i will out of that infinite number , reckone but some that be most capital , and common occurrent both in the life and condition of private man , and also in the manage of public affair and policy . the which you shall understand to be of diverse nature , as i observe they : for some of they be of very great antiquity and long continuance ; other more late and of less endurance ; other daily grow and increase continual , as the evil occasion be every day offer . Eudox : tell they , i pray you , in the same order that you have now rehearse they ; for there can be no better method than this which the very matter itself offer . and when you have reckon all the evil , let we hear your opinion for redress of they . after which there will perhaps of it self appear some reasonable way to settle a sound and perfect rule of government by shun the former evil , and follow the offer good . the which method we may learn of the wise physician , which first require that the malady be know thorough and discover : afterward do teach how to cure and redress it : and last do prescribe a diet with strait rule and order to be daily observe , for fear of relapse into the former disease , or fall into some other more dangerous than it . iron : i will then accord to your advisement , begin to declare the evil which seem to be most hurtful to the comon-weale of that land : and first , those which i say be most ancient and long grow : and they be also of 3 kind ; the first in the law , the second in custom , the last in religion . Eudox : why , Irenius , can there be any evil in the law ? can thing which be ordain for the safety and good of all , turn to the evil and hurt of they ? This well i wot both in that state and in all other , that be they not contain in doutie with fear of law which restrain offence , and inflict sharp punishment to misdoer , no man shall enjoy any thing , every man hand will be against another . therefore in find fault with the law i doubt i you shall much over-shote your self , and make i the more dislike your other dislike of that government . iron : the law Eudoxus , i do not blame for they self , know that all law be ordain for the good of the common weal and for repress of licensiousnesse and vice : but it fall out in law , no otherwise then it do in physic , which be at first devise , and be yet daily mean and minister for the health of the patient : but nevertheless we often see that either through ignorance of the disease , or unseasonableness of the time , or other accident come between , in stead of good it work hurt , and out of one evil , throw the patient into many misery : so the law be at first intend for the reformacon of abuse , and peaceable continuance of the subject : but be since either disannul or quite prevaricate through change and alteration of time , yet be they still good in they self : but to that common wealth which be rule by they they work not that good which they shall , and sometime also perhaps that evil which they will not . Eudox : whether do you mean this by the common law of the realm or by the statute law and act of parliament ? iron : sure by they both : for even the common law , be that which William of Normandy bring in with his conquest and lay upon the neck of England , though it perhaps fit well with the state of England then be , and be ready obey through the power of the commander which have before subdue the people to he , and make easy way to the set of his will ; yet with the state of Ireland peradventure it do not so well agree , be a people altogether stubborn and untamed and , if it be once tame , yet now late have quite shake of their yoke and break the band of their obedience . for England , before the entrance of the conqueror , be a unpeaceable kingdom , and but late enter to the mild and godly government of king Edward surname the confessor ; beside now late grow unto a loathe and detestation of the unjust and tyrannous rule of Harold , a usurper , which make they the more willing to accept of any reasonable condicon and order of the new victor , think sure it can be no worse than the latter , and hope well it will be as good as the former : yet what the proof of the first bring in and establish of the law be , be to many full bitter make know . but with Ireland it be far otherwise : for it be a nation ever acquaint with war , though but amongst they self , and in their own kind of military discipline , train up from their youth : which they have never yet be teach to lay aside , nor make to learn obedience unto the law , scarce to know the name of law , but in stead thereof have always preserve and keep there own law , which be the Brehon law . Eudox : what be that which you call the Brehon law ? it be a word unto we altogether unknown . iron : it be a certain rule of right , unwritten , but deliver by tradition from one to a other , in which oftentimes there appear great show of equity , in determine the right between part and party , but in many thing repugn quite from god law and man , as for example , in the case of murder . the Brehon that be the judge , will compound between the murderer , and the friend of the party murder , which prosecute the action , that the malefactor shall give unto they , or to the child , or wife of he that be slay , a recompense , which they call a Iriach ; by which vile law of they , many murder be amongst they make up and smother . and this judge be , as he be call , the lord Brehon , adjudge for the most part a better share unto his lord , that be the lord of the soil , or the head of that septem , and also unto he self , for his judgement , a great portion than unto the plaintiff or party grieve . Eudox : this be a most wicked law indeed : but i trust it be not now use in Ireland , since the king of England have have the absolute dominion thereof , and establish there own law there . iron : yes true , for there be many wide country in Ireland , in which the law of England be never establish , nor any acknowledgement of subjection make : and also even in those which be subdue and seem to acknowledge subjection , yet the same Brehon law be privy practise amongst they self , by reason that dwell as they do , whole nation and sept of the irish together , without any Englishman amongst they , they may do what they listen , and compound or altogether conceal amongst they self there own crime , of which no notice can be have by they which will and may amend the same , by the rule of the law of England . Eudox : what be this which you say ? and be there any part of that realm , or any nacon therein , which have not yet be subdue to the crown of England ? do not the whole realm universal accept and acknowledge our late prince of famous memory , Henry the eight , there owne king and liege lord ? iron : yes , very : in a parliament hold in the time of sir Anthony saint-lege , than lord deputy , all the irish lord and principal man come in , and be by fair mean wrought thereunto , acknowledge king Henry for their sovereign lord , reserve yet , as some say , unto they self , all their own former privilege and signory inviolate . Eudox : then by that acceptance of his sovereignty they also accept of his law : why then shall any other law be now use amongst they ? iron : true it be that thereby they bind they self to his law and obedience , and in case it have be follow against they , as it shall have be , and a government thereupon present settle amongst they agreeable thereunto , they shall have be reduce to perpetual civility and contain in continual duty : but what boot it to break a colt , and to let he straight run lose at random ? so be this people at first well handle , and wise bring to acknowledge allegiance to the king of England : but be straight leave unto they self , and there own inordinate life and manner , they eftsoon forget what before they be teach , and so soon as they be out of sight by they self , shake of their bridle , and begin to colt anew , more licensious than before . Eudox : it be great pity , that so good a opportunity be omit , and so happy a occasion foreslack , that may have breed the eternal good of that land : but do they not still acknowledge that submission ? iron : no , they do not ; for now the heir and posterity of they which yield , the same be , as they say , either ignorant thereof , or do willing deny , or steadfast disavow it . Eudox : how can they so do just ? do not the act of the parent , in any lawful grant or conveyance , bound his heir forever thereunto ? sith then the ancestor of these that now live yield they self their subject and liege man , shall it not tie their child to the same subjection ? iron : they say no : for their ancestor have have no estate in any their land , signory , or hereditament , long than during their own life , as they allege : for all the irish do hold their land by tanistry , which be to say , no more but a personal estate for his life-time , that be tanist . by reason that he be admit thereunto by election of the country . Eudox : what be this you call tanist and tanistry ? they be name and term never hear of or know to we . iron : it be a custom amongst all the irish , that present after the death of any their chief lord or captain , they do present assemble they self to a place , general appoint and know unto they , to choose a other in his stead : where they do nominate and elect , for the most part , not the old son , nor any of the child of their lord decease , but the next to he of blood , that be , the elder and worthy , as common the next brother unto he , if he have any , or the next couzine germane , or so forth , as any be old in that kindred or sept : and then next to he do those choose the next of the blood to be tanist , who shall next succeed he in the say Captenry , if he live thereunto . Eudox : do they use any ceremony in this election ? for all barbarous nacon be common great observer of ceremony and superstitious right . iron : they use to place he that shall be their captain , upon a stone always reserve for that purpose , and place common upon a hill : in many of the which i have see the foot of a man form and grave , which they say be the measure of their first captain foot , whereon he stand receive a oath to preserve all the former ancient custom of the country inviolable , and to deliver up the succession peaceable to his tanist , and then have a wand deliver unto he by some , who proper office that be : after which , descend from the stone , he turn he self round , thrice forward and thrice backward . Eudox : but how be the tanist choose ? iron : they say he set but one foot upon the stone , and receive the like oath the captain do . Eudox : have you ever hear what be the occasion and first beginning of this custom ? for it be good to know the same , and may perhaps discover some secret meaning and intent therein , very material to the state of that government . iron : i have hear that the beginning and cause of this ordinance amongst the irish , be special for the defence and maintenance of their land in their posterity , and for exclude all innovacon or alienation thereof unto stranger and especial to the english : for when the captain die , if the signiory shall descend unto his child , and he perhaps a infant , a other may perhaps step in between and thrust he out by strong hand , be then able to defend his right , or to withstand the force of a forayner : and therefore they do appoint the elder of the kin to have the signiory , for that he common be a man of strong year , and better experience to maintain the inheritance , and to defend the country , either against the next border lord , which use common to encroach one upon another as each one be strong , or against the english , which they think lie still in wait to wipe they out of their land and territory . and to this end the tanist be always ready know , if it shall happen the captain sudden to die or be slay in battle , or to be out of the country , to defend and keep it from all such doubt and danger . [ f ] or which cause the tanist have also a share of the country allot unto he , and certain cut and spend upon all the inhabitant under the lord . Eudox : when i hear this word tanist it bring to my remembrance what i have read of Tania , that it shall signify a province or seignory [ as ] Aquitania , Lusitania , and Britania , the which some do think to be derive of Dania , that be , from the Dane : but , i think , amiss , for sure it seem that it come ancient from those barbarous nacon that overrane the world , which possess those dominion , whereof they be now so call . and so it may well be that from thence the first original of this word tanist and tanistry come , and the custom thereof have since , as many other , else be continue : but to that general subjection of the land , whereof we former speak , i seem that this custom or tenure can be no bar nor impeachment , sing that in open parliament by their say acknowledgement they waive the benefit thereof , and submit they self to the ordinance of their new sovereign . iron : yea but they say , as i erst tell you , that they reserve their title , tenor , and signory whole and sound to they self , and for proof allege that they have ever since remain to they untouched , so as now to alter they they say shall be a great wrong . Eudox : what remedy be there then , or mean to avoid this inconvenience , for , without first cut out this dangerous custom , it seem hard to plant any sound ordinance , or reduce they to a civil government , since all their evil custom be permit unto they . iron : sure nothing hard ; for by this act of parliament whereof we speak , nothing be give to king Henry , which he have not before from his ancestor , but only the bare name of a king : [ f ] or all other absolute power of principality he have in he self before derive from many former king , his famous progenitor and worthy conqueror of that land , the which since they first conquer and by force subdue unto they , what need he afterward to enter into any such idle term with they to be call there king , when as it be in the power of the conqueror to take upon he self what title he will over his dominion conquer : for all be the conqueror , as Tully to Brutus say : and therefore i seem in stead of so great and meritorious a service , as they boast they perform to the king , in bring all the irish to acknowledge he for their liege , they do great hurt to his title , and have leave a perpetual gall in the mind of that people , who before be absolute bind to his obedience , be now tie but with term whereas both their life , their land , and their liberty be in his from power to appoint , what tenor , what law , what condition he will over they , which be all his : against which there can be no rightful [ re ] sistance , or if there be , he may , when he will , establish they with a strong hand . Eudox : yea , but perhaps it seem better unto that noble king to bring they by their own accord to his obedience , and to plant a peaceable government amongst they , then by such violent mean to pluck they under . neither yet have he thereby lose any thing that he former have : for have all before absolute in his own power , it remain so still , he have neither forgive nor forego anything thereby unto they , but have receive something from they , that be a more voluntary and loyal subjection . so as her majesty may yet , when it shall please she , alter any of those former ordinance or appoint other law , that may be moor both for her own behoof , and for the good of that people . iron : not so , for it be not so easy , now that thing be grow into a habit and have their certain course , to change the channel , and turn their stream a other way ; for they may have now a colourable pretence to withstand such innovasion , have accept of other law and rule already . Eudox : but you say they do not accept of they , but delight rather to lean to the old custom and Brehon law , though they be much more unjust , and also more inconvenient for the common people , as by your late relation of they i gather . as for the law of England , they be sure most just and most agreeable both with the government and with the nature of the people : how fall it out then , that you seem to dislike of they , as not so meet for that realm of Ireland , and not only the common law , but also the statute and act of parliament , which be special provide and intend for the only benefit thereof ? iron : i be about to have tell you my reason therein , but that you your self draw i away with other question , for i be show you by what mean , and in what sort , the positive law be first bring in and establish by the norman conqueror : which be not by he devise , nor apply to the state of the realm then be , nor as it may best be , ( as shall by lawgiver be principal regard , ) but be indeed the very law of his own country of Normandy : the condicon whereof , how far it differ from this of England , be apparent to every least judgement . but to transfer the same law for the govern of the realm of Ireland , be much more inconvenient and unmeet : for he find a better advantage of the time , then be in the plant of they in Ireland , and follow the execution of they with more severity , and be also present in person to overloke the magistrate , and to over awe the subject with the terror of his sword , and countenance of his majesty . but not so in Ireland : for they be otherwise effect , and yet not so remain , so as the same law , i seem , can ill fit with their disposition , or work that reformacon that be wish : for law ought to be fashion unto the manner and condicon of the people to who they be mean , and not to be impose upon they accord to the simple rule of right : for then , as i say , in stead of good they may work ill , and pervert justice to extreme injustice : [ f ] or he that will transfer the law of the lacedaemonian to the people of Athens shall find a great absurdity and inconvenience : for those law of Lacedaemon be devise by Lycurgus , as most proper and best agree with that people , who he know to be incline altogether to war , and therefore whole train they up even from their cradle in arm and military exercise , clean contrary to the institution of Solon , who , in his law to the athenian labour by all mean to temper their warlike courage with sweet delight of learning and science , so that as much as the one excel in arm , the other exceed in knowledge : the like regard and moderation ought to be have in temper and manage of this stubburn nation of the irish , to bring they from their delight of licentious barbarism unto the love of goodness and civility . Eudox : i can see how that may better be then by the discipline of the law of England : for the english be , at first , as stout and war like a people as ever be the irish , and yet you se be now bring to that civility , that no nacon in the world excel they in all godly conversacon , and all the study of knowledge and humanity . iron : what they now be , both you and i see very well ; but by how many thorny and hard way they be come thereunto , by how many civil broil , by how many tumultuous rebellion , that even hazard [ ed ] often time the whole safety of the kingdom , may easy be consider : all which they nevertheless fair overcome , by reason of the continewal presence of the king , whose only person be oftentimes in stead of a army , to contain the unruly people from a thousand evil occasion , which that wretched kingdom , be for want thereof daily carry into . the which when they so make head , no law , no penalty can restrain , but that they do in the violence of that fury , tread down and trample under foot all both divine and humane thing , and the law themselves they do special rage at , and rend in piece , as most repugnant to their liberty and natural freedom , which in their madness they effect . Eudox : it be then a very unseasonable time to plead law , when sword be in the hand of the vulgar , or to think to retain they with fear of punishment when they look after liberty and shake of all government . iron : then so it be with Ireland continual , for the sword be never yet out of their hand , but when they be weary with war , and bring down to extreme wretchedness ; then they creep a little perhaps , and few for grace , till they have get new breath and recover strength again : so it be in vain to speak of plant of law and plot of policy till they be altogether subdue . Eudox : be they not so at the first conquer of they by strangbowe , in the time of king Henry the second ? be there not a thorough way then make by the sword , for the impose of the law upon they ? and be they not then execute with such mighty hand as you say be use by the norman conqueror ? what odds be there then in this case ? why shall not the same law take as good effect in that people , as they do here , be in like sort prepare by the sword , and bring under by extremity ? and why shall it not continue in as good force and vigour for the contain of the people ? iron : the case yet be not like ; but there appear great odds between they ; for by the conquest of Henry the second , true it be that the irish be utter vanquish and subdue , so as no enemy be able to hold up his head against his power : in which there weakness he bring in his law , and settle they as now they there remain , like as William the conqueror do : so as in thus much they agree , but in the rest , that be , the chief , they vary : for to who do king Henry the second impose those law , not to the irish , for the most part of they flee from his power into desert and mountaynee , leave the wide country to the conqueror , who in their stead eftsoon place english man , who possess all the land and do quite shut out the irish , or the most part of they : and to those new inhabitant and colony he give his law , to weet , the same law under which they be bear and breed , the which it be not difficult to place among they , be former well enter thereunto ; unto who afterward there repair diverse of the poor distress people of the irish for succour and relief : of who , such as they think fit for labour , and industrious dispose , as the most part of their base sort be , they receive unto they as their vassal , but scarce vouchsafe to impart unto they the benefit of those law , under which they self live , but every one make his will a commandment and a law unto his own vassal . thus be not the law of England ever proper apply unto the irish nacon , as by a purposte plott of government , but as they can insynuate and steal they self under the same by their humble carriage and submission . Eudox : how come it then to pass , that have be once so low bring , and thorough subject they afterward lift they self so strong again , and sithence do stand stiff against all rule and government ? iron : they say that they continue in that lowliness until the time that the division between the house of Lancaster and York arise for the crown of England : at which time all the great english lord and gentleman which have great possession in Ireland , repair over hither into England , to succour their ffriend here and to strengthen their party for to obtain the crown : other to defend there land and possession against such as hover after the same upon hope of the alteracon of the kingdom , and success of that side which they have favour and effect . then the irish who they before have banish into the mountain , where they live only upon white meat , as it be record : see now there so dispeople land weaken , come down into all the plain adjoin , and thence expel those few english that remain , repossesste they again ; since which time they have remain in they , and grow great , have bring under they many of the english which be before their lord . this be one of the occasion by which all those country which , lie near unto any mountain or irish desert , which have be plant with english , be short displant and lose . as namely in monster , all the land adjoin unto Slowlougher , Arlo , and the bog of Allon . in Connaght , all the country border upon the culver ; Montroo , and orourke country . in Leinster all the land neighbour unto the mountain of glanmull , unto Shellelagh , unto the Briskbagh , and Poulmont . in Ulster , all the country near unto Tirconnell , Tyronne , and Hertellagh , and the Scot . Eudox : sure this be a great violence : but yet by your speech it seem that only the country and valley near adjoin unto those mountain and desert , be thus recover by the irish : but how come it now that we see almost all that realm repossess of they ? be there any more such evil occason grow by the trouble of England ? or do the irish , out of these place so by they get , break further and stretch they self out through the whole land ? but now for aught that i can understand , there be no part but the bare english pale , in which the irish have not the great footing . iron : both out of these small beginning by they get near to the mountain , do they spread they self into the inland country ; and also , to their further advantage , there do other like unhappy accident happen out of England , which give heart and good opportunity to they to regain their old possession . for in the reign of king Edward the four , thing remain yet in the same state that they be after the late break out of the irish , which i speak of : and that noble prince begin to cast a eye unto Ireland , and to mind the reformacon of thing there run amiss : for he send over his brother the worthy duke of Clarence , who have marry the heir of Larie , and by her have all the Erledom of Ulster , and much in meathe and in monster , very careful go about in the redressinge of those late evil : and though he can not beat out the irish again , by reason of his short continuance , yet he do shut they up within those narrow corner and glens under the mountain foot in which they lurk , and so keep they from break any further , by build strange hold upon every border , and fortify all passage : amongst the which he build the castle of Clare in Thurmond : of which country he have the inheritance , and of mortymer land adjoin , which be now by the irish call killalowe . but the time of that good king grow troublesome , do let the thorough reformacon of all thing . and thereunto soon after be add another fatal mischief , which wrought a great calamity than all the former . for the say duke of Clarence , than lord lieutenant of Ireland , be by practice of evil person about the king his brother , call thence away , and soon after by synister mean be clean make away . present after who death all the north revolt , do set up Oneale for their captain , be before that of small power and regard : and there arise in that part of Thomond , one of the o-bryens , call Murrogh en ranagh , that be , morris of the ffarme , or waste wild place : who , gather unto he all the relic of the discontent irish , eftsoon surprise the say castle of Clare , burn and spoil all the english there dwell , and in short space possess all the country beyond the river of Shenan and near adjoin . whence short break forth like a sudden tempest , he overrun all monster and Connnaught , break down all the hold and fortress of the english , deface and utter subvertinge all corporate town that be not strong wall : for those he have no mean nor engine to overthrow ; neither indeed will he stay at all about they , but speedy run forward , count his suddenness his most vantage , that he may overtake the english before they can fortify or gather they self together . so in short time he clean wipe out many great town , as first in chegin , then killalowe , before call clarryfort ; afterward Tharles , mourn , Buttevant , and many other , viz. [ blank line ] who name i can not remember , and of some of which there be now no memory nor sign remain . upon report whereof there flock unto he all the scume of the irish out of all place , that ere long he have a mighty army , and thence march forth into lynster , where he wrought great outrage , waste and spoil all the country where he go : for it be his policy to leave no hold behind he , but to make all plain and waste . in the which he soon after create himself king , and be call king of all Ireland ; which before he i do not read that any do so general , but only Edward lee Bruce . Eudox : what , be there ever any general king of all Ireland ? i never hear it before , but that it be always , while it be under the yrishe , divide into four , and sometime into five kingdom or dominion . but this Edward lee Bruce , what be he , that he can make he self king of all Ireland ? iron : i will tell you , that in case you will not challenge i for forget the matter which i have in hand , that be , the inconvenience and unfitness which i suppose to be in the law of the land . Eudox : no sure i have no cause , for neither be this impertynent thereunto ; for sithence you do set your corpse , as i remember , in your first part , to treat of the evil which hinder the peace and good order of that land , amongst which that of the inconvenience of the law be the first which you have in hand , this discourse of the overrunninge and waste of the realm be very material there unto , for that it be the begin of other evil , which sithence have afflict that land , and open a way unto the irish to recover their possession , and to beat out the english which have former win the same . and beside , it will give great light both unto the second and three part , which be the redressinge of those evil , and plant of some good form or policy therein , by renew the remembrance of those occasion and accident , by which those ruin happen , and lay before we the ensample of those time , to be compare with we and to be reward by those which shall have to do in the like . therefore i pray you , tell they unto we , and as for the point where you leave , i will not forget afterwards to call you back again thereunto . iron : this Edward le Bruce , be the brother of king Roberte lee Bruce , who be king of Scotland att such time as king Edward the second reign here in England , and bear a most malicious and spiteful mind against king Edward , do he all the scathe he can , and annoyinge his territory of England , while he be trouble with civil war of his baron att home . he also , to work he the more mischief , send over his say brother Edward , with a power of Scot and redshank into Ireland , where , by mean of the Lacy and of the irish with who they combine , they get footing , and gather unto he all the scatterlyn [ g ] s and outlaw out of all the wood and mountain , in which they long have lurk , march forth into the english pale , which then be chief in the north , from the point of Dunluce , and beyond unto Dublyn : have in the midst of her Knockfergus , Belfast , Armagh ; Carlingforde , which be now the most out-bounde and abandon place in the english pale , and some no part thereof at all : for it stretch now no further than dundalk towards the north . there the say Edward lee Bruce spoil and burn all the old english pale , put to the sword all the english inhabitant , and sack and raze all cytty and corporate town , no less then murro en ranagh , of who i erst tell you : for he waste Belfast , green castle , Kiells , Beltalbott , Castletowne , Newtowne , and many other very good town and strong hold he root out the noble ffamily of the Audleys , the talbotte , the tutchite , the chamberlain , the Mandevilles , and the savage , though of the lord savage there remain yet a heir , that be now a very poor gentleman dwell at the arde . And come last to dundalk , he there make he self king and rain by the space of one whole year , by the name of Edward king of Ireland , until that king Edward of England , have set some quiet in his affair at home , send over the lord John Birmingham to be general of the war against he , who encounter he near to dundalk , overthrow his army and slay he self , and present follow the victory so hot upon his Scot , that he suffer they not to stay , or gather they self together again , until they come to the sea coast . notwithstanding , all the way as they flee , for very rancour and despite , they utter waste and consume whatsoever they have before leave unspoiled ; so that of all town and castle , fort , and bridge and habitacon , he leave not any stick stand , nor any people remain : for those few , which yet survive , flee from his fury further into the english pale that now be . thus be all that godly country utter waste and leave desolate . and as [ it ] yet remain to this day , which before have be the chief ornament and beauty of Ireland . for that part of the north sometime be as populous and plentiful as any part in England , and yield unto the king of England , as yet appear by good record , thirty thousand mark of old money by the piece , beside many thousand of able man to serve they in their war . sure it be yet a most beautiful and sweet country as any be under heaven , seam throughout with many godly river , replenish with all sort of fish most abundant ; sprinkle with very many sweet island and goodly lake , like little inland sea , that will carry even ship upon their water ; adorn with goodly wood , fit for build of house and shipe , so commodious , as that if some prince in the world have they , they will soon hope to be lord of all the sea , and ere long of all the world ; also full of very good port and haven open upon England [ and ] Scotland , as invite we to come unto they , to see what excellent commodity that country can afford , beside the soil it self most fertile , fit to yield all kind of fruit that shall|be commit there unto . and last the heaven most mild and temperate , though somewhat more moist than the part towards the west . Eudox : true Irenius , what with the praise of your country , and what with the lamentable Dysolucon thereof make by those ragtaile in Scotland , you have fill i with a great compassion of their calamity , that i do much pity that sweet land , to be subject to so many evil , as every day i see more and more throw upon she , and do half begin to think , that it be , as you say at the beginning , her fatal misfortune , above all country that i know , to be thus miserable toss and turmoil with these variable storm of affliction : but since we be thus far enter into the consideracon of her mishap , tell i , have there be any more such tempest , as you term they , wherein she have thus wretched be wrack ? iron : very many more , god wot , have there ben , in which her principal part have be tear a sunder , but none that i can remember , so universal as these . and yet the rebellion of Thomas ffitzGarrett do well nigh stretch it self into all part of Ireland . but that , which be in the time of the lord grey , be sure no less general than all these ; for there be no part free from the contagion , but all conspire in one to cast off their subjeccon to the crown of England . nevertheless , through the most wise and valiant handle of that right noble lord , it get not that head which the former evil find ; for in they the realm be leave , like a ship in a storm amid all the rage surge , rule and undirect of any : for they to who she be commit either faint in their labour , or forsake their charge . but he , like a most wise pilott , keep her corpse careful , and hold she most strong against those roar billow , that he bring she safe out of all : so as long after , even by the space of xij or xiij year , she ride at peace , through his only pain and excellent endurance , how ever envy listen to blatter against he . but of this we shall have more occacon to speak at a other time : now ( if it please you ) let we return again unto our first corpse . Eudox : true i be very glad to hear your judgement of the government of that honourable man so sound ; for i have hear it oftentimes malign , and he do deprave of some , who , i perceive , do rather of malicious mind , or private grievance , seek to detract from the honour of his deed and counsel , then of any just cause : but he be nevertheless , in the judgement of all good and wise man , defend and maintain . and now that he be dead , his immortal fame survive , and flourish in the mouth of all the people , that even those which do backbite he , be choke with their own venom , and break their gall to hear his so honourable report : but let he rest in peace , and turn we to our more troublous matter of discourse , of which i be right sorry that you make so short a end , and covet to pass over to your former purpose ; for there be many part of Ireland , which i have hear have be no less vex with the like storm , than these of which you have treat . as the county of the Byrnes and tool near Dublyn , with the insolent outrage and spoil of ffeagh mac Hugh , the country of Carlo , Wexforde , and Waterforde , of the cavenaghe : the country of Leix , kilkennye , and Kildare , of the moor , the country of Offalie , meath and Langford , of the conhour . the country of Westmeath , Cavan , and Louth , of the o rely , the kelly , and many other . so as the discourse of they , beside the pleasure which shall redound out of your history , be also very profitable for matter of policy . iron : all these which you have name , and many more beside , often time have i right well know , to kindle great fire of tumultuous trouble in the county border upon they . all which to rehearse shall rather be to chronicle time , than to search into the reformacon of abuse in that realm : and yet very needful it will|be to consider they , and the evil which they have stir up , that some redress thereof , and prevencon of the evil to come , may thereby rather be devise . but i suppose we shall have a fit opportunity for the same , when we shall speak of the particler abuse and enormity of the government , which will next after these general defect and inconvenience , which i say be in the law , custom , and religion . Eudox : go to they , in god name , and follow the course which you have purpose to your self , for it fit best i must confess with the purpose of our discourse . declare your opinion , as you begin , about the law of the realm , what incommodity you have conceive to be in they , chief in the common law , which i will have think most free from all such dislike . iron : the common law be , as i before say , of it self most rightful and very convenient , i suppose , for the kingdom for which it be first devise ; for this , i think , as it seem reasonable , that out of the manner of the people , and abuse of the country , for which they be invent , they take their first begin , for else they shall be most unjust : for no law of man , accord to the straight rule of right , be just , but as in regard of the evil which they prevent , and the safety of the common weal which they provide for . as for example , in the true ballancinge of justice , it be a flat wrong to punish the thought or purpose of any , before it be enact : for true justice punish nothing but the evil act or wicked word , yet by the law of all kingdom it be a capital crime , to devise or purpose the death of the king : the reason be , for that when such a purpose be effect , it shall be too late to devise of the punishment thereof , and shall turn that commonweal to more hurt by such loss of their prince , than such punishment of the malefactor . and therefore the law in that case punish his thought : for better be a mischief , than a inconvenience . so that jus polliticum , though it be not of it self just , yet by applicacon , or rather necessity , it be make just ; and this only respect make all law just . now then , if these law of Ireland be not likewise apply and fit for that realm , they be sure very inconvenient . Eudox : you reason strong ; but what unfitness do you find in they for that realm ? show we some particular . iron : the common law appoint that all trial , aswell of crime as title and right , shall be make by verdict of jury , choose out of the honestist and most substancal freeholders : now all the ffree-holders of that realm be irish , which when the cause shall fall between a irish man and a english , or between the queen and any ffreeholder of that country , they make no more scruple to pass against the Englisheman or the queen , though it be to strain their oath , than to drink milk unstrain . so that before the jury go together , it be all to nothing what their verdict will be . the trial thereof have i so often see , that i dare confident avouch the abuse thereof : yet be the law of it self , as i say , good ; and the first institucon thereof be give to all englisheman very rightful , but now that the yrishe have step in to the room of the english , who be now become so heedful and provident to keep they forth from thensforth , that they make no scruple of conscience to pass against they , it be good reason that either that corpse of the law for trial be alter , or that other provision for jury be make . Eudox : in sooth , iron : you have discover a point worth the consideracon . for hereby not only the english subject find no indifferency in decide of his cause , be it never so just ; but also the queen , aswell in all plea of the crown , as also for all inquiry of escheat : land attaint , wardshipp , concealment , and all such like , be abuse , and exceed endamage . iron : you say very true ; for i dare undertake , that at this day there be more attaint land , conceal from her majesty , than she have possession in all Ireland : and that be no small inconvenience : for , beside that she lose so much land as shall turn there to her great proffitt , she beside lose so many good subject , which may be assure to she , as those land will yield inhabitant and live unto . Eudox : but do that people , say you , make no moer conscience to perjuer they self in there verdict , and to damn there soul ? iron : not only so in their verdict , but also in all other there deal , special with the english , they be most wilful bend : for though they will not seem manifest to do it , yet will some one or other subtle head fellow amongst they pick some quirk , or devise some subtle evasion , whereof the rest will light take hold of , and suffer they self easy to be lead by he to that they self desire : for in the most apparent matter that can be , the least question or dowbt that can be move , will make stop unto they , and put they quite out of the way . beside that , of they self , they be for the most part , so cautelous and wily head , especial be man of so small experience and practice in law matter , that you will wonder whence they borrow such subtlety and sly shift . Eudox : but i think , this inconvenience may be much help in the judge and chief magistrate which have the choose and nominatinge of those juror , if they will have care to appoint either most Englishman , or such yrisheman as be of the sownd disposition : for we dowbt not but some there be incorruptible . iron : some there be in deed as you say ; but then will the irish party cry out of partiality , and complain he have notjustice , he be not use as a subject , he be not suffer to have the free benefit of the law : and these outcry the magistrate there do much shun , as they have cause , since they be so reddelie hearken unto here ; neither can it be indeed , although the irish party will be content to be so compass , that such english freeholder , which be but few , and such faithful yrishman , which be in deed as few , shall always be choose for trial : for be so few , they shall soon be make weary of their freeholde . and therefore a good care be to be have by all occasion to increase their number , and to plant more by they . but be it so that the jury can be pick out of such choice man as you desire , there will nevertheless be as bad a corrupcon in the trial : for the evidence be bring in by the base irish people , will be as deceitful as the verdict : for they care much less than the other what they swear , and sure their lord may compel they to say any thing : for my self have hear when one of that base sort , which they call charle , be challenge , and reprove for his false oath , have answer confident , that his lord command he , and that it be the least thing he can do for his lord , to swear for he : so inconscionable be these common people , and so little feel have they of god , or their own soul good . Eudox : it be a most miserable case : but what help can there be in this ? for though the manner of the trial shall be alter , yet the proof of every thing must needs be by the testimony of such person as the party shall produce : which if they shall corrupt , however can there any light of truth appear ? what remedy be there for this evil , but to make heavy law and penalty against juror ? iron : i think sure that will do small good : for when a people be incline to any vice , or have no touch of conscience , nor sense of their evil do , it be bootless to think to restrain they by any penalty or fear of punishment ; but either the occacon be to be take away , or a more understand of the right , or shame of the fault be to be imprint . for if Lycurgus shall have make it death for the lacedaemonian to steal , they be a people which natural delight in stealth , or if it shall be make a capital crime for the fflemminge to be take in drunkenness , there shall have be few lacedaemonian soon leave , and few fflemminge : so unpossible it be to remove any fault so general in a people , with terror of law or more sharp restraint . Eudox : what mean may there be then to avoid this inconvenience ? for the cause sure seem very hard . iron : we be not yet come to that point to devise remedy for the evil , but only have now to recompt they ; off the which this that i have tell you be one defect in the common law . Eudox : tell we then , i pray you further , have you any more of this sort in the common law ? iron : by rehearsal of this , i remember also of a other like , which i have often observe in trial to have wrought great hurt and hindrance , and that be , the excepcon which the commonlawe allow a felon in his trial : . for he may have , as you know , xxxvj excepcon peremptory against the juror , of which he shall show no cause , and as many as he will of such , as he can show cause . by which shift there be , as i have show you such small store of honest jury man , he will either put of his trial , or drive it to such man as perhaps be not of the sownd sort , by who mean , if he can acquit he self of the crime , as he be likely , then will he plague such as be bring first to be of his jury , and all such as make any party against he , and when he come forth , will make their cow and garron to walk , if he do not other mischief to their person . Eudox : this be a sly device , but i think may soon be remedy : but we must leave it a while with the rest : in the mean time do you go forward with other . iron : there be another no less inconvenient than this , which be for the trial of accessary to felony : for , by the common law , the accessary can not be proceed against till the principal have receive his trial . now the case often fall in Ireland that a stealth be make by a rebel , or a outlaw , the steal good be convey to some husbandman or gente , which have well to take to , and yet live most by the receipt of such stealth , where they be find by the owner , and handle : whereupon the party perhaps be apprehend and commit to gaol , or put upon surety , till the session , at which the owner , prefer a bill of indictment , prove sufficient the stealth to have be commit upon he by such a outlaw , and to have be find in the possession of the prisoner , against who , nevertheless , no [ coarse ] of law can proceed , nor trial can be have , for that the principal thief be not to be get , notwithstanding that he likewise , stand perhaps indict at once with the receiver , be in rebellion or in the wood , where peradventure he be slay before he be take , and so the receivor clean acquit and discharge of the crime . by which mean the thief be great encourage to steal , and their maintainer embolden to receive their stealth , know how hardly they can be bring to any trial of law . Eudox : true this be a great inconvenience , and a great cause , as you say , of the maintenance of thief , know their receiver always ready ; for , will there be no receiver , there will be no thief . but this , i seem might easy be provide for by some act of parliament , that the receivor be convict by good proof , may receive his trial without the principal . iron : you say very true , eudox : but that be almost impossible to be compass . and herein also you discover another imperfeccon in the course of the common law , and first ordnance of the realm ; for you know that the say parliament must consist of the peer , gentleman , freeholder , and burgess of that realm it self . now these be perhaps they self , or the most part of they ( as may seem by their stiff withstand of this act ) culpable of this crime , or favourer of their friend , which be such by who their kitchen be sometime amend , will not suffer any such statute to pass . yet have it oftentimes ben attempt , and in the time of sir John Perott very earnest , i remember , labour , but by no mean can be effect : and not only this , but many other like , which be as needful for the reformacon of that realm . Eudox : this also be sure a great defect ; but we may not talk , you say , of the redress of this , until our second part come , which be purpose appoint thereunto . therefore proceed to the recount of more such evil , if at jest you have any more . iron : there also be a great inconvenience , which have wrought great dammadge to her majesty , and to that common wealth , through close and collorable conveyance of the land and good of traitor , felon , and fugitive : as , when one of they mind to go into rebellion : he will convey away all his land and lordship to foeffe in trust , whereby he reserve to himself but a state for term of lief which be determine either by the sword or by the halter , their land straight come to the heir , and the queen be defraud of the intent of the law , which lay that grivyous punishment upon traitor to forfeit all their land to the prince , to the end that man may be the rather terrify from commyttinge treason : for many which will little esteem their own life , yet for remorse of their wife and child , shall be withhold from that hayneous crime . This appear plain in the late earl of Desmond : for before his break forth into open rebellion he have convey secret all his land to feoff of trust , in hope to have cut off her majesty from the escheat of his land . Eudox : yea , but that be well enough avoid ; for the act of parliament which give all his land to the queen do , ( as i have hear , ) cut of and frustrate all such conveyaunce , as have any time , by the space of twelve year before his rebellion , be make : within the compass whereof , that fraudulent feoffment , and many other the like of his accompliss and fellow-traytor be contain . iron : very true , but how hardly that act of parliament be wrounge out of they , i can witness : and be it to be compass again , i dare undertake it will never be compass . but be it so that such act may easy be bring to pass against traitor and felon , yet be it not a endless trouble , that no traitor nor felon shall be attaint , but a parliament must be call for bring his land to the queen , which the common law give she . Eudox : then this be no fault of the common law , but of the person which work this fraud to her majesty . iron : yes , mary , for the common law have leave they this benefit , whereof they make advantage , and wrest it to their bad purpose . so as they be thereby the bold to enter into evil accon , know that if the worst befall they , they shall loose nothing but themselves : whereof they seem sure very careless , as Caesar in his commentary say , be very fearless of death . Eudox : but what mean you of fugitive herein ? or how do this concern they ? iron : yes , very great : for you shall understand that there be many ill dispose and undutiful person of that realm , like as in this point there be also in the realm of England , too many , which be man of good inheritance , be for the dislike of religion , or danger of the law into which they be run , or discontent of the present government , flee beyond the sea , where they live under prince that be her majesty profess enemy , and converse and be confederate with other traitor and fugytive which be there abide . the which nevertheless have the benefit and profit of their land here , by pretence of such cullorable conveyance thereof , former make by they to their privy friend here in trust , who secret send over unto they the say revenue , wherewith they be there maintain and enable against her majesty . Eudox : i do not think that there be any such fugitive which be relieve by the profit of their land in England : for there be a straight order take . and if there be any such in Ireland , it be good it be likewise look unto : for this evil may easy be remedy : but proceed . iron : it be also inconvenient in the realm of Ireland , that the ward and marriage of gentleman child shall be in the disposicon of any of these irish lord , as now they be , by reason that their land be hold by knight service of those lord , as now they be . by which mean it come to pass , that those say gentleman child , be thus in the ward of those lord , be not only thereby bring up lewd and irish like , but also for ever after so bind to their service , as that they will run with they into any disloyal accon . Eudox : this grievance , Irenæus , be also complain of in Ingland ; but how can it be remedy ? since the service must follow the tenure of the land , and the land be give away by the king of England to those lord , when they first conquer that realm : and to say the truth , this also will be some prejudice to the prince in her wardship . iron : i do not mean this by the prince ward , but by such as fall into the hand of the irish lord : for i can wish and this i will enforce , that all those wardship be in the prince disposicon , for than it may be hoop that she , for the universal reformacon of that realm , will take better order for the brininge up of those wardship in good nurture , and not suffer they to come into so bad hand . and though these thing be already pass away by her progenitor former grant unto those say lord , yet i can find a way to remedy a great paret thereof , as hereafter , when fit time serve , shall appear . and since we be enter into speech of such grant of former prince to sundry person of that realm of Ireland , i will mencon unto you some other , of like nature to this , and of like inconvenyence , by which the king of England pass unto they a great part of their prerogatyve , which though than it be well intend , and perhaps well deserve of they which receive the same , yet now such a gap of mischief lie open thereby , that i can wish it be stop . of this sort be the grant of the county palletynes in Ireland , which though at first be grant upon good consideracon when they be first conquer , for that those land lie then as a very border to the wild irish , subject to contynewall invasion , so as it be needful to give they great privilege to the defence of the inhabitant thereof ; yet now that it be no more a border , nor frontier with enemy , why shall such pryviledge be any more continue ? Eudox : i will glad know what you call a county Pallentyne , and whence it be so call . iron : it be as i suppose first name Pallatyne of a pale , as it be a pale and defence to their innere land , so as now it be call the english pale , and thereof also be a palsgrave name , that be a earl Palentyne . other think of the latin , Palare , that be , to foraige or outrune , because that marcher and borderer use common so to do . so as to have a county Pallentyne be in effect but to have a privilege to spoil the enemy border adjoin . and sure so it be use at this day , as a privilege place of spoil and stealth ; for the county of tipperarie , which be now the only county Pallentyne in Ireland , be by abuse of some bad one , make a receptacle to rob the rest of the country about it . by mean of who privilege none will follow their stealth , so as it , be scytuate in the very [ lap ] of all the land , be make now a border , which how inconvenient it be , let every man judge . and though that right noble man , that be the lord of that liberty , do pain he self all that he may to yield equal justice unto all , yet can there not but great abuse lurk in so inward and absolute a priviledginge , consideracon whereof be to be respect careful , for the next succession . and much like unto this grant there be also other privilege grant unto most of the corporacons there ; that they shall not be bind to any other government than their own ; that they shall not be charge with any garrison ; that they shall not be travael forth of their own franchise ; that they may buy and sell with thief and rebel ; that all amercement and fine which shall|be ympose upon they shall come unto themselves . all which , though att the time of their first grante they be tolerable , and perhaps reasonable , yet now be most unreasonable and inconvenyent . but all these will easy be cut of with the superior power of her majesties prerogatyve , against which her own grant be not to be plead nor enforce . Eudox : now true , Irenius , you have , meseeme , very well handle this point touch inconvenyence in the common law there , by you observe , and it seem that you have have a mindful regard unto the thing that may concern the good of that realm . and if you can aswell go through with the statute law of that land , i will think you have not lose all your time there . therefore , i pray you , now take they to you in hand and tell we what you think to be amiss in they . iron : the statute of that realm be not many , and therefore we shall the soon run through they . and yet of those few there be sundry impertinent and unnecessary : the which perhaps though at the time of the make of they be very needful , yet now through change of time be clean antiquate , and altogether idle : as that which forbid any to wear their beard all on their upper lip , and none under the chin , and that which put away saffron shirt and smock , and that which restryne the use of guylte bridle and pettronell , and that which appoint to the recorder and clerk of dubline and Drodagh , to take but ijd . for the copy of a plaint , and that which command bow and arrow , and that which make that all Irishmene that shall converse among the english shall take for spy , and so punish , and that which forbid person ameanable to lawa to enter and distrain in the land in the which they have tittle ; and many other the like which i can rehearse . Eudox : these , true , which you have repeat , seem very frivolous and fruitless ; for by the breach of they little damage or inconvenience can come to the commonwealth , nether , indeed , if any transgress they , shall he seem worthy of punishment , scarce of blame , save be that they abide by the name of law . but law ought to be such , as that the keep of they shall be great for the behoof of the commonwealth , and the violate of they shall be very heinous , and sharp punishable . but tell we of some more weighty dislike in the statute then these , and that may be more behoveful import the reformacon of they . iron : there be one or two statute which make the wrongful destrayninge of any man good against the form of common law to be felony . the which statute seem sure to have benn at first mean for the great good of that realm , and for restrain of a foul abuse , which then reign common among that people , and yet be not altogether lay aside ; that when anyone be indebt to another , he will first demand his debt , and if he be not pay , he will straight go and take a distress of his good or cattle , where he can find they , to the value : which he will keep till he be satisfy , and this the simple churl ( as they call he ) do common use to do yet , through ignorance of his misdo , or evil use that have long settle amongst they . but this , though it be sure most unlawful , yet sure i seem to hard to make it death , since there be no purpose in the party to steal the other good , or to conceal the distress , but do it open , for the most part before witness . and again , the same statute be so slack pen , beside that latter of they be so vnsensiblye contryve that it scarce carry any reason in it , that they be often and very easy wrest to the fraud of the subject ; as if one go to distrain upon his land or tenemente , where lawful he may , yet if in do thereof he transgress the jest point of the common law , he straight commit felony . or if one by any other occasion take any thing from another , as boy use sometime to cap one another , the same be straight felony . this be a very hard law . Eudox : nevertheless the evil use of distrayninge another man good , you will not deny but be to be abolish and take away . iron : it be so , but not by take away the subject withal ; for that be to violent a medicine , special this use be permit , and make lawful to some , and to other some , death . as to most of the corporate town there , it be grant by their charter , that they may , every man by himself , without a officer ( for that be more tolerable ) for any debt , to distrain the good of any irish , be find within their liberty , or but pass through their town . and the first permission of this be for that in those time when that grant be make , the irish be not amesnable to law , so as it be not saifetie for the townsman to go to he forth to demand his debt , nor possible [ to ] draw he into law , so that he have leave to be his own bailiff , to arrest his say debtor good within his own franchise . the which the irish sing , think it as lawful for they to distrain the townsmans good in the country where they find it . and so [ by ] ensample of that grant to townsman , they think it lawful , and make it a use to distrain one another good for small debt . and to say truth , i think it hard for every trifle debt of 2 or 3 . to be drive to law , which be so far from they sometime to be seek , for which i think it be a heavy ordinance to give death , especial to a rude man that be ignorant of law , and think a common use or grant to other man a law for himself . Eudox : yea , but the judge , when it come before he to trial , may easy decide this doubt , and lie open the intent of the law by his better discrecon . iron : yea , but it be dangerous to leave the sense of a law unto the reason or will of judge , who be man and may be miscarry , by affection , and many other mean . but the law ought to be like to stony table , plain , steadfast , and ymmoveable . there be also such another statute or twoe , which make coign or lyverye to be treason , no less inconvenient than the former , be , as it be pen , how ever the first purpose thereof be expedient ; for thereby now no man can go into another house for lodging , nor to his own tenant house to take victual by the way , notwithstanding that there be no other mean for he to have lodging or horse meat , nor man meat , there be no inn , nor none otherwise to be buy for money , but that he be indainger to that statute of treason , whensoever he shall happen to fall out with his tenant , or that his say host listen to complain of grevance , as oftentimes i have see they very malishiouslie do through the least provocation . Eudox : i do not well know , but by guess , what you do mean by these term of coign and lyvery : therefore , i pray you explain they . iron : i know not whether the word be english or irish , but i suppose they rather to be ancient english , for the irisheman can make no derivacon or analogy of they . what lyverie be , we by common use do know well enough , that it be allowance of horsemeate , as common they use the word in stabline , as to keep horse at livery ; the which word , as i guess , be deryved of liveringe or deliver forth their nightly food . so in great house , the lyvery be say to be serve up for all night , that be their evening allowance of drink . and lyvery be also call the [ upper ] garment which a serve man wear , so call , as i suppose , for that it be deliver or take from he at pleasure : so it be apparent , that by the word livery be there mean horsemeate , like as by the wordCoigny be understand man meat : but whence the word be deryve be very hard to tell . some say of coin , for that they use [ common ] in their Coignes , not only to take meat , but coin also ; and that that take of money be special mean to be prohibit by that statute : but i think rather this word coignye be deryved of the irish . the which be a common use amongst the chief landelord , to have a common spend upon their tenant ; for all their tenant , be common but tenant att will , they use to take of they what victual they listen , for of victual they be wounte to make small reckon : neither in this be the tennante wrong , for it be a ordinary and know custom , and his lord common use so to covenant with he , which if at any time the tennante dislike , he may free depart at his pleasure . but now by this statute the irish lord be wrong , for that he be cut of from his customary service , of the which this be one , beside many other of the like , as Cuddy , cossherie , Bonnagh , shragh , sorehin , and such other , the which i think at first be custom bring in by the english upon the irish , the which be never wont , and yet be loath to yield any certain rent , but only such spendinge : for their common say be : spend i and defend i . Eudox : sure i take it as you say , that therein the irish lord have wrong , since it be a ancient custom , and nothing contrary to law , for to the willing there be no wrong do : and this right well i wot , that , even here in England , there be in many place as strange custom as that of Coygnie and lyverye . but i suppose by your speech , that it be the first meaning of the [ statute ] to forbid the violent take of victual upon other man tenant against their will , which sure be a great outraige , and yet not so great i seem , as that it shall be make treason : for consider that the nature of treason be concern the royal estate or person of the prince , or practice with his enemy to the derogacon and danger of his crown and dignity , it be hardly wrest to make this treason . but as you erst say , better a mischief than a inconvenience . iron : another statute i remember , which have be a ancyent irish custom be now upon advisement make a english law , and that be call the custom of kincougish , which be , that every head of every sept and every chief of every kindred or family , shall be require answerable and bind to bring forth every one of that sept and kindred under it at all time to be justify , when he shall be require or charge with any treason , felony or other heinous crime . Eudox : why , sure this seem a very necessary law . for consider that many of they be such losell and scatterlinge , as that they can easy by any sheriff , constable , bailiff , or other ordinary officer be get , when they be challenge for any such fact ; this be a very good mean to get they to be bring in by he that be the head of the septem or chief of that house : wherefore i wonder what [ just ] excepcon you can make against the same . iron : true , Eudox . , in the pretence of the good of this statute , you have nothing err , for it seem very expedient and necessary : but the hurt which come thereby be great than the good . for , while every chief of a septem stand so bind to the law for every man that be of his blood or sept that be under he inclusive , every one of his sept be put under he and he be make great by the command of they all . for if he may not command they , than that law do wrong that bind he to bring they forth to be justify : and if he may command they , than he may command they aswell to ill as to good . hereby the lord and captain of the country , the principal and head of sept , be make strong , who it shall be a most special care in policy to weaken , and to set up , and strengthen diverse of his underline against he , which whensoever he shall offer to swerve from duty , may be able to beard he ; for it be very dangerous to leave the command of so many as some septe be , be five or vi thousand person , to the will of one man , who may lead they to what he will , as he himself shall be incline . Eudox : in very deed , Irenius , it be very dangerous , especial sing the disposicon of those people not always inclynable to the best . and therefore i hold it no wisdom to leave unto they , to much command over their kindred , but rather to withdraw their follower from they as as may be , and to gather they under the command of law by some better mean than this custom of kincougish . the which word i will be glad to know what it namely signify , for the meaning thereof i seem to understand reasonabe well . iron : it be a word mingle of english and irish together , so i be part lead to think , that the custom thereof be first english and afterwards irish , for such a other law they have here in England , as i remember , make by king Alured , that every gentleman shall continual bring forth his kindred and follower to the law . so kin be english and Coughish signify affinity in irish . Eudox : sith than that we have thus reasonable handle the inconvenience in the law , let we now pass unto your second part , which be , as i remember , of the abuse of custom ; in which , i seem , you have a fair champion lay open unto you , in which you may at large stretch out your discourse into many sweet remembrance of antiquity , from whence it seem that the custom of that nation proceed . iron : indeed , eudox : you say very true ; for all the custom of the irish which i have very often note and compare with that i have read , will minister occasion of most ample discourse of the first original of they , and the antiquity of that people , which in truth i do think to be more ancient than most that i know in this end of the world ; so as if it be in the handle of some man of sound judgement and plentiful read , it will be most pleasant and profitable . but it may be we may , at some other time of meeting , take occasion to treat thereof more at large . here only it shall suffice to touch such custom of the irish as seem offensive and repugnant to the good government of that realm . Eudox : follow then your own corpse , for i shall the better content my self to forbear my desire now , in hope that you will , as you say , some other time more abuondant satisfy it . iron : before we enter into the treatise of their custom , it be first needful to consider from whence they sproung , for from the sundry manor of the nation , from whence that people which now be call irish be derive , some of the custom which now remain amongst they have benn fetch , and since they have benn contynwed amongst they ; for not of one nation be that people as it be , but of sundry people of different condicon and manner : but the chief which have first possess , and inhabit it , i suppose to be Scythians . Eudox : how come it then to pass , that the irish do derive themselves from Gathelus the Spaniard ? iron : they do indeed , but ( i conceive ) without any good ground . for if there be any such notable transmission of a colony hither out of Spain , or any such famous conquest of this kingdom by Gathelus , a Spaniard , as they will fain believe , it be not unlikely , but the very chronicle of Spain ( have Spain then be in so high regard as they now have it ) will not have omit so memorable a thing , as the subdue of so noble a realm to the Spaniard , no more than they do now neglect to memorize their conquest of the Indians , especial in those time , in which the same be suppose , be near unto the flourish age of learning and writer under the roman . but the irish do herein not otherwise , than our vain Englishman doe in the tale of Brutus , who they devise to have first conqure and inhabit this land , it be as impossible to prove , that there be ever any such Brutus of Albion or England , as it be , that there be any such Gathelus of Spain . but sure the scythian ( of who i erst speak ) which at such time as the northern nation overflow all Christendom , come down to the sea cost , where inquire for other country abroad , and get intelligence of this country of Ireland , find ship convenient , pass over thither , and arrive in the north part thereof , which be now call Ulster , which first inhabit , and afterwards stretch themselves forth into the island as their number increase , name it all of themselves scuttenlande , which more brief be call Scutland , [ or ] Scotland . Eudox : i wonder , Irenius , whether you run so far astray ; for while we talk of Ireland i think you rip up the original of Scotland ; but what be that to this ? iron : sure very much , for Scotland and Ireland be one and the same . Eudox : that seem more strange ; for we all know right well that they be distinguish , with a great sea run between they ; or else there be twoe Scotland . iron : never the more be there twoe Scotland , but twoe kind of Scotts there be indeed , as you may gather out of Buchanan , the one Irine or irish Scotts , the other albyne Scotts ; for those Scot or scythian arrive , as i suppose , in the north part of the island , where some of they afterward pass into the next coast of albyne , now call Scotland , which , after much trouble , they possess , and of themselves name it Scotland ; but in process of time , as be common see , the denominac [ o ] n of the part prevail in the whole , for the irish Scotts put away the name of Scotts , be call only irish , and albyne Scotts , leave the name of albyne , be call only Scot . therefore it come of some writer , that Ireland be call scotia-major , and that which now be name Scotland , be call scotia-minor . Eudox : i do now well understand your distinguish of the twoe sort of Scotts , and twoe scottlands , how that this which be now call Ireland be auncyent call Erine , and afterwards of some write Scotland , and that which be now call Scotland be former call Albyn , before the come of the Scutts thither : but what other nation inhabit other part of Ireland ? iron : after this people thus plant in the north or before , ( for the certainty of time in thing so far from all knowledge can be just avouch ) , another nation come out of Spain arrive in the west part of Ireland , and find it waste , or weak inhabit , possess it ; who whether they be native Spaniard , or Gaul or african or Goth , or some other of those northern nation which do spread all overspread all Christendom , it be impossible to affirm , only some naked conjecture may be gather ; but that out of Spain certain they come , that do all the irish chronicle agree . Eudox : you do very bold , Irenius , venture upon the history of ancient time , and lean too confident unto those irish chronicle which be most fabulous and forge , in that out of they you dare take in hand to lay open the original of a nation so antique , as that no monument remain of her beginning and [ first ] inhabit there ; special have be always without letter , but only bare tradicon of time and remembrance of bard , which use to forge and falsify every thing as they list to please or displease any man . iron : true i must confess i do so , but yet not so absolute as you suppose . but i do herein rely upon those bard or irish chronicle , though the irish themselves , through their ignorance in matter of learning and deep judgement , do most constant believe and avouch they . but unto they beside i add my own read ; and out of they both together , with comparison of time , likeness of manner and custom , affinity of word and name , property of nature and use , resemblance of right and ceremony , monument of church and tomb , and many other like circumstance i do gather a likelihood of truth ; not certain affirm any thing , but by confer of time , language , monument , and such like , i do hunt out a probability of thing , which i leave unto your judgement to believe or refuse . nevertheless there be some very ancient author which make mention of those thing , and some modern , which by compare of they with the present time , experience , and their own reason , do open a window of great light unto the rest , that be yet unseen ; as namely , of the old , Cesar , Strabo , Tacitus , Ptolemie , Pliny , Solinus , Pompeus , Mela , and Berosus ; of the latter , Vincentius , Æneas Silvius , Ludus , Buckhanan , [ of all of which i do give most credit unto Buchanan ] for that he himself , be a irish Scott or Picte by nacon , and be very excellent learn , and industrious to seek out the truth of these thing concern the original of his own people , have both set down the testimony of the auncyent true , and his own opinion withal very reasonable , though in some thing he do somewhat flatter . beside , the bard and irish chronicler themselves , though through desire of please perhaps to much , and ignorance of art and pure learning , they have [ cloud ] the truth of those time ; yet there appear amongst they some relic of the true antiquity , though disguise , which a well eye man may happy discover and find out . Eudox : how can there be any truth in they at all , since the ancient nation which first inhabit Ireland be altogether destitute of letter , much more of learning , by which they may leave the verity of thing write . and those bard come also so many hundred year after , can not know what be do in former age , nor deliver certainty of any thing , but what they feign out of their unlearned head . iron : those bard indeed , Cesar write , deliver no certain truth of any thing , neither be there any certain hold to be take of any antiquity which be receive by tradiccon , since all man be liar , and [ may ] lie when they will ; but yet for auncyentnes of the write chronicle of Ireland , give i leave to say something , not to justify they , but to show that some of they may say truth . for where you say that the irish have always benn without letter , you be therein much deceive , for it be certain , that Ireland have have the use of letter very ancient , and long before England . Eudox : be it possible ? how come it then that they be so barbarous still , and so unlearned , be so old scholar ? for learning as the Poett say , emollit mores nec sinit esse feros : whence then i pray you can they have those letter ? iron : it be hard to say : for whether they at their first come into the land , or afterwards by trade with other nation which hade letter , learn they of they , or devise they amongst themselves , [ it be very doubtful . but that they have letter ancient , it be nothing doubtful , ] for the saxon of England be say to have their letter , and learning , and learned man , from the irish ; and that also appear by the likeness of the character , for the saxon character be the same with the irish . now the scythian never , i can read , of old have letter among they : therefore it seem that they have they from the nation which come out of Spain , for in Spain there be ( as Strabo write ) letter auncyent use , whether bring unto they by the phoenicians , or the persian , which as it appear by he ) have some foot there , or from marseles , which be say to have be inhabit by the greek , and from they to have have the greek character ; of the which marsiliann it be say , that the Gaul learn they first , and use only for the furtherance of their trade and private business : for the Gaul ( as be strong to be prove by many au ncyent and authentical writer ) do first inhabit all the sea cost of Spain even unto Cales and the mouth of the strait , and people also a great part of Italy , which appear by sundry city and haven in Spain call of they , as Portingalia , Gallecia , Galdunum ; and also by sundry nacon therein dwell , which yet have reseave their own name of the Gaul , as the rhegnie , Presamarie , Tamariti , cineri , and diverse other . all which Pompeius Mela , be himself a Spaniarde , yet say to have descend from the celtic of France , whereby it be to be gather , that that nacon which come out of Spain into Ireland be ancient Gaul , and that they bring with they those letter which they have learn in Spain , first into Ireland , the which some also say do much resemble the old phenicon character , be likewise distinguish with prick and accent , as they auncyentlie ; but the further enquiry thereof need a place of long discourse than this our short conference . Eudox : sure you have show a great probability of that which i have think impossible to have benn prove ; but that which you now say , that Ireland shall have benn people with the Gaul , seem much more stray , for all their chronicle do say that the west and south be possess and inhabit of Spaniards : and Cornelius Tacitus do also strong affirm the same , all which you must either overthrow and falsify or renounce your opinion . iron : neither so , nor so , for the irish chronicle , as i say unto you , be make by unlearned man , and write thing accord to the appearance of the truth which they conceive , do err in the circumstance , not in the matter . for all that come out of Spain ( they be not diligent searcher into the difference of the nation ) suppose to be Spaniards , and so call they , but the groundwork thereof be nevertheless ( as i say ) true and certain , however , they through their ignorance disguise the same , or through their own own vanity while they will not seem to be ignorant , do thereupon build and enlarge many forge history of their own antiquity , which they deliver to fool and make they believe they for true : as for example , that first of all one Gathelus the son of Cecrops , or Argos , who have marry the king of Egyps his daughter , thence sail with she into Spain , and there inhabit : then that of Nemedus and his four son , who come out of Scythia people Ireland , and inhabit it with his 2 son twoe hundred and ffifty year , till he be overcome of the giant dwell then in Ireland , and at the last quite banish and root out . after who two hundred year , the son of one Dela , be Scythians , arrive there again , and possess the whole land , of which the young , call Slaynius , in the end make himself monarch . last , of the iiij son of Milesius king of Spain , which conquer that land from the scythian , and inhabit it with Spaniards , call it of the young heberuus , Hibernia : all which be in truth mere fable , and very Milesian lie , ( as the latin proverb be ; ) for there be never such a king of Spain call Milesius , nor any such colony seat with his son , as they fain , that can ever be prove . but yet under these tale you may in manner see the truth lurk . for Scythians , here inhabit , they name and do speak of Spaniards whereby appear that both those nation here inhabit : but whether very Spaniards , ( as the irish great affect ) , be no way to be prove . Eudox : whence come it that the irish do so great covett to to fetch themselves from the Spaniard , since the old Gaules be a more ancient and much more honourable nation ? iron : even of a very desire of newfangleness and vanity , for be as they be now account , the most barbarous nation in Christendom , they to avoid that reproach will derive they self from the Spaniard , who they now see to be a very honourable people , and next border unto they : but all that be most vain ; for from the Spaniard , that now be , be come from as rude and savage nation as they , there be , as it may be gather by corpse of age and veiwe of their own history ( though they therein labour much to ennoble themselves ) scarce any drop of the old spanish blood leave in they ; for all Spain be first conquer by the romans , and fill with colony from they , which be still increase , and the native Spaniarde still cut of . afterwards the carthaginian in all the long punic war have spoil all Spain , and in the end subdue it whole tothem self , do , ( as it be likely ) root out all that be affect to the romans . and last the roman , have again recover that country and beat out Hannibal , do doubtless cut of all that have favour the carthaginian , so that betwixt they both , to and fro , there be scarce a native Spaniard leave but all inhabit of Romaynes . all which tempest of trouble be overblow , there long after arise a new storm more dreadful than all the former , which overran all Spain , and make a infinite confusion of all thing ; that be , the come down of the Goth , the Hun , and the vandalle , and last all the nation of Scythia , which , like a mountain flood , do overflow all Spain , and quite drown and wash away whatever relic there be leave of the land-bred people , yea and of all the romans too . the which northern nation find the complexion of that soil , and the vehement heat there farf different from their nature , take no felicity in that country but from thence pass over , and do spread themselves into all country in Christendom , of all which there be none but have some mixture or sprinkle , if not [ thorough ] peoplinge , of they . and yet after all those the moor and barbarian , break over out of Africa , do final possess all Spain , or the most part thereof , and tread down under their foul heathenish foot what ever little they find there yet stand . the which , though afterward they be beat out by Ferdinando of Arragon , and [ Isabella ] his wife , yet they be not so cleanse , but that through the marriage which they have make , and mixture of the people of the land , during their long continuance there , they have leave no pure drop of spanish blood , nor of Romayne nor Scythian . so that all nacon under heaven , i suppose , the Spaniard be the most mingle , most uncertain , and most bastardly ; wherefore most foolish do the irish think to ennoble themselves by wrest their ancestry from the Spaniard , who be unable to derive himself from any nacon certain . Eudox : you speak very sharp , Irenius , in dishonour of the Spaniard , who some other boast to be the only brave soldier under the sky . iron : so sure he be a very brave man ; neither be that which i speak any thing to his derogacon , for , in that i say he be a mingle people , it be no dispraise ; for i think there be no nation now in Christendom , nor much further , but be mingle , and compound with other : it be a singular providance of God , and a most admirable purpose of his wisdom , to draw those northern heathen nacon down into those christian part , where they may receive Christianity , and to mingle nation so remote so miraculous , to make , as it be , one kindred and blood of all people , and each to have knowledge of he . Eudox : nether have you sure any more dishoner the irish , for you have bring they from very great and ancient nation , as any be in the world , how ever fond they affect the Spaniard . for both the scythian and the Gaul be twoe as mighty nation as ever the world bring forth . but be there any token , denominacon or monument of the Gaul yet remain in Ireland as there be of Scythians ? iron : yea sure very many : for there be first in the irish language many word of Gaules remain , and yet daily use in common speech . Eudox : where , what be the gallish speech ? be there any part of it still use amongst any nacon ? iron : the gallish speech be the very brytishe , the which be general use here in all Bryttaine before the come of the saxon : and yet be retain of the Welshman , the cornishe man , and the bryttain of France , though time , work alteracon of all thing , and the trade and interdeal with other nacon round about , have change and great alter the dialecte thereof , but yet the original word appear to be the same , as who [ that ] list to read in Cambden or Buckanan , may see at large . beside , there be many place , as haven , hill , town , and castle , which yet bear name from the gall ; of the which Buckanan rehearse above 3 hundred in Scottland , and i can ( i think ) recount near as many in Ireland : moreover there be of the old gall certain nacon yet remain in Ireland which retain the old denominacon of the gall , as the manapij , the Cauci , the venti and other ; by all which and many other very reasonable probability , which this short course , will not suffer to be lay forth , it appear that the chief inhabitant in the island be gall come thither first from Spain , and afterward from beside Tannius , where the Goth , Hun , and the Getes sit down , they also be ( as it be say ) of some ancient gall , and last pass out of Gallia it self , from all the sea coast of Belgia and Celtica , into all the sotherne coast of Ireland , which they possess and inhabit , whereupon it be at this day , among all the irish a common use to call any strange inhabitante there among they , gall , that be , descend of [ or ] from the Gaul . Eudox : this be very likely , for even so do these Gaul ancient possess and people all the southern coast of our Britain , which yet retain their old name , as the belgeæ in Somersetshier , Wiltshire and part of Hampeshier . Atrebatij in Barkshier , Regni in Sussex and Surrey , with many other . now thus far i understand your opinion , that the scythian plant in the north part of Ireland ; the Spaniard ( for so we call they ) what ever they be that come from Spain , in the west ; the Gaul in the south : so that there now remain only the east part towards England , which i will be glad to understand from who you think they to be people . iron : mary , from the brytton themselves , of which though their be little foot now remain , by reason that the saxon afterwards and last the english , drive out all the first inhabitant thereof , do possess and people the land themselves . yet among the tool , the Brines , the cavanaghe , and other nacon in Linster , there be some memory of the britons remain : as the tool be call of the old brytish word Tol , that be , a hilly country . the brin of the brytish word Brin , that be , woody . and the cavenaghe of Caune , that be , strong . so that in thigh three people , the very denominacon of the old brytton do still remain . beside , when any fly under the succour or protection of any against a enemy , he cry unto he commericke , that be Brytton help , for the Brytton be call in his own language , commerouye . Furthermore to prove the same , Ireland be by Diodorus Siculus , and by Strabo , call brytannia , and a part of great Bryttaine . final , it appear by good record yet extant that king Arthur , and before he Gurgunt , have all that island in his alleagiaunce and subjection : hereunto i can add many probability of the name of place , person , and speech , as i do in the former , but they shall be to long for this place , and i reserve they for another . and thus you have hear my opinion , how all the realm of Ireland be first people , and by what nacon . after all which the saxon succeed , do wholley subdue it unto themselves . for first egfryde , long king of Northumberland , do utter waste and subdue , as appear by ancient record , in which it be find write that he subdue all the island of the north , even unto Norwaye , and their king do bring into his subjection . Eudox : this rippinge up of ancestry , be very please unto i , and indeed savour of good conceit , and some read withal . i see hereby how profitable travel and experience of forrainr nacon be to he that will apply they to good purpose . neither indeed will i have think , that any such antiquity can have be avouch for the irish , that make i the more to long to see some other of your observacon , which you have gather out of that country and have erst half promise to put forth : and sure in this mingle of nacon appear ( as you erst well note ) a wonderful providence and purpose of almighty God , that stir up the people in the far part of the world to seek out these region so remote from they , and by that mean both to restore the decay habitacon , and to make himself know to the heathen . but be their , i pray you , no more general impeoplinge of that island , than first by the scythian , which you say be the Scot , and afterwards by the african , beside the Gaul , brytton , and saxon ? iron : yes , there be a other , and that the last and the great , which be by the english , when the earl strangbowe , have conquer that land , deliver up the same into the hand of Henry the second , than king , who send over thither great store of gentleman , and other warlike people , among who he distribute the land , and settle such a strong colony therein , as never since can , with all the subtle practice of the irish , be root out , but abide still a mighty people , of so many as remain english of they . Eudox : what be that you say , of so many as remain English of they ? why be , not they that be once English , abide english still ? iron : no , for the most part of they be degenerate and grow almost mere irish , yea , and more malicious to the english then the very irish they self . Eudox : what hear i ? and be it possible that a Englishman , bring up natural in such sweet civility as England afford , can find such like in that barbarous rudeness , that he shall forget his own nature , and forgo his own nacon ? how may this be ? or what i pray you may be the cause thereof ? iron : sure , nothing but that first evil ordinance and institucon of that common wealth . but thereof now be their no fit place to speak , lest , by the occasion thereof offer matter of long discourse , we may be draw from this that we have in hand , namely , the handleinge of abuse in the custom of Ireland . Eudox : in truth , Irenius , you do well remember the plot of your first purpose ; but yet from that i seem , you have much swerve in all this long discourse , of the first inhabit of Ireland : for what be that to your purpose ? iron : true very material ; for if you mark the course of all that speech well , it be to show by what mean the custom , that now be in Ireland , be some of they indeed very strange and almost heathenish , be first bring in : and that be , as i say , by those nacon from who that country be first people ; for the difference of manner and custom do follow the difference of nation and people : the which i have declare unto you to have be 3 special , which seat themselves there , to wit , first the scythian , than the Gaul , and last the english . notwithstanding that i be not ignorant , that there sundry other nacon which get foot in that land , of the which their yet remain dyver great family and seipte , of who i will also in their proper place make mencon . Eudox : you bring your self , Iren. , very well into the way again , notwithstanding that it seem that you be never out of the way . but now that you have pass through their antiquity , which i can have wish not so soon end , begin when you please , to declare what custom and manner have be deryve from those nacon to the irish , and which of they you find fault withal . iron : i will then begin to count their custom in the same order that i count their nacon : and first with the scythian or scottish manner . of the which there be one use among they , to keep their cattle , and to live they self the most part of the year in bollies , pasture upon the mountain and waste wild place ; and remove still to fresh land , as they have depasture the former day . the which appear plain to be the manner of the scythian , as you may read in Olaus magnus , and Jo. Boemus , and yet be use among all the tartarian and the people about the caspian sea , which be natural Scythians , to live in herd as they call they , be the very same that the irish bollies be , drive their cattle continual with they , and feed only on their whit meat . Eudox : what fault can you find with this custom ? for though it be a old scythian use , yet it be behooffful in this country of Ireland , where their be great mountain , and waste desert full of grass , that the same shall be eat down , and nourish many thousand of cattle for the good of the whole realm , which can mithinke be any other way , then by keep those bollies as there you have show . iron : but by this custom of Bolling there grow in the mean time many great enormity unto that common waylth . for first , if there be any outlaw , or loose people , as they be never without some , which live upon the stelthe and spoil , they be evermore sucered and find relief only in those bollies , be upon the waste place , where eye they shall be drive short to starve , or to come down to the town to seek relief , where , by one mean or another , they will soon be catch . beside , such stelthe of cattle they bring common to those bollies , where they be receive ready , and the thief harbour from danger of law , or such officer as may light upon he . Moreover , the people that live thus in these bollies grow thereby more barborous , and live more licentious than they will in town , use what mean they list , and practyze what mischief and villainy they will , either against the government their , general by their combinacon , or against private man , who they malign , by steal their good , or murder [ they ] . for there they think they self half exempt from law and obedience , and have once taste freedom , do , like a steer that have be long out of his yooke , grudge and repine ever after to come under rule again . Eudox : by your speech , irein . i perceive more evil come by these bollies , then good by their graze ; and therefore it may well be reform : but that must be in his due course : do you proceed to the next . iron : they have another custom from the scythian , that be the wear of manteles and long glebbe , which be a thick curl bush of hair , hang down over their eye , and monstrous disguise they , which be both very bad and hurtful . Eudox : do you think that the mantle come from the scythian ? i will sure think otherwise , for by that which i have red , it appear that most nacon in the world ancient use the mantle . for the Jew use it , as you may read of Elias mantle , of [ blank ] . the caldee also use it , as you may read in Diodorus . the egyptian lykewyes use it , as you may read in Herodotus , and may be gather by the description or Berenice , in the greek commentary upon Callimacus . the greek also use it ancient , as appear by Venus mantle line with star , though afterward they change the form thereof into their clooke , call Pallia , as some of the irish also use . and the ancient Latines and roman use it , as you may read in Virgil , who be a very great antiquary , that Evander , when Æn&ealig ; s come to he at his feast , do entertain and feast he on the ground , and lie on manteles . insomuch that he use the very word mantile for a mantle : -- Mantilia humi sternunt . so that it seem that the mantle be a general habit to most nacon , and not proper to the scythian only , as you suppose . iron : i can deny but ancient it be common to most , and yet sithence disuse and lay away . but in this latter age of the world , since the decay of the roman empire , it be renew and bring in again by those northern nacon when , break out of their can cave and freeze habitacon into the sweet soil of Europe , they bring with they their usual weed , fit to shield their cold , and that continual frost , to which they have be at home inure : the which yet they leave not of , by reason that they be in perpetual war with the nacon where they have invade . but still remove from place to place , carry always with they that weed , as their house , their bed , and their garment . And , come last into Ireland , they find there more special use thereof , by reason of the raw can climate , from whence it be now grow into that general use in which that people now have it . afterwards the african succeed , find the like necessity of that garment , continue the like use thereof . Eudox : since than the necessity thereof be so commodious , as you alegde , that it be instead of howsinge , bed and clthe , what reason have you then to wish so necessary a thing cast of ? iron : because the commodity do not countervail against the discommodity , for the inconvenience that thereby do arise be much more many : for it be a fit house for a outlaw , a meet bed for a rebel , and apt cloak for a thief . First the outlaw be for his many crime and villainy banish from the town and house of honest man , and wander in waste place , far from danger of law , make his mantle his house , and under it cover himself from the wrath of heaven , from the offence of the earth , and from the sight of man . when it rain it be his penthowse , when it blow it be his tent ; when it freeze it be his tabernacle . in summer he can wear it loose , in winter he can lap it close ; at all time he can use it ; never heavy , never cumbersome . lykewaise for a rebel it be as serviceable ; for in his war that he make , if at least it deserve the name of war , when he still fly from his foe , and lurk in the thick wood and straigt passage , wait for advantage , it be his bed , yea , and almost all his household stuff . for the wood be his house against all wether , and his mantle be his cave to sleep in . therein he wrap himself round , and ensconce himself strong against the gnattess , which in the country do more annoy the naked rebel , while they keep the wood , and do more sharp wound they , than all their enemy sword or spear , which can seldom come nigh they ; yea , and often time their mantle serve they , when they be nigh drive , be wrap about their left arm instead of a target , for it be hard to cut through it with a sword . beside it be light to bear , light to throw away , and , be , as they then common naked , it be to they all in all . last , for a thief it be so handsome , as it may seem it be first invent for he ; for under it he can cleanly convey any fit pillage that come handsome in his way , and when he go abroad in the night in freebooting , it be his best and sure friend ; for lie , as they often do , two or three night together abroad , to watch for their booty , with that they can pretty shroud they self under a bush or a back side , till they may convenient do their errand : and when all be do , he can in his mantle pass through any town or company , be close hood over his head , as he use , from knowledge of any to who he be indaunger . beside all this , he , or any man eye that be dispose to any mischief or villainy , may under his mantle go privy arm without suspicon of any : carry his headpiece , his skene , or pistol if he please , to be always in a readiness . thus necessary and fyt be a mantle for a bad man . and sure for a bad huswyfe it be no less convenient , for some of they that be wander woman , call of they Mona shut , it be half a wardrobe , for in summer you shall find she array common but in her smock and mantle ; to be more ready for the light service : in winter , and in her travel , it be her cloak and safeguard for her lewd exercise . and when she have fill her vessill , under it she can hide both her burden , and her blame ; yea , and when her bastard be bear it serve instead of all her swaddle clout . and as for all other good woman which love to do but little work , how handsome it be to lie in and sleep , or to louse themselves in the sun shine , they that have be but a while in Ireland , can well witness . sure i be that you will think it very unfit for good huswyve , to stir in , or to busy her self about her huswyfry in such sort as they shall . these be some of the abuse for which i will think it meet to forbid all mantle . Eudox : oh evil mind man , that have reckon up so many use of mantle , will you yet wish it to be abandon ? sure i think Diogenes dish do never serve his master more turn , notwithstanding he make [ it ] his dish , his cup , his measure , his waterpott , than a mantle do a irish man . but i see they be all to bad intentes , and therefore i will joynn with you in abolish it . but what blame lie you to the glybb ? take heed , i pray you , that you be not too busy therewith for fear of your own blame , see our englisheman take it up in such a general fashion to wear their hair so immesurable long , that some of they exceed the long irish glybbe . iron : i fear not the blame of any undeserving mislike ; but for the irish glybbe , i say that beside their falstye , bruitishnes and fythines which be not to be name ; they be [ as ] fit mask as a mantle be for a thief . for whensoever he have run he self into that peril of law that he will not be know , he either cut of his glib quite , by which he become nothing like himself , or pullethe it so low down over his eye , that it be very hard to discern his thevish countenance . and therefore fit to be truss up with the mantle . Eudox : true these three scythian abuse , i hold fit to be take away with sharp penalty ; and sure i wonder how they have be keep thus long , notwithstanding so many good provicon and order as have be devise for that people . iron : the cause thereof shall appear to you hereafter . but let we now go forward with our scythian custom . of the next that i have to treat of , be the manner of raise their cry in their conflict , and at other troublesome time of uproar : the which be very natural scythian , as we may read in Diodorus Siculus , and Heroditus , discrybe the manner of the scythian and parthian come to give the charge at their battle : at the which it be say , they come run with a terrible yell and hubbubbe as if heaven and earth will have go together , which be the very image of the irish hubbub , which the kern use at their first encounter . beside , the same Herodotus write , that they use in their battle to call upon the name of their captain or general , and sometime upon their great king decease , as in that battle of Tomyris against Cyrus : which custom to this day manifest appear among the irish . for at their join of battle , they lykewyes call upon their captain name , or the name of his ancestor . as they under Oneale cry Landergabo , that be , the bloody hand , which be oneales badge : they under OBrien call [ laun-laid ] , which be [ the strong hand ] . and to their ensample , the old english also which there remain , have get up their cry Scythian like , as Cromabo , and Bulerabo . and herein also lie open a other very manifest proof that the irish be scythe or Scot , for in all their encounter they use one very common word , cry Ferragh , ferrogh , which be a scottish word , to wit , the name of one of their first king of Scottland , call Fergus ( or Ferragus ) , which fight against the picte , as you may read in Buckanan de rebus scoticis ; but as other write , it be long before , that the name of their chief captain , under who they fight against the african , the which be then so fortunate unto they , that ever since they have use to call upon his name in their battle . Eudox : believe i , Irenius , this observacon of you be very good and delightful ; far beyond the blind conceit of some , who i remember have upon the same word Ferragh , make a very blunt conjecture , as namely mr. Stanihurst , who though he be the same country man bear , that shall search more near into the secret of these thing , yet have stray from the truth all the heaven wide ( as they say , ) for he thereupon ground a very gross imagination , that the irish shall descend from the egiptianes which come into that island , first under the lead of Scota the daughter of Phraoh , whereupon they use ( say he ) in all their battle to call upon Pharaoh , cry Ferragh , ferragh . sure he shoot wide on the bow hand , and very far from the mark . for i will first know of he what ancient ground of authority he have for such a senseless fable , and if he have any of the rude irish book , as it may be he have , yet i seem a man of his learning shall not so light have be carry away with old wife tale from approvance of his own reason ; for whether Scota be like a egyptian word or smack of any learning or judgement , let the learned judge . but his Scota rather come upon the greek Scoto , that be , darkness , which have not let he see the light of the truth . iron : you know not , Eudoxus , how well mr. Stanihurst can see in the dark ; perhaps he have owl or cat eye ; but well i will he see not well the very light in matter of more weight . but as for Ferragh i have tell you my conjecture only , and yet thus much i have more to prove a likelihood , that there be yet at this day in Ireland , many irish man , chief in the northern part , call by the name of Ferragh . but let that nowe be ; this only for this place suffice , that it be a word common use in their hubbubb , the which , with all the rest , be to be abolish , for that it discover a affection of irish captenry , which in this platform i endeavour special to beat down . there be other soart of cry , all so use among the irish , which favour great of the scythian barbarism , as their lamentacon at their burial , with despairful outcry , and immoderate wail , the which mr. Stanihurst may also have use for a argument to prove they egyptian , for so in scripture it be mention , that the egyptian lament for the death of Joseph . other think this custom to come from the Spaniard , for that they do imesurable bewail likewise their dead . but the same be not proper spanish , but altogether heathenish , bring in first thither either by the scythian , or the moor , which be african but long possess that country . for it be the manner of all pagan and infidel to be intemperate in their wail of their dead , for that they have no faith nor hope of salvacon . and this ill custom also be special noat by Diodorus Siculus , to have be in the scythian , and be yet among the northern Scot at this day , as you may read in their chronicle . Eudox : this be a evil custom also , but yet do not much concern civil reformacon , as abuse in religion . iron : i do not rehearse it as one of the abuse which i think most worthy of reformation ; but have make mencon of irish cry i think this manner of cry and howl not impertinent to be note as uncivil and scythian like : for by these old custom , and other like conjectural circumstance , the descent of nacon can only be prove , where other monument of writing be not remain . Eudox : then , i pray you , whensoever in your discourse you meet with they by the way , do not shun , but bold touch they ; for beside their great pleasure and delight for their antiquity , they bring also great profit and help unto civility . iron : then since you will have it so i will hear take occasion , since i late speak of their manner of cry in joyninge of battle , to speak somewhat also of the manner of their arm , and array in battle , with other custom perhaps worth the note . and first of their arm and weapon , among which their broad sword be proper Scythian , for such the scythe use common , as you may read in Olaus magnus . and the same also the old Scot use , as you may read in Buchanan , and in [ Solinus ] , where the picture of they be in the same form express . also their short bow , and little quiver with short beard arrow , be very Scythian , as you may read in the same Olaus . and the same soart , both of bow , quiver , and arrow , be at this day to be see common among the northern irish , who scottish bow be not pass 3 quarter of a yard long , with a string of wreathe hemp slack bend , and who arrow be not above half a elline long , tip with steel head , make like common broad arrow head , but many more sharp and slender , that they enter into a arm man or horse most cruel , notwithstanding that they be shoot forth weak . Moreover , their long broad shield , make but with wicker rod , which be common use among the say northern irish , but special of the Scot , and bring from the scythian , as you may read in Olaus magnus , Solinus , and other ; likewyes their go to battle without armour on their body or head , but trust only to the thickness of their glybbe , the which they say will somytimes bear of a good stroke , be mere savage and scythian , as you may see in the say image of the old scythe or Scot , set forth by Hodianus and other . beside , there confuse kind of march in heap , without any order or array , their clash of sword together , their fierce run upon their enemy , and their manner of fight , resemble altogether that which be red in all history to have be use of the scythian . by which it may almost infallible be gather , together with other sircumstance , that the irish be very Scot or scythe oridgionall , though since intermingle with many other nacon repair and join unto they . and to these , i may also add a other very strong conjecture , which come to my mind , that i have often observe there among they ; that be , certain relidgious ceremony , which be very superstitious , yet use among they , the which be also write by sundry authore , to have be observe among the scythian , by which it may very vehement be presume that the nation be ancient all one . for Plutarch , as i remember , in his treatise of Homer , indeavoringe to search out the truth , what countryman Homer be , prove it most strong , as he think , that he be a italian bear , for that in distribute of a sacrifice of the greek , he omit the [ blank space ] call [ blank space ] [ loin , ] the which all the other grecian , save the italian , do use to burn in their sacrifice : also for that he make the entrails to be roast on fyve spite , the which be the proper manner of the ætolians , who only , of all the nation and country of Gretia , use to sacrifice in that sort , whereas all the rest of the greek use to roast they upon three spite , by which he infer , necessary , that Homer be a ætolian . and by the same reason may i as reaonable conclude , that the irish be descend from the scythian , for that they use even to this day , some of the same ceremony which the scythian ancient use . as for example , you may read in [ Lucian ] in that sweet dialogue which be entitle Toxaris or of friendship , that the common oath of the scythian , be by the sword , and by the fire , for that they account these two special divine power , which shall work vengeance on perjuror . so do the irish at this day , when they go to any battle , say certain prayer or charm to their sword , make a cross therewith upon the earth , and thrust the point of their blade into the ground ; think thereby to have the better success in fight . also they use to swear common by their sword . likewise at the kindle of candle , they say certain prayer ; and use some other superstitious right , which show that they honour the fire and the light ; for all those northern nation , have be use to be annoy with much can and darkness , be wont therefore to have the fire and the son in great veneracon : like as otherwise the moor and egyptian , which be much offend and grieve with much extreme heat of the sun , do every morning , when the sun rise , fall to curse and ban of he as their plague and chief scourge . [ also the scythian use when ] they will bind any solemn vow or combynacon , to draw a bowl of blood , together vow thereby to spend their last blood in that quarrel , as you may read in Buckhanan ; and some of the northern irish , likewise : as you may also read in the same book , in the tale of Arsacomas , that it be the manner of the scythian when any on [ e ] of they be heavy wrong , and will assemble unto he any force of people , to join with he in his revenge , to sit in some public place for certain day upon a ox hide , to which there will resort all such person as be dispose to take arm will enter into his arm , will take pay or join with he in his quarrel . and the same you may likewise read to have be the ancient manner of the wild Scot , which be indeed the very natural irish . Moreover , the scythian use to swear by their king hand , as Olaus show . and so do the irish use to swear by their lord hand , and , to forswear it , hold it more cryminall then to swear by god . also the scythian say , that they be once every year turn into wolf , and so it be wrighten of the irish ; though master Camden in a better sense do suppose it be a disseaze , call lycanthropia , so name of the wolf . and yet some of the irish do use to make the wolf there gossopp . the scythian also use to see the flesh in the hide , and so do the north irish yet . the scythian likewise use to boil the blood of the beast live , and to make meat thereof : and so do the irish still in the north . many such custom i can recount unto you , as of there old manner of marry , of bury , of dance , of sing , of feast , of curse , though Christians have wipe out the most part of they , by resemblance whereof it may plain appear to you that the nacon be the same , but that by the reckon of these few , which i have tell unto you , i find my speech draw out to a great length than i suppose . thus much only for this time , i hope , shall suffice you , to think that the irish be ancient deduce from the scythian . Eudox : sure , Irenius , i have in these few word hear that from you which i will have think have be impossible to have be speak of time so remote , and custom so ancient : with delight whereof i be as it be all that while entrance , and carry far from myself , as that i be now right sorry that you end so soon . but i marvel much how it come to pass , that in so long continuance of time , and many age come between , yet any jott of those old right and superstitious custom shall remain amongst they . iron : it be no cause of wonder at all , for it be the manner of all barbarous nacon to be very superstitious , and diligent observor of old custom and antiquity , which they receive by continual tradicon from their parent , by record of their bard and chronicle [ s ] , in their song , and by daily use and ensample of their elder . Eudox : but have you i pray you observe any such custom among they , bring likewise from the Spaniard or Gaul , as those from the scythian ? that may sure be very material unto your first purpose . part two iron : some perhaps i have ; and who that will by this occasion mark and compare their custom shall find many more . but there be few i think , remain of the Gaul or Spaniard then of the scythian , by reason that the part , which they then possess lie upon the coast of the western and southern sea , be sithence continual visit with stranger and foreign people , repair thither for traffic , and for fish , which be very plentiful upon the coast : for the trade and interdeal of seacoste nacon one with another work more civility and good fashion , all sea man be natural desirous of new fashion , than the inland dweller which be seldom see of forreyner ; yet some of they as i have note , i will recount unto you . and first i will , for the better credit of the rest , show you one out of their statute , among which it be enact that no man shall wear his beard but only on the upper lip , like mustachio , shave all the rest of his chin . and this be the ancient manner of the Spaniard , as yet it be of all the mahometan , to cut all their beard close , save only muschacho , which they wear long . and the cause of this use be for that they , be breed in a hot country , find much hair on their face and other part to be noyous unto they : for which cause they do cut it most away , like as contrary all other ncaon , bring up in can country do use to nourish their hare , to keep they the warm , which be the cause that the scythian and Scot wear glib , as i show you , to keep their head warm , and long beard to defend their face from can . from they also i think come saffron shirt and smock , which be devise by they in those hot country , where saffron be very common and rife , for avoid that evil which come of much sweetness , and long wear of linen . also the woman among the old Spaniard have the charge of all hushould affair , both at home and abroad , as Boemius wright , though now these Spaniard use it quite otherwise . and so have the irish woman the trust and care of all thing , both at home , and in the field . likewise round leather target , as the spanyarde fashion , who use it , for the most part , paint , which in Ireland they use also , in many place , colour after their rude fashion . Moreover the manner of their woman ride on the wrong side of the horse , i mean with their face towards their right side , as the irish use , be , as they say , old spanish , and as some say Africane , for among they the woman ( they say ) use to ride across : also the deep smock sleve hang to the ground , which the irish woman use , ( they say ) , be old Spanish , and be use yet in Barbary : and yet that shall seem rather to be a old irish fashion ; for in armoury the fashion of the Manche , which be give in arm by many , be indeed nothing else but a sleve , be fashion much like to that sleve . and that knight in old time use to wear their mistress favour or love sleve , upon their arm , as appear by that be wrighten of sir Launcelott , that he wear the sleve of the fair maid of Asteroth in a tourney , whereat queen guenouer be much displease . Eudox : your conceit be very good , well fit for thing so far from certainty of knowledge and learning , only upon lykelyhoode and conjecture . but have you any custom remain from the Gaul or bryttan ? iron : i have observe a few of either ; and who will better search into they may find more . and first the possession of their bard be , as Caesar write , usual among the Gaul ; and the same be also common among the britons , and be not yet altogether leave of with the Walshe , which be the posterity . for all the fashion of the Briton , as he testify , be much like . the long deart come also from the Gaul , as you may read in the same Ceasaer , and in John Boemius . likewise the say Jo. Boemius wright , that the Gaul use sword , a hanfull broad , and so do the irish now . also that they use long wicker shield in battle that shall cover their whole body , and so do the northern irish . but because i have not see such fashion target in the southern part , but only among those northern people , and irish Scot , i do think that they be bring in rather by the scythian , then by the Gaul . also the Gaul use to drink their enemies blood , and to paint themselves therewith : so also they wright , that the old irish be wont , and so have i see some of the irish doe , but not their enemy but friend blood . as namely at the execution of a notable traitor at lymbricke , call Murrogh Obrien , i see a old woman , which be his foster mother , take up his head , while he be quarter , and suck up all the blood run thereout , say , that the earth be not worthy to drink it , and therewith also steep her face and breast , and tear she hear , cry and shriek out most terrible . Eudox : you have very well run through such custom as the irish have deryve from the first old nacon which inhabit that land , namely , the scythian , the Spaniard , the Gaul , the Britain . it now remain that you now take in hand the custom of the old english which be among the irish : of which i do not think that you shall have much to find fault with any , consider that by the english most of the old bad irish custom be abolish , and more civil fashion bring in their stead . iron : you think otherwise , eudox : then i do ; for the chief abuse which be now in that realm , be grow from the english , that be now much more lawless and lycencious than the very wild irish : so that as much care as be then by they have to reform the irish , so much and more must now be use to reform they ; so much time do alter the manner of man . Eudox : that seem very strange which you say , that man shall so much degenerate from their first nature as to grow wild . iron : so much can liberty and ill example do . Eudox : what liberty have the english there , more than they have here at home ? be not the law plant among they at the first , and have they not governor to curb and keep they still in awe and obedience ? iron : they have , but it be such for the most part , as do more than good [ , ] for they have governor for the most part of they self , and common out of the two familiye of the gerldine and the butler , both adversary and corivale one against the other . who though , for the most part , they be but deputy under some of the king of England son , brethren , or other near kinsman , who be the king leiutenante yet they sway so much as they have all the rule , and the other but the title . of which butler and Geraldines , albeit i must confess they be very brave worthy man , as also of other the peer of that realm , make lord deputy , and lord justice and signory at sundry time , yet through greatness of their late conquest and signory they grow insolent , and evil bend both that regal authority , and also there private power , one against another , to the utter subversion of they self and strenthine of the irish again . This you may read plain discover by a letter write from the citizen of cork out of Ireland , to the earl of Shressburye then in England , and remain yet upon record , both in the tower of London , and also among the chronicle of Ireland . wherein it be by they complain , that the english lord and gentleman , who then have great possession in Ireland , begin through pride and insolency , to make private war one against another , and , when the other part be weak , they will wage and draw in the irish to take there part , by which mean they both great encourage and enable the irish , which till that time have be shut up within the mountain of Slewlougher , and weaken and disable they self , in so much that there revenue be wonderful impair , and some of they , which be there reckon to have be able to have spend xij or xiij hundred pound per annum , of owld rent , that i may say no more , beside their comodetye of creek and haven , be now scarce able to dispend the three part . from which disorder , and through their huge calamity which have come upon they thereby , they be now almost grow to be almost as lewd as the irish : i mean of such English as be plant towards the west ; for the english pale have preserve it self , through nearness of the state , in reasonable civility , but rest which dwell above in Connagh and Munster , which be the sweet soil of Ireland , and some in Leinster and Ulster , be degenerate and grow to be as very patchcocke as the wild irish , yea , some of they have quite shake of the english name , and put on irish that they may be altogether irish . Eudox : be it possible that any shall so far grow out of frame that they shall in so short space , quite forget there country and there own name ? that be a most dangerous lethargy , much worse than that of MESSILA CARVINUS , who , be a most learned man , through sickness forget his own name . but can you count we any of this kind ? iron : i can but by the report of the irish themselves , who report , that the macmaghon , in the north , be auncyent English ; to wit , descend from the Fitz ursulas , which be a noble family in England , and that the same appear by the significacon of their irish name . likewise that the macswiny , now in Ulster , be ancient of the Vere of England , but that they themselves , for hatred of the english , so disguise there name . Eudox : can they ever conceive any such devilish dislike of their own natural country , as that they will be ashamed of their name , and bite of the dug from which they suck life ? iron : i wot well there shall be none : but proud heart do oftentimes , like wanton coulte , kick at their mother , as we read Alcibiades and Themistocles do , who , be banish out of Athens , flee unto the king of Asia , and there stir he up to war against their country , in which war they they self be cheiftayne . so that , they say , do these macswyne and macmahon , or rather Vere or Fitz ursulay , for private despite , turn themselves against England . for at such time as Robert Vere , earl of Oxford , be in the baron war against king Richard the second , through the malice of the peer , banish the realm and proscribe , he with his kinsman Fitz Ursula flee into Ireland , where be prosecute , and afterwards in England put to death , his kinsman there remain behind in Ireland , rebel , and conspire with the irish , do quite cast of the english name and alleigaunce ; since which time they have so remain , and have ever since be count mere irish . the very like be also ever so report of macswyne , mackmahon and mackshehay of monster , how they likewise be auncyent english , and old follower to the earl of Desmond , until the reign of king Edward the four : at which time the earl of Desmonde that then be , call Thomas , be through false subbornacon , as they say , of the queen for some offence , by she against he conceive , bring to his death at Tredagh most unjust , notwithstanding that he be a very good and sound subject to the king . thereupon all his kinsman of the Geraldine , which then be a mighty family in monster , in revenge of that huge wrong , rise into arm against the king , and utter renown and forswear all obedience to the crown of England ; to who the say mackswyne , Mackshehayes , and mackmahon , their servant and follower , do the like , and have ever sithence so continue . and with they , they say , all the people of monster go , and many other of they , which be mere english , thenceforth join with the irish against the king , and term themselves very irish , take on they irish habit and custom , which will never since be clean wipe away , but the contagion thereof have remain still among their posterity . of which sort , they say , be most of the surname which end in an , as Shinian , Mangan , etc the which now account they self natural irish . other great house there be of the old english in Ireland , which through licentious conversinge with the irish , or marry , or foster with they , or lack of meet nurture , or other such unhappy occasion , have degender from their ancient dignity , and be now grow as irish as ohanlans breach , ( as the proverb there be , ) of which sort there be two most pitiful example above the rest : to wit the lord Breningham , who be the most ancient baron in England , be now waxen the most savage irish , name himself irish like noccorish : and the other the great Mortimer , who forget how great he be once in England , or English at all , be now become the most barbarous of they all , and be now call Macnemarra ; and [ not ] much better than he be the old lord courrie , who have lewd waste all the land and signorye that he have and alien they unto the irish , be himself also now grow quite irish . Eudox : in truth this which you tell be a most shameful hear , and to be reform with most sharp censure in so great personage , to the terror of the mean : for where the lord and chief man wax so barbarous and bastard like , what shall|be hope of the pesante , and base people ? and hereby sure you have make a fair way unto your self to lay open the abuse of their vile custom , which you have now next to declare , the which , no doubt , but be very bad and barbarous , be borrow from the irish , as there apparel , their language , their ride , and many other the like . iron : you can but think they sure to be very brute and uncivil ; for be they at the best that they wear of old , when they be bring in , they shall in so long a alteracon of time seem very strange and uncouth . for it be to be think , that the use of all England , be in the reign of Henry the second , when Ireland be first plant with english , very rude and barbarous , so as if the same shall be now use in England by any , it will seem worthy of sharp correction , and of new law for reformacon ; but it be but even the other day since England grow civil : therefore in count the evil custom of the english ther , i will [ not ] have regard whether the begin thereof be english or irish , but will have respect only to the inconvenyence thereof . and first i have to find fault with the abuse of language , that be , for the speak of irish among the english , which as it be unnatural that any people shall love another language more than their own , so it be very inconvenient , and the cause of many other evil . Eudox : it seem strange to i that the english shall take more delight to speak that language more than their own , whereas they shall ( i think ) rather take scorn to acquiante their tongue thereto : for it have always be the use of the conqueror to dispose the language of the conquer , and to force he by all mean to learn he . so do the roman always use , insomuch that there be almost not a nacon in the world , but be sprinkle with their language . it be good therefore ( i think ) to search out the original course of this evil ; for , the same be discover , a redress thereof will|be the more easy provide : for i think it be strange , that the english be so many , and the irish so few , as they then be leave , the few shall draw the more unto their use . iron : i suppose that the chief cause of bring in the irish language , among they , be special the foster , and marrijng with the irish , which be twoe most dangerous infection ; for first the child that suck the milk of the nurse , must of necessity learn his first speech of she , the which be the first that be enure to his tongue , be after most please unto he , insomuch as though he afterwards be teach English , yet the smack of the first will always abide with he ; and not only of the speech , but of the manner and condicon . for beside the young child be like ape , which affect and imitate what they have see do before they , special by their nurse who they love so well : moreover they draw into themselves , together with their suck , even the nature and disposition of their norse : for the mind follow much the temperature of the body ; and also the word be the image of the mind , so as , the [ y ] proceed from the mind , the mind must be needs affect with the word . so that the speech be Irish , the hart must needs be irish ; for out of the abundance of the hart , the tongue speak . the next be the marry with the irish , which how dangerous a thing it be in all comonwelth appear to every symple sense ; and though some great one have use such match with their vassal , and have of they nevertheless raise worthy issue , as Telamonius do with Tecmissa , Alexander the great with Roxane , and Julius Cesar with Cleopatre , yet the example be so perilous , as it be not to be venture : for in stead of those few good , i can count unto they infinite many evil . and indeed how can such match but bring forth a evil race , sing that common the child take most of his nature of the mother , beside speech , manor , and inclination , which be for the most part agreeable to the condicon of their mother ? for by they they be first frame and fashion so as [ if ] they receive any thing from , they will hardly ever after forgo . therefore be these twoe evil custom of foster and marry with the irish most careful to be restrain ; for of they twoe , the three , that be the evil custom of language which i speak of , chief proceed . Eudox : but be there not law already appoint , for avoid of this evil ? iron : yes , i think there be ; but as good never a whit as never the better . for what do statute avail without penalty , or law without charge of execution ? for so there be another like law enackt against wear of irish apparel , but never the more it be observe by any , or execute by they that have the charge : for they in their private discresion think it not fit to be force upon the poor wretch of that country , which be not worth the price of english apparel , nor expedient to be practise against the better sort , by reason the the country ( say they ) do yield no better : and be there better to be have , yet these be fit to be use , as namely , the mantle in travel , because there be no inn where meat or bed may be have , so that his mantle serve he then for a bed : the leather quilt Jacke in jorninge and in campinge , for that it be fit to be under his shirt of mail , for any occasion of sudden service , as there happen many , and to cover his thou breech on horseback . the great linen roll which the woman wear , to keep their head warm after cut their hair , which they use in any sickness . beside there thick fold linen shirt , there long sleve smock , there halfe-sleved coat , there silken fillotte , and all the rest , they will devise some colour for , either of necessity , or of antiquity , or of comeliness . Eudox : but what colour soever they allege , i think it be not expedient , that the execution of a law once ordain shall be leave to the discretion of the officer , but that without partiality or regard , it shall be fulfil aswell on english as irish . iron : but they think this pricisenes in reformacon of apparel not to be so material , or great pertinent . Eudox : yes sure but it be ; for man apparel be common make accord to their condicon , and their condicon be oftentimes goveren by their garment : for the person that be gown be by his gown put in mind of gravity , and also restrain from lightness by the very aptness of his weed . therefore it be write by Aristotle , then when Cyrus have overcome the lydeans that be a warlike nacon , [ and ] devise to bring they to a more peaceable life , he change their apparel and music , and in stead of their short warlike coat , clothe they in long garment like wife , and in stead of their warlike music , appoint to they certain lascyvious lay , and loose gig , by which in short space their mind be [ so ] mollify and abate , that they forget their former fierceness , and become most tender and effeminate : whereby it appear , that there be not a little in the garment to the fashioninge of the mind and condicon . but be [ all ] these , which you have describe , the fashion of the irish weed ? iron : no : all these which i have rehearse to you , be not irish garment , but english ; for the quilt leather Jacke be old english ; for it be the proper weed of the horseman , as you may read in Chaucer , where he describe sir Thopas apparel and armour , when he go to fight against the giant , which shecklaton , be that kind of gild leather with which they use to imbrode their irish jack . and there likewise by all that discripcon you may see the very fashion and manner of the irish horseman most lively set out , in his long hose , his shoe of costly cordwaine , his hacqueton , and his haberjon , with all the rest thereunto belong . Eudox : i sure think that that manner have be kind irish , for it be far differ from that we have now ; as also all the furniture of his horse , his strong brass bit , his slide reins , his shank pillyon without stirruppe , his manner of mount , his fashion of ride , his charge of spear aloft above hand , [ and ] the form of his spear . iron : no sure ; they be native english , and bring in by the english man first into Ireland : nether be the same yet account a uncomely manner of ride ; for i have hear some great warryor say , that , in all these service which they have see abroad in forraygne country , they never see a more comely horseman than the irish man , nor that come on more brave in the charge ; neither be his manner of mount unseemly ; though he lack stirrup , but more ready than with styroppe ; for in his get up , his horse be still go , whereby he gain way . and therefore the styrrop be call so in scorn , as it be a stair to get up , be derive out of the old english word sty , which be , to mount . Eudox : it seem then that you find no fault with this manner of ride ; why then will you have the gild jack lay away ? iron : i will not have that lay away , but the abuse thereof to be put away ; for be use to the end that it be frame , that be , to be wear in war under a shirt of male , it be allowable , as also the shirt of mail , and all his other furniture : but to be wear daily att home , as in town and civil place , it be a rude habit and most uncomely , seem like a player paint coote . Eudox : but it be wear , they say , likewise of irish footman ; how do you allow of that ? for i shall think it be unseemly . iron : no , not as it be use in war , for it be then wear likewise of footman under their shirt of mail , the which footman they call galloglass ; the which name do discover he to be also ancient english , for Gallogla signify a english servitor or yeoman . and he be so arm , in a long shirt of mail down to the calf of his leg , with a long broad axe in his hand , be then pede gravis armaturæ , and be instead of the arm footman that now wear a Corselett , before the corslett be use , or almost invent . Eudox : then he belike you allow in your straight reformacon of old custom . iron : both he and the kearne also ( who only i take to be the proper irish soldier ) can i allow , so that they use that habit and cutome of they in the war only , when they be lead forth to the service of their prince , and not usual [ y ] at home , and in civil place , and beside do lay aside the evil wild use which the galloglass and kern do use in their evil trade of lief . Eudox : what be those ? iron : marry , these be the most loathly and barbarous condicon of any people , i think , under heaven ; for , from the time that they enter into that course , they do use all the beastly behaviour that may be to oppress all man : they spoil aswell the subject as the enemy ; they steal , they be cruel and bloody , full of revenge , and delight in deadly execucon , licentious , swearer , and blasphemer , common ravisher of woman , and murderer of child . Eudox : those bee most villainous condicon ; i mervayle then that ever they be use or employ , or almost suffer to live : what good can there be then in they ? iron : yet sure they be very valiant , and hardy , for the most part great enduror of cold , labour , hunger , and all hardness , very actyve and strong of hand , very swift of foot , very vigilant and circumspect in their enterprise , very present in peril , very great scorner of death . Eudox : true , by this that you say , it seem the Irishman be a very brave soldier . iron : yea true , even in that rude kind of service he bear himself very courageous . but where he come to experience of service abroad , or be put to a piece , or a pike , he make as worthy a soldier as any nacon he meet with . but let we i pray you turn again to our discourse of evil custom amongst the irish . Eudox : i seem , all this which you speak of , concern the custom amongst the irish very material ; for their use in war be of no small importance to be consider , aswell to reform those which be evil , as to confirm and continue those which be good . but follow you your own course , and show what other their custom you have to dislike of . iron : there be amongst the irish , a certain kind of people call the bard , which be to they instead of poet , who profession be to set forth the praise and disprayese of man in their poem or rhyme ; the which be have in so high regard and estimacon amongst they , that none dare displease they for fear to run into reproach through their offence , and to be make infamous in the mouth of all man . for their verse be take up with a general applause , and usual sonnge att all feast meeting , by certain other person who proper function that be , which also receive for this same , great reward , and reputacon beside . Eudox : do you blame this in they , which i will otherwise have think to have be worthy of good account , and rather to have be maintain and augment amongst they , than to have be dislike ? for i have read that in all age poets have be have in special reputacon , and that i seem not without great cause ; for beside their sweet invencon , and most witty lay , they be always use to set forth the praise of the good and virtuous , and to beat down and disgrace the bad and vicyous . so that many brave young mind have oftentimes , through the hear the praise and famous eulogy of worthy man song and report unto they , benn stir up to affect the like commendacon , and so to strive unto the like desert . so they say that the lacedaemonian be more incline to desire of honour with the excellent verse of the poett Tyrteus , then with all the exhortacon of their captain , or authority of their ruler and magistrate . iron : it be most true that such poette , as in their write do labour to better the manner of man , and through the sweet bait of their number , to steal into the young spiritte a desire of honour and virtue , be worthy to be have in great respect . but these irish bard be for the most part of another mind , and so far from instruct young man in moral discipline , that they themselves do more deserve to be sharp decypline ; for they seldom use to choose unto themselves the do of good man , for the ornament of their poem , but whomsoever they find to be most licentious of lief , most bold and lawless in his do , most dangerous and desperate in all part of disobedience and rebellious disposicon , he they set up and glorify in their rhyme , he they praise to the people , and to young man make a example to follow . Eudox : i mervayle what kind of speech they can find , or what face they can put on , to praise such lewd person as live so lawless and licensiouslie upon stealth and spoil , as most of they do ; or how can they think that any good mind will applaud the same ? iron : there be none so bad , Eudoxus , but that shall find some to favour his do ; but such licentious part as these , tend for the most part to the hurt of the english , or maintenance of their own lewd liberty , they themselves , be most desirous thereto , doe most allow . beside these evil thing be deck and suborn with the gay attire of goodly word , may easy deceive and carry away the affeccon of a young mind , that be not well stay , but desirous by some bold adventure to make proof of himself ; for be ( as they all bee ) bring up idle , without awe of parent , without precept of master , without fear of offence , not be direct , nor employ in any course of lief , which may carry they to virtue , will easy be draw to follow such as any shall set before they : for a young mind can but rest ; if he be not still busy in some goodness , he will find himself such business as shall soon busy all about he . in which if he shall find any to praise he , and to give he encorragement , as those bard and rhymer do for little reward , or a share of a steal cow , then wax he most insolent and half mad with the love of himself , and his own lewd deed . and as for word to set forth such lewdness , it be not hard for they to give a goodly gloss and paint show thereunto , borrow even from the praise which be proper unto virtue it self . as of a most notorious thief and wicked outlaw , which have live all his time of spoil and robbery , one of their bard in his praise find , that he be none of those idle mylkesoppe that be bring up by the fire side , but that most of his day he spend in arm and valiant enterprise ; that he never do eat his meat before he have win it with his sword ; that he lie not slugginge all night in a cabben under his mantle , but use common to keep other wake to defend their life , and do light his candle at the flame of their house to lead he in the darkness ; that the day be his night , and the night his day ; that he love not to lie woo of wench to yealde to he , but where he come he take by force the spoil of other man love , and leave but lamentacon to their lover ; that his music be not the harp , nor lay of love , but the cry of people , and clashinge of armour , and that final , he die not wail of many , but [ make ] many wail when he die , that dear buy his death . do you not think , Eudoxus , that many of these praise may be apply to man of best desert ? yet be they all yield to most notable traitor , and amongst some of the irish not smal account of . for the same , when it be first make and soung unto a person of high degree , they be buy as their manner be , for forty crown . Eudox : and well worth sure . but tell i i pray you , have they any art in their composicon ? or be they any thing witty or well favour , as poem shall be ? iron : yea true ; i have cause diverse of they to be translate unto i that i may understand they ; and sure they savour of sweet wit and good invencon , but skill not of the goodly ornament of poetry : yet be they sprinkle with some pretty flower of their own natural devise , which give good grace and comeliness unto they , the which it be great pity to see so good a ornament abuse , to the grace of wickedness and vice , which will with good usage serve to beautify and adorn virtue . this evil custom therefore need reformacon . and now next after the irish kern , i seem the irish horse boy will come well in order , the use of which though necessary ( as time now be ) do enforce , yet in the reformacon of that realm they shall be cut of . for the cause why they must be now permit be the want of convenient inn for lodging of traveller on horseback , and of ostler to tend their horse by the way . but when thing shall|be reduce to a better pass , this need special to be reform ; for out of the fry of these rakehelly horseboye , grow up in knavery and villainy , be their kern contynewal supply and maintain . for have benn once bring up a idle horseboye , he will never after fall to labour , but be only make fit for the halter . and these also ( the which be one foul oversight ) be for the most part breed up amongst Englishman , and soldier , of who learning to shoot a piece , and be make acquaint with all the trade of the english , they be afterwards , when they become kern , make more fit to cut their throat . next to this there be another much like , but much more lewd and dishonest ; and that be , of their carrowe , which be a kind of people that wander up and down gentleman house , live only upon card and dice , the which , though they have little or nothing of their own , yet will they play for much money , which if they win , they waste most light , and if they loose , they pay as slender , but make recompense with one stealth or another , who only hurt be not , that they themselves be idle losselle , but that through gayminge they draw other to like lewdness and idleness . and to these may be add another sort of like loose fellow , which do pass up and down amongst gentleman by the name of jester , but be in deed notable roges , and partaker not only of many stealth by set forth other man good to be steal , but also privy to many traitorous practice , and common carrier of news , with desire whereof you will wonder how much the irish be feed : for they use common to send up and down to know news , and if any meet another , his second word be , what news ? in so much that hereof be tell a pretty jest of a Frenchman , who have be sometime in Ireland , where he make their great enquiry for news , and meet afterwards in France a Irishman who he know in Ireland , first salute he , and afterwards thus mere : sir , i pray you ( quoth he ) tell i of courtesy , have you hear yet any thing of the news that you so much inquire for in your country ? Eudox : this argue sure in they a great desire of innovacon , and therefore these occasion which nourish the same be to be take away , as namely , these jester , carrowe , mora-shite , and all such straggler , for who i seem the short riddance of a martial be meet than any ordinance or prohibicon to restrain they . therefore , i pray you , leave all this brablement of such loose runagate , and pass to some other custom . iron : there be a great use among the irish , to make great assembly together upon a Rath or hill , there to parley ( as they say ) about matter and wrong between township and township , or one private person and another . but well i wot , that know , it have be oftentimes approve , that in these meeting many mischief have benn both practise and wrought : for to they do common resort all the scum of loose people , where they may free meet and confer of what they listen , which else they can not do without suspicon or knowledge of other . beside , at these parley i have diverse time know that many Englishman , and other good irish subject , have benn villanous murder , by move one quarrel or another amongst they . for the irish never come to those rathe but arm , whether on horseback or on foot , which the english nothing suspect , be then common take at advantagge like sheep in the pynfolde . Eudox : it may be iron : that abuse may be in these meeting . but these round hill and square bawne , which you see so strong trench and throw up , be ( they say ) at first ordain for the same purpose , that people may assemble themselves thereon ; and therefore auncientlye they be call Folkmotes , that be , a place for people to meet or talk of any thing that concern any difference between party and towneshipe , which seem yet to i very requisite . iron : you say very true , eudox : the first make of these high hill be at first indeed to very good purpose for people to meet ; but though the time when they be first make , may well serve to good occasion , as perhaps they do then in England , yet thing be since alter , and now Ireland much differ from that stae of England , the good use that then be of they be now turn to abuse ; for those hill whereof you speak , be ( as you may gather by read ) appoint for two special use , and build by two several nation . the one be those which you call folke-mote , the which be build by the saxon , as the word bewray ; for it signify in Saxone a meeting of folk or people , and those be for the most part in form four square , well trench for the meeting of that [ blank ] . the other that be round , be cast up by the Dane , as the name of they do betoken ; for they be call danerath , that be , hill of the Dane , the which be by they devise , not for parley and treaty , but appoint as fort for they to gather unto in troublesome time , when any tumult arise ; for the Dane , be but a few in comparison of the saxon , use this for their safety . they make these small round hill , so strong fence , in every quarter of the hundred , to the end that if in the night , or at any other time , any cry or uproar shall happen , they may repair with all speed unto their own fort , which be appoint for their quarter , and there remain sayfe , till they can assemble themselves in great strength : for they be make so strong , with one small entrance , that whosover come thither first , be he one or twoe , or like few , he or they may rest safe , and defend themselves against many , till more succour come unto they ; and when they be gather to a sufficient number they march to the next fort , and so forward till they meet with the peril , or know the occasion thereof . but beside these twoe sort of hill , there be ancient diverse other ; for some be raise , where there have be a great battle , as a memory or trophy thereof ; other , as monument of buryall of the carcase of all those that be slay in any fight , upon who they do throw up such round mount , as memorial for they , and sometime do cast up great heap of stone , as you may read the like in many place of the scripture , and other while they do throw up many round heap of earth in a circle , like a garland , or pitch many long stone on end in compass , every one of which they say , betoken some worthy person of note there slay and bury ; for this be their ancient custom , before Christianity come in amongst they that churchyard be enclose . Eudox : you have very well declare the original of these mount and great stone encompass , which some vain term the old giant tryvett , and think that these huge stone will not else be bring into order or rear up without the strength of giant . and other as vain think that they be never place there by man hand or art , but only remain there since the begin , and be afterward discover by the deluge , and lay open by the wash of the water , or other like casullytie . but let they dream their own imaginacon to please themselves ; but you have satisfy i much better , both by that i see some confirmacon thereof in the holy wrytt , and also remember that i have read in many history and chronicle the lie mount and stone oftentimes mencon . iron : there be many great authority , i assure you , to prove the same ; but as for these meeting on hill , whereof we be much speak , it be very inconvenient that any such shall be permit , special in a people so evil mind as they now be and diverse show themselves . Eudox : but it be very needful i seem for many other purpose , as for the country to gather together when there be any imposicon to be lay upon they , to the which they then all agree att such meeting to cut and divide upon themselves , accord to their holding and ability . so as if att these assembly there be any officer , as constable , bailiff , or such like amongst they , there can be no peril or doubt of such bad practice . iron : nevertheless , dangerous be such assembly , whether for cease or ought else , the constable and officer be also of the irish ; and if there happen there to be of the english , even to they they may prove perilous . therefore for avoid of all such evil occasion , they be best to be abolish . Eudox : but what be that which you call cease ? it be a word sure unuse amongst we here ; therefore i pray you expound the same . iron : cease be none other but that your self call imposicon , but it be in a kind unacquainted perhaps unto you . for there be cess of sundry sort ; one the cessing of soldier upon the country ; for Ireland be a country of war as it be handle , and all way full of souldyor , they which have the government , whether they find it the most ease to the queen purse , or most ready mean at hand for the victualinge of soldier , or that necessity enforce they thereunto , do scatter the army abroad the country , and place they in town to take their victual of they , att such vacant time as they lie not in camp , nor be otherwise employ in service . another kind of cease , be the imposinge of provision for the governor house keep , which though it be most necessary , and be also , for avoid of all the evil former therein use , late bring to a composicon , yet it be not without great inconvenience , no less than here in England , or rather much moor . the like cease be also charge upon the country sometime for victuallinge of the souldyor , when they lie in garrison , at such time as when there be none remain in the queen store , or that the same can convenient be convey to their place of garrison . but these twoe be not easy to be redress when necessity thereto compel ; but as the former , as it be not necessary , so it [ be ] most hurtful and offensyve to the poor country , and nothing convenient to the souldyor himself , who during his lie at cease , use all kind of outrageous disorder and villainy , both towards the poor man that victell and lodge they , and also to all the rest of the country round about they , who they abuse , spoil , and afflict by all the mean they can invent : for they will not only content themselves with such victual as their host do provide they , nor yet as the place will afford , but they will have their meat provide for they , and aqua vitae send for ; yea and money beside lay at his trencher , which if he want , then about the house he walk with the wretched poor man and the silly poor wief , who be glad to purchase their peace with any thing . by which vile manner of abuse , the country people , yea and the very english which dwell abroad and see , and sometime feel these outrage , grow into great detestacon of the souldyor , and thereby into hatred of the very government , which draw upon they such evil : and therefore this you may also join with the former evil custom which you have to reprove in Ireland . Eudox : true this be one not the least , and though the person , of who it be use be of better note than the former roguish sort which you reckon , yet the fault [ be ] no less worthy of a martial . iron : that be a hard corpse , Eudoxus , to redress every abuse by a martial : it will seem to you evil sugery to cut of every unsound sick part of the body , which , be by other due mean recover , may afterward do very good service to the body again , and haply help to save the whole : therefore i think better that some good salve for redress of this evil be seek forth , than the least part suffer to perish . but hereof we have to speak in another place . now we will proceed to the other like defect , among which there be one general inconvenience which rain almost throughout all Ireland : and that of the lord of land , and freeholders , who do not there use to set out their land to farm , or for term of year , to their tenant , but only from year to year , and some during pleasure ; neither indeed will the irish tenant or husband otherwise take his land then so long as he listen himself . the reason hereof in the tenant be , for that the landlord there use most shameful to rack their tenant , lay upon he coygnie and livery at pleasure , and exact of he beside his covenant , what he please . so that the poor husbandman either dare not bind himself to he for long time , or that he think by his continual liberty of change to keep his landlord the rather in awe from wronginge of he . and the reason why the landlord will not long covenant with he be , for that he daily look for change and alteracon , and hover in expectacon of new world . Eudox : but what evil come hereby to the commonwealth ? or what reason be it that any landlord shall not set , nor any tennante take his land as himself list ? iron : marry , the evil that come hereby be great , for by this mean both the landlord think that he have his tennante more at command , to follow he into what accon soever he will enter , and also the tenant , be leave at his liberty , be fit for every variable occasion of change that shall|be offer by time : and so much also the more willing and ready be he to run into the same , for that he have not such estate in any his hold , no such building upon any farm , no such cost employ in fence and hubandinge the same , as may withhold he from any such wilful corpse , as his lord cause , and his own lewd disposicon may carry he unto . all which he have forbear , and spare so much expense , for that he have no former estate in his tenement , but be only a tennante at will or little more , and so at will may leave it . and this inconvenience may be reason enough to ground any ordinance for the good of a commonwealth , against the private behoof or will of any landlord that shall refuse to grant any such term or estate unto his tennante as may tend to the good of the whole realm . Eudox : indeed i seem it be a great wilfulness in any such landlord to refuse to make any long farm to their tenant , as may , beside the general good of the realm , be also great for their own profit and avail : for what reasonable man will not think that the tenement shall|be make much the better for the lord behoof , if the tennante may by such mean be draw to build himself some handsome habitacon thereof , to dytch and enclose his ground , to manure and husband it as good farmer use ? for when his tenant term shall|be expire , it will yield he , in the renew his lease , both a good fine , and also a better rend . and also it will be for the good of the tenent likewise , who by such building and enclosure shall receive many benefit : first , by the handsomeness of his house , he shall take great comfort of his lief , more safe dwell , and a delight to keep his say house neat and cleanly , which now be , as they common be , rather swyne-steade than house , be the chief cause of he so beastly manner of life , and saluaige condicon , lie and live together with his beast in one house , in one room , and in one bed , that be the clean straw , or rather the foul dunghill . and to all these other commodity he shall in short time find a great add , that be his own wealth and riches increase , and wonderful enlarge , by keep his cattle in enclosure , where they shall always have fresh pasture , that now be all trample and over run ; warm cover , that now lie open to all weather ; safe be , that now be continual filch and steal . iron : you have well , Eudoxus , account the commodity of this one good ordinance , amongst which this that you have name last be not the jest : for all other be most beneficial both to the landlord and the tenant , this chief redound to the good of the commonwealth , to have the land thus enclose , and well fence . for it be both a principal bar and impeachment unto thief from steal of cattle in the night , and also a gall against all rebel and outlaw , that shall rise up in any number against government ; for the thief thereby shall have much adooe , first to bring forth , and afterward to drive [ away ] his steal prey but through the common high way , where he shall soon be descry and meet withal : and the rebel or open enemy , if any such shall happen , either at home , or from abroad , shall easy be find when he come forth , and be well encounter withal by a few in so straight passage and strong enclosure . This , therefore , when we come to the reform of all these evil custom before mencon , be needful to be remember . but now by this time i seem that i have well run through the evil use which i have observe in Ireland . nevertheless i will note that many more there be , and infinite many more in the private abuse of man . but those that be most general , and tend to the hurt of the common wealth , as they have come to my remembrance , i have as brief as i can rehearse unto you . and therefore i think best that we pass to our third part , in which we note inconvenience that be in religion . Eudox : sure you have very well handle these rwoe former , and if you shall as well go through the third likewise , you shall merit a very good meed . iron : little have i to say of religion , both because the part thereof be not many , it self be but one , and my self have not be much conversant in that call , but as light pass bye i have see or hear : therefore the fault which i find in religion be but one , but the same universal throughout all that country ; that be , that they be all papist by their profession , but in the same so blind and brutish inform , for the most part , as that you will rather think they atheist or infidel , for not one amongst a hundred know any ground of religion , and any article of his faith , but can perhaps , say his pater noster , or his have maria , without any knowledge or understand what one word thereof mean . Eudox : this be true a most pyttifull hear that so many soul shall fall into the devils hand at once and lack the bless comfort of the sweet gospel and Christ dear passion . aye i , how come it to pass , that be a people , as they be , trade with so many nacon and frequent of so many , yet they have not taste any part of those happy joy , nor once be lighten with the morning star of truth , but lie mellinge in such sperituall darkness hard by hell mouth , eaver ready to fall in , if God happy help not ? iron : the general fault come not of any late abuse either in the people or their priest , who can teach [ no ] better than [ they ] know , nor show no more light than they have see , but in the first instruccon , and plant religion in all that realm , which be i read in the time of pope Calestine , who , as it be write , do first send over thither Pallidaius , who thence decreasinge , he afterward send over saint Patrick , be by nacon a Brytton , who convert the people , be then infidel , from paganism , and christen they : in which pope time and long before , it be certain that religion be general corrupt with their popish trumpery . therefore what other cold they learn , than such trash as be teach they and drink of that cup of fornicacon [ with ] which the purple harlot have then make all nacon drunken ? Eudox : what , do you then blame and find fault with so good a act in that good pope , as the reduce of such a great people to Christendom , bring so many soul to Christe ? if that be ill , what be good ? iron : i do not blame the Christendom of they : for to be seal with the mark of the lamb , by what hand so ever it be do right , i hold it a good and gracious mark , for the general profession which [ they ] than take upon they at the cross and faith in Christe . i nothing doubt but through the powerful grace of that mighty saviour [ it ] will work salvacon in many of they . but nevertheless since they drouncke not of the pure springe of life , but only taste of such trouble water as be bring unto they , the drag thereof have bring a great contagion in their soul , the which daily encresinge and be still more augment with their own lewd life and filthy conversacon , have now breed in they this general disease that can but only with very strong purgacon , be cleanse and carry away . Eudox : then for this defect you find no fault with the people themselves , nor with the priest which take the charge of soul , but with the first ordinance and institucon thereof . iron : not so , eudox : for the sin or ignorance of the priest shall not excuse the people , nor the authority of their great pastor , Peter successor , shall not excuse the priest , but they all shall dye in their sin : for they have all err and go out of the way together . Eudox : but if this ignorance of the people be such burden unto the pope , be it not a like blot to they that now hold that place , in that they which now be in the light themselves suffer a people under their care to wallow in such deadly darkness ? for i do not see that the fault be change but the faultiness . iron : that which you blame , Eudoxus , be not i suppose any fault of will in these godly father which have charge thereof , nor any defect of zeal for reformacon , but the inconvenience of the time and troublous occasion , wherewith that wretched realm have be continual turmoil ; for instruccon in religion need quiet time , and ere we seek to settle a sound discypline in the clergy , we must purchase [ peace ] unto the laity , for it be ill time to preach amongst sword , and most hard , or rather ympossible , it be to settle a good opinion in the mind of man for matter of religion dowbtfull , which have dowbtles evil opinion of ourselves ; for ere a new be bring in , the old must be remove . Eudox : then belike it be meet that some fit time be attend , that God send peace and quietness there in civil matter before it be attempt in ecclesiastical . i will rather have think that as it be say , correccon shall begin at the house of God , and that the care of the soul shall have benn prefer before the care of the body . iron : most true , Eudoxus , the care of the soul and soul matter be to be prefer before the care of the body , in consideracon of the worthiness thereof , but not in the time of reformacon ; for if you shall know a wicked person dangerous sick , have now both soul and body great disease , yet both recoverable , will you not think it ill advertisement to bring the preacher before the phisicon ? for if his body be neglect , it be like that his languish soul be disquiet by his diseaseful body , will utter refuse and loathe all spiritual comfort . but if his body be first recure , and bring to good frame , shall there not then be find best time to to recure his soul also ? so it be in the stae of a realm : therefore as i say it be expedient , first to settle such a course of government there , as thereby both civil disorder and ecclesiastical abuse may be reform and amend , whereto need not any such great distance of time , as you suppose i require , but one joint resolucon for both , that each may second and confirm the other . Eudox : that we shall see when we come thereto : in the mean time i consider thus much , as you have deliver , touch the general fault which you suppose in religion , to weet , that it be popish ; but do you find no particular abuse therein , in the minister thereof ? iron : yes very ; for what ever disorder you see in the church of England you may find there , and many more : namely , gross simony , greedy covetousness , fleshly incontinence , careless slougth , and general all disorder lief in the common clergieman . and beside all these , they have their own particular enormity ; for all the irish priest , which now enjoy the church living there , be in a manner mere layman , so like layman [ that they ] live like layman , follow all kind of hubandrye and other worldly affair , as the other irish layman do . they nether read scripture , nor preach to the people , nor minister the sacrament of communion ; but the baptism they do , for they christen yet after the popish fashion , and with the popish latin mynistracon , only they take the tithe and offering , and gather what fruit else they may of their live ; the which they convert as bad . and some of they they say pay as due tributt and share of their live to their bishop , ( ispeake of those which be irish ) as they receive they du . Eudox : but be that suffer amongst they ? it be wonder but that the governor redress such shameful abuse . iron : how can they , since they know they not ? for the irish bishop have their clergy in such awe and subjeccon under they , that they dare not complain of they , so as they may do to they what they please , for they know their own unworthiness and incapacity , and that they be therefore removable att their bishop will , yield what please he , and he take what he list : yea , and some of they who diocese be in remote part , somewhat out of the world eye , do not att all bestow the benefice , which be in their own devocon , upon any , but keep they in their own hand , and set their own servant and horseboye to take up the tithe and frauct of they , with the which some of they purchase great land , and build fair castle upon the same . of which abuse if any question be move , they have a very seemly colour of excuse , that they have no worthy minister to bestow they upon , but keep they so unbestow for any such sufficient person as any shall bring unto they . Eudox : but be there no law or ordinance to meet with this mischief ? nor have it never before be look into ? iron : yes , it seem it have ; for there be a statute there enact in Ireland , which seem to have benn ground upon a good meaning -- that whatsoever Englisheman be of good conversacon and sufficiency , shall|be bring unto any of those bishop , and nominate unto any live within their dyoce that be present void , that he shall without contradiccon be admit thereunto before any irish . Eudox : this be sure a very good law , and well provide for this evil , whereof you speak : and why be not the same observe ? iron : i think it be well observe , and that none of the bishop transgress the same , but yet it work no reformacon hereof for many respect . first there be no such sufficient english minister send over as may be present to any bishop for any live , but the most part of such english as come over thither of they self be either unlearned , or man of some bad note , for the which they have forsake England . so as the bishop , to who they shall|be present , may just rejecte they as incapable and insufficient . second , the bishhop himself be perhaps a irish man , who be make judge by that law of the sufficiency of the minister , may at his own will , dislike of the Englisheman , as unworthy in his opinion , and admytt of any other irish who he shall think more fit for his turn . and if he shall at the instance of any Englishman of countennance there , who he will not displease , accept of any such english minister as shall tender unto he , yet he will under hand carry such a hard hand over he , or by his officer wring he so sore , that he will soon make he weary of his poor live . last , the benefice themselves be so mean , and of so small proffitt in those irish country , through the ill husbandry of the irish people which inhabit they , that they will not yield any competent maintenance for any honest minister to live upon , scarce to buy he a gown . and be all this redress , as happy it may be , yet what good shall any english minister doe among they , by preach or teach which either can understand he , or will not hear he ? or what comfort of lief shall he have , where his parishioner be so insacyable , so intractable , so ill-affected to he , as they usual be to all the english ? or final , how dare almost any honest minister , that be peaceful civil man , commit his saifetie to the hand of such neighbour , as the bold captain dare scarce dwell by ? Eudox : little good then i see be by that statute wrought , how ever well intend ; but the reformacon thereof must grow high , and be bring from a strong ordinance than the commandment or penalty of a law , which none dare inform or complain of when it be break : but have you any more of these abuse in the clergy ? iron : i can perhaps reckon more , but i perceive my speech to grow to long , and these may suffice to judge of the general disorder which reign among they ; as for the particular , they be too many to be reckon . for the clergy there , except some few grave father which be in high place about the state , and some other which be late plant in their new college , be general bad , licentious , and most disorder . Eudox : you have then , as i suppose , go through these three first part which you purpose unto your self , to wit , the inconvenience which you observe in the law , in the custom , and in the religion of that land the which i seem , you have so thorough touch , as that nothing more remain now to be speak thereof . iron : not so thorough as you suppose , that nothing more can remain , but so general as i purpose ; that be , to lay open the general evil of that realm , which do hinder the good reformacon thereof ; for to account the particular fault of private man , shall be a work infinite ; yet some there be of that nature , that though they be in private man , yet their evil reach to a general hurt , as the extorcon of sheriff , subsheriffe , and their bailiff , the corrupcon of victualler , cessor , and purveryor , the disorder of shenescalle , captain , and their soldier , and many such like : all which i will only name here , that their reformacon may be mind in place where it most concern . but there be one very foul abuse which , by the way , i may not omit , and that be in captain , who notwithstanding that they be special employ to make peace through strong execucon of war , yet they do so dandle their do , and dally in their service to they commit , as if they will not have the enemy subdue , or utter beat down , for fear jest afterwards they shall need employment , and so be dischrge of pay : for which cause some of they that be lay in garrison do so handle the matter , that they will do no great hurt to the enemy , yet for colour sake some man they will kill , even half with the consent of the enemy , be person either of base regard , or enemy to the enemy , who head eftsoon they send in to the governor for a commendacon of their great endeavour , tell how weighty a service they have perform by cut of such and such dangerous rebel . Eudox : true this be a pretty mockery , and not to be permit by the governor . iron : yes , but how can the governor know ready what person those wear , and what the purpose of their kill be ? yea , and what will you say , if the captain do justify this their course by ensample of some of their governor , who , under benedicite , i do tell it to you , do practise the like sleight in their government ? Eudox : be it possible ? take heed what you say , Irenius . iron : to you , you only , Eudoxus , i do tell it , and that even with great heart grief , and inward trouble of mind , to see her majesty so much abuse by some who they put in special trust of their affair : of which some , be martial man , will not will not do always what they may for quiet of thing , but will rather wink at some fault , and suffer they unpunished , jest they have put all thing in that assurance of peace that they may , they shall seem afterward not to be need , nor continue in their government with so great a charge to her majesty . and therefore they do cunning carry their course of government , and from one hand to another do bandy the service like a tennys-balle , which they will never strike quite away , for fear jest afterward they shall want sport . Eudox : do you speak of under magistrate , Irenius , or of principal governor ? iron : i do speak of no particular , but the truth may be find out by trial and reasonable insight into some of their do . and if i shall say there be some blame thereof in some of the principal governor , i think i may also show some reasonable proof of my speech . for by that which i and many have observe , the like may be gather . as for ensample , some of they feinge the end of their government to draw nigh , and some mischief or troublous practice grow up , which afterward may work trouble to the next succeed governor , will not attempt the redress or cut of thereof , either for fear they shall leave the realm unquiet att the end of their government , or that the next that come shall receive the same to quiet , and so happy win more praise thereof then they before . and therefore they will not as i say , seek at all to redress that evil , but will either by grant proteccon for a time , or hold some enparlance with the rebel , or by treaty of commissioner , or other like devise , only smother and keep down the flame of the mischief , so as it may not break out in their time of government : what come afterward they care not , or rather wish the worst . this course have be note in some governor . Eudox : sure Irenius this , if it be true , shall be worthy of a heavy judgement : but it be hard to be think , that any governor shall so much either envy the good of that realm which be put into his hand , or defraud her majesty , who trust he so much , or malign his successor which shall possess his place , as to suffer a evil to grow up , which he may time have keep under , or perhaps to nourish it with colour countenance , or such synister mean . iron : i do not certain avouch , Eudoxus : but the sequel of thing do in a manner prove , and plain speak so much , that the governor usual be envious one of another great glory , which if they will seek to excel by better govern , it shall be a most laudable emulacon . but they do quite otherwise : for this ( as you may mark , ) be the common order of they , that who come next in place will not follow that course of government , how ever good , which his predecessor hold , or for desdaine of himself , or doubt to have his do drown in another man praise , but will straight take a way quite contrary to the former : as if the former thought by keep under the irish , to reform they , the next , by discontynencinge the english will curry favour with the irish and so make his government seem plausible in view , as have all the irish at his command : but he that come next after will perhaps follow neither one nor other , but will dandle one and other in such sort , as he will suck sweet out of they both , and leave bitterness to the poor land , which if he that come after shall seek to redress , he shall perhaps find such cross as he shall|be hardly able to bear , or do any good that may work disgrace of his predecessor . Ensmples hereof you may see in the governor of late time sufficient , and in other of former time more manifest , when the government of that realm be commit sometime to the geraldynes , as when the house of York hold the crown of England ; sometime to the butler , as when the house of Lancaster get the same . and other while , when a english governor be appoint , he perhaps find enemy of both . and this be the wretchedness of that fatal kingdom which , i think , therefore in old time be not call amiss Ranna or sacra insula , takingesacra for accurse . Eudox : i be sorry to hear so much as you report ; and now i begin to conceive somewhat more of the cause of her continual wretchedness then heretofore i find , and i wish that this inconvenyence be look into : for sure i seem it be more weighty than all the former , and more hardly to be redress in the governor then in the govern ; as a malady in a vital part be more incurable than in a external . iron : you say very true ; but now that we have thus end all the abuse and inconvenience of that government , which be our first part , it follow next to speak of the second part , which be of the mean to cure and redress the same , which we must labour to reduce to the first beginning thereof . Eudox : right so Irenius : for by that which i have note in all this your discourse , you suppose that the whole ordinance and institucon of that realm government be , both att first when it be place , evil plot , and also since , through other oversight , run more out of square , [ to ] that disorder which it be now come unto ; like as twoe indirect line , the further they be draw out , the further they go asunder . iron : i do see , Eudoxus and as you say , so think , that the long that government thus continu , in the worse case will that realm be ; for it be all in vain that they now strive and endeavour by fair mean and peaceable plot to redress the same without first remove all those inconvenience , and new frame , as it be in the forge , all that be wear out of fashion : for all other mean will|be but lose labour , by patch up one hole to make many ; for the irish do strong hate and abhor all reformacon and subjeccon to the english , by reason that , have be once subdue by they , they be thrust out of all their possession . so as now they fear , that if they be again bring under , they shall likewise be expel out of all , which be the cause that they hate english government , accordine to the say , quem metuunt oderunt : therefore the reformacon must now be with the strength of a great power . Eudox : but , i think , that may be by make of good law , and establish of new statute , with sharp penalty and punishment for amend of all that be present amiss , and not as you suppose , to begin all as it be anew , and to alter the whole form of the government ; which how dangerous a thing it be to attempt , you your self must needs confess , and they which have the manage of the realm whole policy , can , without great cause , fear and refrain : for all innovacon be perilous , in so much as though it be mean for the better , yet so many accident and fearful event may come between , as that it may hazard the loss of the whole . iron : very true , Eudoxus ; all change be to be shunde , where the affair stand in such state as that they may continue in quitnes , or be assure at all to abide as they be . but that in the realm of Ireland we see much otherwise , for every day we perceive the trouble grow more upon we , and one evil grow upon another , in so much as there be no part find nor ascertain , but all have their ear upright , wait when the watchword shall come that they shall all rise general into rebellion , and cast away the english sujeccon . to which there now little want ; for i think the word be already give , and there want nothing but opportunity , which true be the death of one noble person , who , be himself most steadfast to his noble queen and his country , coast upon the south sea , stop the ingate of all that evil which be look for , and hold in all those which be at his back , with the terror of his greatness , and the|assurance of his most immovable loyalltye : and therefore where you think , that good and sound law may amend and reform thing amiss there , you think sure amiss . for it be vain to prescribe law , where no man care for keep of they , nor fear the danger for break of they . but all the realm be first to be reform , and law afterward to be make for keep and continue it in that reform estate . Eudox : how then do you think be the reformacon thereof to begin , if not by the law and ordinance ? iron : even by the sword ; for all those evil must first be cut away with a strong hand , before any good can be plant ; like as the corrupt branch and unwholesome law be first to be prune , and the foul moss cleanse or scrape away , before the tree can bring forth any good fruit . Eudox : do you blame i , even now , for wish Kerne , horse-boi , and carrowe to be clean cut of , as too violent a mean , and do your self now prescribe the same medicine ? be not the sword the most violent redress that may be use for any evil ? iron : it be so ; but yet where no other remedy may be find , nor no hope of recovery have , there must needs this violent mean be use . as for the loose kind of people which you will have cut off , i blame it , for that they may otherwise perhaps be bring to good , as namely by this way which i set before you . Eudox : be not your way all one with the former , in effect , which you find falte with , save only this odds , that i say by the halter , and you say by the sword ? what difference be there ? iron : there be sure great , when you shall understand it ; for by the sword , which i name , i do not mean the cut off of all that nacon with the sword , which far be it from i , that ever i shall think so desperate , or wish so uncharitable , but by the sword i mean the royal power of the prince , which ought to stretch it self forth in their chief strength to the redressinge and cut of of those evil , which i before blame , and not of the people which be evil . for evil people by good ordnance and government may be make good ; but the evil that be of it self evil , will never become good . Eudox : i pray you then declare your mind at large , how you will wish that sword , which you mean , to be use to the reformacon of those evil . iron : the first thing must be to send over into that realm such a strong power of man , as that shall perforce bring in all that rebellious rout of loose people , which either do now stand out in open arm , or in wander company do keep the wood , spoil and infestinge the good subject . Eudox : you speak now , Iren. , of a infinite charge to her majesty , to send over such a army as shall tread down all that stand before they on foot , and lie on the ground all the stiffnecked people of that land ; for there be now but one outlaw of any great reckon , to wit , the earl of Tyrone , abroad in arm , against who you see what huge charge she have be att this last year , in send of man , provide of victual , and make head against he : yet there be little or nothing at all do , but the queen treasure spend , her people waste , the poor country trouble , and the enemy nevertheless bring into no more subjeccon than he be , or listen outward to show , which in effect be none , but rather a scorn of her power , and emboldeninge of a proud rebel , and a encouragement unto all like lewd dispose traitor that shall dare to lift up their heel against their sovereign lady . therefore it be hard counsel to draw such a exceed charge upon she , who event shall be so uncertain . iron : true indeed , if the event shall be uncertain ; but the certainty of theffecte hereof shall so infallible as that no reason can gain say it , nether shall the charge of all this army , which i demand , be much great than so much as in this last twoe year war have vain benn expend . for i dare undertake that it have cost the queen above 200000 pound already , and for the present charge , that she be now att there , amount to the very near 2000 pound a month whereof cast you the count ; yet nothing be do . the which some , have it benn employ as it shall be , will have effect all this that i now go about . Eudox : how mean you to have it employ , but to be spend in the pay of souldyor , and provision of victual ? iron : right so , but it be now not disburse at once , as it may be , but draw out into a long length , by send over now 20000 pound , and next half year 10000 pound ; so as the soldier in the mean time , be for want of due provision of victual , and good payment of his due , starve and consume ; that of a 1000 , which come over lusty able man , in half a year there be not leave 500 and yet be the queen charge never the less , but what be not pay in present money be account in debt , which will not be long unpaid ; for the captain , half of who souldyor be dead , and other quarter never muster , nor see , come short to demand payment here of his whole account , where , by good mean of some great one , and privy sharinge with the officer and servant of other some , he receive his debt , much less perhaps then be due , yet much more indeed than he just deserve . Eudox : i take this , sure , to be no good husbandry ; for what must needs be spend , at once , where be enough , as to have it draw out into long delay , sing that thereby both the service be much hinder , and yet nothing save : but it may be the queen treasure be so great a some together , but be pay as it be , now some and then some , it be no great burden unto she , nor any great ympoverishment to her coffer , sing by such delay of time that it daily come in so fast as she pour it out . iron : it may be as you say , but for the go through of so honourable a course i doubt not but if the queen coffer be not so well store , which we be not to look into , but that the whole realm which now , as thing be use , do feel a continual burden of that wretched realm hang upon their back , will , for a final ryddance of that trouble , be once trouble for all ; and put to all their shoulder , and help hand , and heart also , to the defray of that charge , most gladfullie and willing ; and sure the charge , in effect , be nothing to the infinite great good which shall come thereby , both to the queen , and all this realm genarallye , as when time serve shall show . Eudox : how many man then will you require to the finnish of this which you take in hand ? and how long space will you have they entertain ? iron : very , not above ten thousand footman , and a 1000 horse , and all those not above the space of one year and a half ; for i will still , as the heat of the service abate , abate the number in pay , and make other provision for they , as i will show . Eudox : sure , it seem not much that you require , nor no long time : but how will you have they use ? will you lead forth your army against the enymie , and seek he where he be to fight ? iron : no , eudox . , it will not be , for it be well know that he be a fly enemy , hide himself in wood and bog , from whence he will not draw forth , but into some straight passage or perilous ford where he know the army most need pass ; there will he lie in wait , and , if he find advantage fit , will dangerous hazard the trouble soldier . therefore to seek he owte that still fly , and follow he that can hard be find , be vain and bootless ; but i will divide my man in garrison upon his country , in such place as i will think might most annoy he . Eudox : but how can that be , Iren. , with so few man ? for enemy , as you now see , be not all in one countyre , but some in Ulster , some in connaug , and other in Leinster . so as to plaint strong garrison in all these place shall need many more man than you speak of , or to plaint all in one , and to leave the rest naked , shall be but to leave they to the spoil . iron : i will wish the chief power of the army to be garrison in one country that be strong , and the other upon the rest that be weak : as for example , the earl of Terrone be now count the strong ; upon he will i lay 8000 man in garrison , 1000 upon Pheagh mac-hugh and the cavanaghe , and 1000 upon some part of Connaghe to be at the direction of the governor . Eudox : i see now all your man bestow , but in what place will you set their garrison that they may rise out most convenientlye to service ? and though perhaps i be ignorant of the place , yet i will take the map of Ireland before i , and make my eye in the mean while my schoolmasters , to guide my understand to judge of your plot . iron : these 8000 in Ulster i will divide likewise into four part , so as their shall be 2000 footman in every garrison ; the which i will thus place . upon the blackwater , in some convenient place , high upon the river as may be , i will lay one garrison . another will i put at Castlelisser or castlefine thereabouts , so as they shall have all the passage upon the river to Loghfoyle . the three i will place about Fermaugh or Bondroise , so as they may lie between Connaugh and Ulster , to serve upon both side , as occasion shall|be offer ; and this therefore will i have strong than any of the rest , because it shall be most enforce , and most employ , and that they may put ward at Ballashanon , belike , and all those passage . the rest will i set about Mannaghan or Belterbert , so as it shall front both upon thenymie that way , and also keep the county of Cavan a meath in awe from pass of straggler , and out gader from those part , whence they use to come forth , and oftentimes work much mischief . and to every of these garrison of 2000 footman , i will have 200. horseman add , for one without other can do but little service . the four garrison , thus be place , i will have to be victual aforehand for half a year , which you will say to be hard , consider the corruption and usual waste of victual . but why shall they not be aswell victual for so long time , as the shipe be usual for a year , and sometime twoe , sing it be easy to keep they on land then on water ? there bread will i have in flower , so as it may be bake still to serve there want . there drink also there brew within they , from time to time , and their beef before hand barrel , the which may be use as it be need ; for i make no doubt but of fresh victual they will sometime purvay themselves among their enemy Crete . here unto will i also have they have a store of hose and shoe , with such other necessary as may be needful for soldier , so as they shall have no occasion to look for relief from abroad , or occasion such trouble , for their continual supply , as i see and have often prove in Ireland to be more coumberous to the deputy , and more dangerous to they that relief they , then half the lead of a army ; for the enemy , know the ordinary way by which their relief most be bring they , use common to draw himself into the distraught pasage thitherward and oftentimes do dangerous distress they : beside , the pay of such force as shall be send for their convoy , the charge of the carryage , the exaction of the country shall|be spare . but only every half year the supply bring by the deputy himself , and his power , who shall then visit and overlook all those garrison , to see what be need , to change what be expedient , and to direct what he shall best advise . and these four garrison issue forth , at such convenient time as they shall have intelligence or espeiall upon the enemy will so drive he from one stead to another , and tennis he among they , that he shall find no where saif to keep his creet , nor hide himself , but fly from the fire shall fall into the water , and out of one danger into another , that be short time his Crete , which be his most susteniance , shall|be waist with pray , or kill with drivinge , or starve for want of pasture on the wood , and he himself bring so low , that he shall have no art nor abbilitye to endure his wretchedness , the which will sure come to pass in very short space ; for one winter well follow of he will so pluck he on his knee , that he will never be able to stand up again . Eudox : do you then think the winter time fit for the service of Ireland ? how fall it then that our most employment be in summer , and the army then lead common forth ? iron : it be sure misconceive ; for it be not with Ireland as with other country , where the war flame most in summer , and the helmet glister bright in the fair sonneshine : but in Ireland the winter yield best service , for than the tree be bare and naked , which use both to cloth and house the kern ; the ground be can and wet , which use to be his bed ; the air be sharp and bitter , which use to blow through his naked side and leg ; the kyen be barren and without milk , which use to be his only food , neither if he kill they will they yield hime flesh , nor if he keep they will they give he food ; beside then be all in calf for the most part , they will , through much chase and drive , cast all their calf , and loose all their milk , which shall relief he the next summer after . Eudox : i do well understand your reason ; but by your leave , i have hear it other wise say , of some that wear outlaw , that in summer they keep themselves quiet , but in winter will play their part , and when the night wear long , then burn and spoil most , so that they may safe return before day . iron : i have likewise hard and likewise see proof thereof true : but that be of such outlaw as war abiddinge in well inhabit country , as in monster , all a-bordringe to the english pale , as Pheah Mac Hugh , the cavanaghe , the moor , the dempse , the ketinge , the kelly , or such like : for for they indeed the night be the fit time for spoyle and rob , because the night be then , as you say , long and dark , and also the country all about be then full of corn , and good provision to be every where get by they ; but it be far otherwise with a strong people enymye , that possess a whole country , for other be but a few , be indeed privillye lodge , and keep in out village and corner nigh the wood and mountain , by some of their privy friend , to who they bring their spoil and stealth , and of who they continual receive secreete relief ; but the open enymye have all his country waste , what by he , and what by the soldier , find they succour in no place . town there be none of which he may get spoil , they be all burn ; country house and farmer there be none , they be all fleed ; bread he have none , he plow not in summer ; flesh he have , but if he kill it in winter , he shall want milk in summer , and short want life . therefore if they be well follow but one winter , you shall have little work to do with they the next summer . Eudox : i do now well perceive the difference , and do very think that the winter time be there fit for service : withal i perceive the manner of your handle the service , by draweinge sudden draught upon the enemy , when he look not for you , and to watch advantage upon he , as he do upon you . by which straight keep of they in , and not suffer they long at any time to rest , i must needs think that they most soon be bring low , and drive to great extremyty . all which when you have perform , and bring they to the very last cast , suppose that either they will offer to come in unto you and submit themselves , or that some of they will seek to withdraw themselves , what be your advice to do ? will you have they receive ? iron : no ; but at the beginiynge of these war , and when the garrison be well plant and fortyfy , i will wish a proclamacon wear make general to come to there knowledge , that what person soever will within twenty day absolute submite themselves , except onlelye the very principal and ringeleader , shall find grace : i doubt not , but upon the settle of these garrison , such a terror and near consideracon of there perilous estate will be strike into most that they will covett to draw away from their leader . and again i well know that the rebel themselves ( as i see by proof in the Desmonds war ) will turn away all their rascal people , who they think unserviseable , as old man , woman , child , and hind , which they call churl , which will only waste their victual , and yield they no aid ; but their cattle they will sure keep away : these therefore though policy will turn then back again , that they may the reyther consume and afflict the other rebel , yet in a pitiful commiseration , i will wish they to be receive ; then reyther for that this base sort of people do not for the most part rebel of himself , have no heart thereunto , but be of force draw by the grand rebel into their action , and carry away with the violence of the stream , else he shall be sure to loose all that he have , and perhaps his life also , the which now he carri with they , in hope to enjoy they their , but he be there by the strong rebel themselves turn out of all , so that the constraint hereof may in he deserve pardon . liewise if any of there able man or gentleman shall offer to come away , and to bring there creete with they , as some no doubt may steal they away prevelye , i wish they also to be receive , for the disable of thenymye , but withal , that good assurance may be take of their true behayvor and absolute submission , and that they then be not suffer to remain any long in those part , no nor about the garrison , but send away into the inner part of the realm , and disperse in such sort as they shall not come together , nor easy return if they will : for if they may be suffer to remain about the garrison , and there inhabit , as shall offer to till the ground , and yield a great part of the profit thereof , and of their cattle , to the coronel , wherewith they have heretofore tempt many , they will ( as i have by experience know ) be ever after such a gall and inconvenyence to they , as that their profit shall not recompense their hurt ; for they will privy relieve their friend that be forth ; they will send the enemy secret advertisement of all their purpose and journey which they mean to make upon they ; they will also not stick to draw the enemy upon they , yea and to betray the fort it self , by discovery of all defect and disadvantage if any be , to the cut of all their throat . for avoid whereof and many other inconvenience , i wish that they shall be carry far from thence into some other part , so as i say , they come and submit themselves , upon the first summons : but afterward i will have none receive , but leave to their fortune and miserable end : my reason be , for that those which afterward remain without , be stout and obstinate rebel , such as will never be make dutiful and obedient , nor bring to labour or civil conversation , have once taste the licentious life , and be acquaint with spoil and outrage , will ever after be ready for the like occasion , so as there be no hope of their amendment of recovery , and therefore needful to be cut of . Eudox : Surelye of such desperate person , as will follow the course of their own folly , there be no comparison to be have , and for the other you have purpose a merciful mean , much more than they have deserve : but what shall be the conclusion of this war ? for you have prefix a short time of their contenewance . iron : the end i assure i will be very short , and much soon then can be , in so great trouble ( as it seem ) hope for , although there shall none of they fall by the sword , nor be slay by the soldier , yet thus be keepte from manurance , and their cattle from runinge abroad , by this hard restraint , they will quick consume themselves , and devour one a other . the proof whereof i see sufficient ensample in those late war in monster ; for notwithstanding that the same be a most rich and plentiful country , full of corn and cattle , that you will have think they can have be able to stand long , yet ere one year and a half they be bring to such wretchedness , as that any stony heart will have rue the same . out of every corner of the wood and glenn they come creep forth upon their hand , for their leg can not bear they ; they look anatomy [ of ] death , they speak like ghost , cry out of their grave ; they do eat of the carrion , happy where they can find they , yea , and one another soon after , in so much as the very carcase they spare not to scrape out of their grave ; and if they find a plot of watercress or shamrock , their they flock as to a feast for the time , yet not able long to continue therewithal ; that in a short space there be none almost leave , and a most populous and plentiful country sudden leave void of man or beast : yet sure in all that war , there perish not many by the sword , but all by the extreamytie of famine which they themselves have wrought . Eudox : it be a wonder that you tell , and more to be wonder how it shall so short come to pass . iron : it be most true , and the reason also very ready ; for you must conceive that the strength of all that nation be the kearne , Gallowglasse , Stocagh , Horsman , and horseboy , the which have be never use to have any thing of their own , and now live of other , make no spar of any thing but havoc and confusion of all they meet with , whether it be their friend good , or there foe . and if they happen to get never so great spoil at any time , the same they spoil and waste at a trice , as natural delight in spoil , though it do themselves no good . on other side , whatsoever they leave unspent , the soldier , when he come there , he havock and spoil likewise , so that between they both nothing be very short leave . and yet this be very necessary to be do , for the son finyshinge of the war ; and not only this in this wise , but also all those subject which border upon those part , be wyther to be remove and draw away , or likewise to be spoil , that the enymie may find no succour thereby : for what the soldier spare the rebel will sure spoil . Eudox : i do now well understand you . but now when all thing be bring to this pass , and all fill with these rueful spectackle of so many wretched carcase starvinge , goodly country waste , so huge a desolation and confusion , as even i that do but hear it from you , and do picture it in my mind , do great pity and commiserate it , if it shall happen , that the state of this misery and lamentable image of thing shall be tell , and felingelye present to her sacred majesty , be by nature full of mercy and clemency , who be most inclynable to such pitiful complaint , and will not endure to here such tragidye make of her people and poor subject as some about she may insinuate ; then she perhaps , for very compassion of such calamity , will not only stop the stream of such violence , and return to her wont myldnes , but also cone they little thanks which have be the author and counseller of such bloody plattforme . so i remember that in the late government of that good lord grey , where after long travel and many perilous assay , he have bring thing almost to this pass that you speak of , that it be even make ready for reformation , and may have be bring to what her majesty will , like complaint be make against he , that he be a bloody man , and regard not the life of her subject no more than dog , but have waste and consume all , so as now she have nothing leave ; but to reign in their ash : her majesty ear be son lend thereunto , all sudden turn topsy turvie ; the noble lord eftsoon be blame ; the wretched people pity ; and new counsel plot , in which it be conclude that a general pardon shall be send over to all that will accept of it : upon which all former purpose be blanck , the governor at a bay , and not only all that great and long charge which she have before be at , quite lose and cancel , but also all that hope of good which be even at the door put back , and clean frustrate . all which whether it be true , or not , your self can well tell . iron : too true , eudox . , the more the pity , for i may not forget so memorable a thing : neither can i be ignorant of that perilous devise , and of the whole mean by which it be compass , and very cunning contrive , by soweinge first dyssension between he and a other noble personage , wherein they both at length find how notable they have be abuse , and how thereby , under hand , this universal alteracon of thing be bring about , but then to late to stay the same ; for in the mean time all that be former do with long labour and great toil , be ( as you say ) in a moment undo , and that good lord blot with the name of a bloody man , who , who that well know , know to be most gentle , affable , love and temperate ; but that the necessity of that present state of thing enforce he to that violence , and almost change his very natural dispostion . but otherwise he be so far from delight in blood , that oftentimes he suffer not just vengeance to fall where it be deserve : and even some of those which be afterwards his accuser , have taste to much of his mercy , and be from the gallows bring to be his accuser . but his course indeed be this , that he spare not the head and principal of any mischievous practice or rebellion , but show sharp judgement on they , chief for a example sake , that all the mean sort , which also be then general infect with that evil , may by terror thereof be reclaim , and save , if it be [ possible ] . for in the last conspiracy of some of the english pale , think you not that there be many more guilty than [ they ] that feel the punishment ? or be there any almost clear from the same ? yet he touch only a few of special note ; and in the trial of they also even to prevent the blame of cruelty and partial proceed as seek their blood , which he , in his great wisdom ( as it seem ) do foresee will be object against he ; he , for avoid thereof , do use a singular discretion and regard . for the jury that go upon their trial , he make to be choose out of their near kinsman , and their judge he make of some their own father , of other their uncle and dear friend , who when they can not but just condemn they , yet utter their judgement in abundance of tear , and yet even herein he be account bloody and cruel . Eudox : indeed so have i hear it often so speak , but i perceive ( as i always very think ) that it be most unjust ; for he be always know to be a most just , sincere , godly , and right noble man , far from such stearnenesse , far from such unrighteousness . but in that sharp execucon of the Spaniard at the fort of Seuawick , i hear it special note , and , if it be true as some report , sure it be a great touch to he in honour , for some say that he promise they life ; other that at the least he do put they in hope thereof . iron : both the one and the other be most untrue ; for this i can assure you , my self be as near they as any , that he be so far from promise or put [ they ] in hope , that when first their secretary , call , as i remember segnor Jeffrey , a italian [ be ] send to treat with the lord Deputie for grace , be flat refuse ; and afterwards their colonel , name don Sebastian , come forth to entreat that they may part with their arm like soldier , at least with their life , accord to the custom of war and law of nation , it be strong deny he , and tell he by the lord Deputie he self , that they can not just plead either custom of war , of law of nation , for that they be not any lawful enemy ; and if they be , will they to show by what commission they come thither into another princes dominion to war , whether from the pope or the king of Spain , or any other . then when they say they have not , but be only adventurer that come to seek fortune abroad , and serve in war among the irish , who desire to entertain they , it be then tell they , that the irish they self , as the earl and John of Desmonde with the rest , be no lawful enemy , but rebel and traitor ; and therefore they that come to succour they no better than rogue and runagate , special come with no licence , nor commission from their own king : so as it shall be dishonourable for he in the name of his queen to condicon or make any term with such rascal , but leave they to their choice , to yiedle and submit themselves , or no . whereupon the say colonel do absolute yield he self and the fort , with all therein , and crave only mercy , which it be think good not to show they , both for daiunger of themselves if , be save , they shall afterwards join with the irish , and also for terror of the irish , who be much embolden by those foreign succour , and also put in hope of more ere long ; there be no other way but to make that short end of they which be make . therefore most untrue and malicious do these evil tongue backbite and slander the sacred ash of that most just and honourable personage , who jest virtue , of many most exceleent which abound in his heroic spirit , they be never able to aspire unto . Eudox : true , iron : i be right glad to be thus satisfy by you in that i have often hear question , and yet be never able , to choke the mouth of such detractor with the certain knowledge of their slanderous untruth : neither be the knowledge thereof impertinent to that which we former have in hand , i mean to the through prosecute of that sharp course which you have set down for the bring under of those rebel of Ulster and Connaght , and prepare a way for their perpetual reformacon , least happy , by any such synister sugestion of creweltie and to much bloodshed , all the plot may be overthrow , and all the cost and labour therein employ be utter lose and cast away . iron : you say most true ; for after that lord call away from thence , the two lord justice continue but a while : of which the one be of mind , as it seem , to have continue in the foot of his predecessor , but that he be curb and restrain . but the other be more mylde dispose , as be meet for his profession , and willing to have all the wound of that commonwealth heal and recure , but not with the heed as they shall be . after , when [ he ] be go sir John Parrott , succeed , as it be , into another man harvest , find a open way to what course he list , the which he bend not to that point which the former governor intend , but rather quite contrary , as it be in scorn of the former , and in a vain vaunt of his own counsel , with that which he be to wilful carry ; for he do tread down and disgrace all the english , and set up and countenance the irish all that he can , whether think thereby to make they more tractable and buxom to the government , wherein he think much amiss , or privy plot some other purpose of his own , as it partly afterwards appear . but sure his manner of goverement can not be sound nor wholesome for that realm , be so contrary to the former . for it be even as two phesition shall take one sick body in hand at two sundry time ; of which the former will minister all thing meet to purge and keep under the body , the other to pamper and strengthen it sudden again , whereof what be to be look for but a most dangerous relapse ? that which we now see through his rule , and the next after he , happen thereunto , be no more dangerous sick then ever before . therefore by all mean it must be foresee and assure , that after once enter into this course of reformacon , there be afterwards no remorse or draw back for the sight of any such rueful object as must thereupon follow , nor for compassion of their calamity , see that by no other mean it be possible to recure they , and that these be not of will , but of very urgent necessity . part three eudox : thus far then you have now proceed to plant your garrison , and to direct their service ; of the which nevertheless i must needs conceive that there cannot be any certain direction set down , so that they must follow the occasion which shall|be [ daily ] offer , and diligent await . but , by your leave Iren. , notwithstanding all this your careful foresight and provision , i think i see a evil lurk unspied , that may chance to hazard all the hope of this great service , if it be not very well look unto ; and that be , the corruption of their captain : for though they be place never so careful , and their company fill never so sufficient , yet may they ( if they listen ) discard when they please , and send away such as will willing be ride of that dangerous and hard service ; the which well i wot , be their common custom to do , when they be lay in garrison , for than they may better hide their default , then when they be in camp , where they be continual eye and note of all man . beside , when their pay come , they will ( as they use ) detain the great porcon thereof at their pleasure , by a hundred shift that need not here be name , through which they oftentimes deceive the soldier , abuse the queen , and great hinder the service . so that let the queen pay never so full , the muster-master view they never so diligent , let the deputy or general look never so exact , yet they can cozen they all . therefore meseeme it be good , if at least it be possible , to make some provision for this inconvenience . iron : it will sure be very hard ; but the chief help for prevencon hereof must be the care of the coronel that have the government of all his garrison , to have a eye to their alteracon , to know the number and name of the sick soldier , and the slay , to mark and observe their rank in their daily rise forth to service , by which he can easy be abuse , so that he he self be a man of special assurance and integrity . and therefore good regard be to be have in the choose and appoint of they . beside , i will not by any mean that the captain shall have the pay of their soldier , but that there shall a paymaster be appoint , of special trust , which shall pay every man accord to his captain tickett , and the account of the clarke of his band : for by this mean the captain will never seek to falsify his alteracon , nor to dyminishe his company , nor to deceive his soldier , when nothing thereof shall for his gain . this be the manner of the Spaniard captain , who never have to meddle with his soldier pay , and indeed scorn the name as base , to be count his soldier pugadore ; whereas the contrary amongst we have bring thing to so bad a pass , that there be no captain , but think his band very sufficient , if he can muster iiixx [ three score ] , and stick not to say open , that he be unworthy to have a captayneship , that can make it ccccli by the year , the which they right well verify by the proof . Eudox : true i think this be a very good mean to avoid that inconvenience of captain abusion . but what say you of the coronel ? what authority think you meet to be give he ? whether will you allow he to protect , to saufe conduct , [ and ] to have martial law as they be accustom ? iron : yea very , but all these to be limit with very straight instruction . as thus for protection , that he shall have authority after the first proclamation , for the space of twenty day , to protect all that shall come unto they , and then to send we to the lord Deputie , with their sauf conduct or pass , to be at his disposicon ; but so as none of they turn back again , be once come , but be present send away out of the country , unto the next shereff , and so convey in safety . and likewise for martial law , that to the soldier it be not extend , but by trial former make of his crime , by a jury of his fellow soldier as it ought to be , and not rash , at the will or displeasure of the coronel , as i have sometime see to light . and as for other of the rebel that shall light into their hand , that they be well aware of what condicon they be , and what hold they have . for , in the last general war there , i know many good freeholder execute by martial law , who land be thereby save to their heir , which shall otherwise have escheat to her majesty . in all which , the great discretion and uprightness of the cornel he self be to be the chief stay both of all these doubt , and for many other difficulty that may in the service happen . Eudox : your causion be very good ; but now touch the arche-rebell he self , i mean the earl of Tyrone , if he , in all the time of these war , shall offer to come in and submytt he self to her majesty , will you not have he recyve , gyve good hostage , and sufficient assurance of he self ? iron : no , marry ; for there be no doubt , but he will offer to come in , as he have do dyver time already , but it be without any intent of true submission , as the effect have well show ; neither indeed can he now , if he will , come in at all , nor gyve that assurance of he self that shall be meet , for be , as he be , very subtle head , sing he self now so far engage in this bad action , can you think that by his submission he can purchase to he self any safety , but that hereafter , when thing shall|be quiet , these his villainy will ever remember ? and whensoever he shall tread awry ( as needs the most righteous must some time ) advantage will|be take thereof , as a breach of his pardon , and he bring to a reckon for all former matter : beside , how hard it be for he now to frame he self to subjection , that have once set before his eye the hope of a kingdom , have thereunto find not only encouragement from the great king of Christendom , but also find great faintness in her majesty withstand [ he ] , whereby he be animate to think that his power be to defend he , and offend further than he have do , when so ever he please , let every reasonable man judge . but if he he self shall come in , and leave all other his accomplice without , as Adonel , Macmahon , mackuyre , and the rest , he must needs think that then , even they will ear long cut his throat , which have draw they all into this occasion , now in the myde of their trouble gyve they the slip ; whereby he must needs perceive how impossible it be for he to submytt himself . but yet if he will so do , can he gyve any assurance of his good obedience ? for how weak hold there be by hostage , have to often be prove , and that which be speak of take Shan oneale son from he , and set they up against he , be a very perilous council , and not by any mean to be put in proof ; for be they let forth and can overthrow they , or what assurance can be have of they ? it will|be like the tale in Æsope of the wild horse , who , have enmytie against the stag , come to a man to desire his aid against his enemy , who yield thereunto mount upon his back , and so follow the stag ere long slay he , but then when the horse will have he alight , he refuse , but keep he ever after in his service and subjection . Suche , i doubt will be the prose of Shane oneale son . therefore it be most dangerous to attempt any such plot , for even that very manner of plot , be the mean by which this traitorous earl be now make great : for when as the last Oneale , call Turlagh Lenagh , begin to stand upon some ticle term , this fellow , then call baron of Dungannon , be set up ( as it be ) to beard he , and countenance and strenghen by the queen so far , as that he be now able to keep her self play : much like unto a gamester which have lose all , borrow of his next fellow gamester that be the most wynner , somewhat to maintain play , which he , fetch unto he again , short thereby win all from the wynner . Eudox : be this rebel then set up at first by the queen ( as you say ) , and now become so undutiful ? iron : he be i assure you the [ most ] outcast of all the oneale then , and lift up by her majesty out of the dust , to that he have now wrought he self unto ; and now he play like the freeze snake , who be for compassion relieve by the husbandman , soon after he be warm begin to hiss , and threaten danger even to he and he . Eudox : he sure then deserve the ponishment of the snake , and shall worthy be hew to piece . but if you like not the set Shane oneale son against he , what say you then to that advice which i hear be give by some , to draw in the Scot , to serve against he ? how like you that advise ? iron : much worse than the former ; for who that be experience in those part and know not that the oneale be near ally unto the Mac oneale of Scotland , and to the earl of Argill , from who they use to have all their succour of those Scot and redshank ? beside , all these Scot be , through long continuance , intermingle and ally to all the inhabitant of the north ; so as there be no hope they will ever be wrought to serve faithful against their old friend and kinsman ; and if they will , how when the war be finish and they have over throw he , shall they themselves be put out ? do not all know , that the Scot be the first inhabitant of all the north , and that those which be now call north Irish be indeed very Scot , which challenge the ancient inheritance and dominion of that country to be their own ancient . this be then but to leap out of the pan into the fire ; for the chief caveat and provision in the reformacon of the north must be to keep out the Scot . Eudox : indeed , i remember that in your discourse of the first people of Ireland , you show that the scythian or Scotts be the first that sit down in the north , whereby it seem they may challenge some right therein . how come it then that Oneale claim the dominion thereof , and this earl of Tirone say the right be in he ? i pray you resolve i herein ; for it be very needful to be know , and make most unto the right of the war against he , whose success use common to be accord to the justness of the cause , for which it be make : for if Tiron have any right in that seignory i seem it shall be wrong to thrust he out : or if ( as i remember you say in the beginning ) that Oneale , when he acknowledge the king of England for his liege lord and sovereign do , as he allege , reserve in the same commission all his signory and right unto he self , it shall be account unjust to thrust he out of the same ? iron : for the right of only in the signiory of the north , it be sure none at all : for beside that the king of England conquer all the realm , and thereby invest all the right of that land to themselves and their heir and successor for ever , so as nothing be leave in only but what he receive back from they , only himself never have any ancient signiory in that country , but what by usurpation and incrochment , after the death of the duke of Clarence , he get upon the english , whose land and possession be former waste by the Scot , under the lead of Edward le Bruce , as i former declare unto you , he eftsoons enter into , and since have wrongful detain , through the other occupation and great affair which the king of England soon after fall into here at home , so as they can not intend to the recovery of that country of the north , nor restrain the insolency of Oneale ; who , find none now to withstand he in that desolation , make himself lord of those few people that remain there , upon who ever since he have contenew the first usurp power , and now exact and extort upon all man what he list : so that now to subdue or expel a usurper , shall be no unjust enterprise nor wrongful war , but a restitution of a ancient right unto the crown of England , from whence they be most unjust expel and long keep out . Eudox : i be very glad herein to be thus satisfy by you , that i may the better satisfy they who i have often hear to object these doubt , and slanderous to bark at the course that be hold against that traitorous earl and his adherence . but now that you [ have ] thus settle your service for Ulster and Connaught , i will be glad to hear your opinion for the prosecute of Feagh McHugh , who be but a base villain , and of himself of no power , yet so continual trouble that state , notwithstanding that he lie under their nose , that i disdain his bold arrogancy , and think it to be the great indignity to the queen that may be , to suffer such a caitiff play such reak , and by his ensample not only to give hart and encouragement to all such bold rebel , but also to yield the succour and refuge against her majesty , whensoever they fly into his Comerick : wherefore i will first wish , before you enter into your plot of service against he , that you shall lay open by what mean he , be so base , first lift he self up to this dangerous greatness and how he mayteyn his part against the queen and her power , notwithstanding all that have be don and attempt against he . and whether also he have any pretence of right in the land he hold , or in the war that he make for the same ? iron : i will so , at your pleasure , and since you desire to know his beginning , i will not only discover the begin of his private house , but also the original of all his Sept of the birnes and tool , so far as i have learn the same from some of they self , and gather the rest by read : this people of the birnes and tool ( as before i show you my conjecture ) descend from the ancient briton , which first inhabit all those eastern part of Ireland , as their name do betoken ; for Brin in the briton language signify woody , and toll hilly , which name , it seem , they take of the country which they inhabit , which be all very mountain and woody . in the which it seem that ever sithence the come in of the english with dermonigile , they have continue : whether that their country be so rude and mountainous be of they despise , and think [ unacustomated ] worthy the inhabit , or that they be receive to grace by they , and suffer to enjoy their land as unfit for any other , yet it seem that in some place of the same , they do put foot , and fortify with sundry castle , of which the ruin there do only now remain , since which time they be grow to that strength , that they be able to lift up hand against all the estate ; and now late , through the boldness and late good success of this Feagh Mc Hugh , they be so far embolden , that they threaten peril even to Dublin , over whose neck they continual hang . but touch your demand of these feagh right unto that country , or the seignory which he claim therein , it be most vain and arrogant . for this you can be ignorant of , that it be part of that which be give in inheritance by Dermot McMurrogh , king of Leinster , to strangbow with his daughter , and which strangbow give over to the king and his heir , so as the right be absolute now in her majesty ; and if it be not , yet can it not be in this Feagh , but in Obrin , which be the ancient lord of all that country ; for he and his ancestor be but follower unto o Brin , and his grandfather , Shane Mac Turlogh , be a man of mean regard among they , neither have wealth nor power . but his son Hugh Mac Shane , the father of this Feagh , first begin to lift up his head , and through the strength and great fatness of Glan-Malor , which adjoin unto his house of Ballenecan , draw unto he many thief and outlaw , which flee unto the succour of the glenn , as to a sanctuary , and bring unto he part of the spoil of all the country , through which he grow strong , and in short space get to he self a great name thereby amongst the irish , in whose footing this his son continue have , through many unhappy occasion , increase his name , and the opinion of his greatness , so that now he be become a dangerous enemy to deal withal . Eudox : sure , i commend he , that be of he self of so base as condicon , have through his own hardness lift himself to the height that he now dare front prince , and make term with great potentate ; the which as it be honourable to he , so it be to they most dsgracefull , to be beard of such a base varlet , that be of late grow out of the dunghill begin now to overcrow so high mountain , and make he self great protector of all outlaw and rebel that will repair unto he . but do you think that he be now so dangerous a enemy as he be count , or that it be so hard to take he down as some suppose ? iron : no very , there be no great reckon to be make of he ; for have he ever be take in hand , when the rest of the realm , or at least the part adjoin , have be quiet , as the honourable gentleman that now govern there , i mean sir Willyam Russell , give a notable attempt thereunto , and have worthy perform it , if his course have not be cross unhappelye , he can not have stand three month , nor ever have look up against a very mean power : but now all the part about he be up in a mad mood , as the moor in lease , the cavanaghe in the county of Wexford , and some of the butler in the county of Kilkenny , they all flock unto he , and draw unto his country , as to a strong hold where they think to be safe from all that prosecute they : and from thence they do at their pleasure break out into all the border adjoin , which be well poepled country , as the county of Dublin , of Kildare , of Carlough , of Kilkenny , of Wexford , with the spoil whereof they victell and strengthen they self , which shall in short time be starve , and sore pine ; so that what he be of he self you may hereby perceive . Eudox : then , by so much as i gather out of your speech , the next way to end the war with he , and to root he quite out , shall be to keep he from invade of those country adjoin , which as i suppose , be to be donn , by draw all the inhabitant of those next border away , and leave they utter waste , or by plant garrison upon all those frontier about he , that , when he shall break forth , may set upon he and shorten his return . iron : you conceive very right , eudox . , but for the dispoepling and drive away all the inhabitant from the country about he , which you speak of , shall be great confusion and trouble , aswell for the unwillingness of they to leave their possessopn , as also for place and provide for they in other country , i seem , the better course shall be by plant of garrison about he , the which , when soever he shall look forth , or be draw out with desire of the spoil of those border , or for necessity of victual , shall be always ready to intercept his go or come . Eudox : where then do you wish these garrison to be plant , that they may serve best against he ; and how many in every garrison ? iron : i my self , by reason that , as i tell you , i be no marsiall man , i will not take upon i to direct so dangerous affair , but only as i understand by the purpose and plot , which the lord grey who be well experience in that service , against he do lay down : to the performance whereof he only require a 1000 man to be lay in 4. garrison : that be , at ballincore , 200 footman and 50. horse , which shall shut he out of his great glenn , whereto he so much trust ; at knocklough 200. footman and 50. horse , to answer the county of Carlo ; at Arclo or Wicklo 200 footman and 50 horseman , to defend all that side towards the sea ; in Shelalagh 100 footman which shall cut he from the cavernaghe , and the county of Wexford ; and about the 3 castle 50. horseman , which shall defend all the county of Dublin ; and 100 footman at talbotts town , which shall keep he from break into the county of Kildare , and be always on his neck on that side : the which garrison , so lade , will so busy he , that he shall never rest at home , nor stir forth abroad but he shall be have ; as for his Crete they can not be above ground , but they must needs fall into their hand or starve , for he have no fastness nor refuge for they , or his partaker of the moor , butler , and cavanaghe . they will soon leave he , when they see his fastness and strong place thus take from he . Eudox : sure this seem a plot of great reason , and small difficulty , which promise hope of a short end . but what special direction will you set down for the service and rise out of these garrison ? iron : none other than the present occasion shall minister unto they , and as by good espial , whereof there they can want store , they shall be draw coninual upon he , so as one of they shall be still upon he , and sometime all at one instant bait he . and this i assure my self , will demand no long time , but will be all finish in the space of one year ; which how small a thing it be , unto the eternal quietness which shall thereby be purchase to the realm , and the great good which shall grow to her majesty , shall i think ready draw on her highness to the undertake of the enterprise . Eudox : you have very well i seem , Irenius , plot a course for the achieve of these war now in Ireland , which seem to ask no long time , nor great charge , so as th'effect thereof be commit to man of some trust , and some experience , aswell in the say country as in the manner of those service ; for if it be leave in the hand of such raw captain as be usual send out of England , be thereto prefer only by friendship , and not choose by sifficiensy , it will soon fall to the ground . iron : therefore it be meet i think that such captain only be hereto employ , as have former serve in that country , and be at least lieutenant unto other captain there . for otherwise , be bring and transfer from other service abroad , as in France , in Spain , and in the Low-countries , though they be of good experience in those , and have never so well deserve , yet in these they will be new to seek , and , before they have gather experience , they shall buy it with great loss to her majesty , either by hazard of their company , through ignorance of the place , and manner of the irish service , or by lose a great part of the time which be require hereunto , be but short , in which it may be finish , before they have almost take out a new lesson , or can tell what be to be donn . Eudox : you be no good friend to new captain it seem , Irenius , that you bar they from the credit of this service : but to say truth , i think it be meet , that any one , before he come to be a captain , shall have be a soldier ; for , parere qui nescit , nescit imperare . and beside , there be great wrong do to the old soldier , who from all mean of advancement ( which be due unto he ) be cut of , by shuffle in these new cut captain into their place , for which he have long serve , and perhaps better deserve . but now those that have thus as i suppose finish all the war , and bring all thing to that low ebb which you speak [ of ] , what course will you take for the bring in of that reformation which you intend , and recover all thing from this dissolute estate , in which i think i behold they now leave , unto that perfect establishment and new commonwealth which you have conceive , of which so great good may redoune to her majesty , and a assure peace be confirm ? for that be that whereunto we be now to look , and do great long for , be long since make weary with the huge charge which you have lade upon we , and with the strong endurance of so many complaint , so many delay , so many doubt and danger , as will hereof i know well , arise : unto the which before you come , it be meet i think that you shall take some order for the soldier , which be now first to be discharge and dispose of , some way ; the which if you do not well foresee , may grow to a great inconvenience , as all this that we suppose you have quit we from , by the loose leave of so many thousand soldier , which from hence forth will be unfit for any labour or other trade , but must either seek service and employment abroad , which may be dangerous , or else will perhaps employ they self here at home , as may be discommodious . iron : you say very true ; and it be a thing much mislike in this our commonwealth that no better course be take for such as have be employ once in service , but that return , whether maim , and so able to labour , or otherwise , though hole and sound , yet afterward unwilling to work , or rather will to make work for the hangman . but that need a other consideration ; but to this that we have now in hand , it be far from my meaning to leave the soldier so at random , or to leave that waste realm so weak and destitute of strength , which may both defend it against other that may seek to set upon it , and also keep it from that relapse which i before do forecast . for it be one special good of this plot which i will devise , that six thousand soldier of those who i have now employ in that service , and make thorough acquaint both with the state of the country , and manner of the people , shall henceforth be still continue , and for ever maintain of the country , without any charge to her majesty ; and the rest that either be old , and able to serve long , or willing to fall to thrift , ( as i have see many soldier after their service to prove very good husband , ) shall be place in part of the land by they woonn , at such rate , or rather better than other , to who the same shall be let . Eudox : be it possible Irenius ? can there be any such mean devise that so many man shall be keep still for her majesty service without any charge to her majesty at all ? Surely this be a exceed great good , both to her highness to have so many old soldier always ready at call , to what purpose soever she list to employ they , and also to have that land thereby so strengthen , that it shall neither fear any foreign invasion , nor practise , which the irish shall ever attempt , but shall keep they under in continual awe and firm obedience . iron : it be so indeed . and yet this true i do not take to be any matter of great difficulty , as i think it will also soon appear unto you . and first we will speak of the north part , for that the same be of most weight and importance . so soon as it shall appear that the enemy be bring down , and the stout rebel either cut of , or drive to that wretchedness that he be no long able to hold up hand , but will come into any condition , which i assure my self will be before the end of the second winter , i wish that there be a general proclamation make , that whatsoever outlaw will free come in , and submit themselves to her majesty mercy , shall have liberty so to do , where they shall either find that grace they desire , or return again in safety : upon which it be likely that so many as survive , will come in to sue for grace , of which who so be think meet for subjection , and fit to be bring to good , may be receive , or else all of they , for i think that all will be but a very few ; upon condicon and assurance that they will submit themselves absolute to her majesty ordinance for they , by which they shall be assure of life and liberty , and be only tie to such condicon as shall be think by her meet for contain they ever after in due obedience . to the which condicon i nothing doubt but that they will all most ready , and upon their knee submit they self , by the proof of that which i see in monster . for upon the like proclamation there , they all come in tag and rag , and when as afterward many of they be deny to be receive , they bid they do with they what will , for they will not by no mean return , nor go forth . for in that case who will not accept almost of any condition , rather than dye of hunger and misery ? Eudox : it be very likely so . but what then be the ordinance , and what be the condition which you will purpose unto they , that shall reserve unto they a assurance of life and liberty ? iron : so soon as they have give the best assurance of they self which may be require , which must be i suppose some of their principal man to remain in hostage one of another , and some other for the rest , for other surety i reckon of none that may bind they , neither of wife , neither of child , since then perhaps they will glad be rydd of both from the famine ; i will have they first unarm utter , and strip quite of all there warlike weapon , and then , these condition set down and make know unto they ; that they shall|be bring and remove with such creete as they have , into lympster , where they shall|be place , and have land give they to occupy and to live upon , in such sort as shalbecome good subject , to labour thenceforth for there live , and to apply they self unto honest trade of civility as they shall every one be find meet and able for . Eudox : where then , a god name , will you place they in lynster ? or will you find out any new land there for they that be yet unknown ? iron : no , i will place they in all the country of the birnes and tool , which Feagh McHugh have , and in all the land of the cavanaghe , which be now in rebellion , and all the land which will fall to he majesty thereabout , which i know to be very spacious and large yeanough to contain they , be very near twenty or thirty mile wide . Eudox : but what then will you do with all the birnes , the tool , and the cavanaghe , and all those that now be join with they ? iron : at the same very time , and in the same manner that i make that proclamation to they of Ulster , will i also have it make to these ; and upon their submission thereunto , i will take like assurance of they as of other . after which i will translate all that remain of they unto the place of the other in Ulster , with there Crete , and what else they have leave they , the which i will cause to be divide amongst they in some meet sort , as each may thereby have somewhat to sustain he self a while withal , until , by his further travel and labour of the earth , he shall|be able to provide himself better . Eudox : but will you then give the land free unto they , and make they heir of the former rebel ? so may you perhaps make the heir also of their former villainy and disorder ; or how else will you dispose of they ? iron : not so ; but all the land i will give unto Englishmene who i will have draw thither , who shall have the same with such estate as shall thought meet , and for such rend as shall eftsoon be rate : under every of those english man will i place some of those irish to be the tenant for a certain rent , accord to the quantyty of such land as every man shall have allot unto he , and shall|be find able to meet , wherein this speial regard shall|be have , that in no place under any land lord there shall remain of they plant together , but disperse wide from their acquaintance , and scatter far abroad through all the country : for that be the evil which i now find in all Ireland , that the irish dwell altogether by their septe , and several nation , so as they may practise or conspire what they will ; whereas if there be English shed amongst they and place over they , they shall not be able once to styrr or murmur , but that it shall be know , and they shorten accord to there demerit . Eudox : you have good reason ; but what rate of rent mean you ? to what end do you purpose the same ? iron : my purpose be to rate the rend of all those land of her majesty in such sort , unto those english man as shall take they , as they may be well able to live thereupon , yeid her majesty a reasonable cheiferie , and also give a competent maintenance unto the garrison , which shall there be leave amongst they ; for these soldier ( as i tell you ) remain of the former garrison , i cast to maintain upon the rent of those land which shall escheat , and to have they divide through all Ireland in such place as shall thought most convenient , and occasion may require . and this be the course of the roman observe in the conquest of England , for they plant of their legion in all place convenient , the which they cause the country to maintain , cut upon every portion of land a reasonable rend , which they call Romestot , the which may not surcharge the tennante or freholder , and defray the pay of the garrison : and this have be always observe in all prince in all country to they new subdue , to set garrison amongst they to contain they in duty who burden they make they to bear ; and the want of this ordinance in the first conquest of Ireland by Henry the second , be the cause of so short decay of that government , and the quick recovery again of the irish . therefore by all mean it be to be provide for . and this be it that i will blame , if it shall not misbecom i , in the late planty of Munster , that no care be have of this ordinance , nor any strength of a garrison provide for , by a certain allowance out of all the say land , but only the present profit look unto , and the safe continewance thereof ever hereafter neglect . Eudox : but there be a band of soldioure lay in monster , to the maintenance of which , what odds be there whethere the queen , receive the rent of the country , do give pay at he pleasure , or that there be a settle allowance appoint unto they out of their land there ? iron : there be great odds , for now that say rent of the country be not usual apply to the pay of the soldyar , but it be , ( every other occasion come between , ) convert to other use , and the soldier in time of peace discharge and neglect as unnecessary ; whereas if the say rent be appoint and ordain by a establishment to this end only , it shall not be turn to any other ; nor in troublous time , upon every occasion , her majesty be so trouble with send over new soldier as she now be , nor the country ever shall dare to mutiny , have still the soldier in their neck , nor any foreign enymy dare to invade , know there so strong a garrison allwais to receive he . Eudox : sith than you thinkee this Romescott of the pay of the soldier upon the land to be both the ready way to the soldier , and less troublesome to he majesty , tell we , i pray you , how you will have the say land rate , that both a rend may rise thereout unto the queen , and also the soldier receive pay , which ( i seem ) will harden ? iron : first , we be to consider how much land there be in all Ulster , that accord to the quantity thereof we may cease the say rend and allowance issue thereout . Ulster , as the ancient record of that realm do testify , do contain nine thousand plough land , every of which plow land contain six score acre , after the rate of twenty-one . foot to every perch of the say acre , which amount in the whole to eighteen [ 000 ] l , beside 6 . 8d . chiefrie out of every plowland . but becuase the county of Louth , be a part of Ulster , and contain in it seven . h . and xij . plowlande , be not whole to escheat unto her majesty as the rest , they have in all these war continue for the most part duetyfull , though otherwise a great part thereof be now under the rebel , there be a abatement to be make out of iiij h . or five h . plow land , as i estimate the same , the which be not to pay the whole yearly rend of forty [ vis . 8d . ] out of every plow land , like as the escheat land do , but yet shall pay for their composition of cease towards the maintenance of the soldier xx . out of every plow land : so as there be to be deduct out of the former some iij h . yearly , the which may nevertheless be supply by the rent of the fyshing , which be exceed great in Ulster , and also by a increase of rend in the best land , and those that lie in the best place near the seacost . the which xviii [ thousand ] pound will defray the entertainment of xv . hundred soldier , with some overplus towards the pay of the victual which be to be employ in victual of these garrison . Eudox : so then , belike , you mean to leave xvc . [ 1500 ] soldier in garrison for Ulster , to be pay principal out of the rent of those land which shall there escheat unto her majesty . the which , where i pray you , will you have they garrison ? iron : i will have they divide into 3 part ; that be , vc . [ 500 ] in every garrison , the which i will have to remain in three of the say place where they be before appoint ; to weet , v. c at Straban and about Loghfoyle , and so as they may hold all the passage of that part of the country , and some of they be put in ward , upon all the straight thereabouts , which i know to be such , as may stop all passage into the country one that side ; and some of they also upon the Bann , up towards Logh Sidney , as i former direct . also other v.c. at the fort upon logh-earne , and ward take out of they which shall|be lay at Farmannagh , at belicke , at Ballishannon , and on all the straight towards Connagh , the which i know do so strong command all the passage that way , as that none can pass from Ulster into Connaught , without their leave . the last v.c. shall also remain in their fort in Monoghan , and some of they be draw into ward , to keep the key of all that country , both downwards , and also towards orlye country , and the pale ; as some at eniskilline , some at Belterbert , some at the black fort , and so along that river , as i former show in the first plant of they . and moreover at every of these fort , i will have the seat of a town lay forth and encompass , in which i will wish that there shall inhabitant of all sort , as merchant , artificere , and husbanman , to be place , to who there shall be charter and franchise grant to incorporate they . the which , as it will|be no matter of difficulty toe draw out of England person which will very glad be so place , so will it in short space turn those part to great commodity , and bring ere long to her majesty much profit ; for those place be fite for trade and traffic , have most convenient outgate by [ river ] to the sea , and ingates to the rich part of the land , that they will soon be enrich , and mighty enlarge , for the very seat of the garrison by they , beside , the safety and assurance which they shall work unto they , will also draw thither store of people and trade as i have see ensampled at Mariburgh and Phillipstowne in Leinstor , where by reason of those two fort , though there be but small ward leave in they , there be two good town now grow , which be the great stay of both those two country . Eudox : indeed i seem 3 such town , as you say , will do very well in those place with the garrison , and in short space will be so augment , as they will be able with little [ help ] to inwall they self strongley : but , for the plant of all the rest of the country , what order will you take ? iron : what other then as i say to bring people out of England , which shall inhabit the same ; whereunto though , i doubt not , but great troop will be ready to run , yet for that in such case , the worst and most decay man be most ready to remove , i will wish they rather to be choose out of all part of this realm , either by discretion of wise man thereunto appoint , or by lot , or by the drum , as be the old use in send forth of collinies , or such other good mean as shall in their wisdom be think meet . among the chief of which i will have the land set into seignory , in such sort as it be now in monster , and divide into hundredes and parish , or ward , as it be in England , and lay out into sheire as it be ancient ; vizt . the county of down , the county of Antrim , the county of Lowth , the county of Armagh , the county of Cavan , the county of Colrane , the county of Monaghan , the county of Tiron , the county of Fermannagh , the county of Donegall , be in all 10. over all which i wish a lord precedent and a counsel to be place , which may keep they afterwards in awe and obedience , and minister unto they justic and equity . Eudox : thus i see the whole purpose of your plot for Ulster , and now i desire to hear your like opinion for Cannagh . iron : by that which i have already say of Ulster , you may gather my opinion for Cannagh , be very answerable unto the former . but for that the land , which shall escheat unto he majesty , be not so intyrelie together as that they can be account unto one some , it need that they be consider several . the province of Cannagh contain in the whole , as appear by record at Dubline , seven thousand and twoe hundred plow land of the former measure , and be of late divide into six sheire or county : the county of Clare , the county of Letrim , the county of Roscaman , the county of Galway , the county of Maio , the county of Sligoh . of the which , all the county of Slygoh , all the county of Maio , the most part of the county of Lietrim , a great part of the county of Galway , and some of the county of Clare , be like to escheat unto he majesty for the rebellion of there present possessor . the which two county of Sligoh and Maio be suppose to contain almost iij [ thousand ] plow land , the rate whereof , ratable to the former , i value almost at six [ thousand ] li . p. and . the county of Roscomon , save what pertain to the house of Roscomon and some few other English there late sete , be all out , and therefore it be whole likewise to escheat to her majesty , save those porcon of the english inhabitant ; and even those english do , as i understand by they , pay as much rend to he majesty as be set upon those in Ulster , count their composition money therewithal , so as it may run all into one reckon with the former two county : so that this county of Roscomon , contain xij . c . plow land , as it be account , amount to two [ thousand ] iiijc . pound by the year , which with the former twoe county rend make about viij [ thousand ] li . for the former want somewhat . but what the escheat land of the county of Galway and Lietrim will rise unto be yet uncertain to define , till survey thereof be make , for that those land be intermingle with the earl Clanricard , and other [ land ] ; but it be think that they be one half of both those county , so as they may be count to the value of one thousand plowlande ( for so many the least county of they comprehend , ) which make two thousand pound more , that be , in all , ten or xi thousand pound . other two county must remain till there escheat appear , the which let pass as yet unknown , yet thus much be know to be account for certain , that the composition of these twoe county , be rate at xx . every plow land , will amount to above xiij [ thousand ] li . moor : all which be lay together to the former , may be reasonable estimate to rise unto xiij [ thousand ] pound , the which some , together with the rest of the escheat land in the twoe last county , which can yet be value ( be , as i doubt not , less than a thousand pound moor ) will yield large unto a thousand man and their victualler , and a thousand pound over towards the governor . Eudox : you have i think , make but a estimate of those land of Connaght even at a very venture , so as it shall be hard to build any certainty of charge to be raise upon the same . iron : not altogether yet upon uncertantye ; for thus much may easy appear unto you for certain , as the composition money of every plowelande amount unto ; for this i will have you principal understand , that my purpose be to rate all the land in Ireland at xx . every plowlande , for there composition towards the garrison . the which i know , in regard of be feed from all other charge whatsoever , will ready and most glad yield unto . so that there be in all Ireland ( as appear by there old rent ) 43920 plowelande , the same shall amount to the some likewise of 43920 pound , and the rest to be rear of thescheat land which fall to he majesty in the say province of Ulster , connoght , and that part of Leinster under the rebel ; for monster we deal not withal . Eudox : but tell i this , by the way , do you then lay composition upon thescheat land as you do upon the rest ? for so i think , you reckon all together . and that sure be to much to pay seven noble out of every plow land , and composition money beside , that be xxs . out of every plowelande . iron : no , you mistake i ; i put only seven noble rend and composition both upon every plow land escheat , that be xls . for composicon , and vjs . vijd . for cheifery to he majesty . Eudox : i do now conceive you ; proceed than i pray you , to the appoint of your garrison in cannaght , and show we both how many and where you will have they place . iron : i will have one thousand lay in cannaght in two garrison ; namely , v.c. in the county of Maio , about Clan mccostulaghe , which shall keep Mayo and the Burckes of McWilliam enter : other v.c. in the county of Clanricarde , about Garrandough , that they may contain the [ conhor ] and they [ blank ] Burkes there , the kelly and macknyar with all they about ; for that garrison which i former place at Lougharne will serve for all occasion in the county of Sligah , be near adjoin thereunto , so as in one nighet march they may be almost in any place thereof when need shall require they . and like as in the former place of garrison in Ulster , i wish iij corporate town to be plant , which under the safeguard of the strength shall dwell and trade safe with all the country about they , so will i also wish to be in this of Connaght ; and that beside , there be another establish at Athlone , with a convenient ward in the castle there for their defence . Eudox : what shall that need , sing that the governor of Cannagh use to lie there always , who presence will|be a defence to all that township . iron : i know he do so , but that be much to be dyslike that the governor shall lie so far of , in the remote place of all the province , whereas it be meet that he shall be continual abide in the midst of his charge , that he may both look out alike into all place of his government , and also be soon at hand in any place , where occasion shall demand he ; for the presence of the governor be ( as you say ) a great stay and bridle unto they that be ill dispose : like as i see it be well observe in monster , where the daily good thereof be continual apparent ; and , for this cause also do i great mislike the lord deputy seat at Dubline , be the out corner in the realm , and leave nede the awe of his presence ; whereas , i seem it be fit , since his proper care be of Leinster , though he have care of all beside general , that he shall seat himself about Athie , or thereabouts , upon the skirt of that unquiet country , so as that he may sit , as it be , at the very main mast of the ship , whenc he may easy overlook and some time overreach the moor , the butler , the dempse , the Ketines , the Conners , Ocarrell , omoloy , and all that heap of irish nation which there lie huddle together without any to over-rule they , or contain they in duty . for the irish man , i assure you , fear the government no long than he be within sight or reach . Eudox : sure i think herein you observe a matter of much importance , more than i have hear ever note ; but sure that seem so expedient , as that i wonder it have be heretofore over omit ; but i suppose the instance of the citizen of Dublin be the great let there . iron : true , than it ought not so to be ; for no cause [ s ] e have they to fear that it will any hindrance for they ; for Dubline will|be still , as it be , the key of all passage and transportacon out of England thither , to no less profit of those citizen then it now be , and beside other place will hereby receive some benefytt . but let we now , i pray you , come to lynster , in the which i will wish the same course to be observe as in Ulster . Eudox : you mean for the leave of the garrison in their fort , and for plant of English in all those country bewene the county of Dubline and the county of Wexforde ; but thosw waste wild place , i think , when they be win unto her majesty , that there be none that will|be hasty to seek to inhabit . iron : yes , enough , i warrant , for though the whole tract of the country be mountain and wodie , yet there be many goodly valley among they , fit for fair habytation , to which those mountain adjoin will a great increase of pasturage ; for that country be a very great soil of cattle , and very fit for breed : as for corn it be nothing natural , save only for barley and oat , and some place for rye , and therefore the large pennyworth may be allow unto they , though other wise the wyldnes of the mountain pasturage do recompense the badness of the soil , so as i doubt not but it will find inhabitant and undertaker enough . Eudox : how much then do you think that all those land which Pheagh McHugh hold under he may amount unto , and what rent may be rear thereout to the maintenance of the garrison that shall lay there ? iron : true , it be ympossible by aim to tell it , and as for experience and knowledge , i do not think that there be ever any of the particular thereof , but yet i will , if it please you , guess thereat , upon ground only of their judgement which have former divide all that country into twoe sheire or county , namely the county of Wickloe , and the county of fern : the which twoe i see no cause but they shall holy escheat to her majesty , all but the barrony of Arclo which be the earl of ormwoode ancient inheritance , and have ever be in his possession ; for all the whole land be the queen , unless there be some grant of any part thereof to be show from he majesty : as i think there be only of new castle to sir Henry Harrington , and of the castle of fern to sir Thomas Masterson , the rest , be almost thirty mile over , i do suppose can contain no less than two thousand plowelande , which i will estimate at iiij [ thousand ] li . rend , by the year . the rest of Leinster , be seven county , to weet , the county of Dubline , Killdare , Catherlogh , Wexford , kilkenye , the king and the queen county , do contain in they 7400. plowelande , which amount to so many pound for composition to the garrison , that make in the whole xi [ thousand ] iiijc . l. , the which some will yield pay unto a thousand soldier , little want , which may be supply out of other land of the cavenaghe , which be to be escheat to her majesty for rebellion of their possession , though otherwise indeed they be of her own ancient demean . Eudox : it be a great reason . but tell we now where you will wish those garrison to be lay , whether alltogeather , or to be disperse in sundry place of the country ? iron : mary , in sundry place , to weet , in this fort , or much the like as may be better advise , for cc. in a place i do think to be enough for the safeguard of the country , and keep under all sudden upstart , that shall seek to trouble the peace thereof : therefore i wish [ 200. ] to be layede at Ballinocros for the keep of all bid person from glammalour , and all the fasten thereabouts , and also to conteynne all that shall|be plant in those land thenceforth . another 200. at knockloughe in there former place of garrison , to keep the Briskagh and all those mountain of the cavanaghe ; 200. more to lie at fern , and upwards , inward upon the Slane ; 200. to be place at the fort of Leix , to restrain the moor , ossorie , and Ocarroll ; other 200. at the fort of Ofaley , to carbe the Oconnors , Omolys in [ Mac ] Coghlane Maccughejan , and all those irish nation border thereabout . Eudox : thus i see all your thousand man bestow in Leinster : what say you then of meath , which be the first part ? iron : meath , which contain both Estmeath and Westmeath , and of laite the Analy , now call the country of Langforde , be account thereunto : but meath it self ( accord to the old record ) 4320. plowelande , and the county of Langford 947. , which in the whole make 5267 plowlande , of which the composition money will amount likewise to 5267 livre . to the maintenance of the garrison . but because all meath , lie in the bosom of that kingdom , be always quiet enough , it be needless to put any garrison there , so as all that charge may be spare . but in the county of Longforde i wish 200. footman and 50. horseman to be place in some convenient seat between the Annalie and brain , as about Lough silone or some like place of that river , so as they may keep both the oneale , and also the ofarralle , and all that outskirte of meathe in awe ; the which use upon every light occasion to be stir , and have continual enmity amongst themselves , do thereby oftentimes trouble all those part , the charge whereof be 4400 and odd pound be to be cut out of that composition money for meath and Longforde , the overplus , be almost 2000 livre . by the year , will come in clear to her majesty . Eudox : it be worth the harken unto . but now that you have do with meath , proceed i pray you to monster , that we may see how it will rise there for the manteynance of the garrison . iron : monster contain by record at Dublyne 16000 plowlande , the composition whereof , as the rest , will make 16000 livre . by the year , out of the which i will have 1000 soldier to be maintain for the defence of that province , the charge , which with the victualler wage , will amount to 12000 livre . by the year ; other 4000 li . will defray the charge of the precydence and the counsel of that province . Eudox : the reckininge be easy ; but in this account , by your leave , i think you be deceive , for in this some of the composition money you account the land of the undertaker of that province , who be , by there grant from the queen to be free from all such imposition whatsoever , except there only rend , which be sure enough . iron : you say true , i do so ; but the same 20 s . for every plolande i mean to have deduct out of the rend due upon they to her majesty , which be no hindrance , nor charge at all more to her majesty then it now be , for all that rend which she receive of they , she put forth again to the maintenance of the presidency there , the charge whereof it do scarce defray ; whereas in this account both that charge of the presidencye , and also of 1000 soldyor more , shall maintain . Eudox : it shall be well , if it can be bring to that . now where will you [ have ] your 1000 man garryson ? iron : i will have 100 of they place at the bantry where be a most fit place , not only to defend all that side of the country west part from foreign invasion , but also to answer all occasion of trouble , to which that country , be so remote , be very subject . and sure here also will be place a good town , have both very good haven and plentiful fish , and the land be already escheat to her majesty , be forcaible keep from she by a rough tail kern that proclaim he self the bastard son of the earl of Clancar , be call Donnell Mac chartie , who it be meet to foresee to cut of ; for [ as ] whensoever the earl shall dye , all those land , after hime , be to come to her majesty , he be like to make a foul stir there , though of hime self of no power , yet through supportance of some other who lie in the wind , and look after the fall of that inheritance . another 100 will i have place at Castlemaine , which shall keep all desmonde and kerrye , for it answer they both most covenyentlye : also about Kylmore in the county of cork will i have 200 place , which shall break that nest of thief there , and answer equal both the county of lymbricke , and also the county of cork : another 100 whold i have lie at cork , aswell to command the town , as also to be ready for any foreign occasion : likewise at Waterforde , will i place 200 , for the same reason , and also for other privy cause , that be no less importante . Moreover on the side of Arlo , never to maskrye work , which be the county of the bourke , about [ kill-patrick , ] will i have 200 to be garrison , which shall skowre both the white knight country and Arlo , and muskre wherke , by which place all the passage of thief do lie , which convey their stealth from monster downwards towards tipperarie , and that english pail , and from the english pale also up unto monster , whereof they use to make a common trade . beside that , ere long i doubt the county of tipperarie it self will need such a strength in it , which be good to be there ready before the evil fall , that be daily of some expect : and thus you see all your garrisone place . Eudox : i see it right well , but let i i pray you , by the way ask the reason why in those city of monster , namely Waterforde and cork , you rather place garryson then in all the other in Ireland ? for they may think they self to have great wrounge to be so charge above all the rest . iron : i will tell you : those two cytty , above all the rest , do offer a ingate to the spanyarde most fytlie ; and also inhabytant of they be most ill affect to the english government , and most friend to the Spaniard ; but yet , because they shall not take exception to this , that they be charge above all the rest , i will also lay a charge upon the other likewise ; for in deed it be no reason that the corporatee town , enjoy great franchise and privilege from her majesty , and live thereby not only safe , but draw to they the wealth of all the land , shall live so free as not to be partaker of the burden of this garrysone for there own safety , special in this time of trouble , and sing all the rest burden ; and therefore , i will thus charge they all ratable , accord to their ability , towards there maintenance , the which her majesty may if she please , spare out of the charge of the rest , and reserve towards her own cost , or add to the charge of the presydence in the north . Waterford 100 Clonmell 10. Dundal [ k ] e 10. cork 100 Cashell 10. Mollinger 10. Lymricke 50. fedred 10. Newry 10. Galwaye 50. kilkiny 25. trim 10. kinsaile 10. Wexford 25. ardrye 10. dinglecushe 10. Treddagh 25. Kells 10. Youchall 10. Rosse 25. Dubline 100 kilmallocke 10. Suma 490. [ shall be 630. ] Eudox : it be easy , iron : to lay a charge upon any town , but to foresee how the same may be answer and defray be the chief part of good advisemente . iron : sure this charge which i put upon they i know to be so reasonable , as that it will not much [ be ] feel , for the port town which have benefit of ship may cut it easy of their trade , and in inland town of their corn and cattle : neither do i see , but since to they the benefit of peace do redownde , that they special shall bear the burden of their safeguard and defence , as we see all the town of the low country do cut upon they self a excise of all thing towards the maintenance of the war that be make in their behalf , to which though the [ y ] fear not to be compare in riches , yet be to be charge accord to their poverty . Eudox : but now that yowe have set upon these force of soldier , and provide well as you suppose , for there pay , yet there remain to forcaste how they may be vitual , and where purvayance thereof may be make ; for in Ireland it self i can see how any thing almost be to be have for they , be already so pitiful waste as it be with this short time of war . iron : for the first two year indeed it be needful that they be vitual out of England thorough , from half year to half year , aforehand . which time the english pail shall not be burden at all , but shall have time to recover they self ; and monster also , be reasonable well store , will by that time , if God send sesonable wether , be thorough well furnish to supply a great part of that charge , for i know there be a great plenty of corn send over sea from thence , the which if they may have sail for at home , they will be glad to have money so near hand , special if they be straight restrain from transportinge of it . thereunto also there will a great help and furtherance give to the put forward of hubandrye in all meat place , as hereafter shall in due place appear . but hereafter , when thing shall grow to a better strength , and the country be replenish with corn , as in short space it will if it be well follow , for the country people themselves be great plower , and small spender of corn , then will i wish there shall be good store house and magazine erect in all those great place of garrison , and in all great town , aswell for the victuallinge of soldier and ship , as for all occasion of sudden service , as also for prevent of all time of dearth and scarcity : and this want be much to be complain of in England above all other country , who , trust to much to the usual blessing of the earth , do never forcaste any such hard sesaon , nor any such sudden occasion as these troublesome time may every day bring forth , when it will|be too late to gather provision from abroad , and to bring perhaps from far for the furnish of shipe or soldier , which peradventure may need to be present employ , and who want may ( which God forbid ) hap to hazard a kingdom . Eudox : in deed the want of those magasynes of victual , i have hear oftentimes complain of in England , and wonder at in other country , but that be nothing now to our purpose ; but as for these garrison which you have now so strong plant throughout all Irland , and every place swarm with soldier , shall there be no end of they ? for now thus be i seem , i do see rather a country of war then of peace and quiet , which you erst pretend to work in Ireland ; for if you bring all thing to the quietness which you say , what nead then to maintain so great force as you have charge upon it ? iron : i will unto you , eudox . in privity discover the drift of my purpose : i mean ( as i tell you ) and do well hop thereby both to settle a eternal peace in that country , and also to make it very profitable to her majesty , the which i see must be bring in by a strong hand , and so contenue until it grow into a steadfast course of governmente , the which in this sort will neither be defyculte nor dangerous ; for the soldier be once bring in for the service into Ulster , and have subdue it and Connaught , i will not have he to lay down his arm any more , till he have effect that which i purpose : that be , first to have this a general composition for the maintenance of these throughout all the realm , in regard of the trouble time , and daily danger which be threaten to this realm by the king of Spain : and thereupone to bestow all my soldier in [ such ] sort as i have do , that no part of all Irlande shall able to dare so much as quinch . then will i bring eftsoon in my reformacon , and thereupon establish such a order of govermente as i may think mettest for the good of that realm , which be once establish , and all thing put into a right way , i dowbt not but they will run one fair . and though they will ever seek to swerve aside , yet shall they not be able without foreign violence once to remove , as you your self shall soon , i hope , in your own reason ready conceve ; which if it shall ever appear , enemy may her majesty at pleasure withdraw some of the garrison , and tear there pay into her purse , or if she will never please so to doe ( which i will rather wish ) , then shall she have a number of brave old soldier always ready for any occasion that she will ymploe unto , suppliinge there garrisone with fresh one in their steed ; the maintenance of who shall no more charge to her majesty then now the realm be ; for all the revinue thereof , and much more , she spend , even in the most peaceable time that be there , ( as thing now stand ) . and in time of war , which be sure now every seven year , she spend infinite treasure beside to small porpose . Eudox : i perceive your porpose ; but now if you have thus strong make way unto your reformacon , as that i see the people so humble and prepare that they will and must yield to any ordnance that shall|be give they , i do much desire to understand the same ; for in the begin you promise to show a mean how to redress all those inconvenience and abuse , which you show to be in that state of governmente , which now stand there , as in the law , custom , and religion : wherein i will glad know first , whether , in steed of those law , you will have new law make ? for now , for ought that i see , you may do what you please . iron : i see , eudox . that yowe well remember our first porpose , and do right continue the course thereof . Firste therefore to speak of law , since we first begin with they , i do not think it convenient , though now it be in the power of the prince to change all the law and make new ; for that shall bread great toble and confusion , aswell in the english now dwell and to be plant , as also in the irish . for the english , have be train up always in the english government , will hardly be induce unto any other , and the irish will better draw to the english , than the english to the irish governmente . therefore since we can now apply law fit to the people , as in the first institution of comone-welthes it ought to be , we will apply the people , and fit they to the law , as it most convenient may be . the law therefore we resolve shall abide in the same sort that they do , both common law and statute , only such defect in the common law , and inconveniens in the statute , as in the beginning we note , and as man of deep insight shall advise , may be change by some other new act and ordnance to be [ by ] a parlymente there confirm : as those of trial of ple of the crown , and private right between party , colorable convaiance , [ and ] accessary . Eudox : but how will those be redress by Parlimente , when as the irish , which sway most in parliament , as you say , shall oppose they self against they ? iron : that maybe well avoid : for now that so many freeholders of english shall|be establish , they together with burgess of town , and such other loyal irish man as may be prefer to be knight of the shire , and such like , will|be able to beard and counterpose the rest ; who also , be now bring more in awe , will the more easy submite to any such ordnance as shall for the good of they self , and that realm general . Eudox : you say well , for the incresse of the freholder , for their number will hereby be great augment ; but how shall it pass through the high house , [ which ] will still consist all of irish ? iron : marie , that also may be redress by example of that which i hard be do in the like case , by king Edward the theerd , as i remember , who , be great bar and cross by the bill of the clergy , they be then by reason of the lord abbot and other , too many and strong for they , so she can not for there forwardness , order and reform thing as he desire , be advise to dyrecte forth his write to certain gentleman , and of the best ability and trust , intitlinge they therein baron , to serve and fit as baron in the next Parlyment . by which mean he have so many baron in his parliament , as be able to weight down the clarge and there friend : the which baron they say , be not afterwards lord , but only barronit , as sundry of they do yet retain the name . and by the like devise her majesty may now likewise curb and cut short those irish unruly lord that hinder all good proceed . Eudox : it seem no less than for reform of all those inconveniente statute which you note in the begin , and redressinge of all those evil costome , and lastelye , for set sound religion amongst they : i think you shall not need any more to overgo those particular again , which you mencon , nor any other which may beside be remember , but to leave to the reformacon of such a parliament , in which , by the good care of the lord deputy and counsel , they may all amend . therefore now that you may come come to that genarall reformacon which you speak of , and bring in of all that establishment , by which you say all man shall be contain in duty ever after , without the terror of warlike force , or violent wrest of thing by sharp punishment . iron : i will so at your pleasure , the which i seem by no mean can be better plot , then by example of such other realm as have be annoy with the like evelle , Ireland now ` be , and use still to be . and first in this realm of England , it be manifest , by the report of the chronicle and other ancient writer , that it be great infect with robber and outelawe , which lurk in wood and fast place , whence they use often time to break forth into the high way , and sometime into small village to rob and spoil . for redress whereof it be write that king allure , or Alfride , who then reign , do divide the realm into shire , and the shire into hundredes , [ and the hundredes ] into rape , rapentacke , and wapentacke into tythinge : so that ten tythinge make a hundred , and five make a laythe or weapentacke , of which ten , each one be bind for another , and the elder or best of theme , who they call the tythingman or bourroghsolder , that be , the elder pledge , become surety for all the rest . so that if any one of they do start into any undutiful action , the burroughsolder be bind to bring he forth , who joyninge eftsoons with all his tythinge , will follow the loose person through all place , till they bring he in . and if all the tythinge fail , than all the lathe be charge for the tythinge , and if that lathe fail , than all the hundred be demand for theme ; and if the hundred , than the shire , who joyninge eftsoon altogether , will not rest till they have find out and deliver in , that unlawful fellow which be not ameanable to law . and herein it seem , that that good saxon king follow the counsel of Jethro to Moses , who advise he to divide the people into hundred , and to set captain and wise man of trust over they , which shall take the charge of they , and ease he of that burden . and so do Romulus , as you may read , divide the roman into trybbe , and the tribbe into centuryon or hundred . by this ordinance this king bring this realm of England , which before be most trooblesome , unto that quiet state , that no one bad person can stir that he be [ not ] straight take hold of by those his tythinge , and there burrowsolder , who be his neighbour or next kindesman be privy to all his way , and look narrow to his life . the which institution if it be observe in Irland , will work that effect which it do in England , and keep all man within the compass of duty and obedience . Eudox : this be contrary to that you say before ; for , as i remember , you say that there be a great disproportione between England and Irlande , so as the law which be fit of the one will not fit the other . Howe come it then now , that you will transfer a principal institution from England to Irland ? iron : this law be not make by a norman conqueror , but by a saxon king , be at what time England be very like to Irland , as now it stand : for it be , i tell you , annoy great with robber and outlaw , which trouble the whole realm , every corner have in it a Robin Hood , that keep all wood , and spoil all passenger and inhabitant , as Irland now have ; so as , i seem , this ordnance will fit very well , and bring they all into one . Eudox : then , when you have thus tithe the commonalty , as you say , and set burrowsolder over they all , what will you do when you come to the gentleman ? will you hold the same corpse ? iron : you , marry , most special ; for this you must know , that all the irish almost boast they self to be gentleman , no less than the Welshman ; for if he can derive himself from the head of a sept , as most of they can , they be [ so ] expert by their bard , then so hold he self a gentleman , and thereupon scorn eftsoon to work , or use any hard labour , which he say be the liese of a peasant or churl ; but thenceforth either become a horseboye , or a stocage to some kern , inure he self to his weapone , and to the general traide of steal , ( as they count it ) . so that if a gentleman , or any worthy yeoman of they , have any child , the eldest of they perhaps shall|be keep in some order , but all the rest shall shift for they self , and fall to this occupacon . and it be a common use amongst some of their best gentle [ leman ] tenant son , that so soon as they be able to use there weapon , they straight gether to themselves three or four straugler , or kern , with who wander a while id vpe and down the country , take only meat , he at last fall unto some bid occasion that he shall offrede , which be once make know , he be thencforthe count a mane of worth , in who there be courage ; whereupon there draw to hime many other like loose young man , which , stir hime up , with encouragement , provoke he short to flat rebellion ; and this happen not only in the son of gentle [ man ] , but oftentimes by their nobleman , special there base bear son , as there be few without some of they . for they be not only not ashamed to acknowledge they , but also to boast of they , and use they in such secret service as they themselves will not be see in , as to plague there enemy , spoil there neighbores , to oppress and crush some of [ their ] own to to stubborn freholder , which be not tractlable to their bid will . two such bastard of the lord rock there be now out in monster , who he do not only countenance but also pryvilye maintain and relyve mighty amongst his tenant . such other be thereof the earl of Clancarte in Desmond , and many other in many other place . Eudox : than it seem that this ordnance of tythinge they by the pole be not only fit for the gentleman , but also for the nobleman , who i will [ have ] think to have be so honourable mind , as that they shall not need such a base kind of live , be bind to there allegiance , [ who ] shall rather have hold in and stay all other from undutifulness , then need to be force thereunto they self . iron : yet so it be , eudox : but yet because that nobleman can be tithe , there be not many tythinge of they , and because a barrow holder over they shall not only be a great indignity , but also a danger to add more power to they than they have , or to make one the comander of ten , i hold it meet that there be only sewerty take of they , and one bind for another , whereby , if any shall swerve , his sewerty shall for safeguard of their band bring he in , or seek to serve upon he : and beside , i will wish they all to be swear to her majesty , which they never yet be , but at the first creation ; and that oath will sure contain they great , or the breach of it bring they to short vengeance , for God use to punish perjurye sharp . so i read , in the reign of Edward the 2 , and also of Henry the 7 , when the time be very break , that there be a corporate oath take , of all the lord and best gentleman of fealty to the king , which now be no less nedfull , because many of they be suspect to have take a other oath privy to some bad purpose , and thereupon they have receive the sacrament , and be swear to a priest , which they think bind they more than their allegiance to their prince , or love of their country . Eudox : this tythinge of the common-people , and take surety of lord and gentleman , i like very we , but that it will|be very troublesome : shall it not be as well to have to have they all book , and the lord and gentleman to take all mean sort upon themselves ? for they be best able to bring they in , whensoever any of they start out . iron : this indeed Eudoxus have be hitherto , and yet be a common order among they , to have all the people book by lord and gentleman , but it be the worst order that ever be devise ; for by this bokinge of man , all the inferyour sort be bring under the command of their lord , and force to follow they into any action whatsoever . now this you be to understand , that all the rebellyon which you see from time to time happen in Ireland , be not begin by the common people , but by the lord and captain of country , upon pride or wilful obstanacye against the government , which whensoever they enter into , they draw with they all their people and such follower , as think themselves bind to go with they , because they have boke they and undertake for they . and this be the reason that you have few such bad occasion here in England by reason that the noble man howeever they shall happen to be evil dispose , have no command at all over the comynalty , though dwell under they , because every man stand upon himself , and build his fortune upon his own faith and firm assurance : the which this manner of tythinge the pole will work also in Ireland . for by this the people be break into many small part , like little stream , that they can easy come together into one head , which be the principal regard that be to be have in Ireland to keep they from grow into such a head , and adhere unto great man . Eudox : but yet i can see how this can be bring about , without do great wrong unto the noble man there ; for at the conquest of the realm , those great signorye and lordship be give they by the king , that they shall be the strong against the irish , by the multitude of follower and tenant under they : all which hold their tenement of they by fealty , and such service , whereby they be by the first grant of the king , make bind unto they , and tie to rise out with they upon all occasion of service . and this i have often hear , that when the lord deputy have raise any general ostinge , the noble man have claim the lead of they , by grant from the king of England inder the great seal exhibyte ; so as the deputy [ s ] will not refuse they to have the lead of they , or if they do , they will so work , as none of they [ r ] follower shall rise forth to the ostinge . iron : you say very true ; but will you see fruit of those grant ? i have know when those lord have have the lead of their own follower under they to the general ostinge , that they have for the same cut upon every plowland within their country forty shilling or more , whereby some of they have gather above seven . or viij . c . li . , and other much more into there purse , in lief whereof they have gather unto themselves a number of lose kern out of all part , which they have carry forth with they , to who they never give penny of entertainment , allow by the country or force by they , but let they feed upon the contrye , [ and ] extort upon all man where they come ; for thatpeople will never ask better entertainment than to have a colour of service or employment give they , by which they will Paul and spoil so outrageous , that the very enemy can do much worse : and beside turn they to the enemy . Eudox : it seem the first intent of these grant be against the irish , which now some of they use against the queen her self : but now what remedy be there for this ? or how can these grant of the king be avoid , without wrong of those lord which have those land and lordship give they ? iron : sure they may be well enough ; for most of those lord , since the first grant from the king by who these land be give they , have sense bestow the most part of they among their kinsfolk , as every lord perhaps in his time have give one or another of his principal castle to his young son and other to other , as large and as ample as they be give to he ; and other they have sell , and other buy , which be not in their first grant , which now nevertheless they bring within the compass thereof , and take and exact upon they , as their first demean of all thiose kind of service , yea and the very wild irish exaction as Coynie and lyverye for he , and such like , by which they pole and utter undo the poor tenant and frehoulder under they , which either through ignorance know not their tennor , or through greatness of their new lord dare not challenge they ; yea , and some lord of country also , as great one as themselves , be now by strong hand bring under they , and make their vassal . as for example Arundel of the strand in the county of cork , who be auncyent a great lord , and able to spend 3500 livre . by the year , as appear by good record , be now become the lord barrye man , and do to he all those service , which be due unto her majesty . for reformacon of which , i wish that their be a commission grant forth under the great seal , as i have see one record in the old council book in monster : that be send forth in the time of sir William drurye unto person of special trust and judgement to inquire throughout all Ireland , begin in one county first and so rest a while until the same be settle , by the verdict of a sound and substantial jury , how every man hold his land , of who and by what tenor , so that every one shall be admit to show and exhibit what right he have , and by what service he hold his land , whether in chief or in soccage , or in knight service , or else soever . thereupon will appear , first how all those great english lord do claim those great service , what signorye they usurp , what wardship they take from the queen , what land of she they conceal : and then , how those irish captain have encroach upon the queen frehoulder and tenant , how they have translate the tennor of they from English hold into Irish tanistre , and defeat her majesty of all her right and duty which be to acrew to she thereabout , as wardshipp , livery , marriage and fine of allyenacon , with many other comodyty ; which now be keep and conceal from her majesty to the vallowe of 60000 livre . yearly , i dare undertake , in all Ireland , by that which i know in one county . Eudox : this , Iren. will seem a dangerous commission , and ready to stir up all the irish in rebellion , who know that they have nothing to show for all those land which they hold , but their sword , will rather draw they then suffer their land to be thus draw away from they . iron : neither shall their land be take away from they , nor the uttermost advantage enforce against they : but this by descretyon of the commissioner shall be make know unto they , that it be not her majesty meaning to use any such extremetye , but only to reduce thing into order of english law and make they hold their land of her majesty and to restore to she her due service , which they detain out of those land which be auncyent hold by her majesty . and that they shall not only [ not ] be thrust out , but also have estate and grant of their land new make to they from her majesty , so as they shall thenceforth hold they rightful , which they now usurp most wrongful ; and yet withal i will wish that in all those irish country there be some land reserve to her majesties free disposytyon for the better contain of the rest , and enterninglinge they with english inhabytante and custom , that knowledge may still be have by they of their do , so as no manner of practice or conspiracy shall be in hand among they , but notice shall be give thereof by one mean or another , and their practise prevent . Eudox : true neither can the irish , nor english lord , think themselves wrong , or hardly deal withal herin , to have that indeed which be none of their own at all , but her majesty absolute , give unto they with such equal condicon , as that both they may be assure thereof , better than they be , and also her majesty not defraud of her right utter ; for it be a great grace with a prince , [ to ] take that with condicon which be absolute she own . thus shall the irish be well satisfy , and as for the great man which have such grant make they at first by the king of England , [ it ] be in regard they shall keep out the irish , and defend the king right , and his subject : but now sing that , in stead of defend they , they rob and spoil they and , in stead of keep out the irish , they do not only make the irish their tenant in those land , and thrust out the english , but also they themselves become mere irish , with marry they , fosteringe with they , and combinynge with they against the queen ; what reason be there but those grant and precedent shall be either revoke , or at least reduce to their first intencon for which they be grant ? for sure in my opinion they be more sharp to be chastise and reform then the wild irish , which , be very rude at the first , be now become somewhat more civil , when as english , from Englyshe be growene to be wild and mere irish . iron : indeed as you say , eudox : these do need a sharp reformacon than the very irish , for they be much more stubborn , and disobedient to law and government , than the irish be ; and more mallytious than the english that be dayle send over . Eudox : be that possible ? i pray you , how come it to pass ? what may be the reason hereof ? iron : mary , they say that the land be they , only by right , be first conquer by their ancestor , and that they be wrong by the new english man enter their unto , who they call la sa bona , that be in english with a great reproach as they will rate a dog . [ and for ] that some of your ancestor be in time past ( when they be civil and uncorrupted ) deputy and justice of the land , they think that the like authority shall be comyt unto you and the charge of the realm leave in their hand ; which , for that they see now otherwise dispose and that trust not give they ( which their ancestor have ) they think they self great indignyfy and disgrace thereby , and so grow both discontent and undutiful . Eudox : in truth , Irenyus , this be more than ever i hard , that the english-irish there shall be worse than the wild irish : oh lord , how quick do that country alter man nature ! it be not for nothing i perceive that i have hear , that the council of England think it not good policy to have that realm reform , or plant with english , lest they shall grow so undutiful as the irish , and become much more dangerous : as appear by the example of the lacyes in the time of Edward the second , which you speak of , that shake of their religion to their natural prince , and turn to Edward le Bruce , devise to make he king of Ireland . iron : no time have be without bad man : but as for that purpose of the council of England , which you speak [ of , ] that they shall keep that realm from reformacon , i think , they be most lewd abuse , for their great carfulnes and earnest endeavour do witness the contrary . neither be it [ the ] nature of the country to alter a man manner , but the bad mind of they , who have be bring up at home under a straight rule of duty and obedience , be always restrain by sharp penalty from lewd behaviour , so soon as they come thither , where they see law so slack tend , and the hard [ restraint ] which they be use unto now slack , they grow more lose and careless of their duty . as it be the nature of all man to love liberty , so they become flat libertyne , and fall to flat licentyousnes , more bold dare to disobey the law , through presumption of favour , and friendship , than any irish dare . Eudox : then if it be so , i think your late advisement be very evil , whereby you wish the irish to be sow and sprinkle with the english , [ and ] in all the irish country to have English plant among they for to bring they to Eng [ lish ] fashion , since the english be soon draw to the irish , than the irish to the english : for as i say before , [ if ] they much run with the stream , the great number will carry away the less : therefore i seem by this reason it shall be better to part the irish and english , than to mingle they together . iron : not so , eudox : but where there be no good stay of government , and strong ordinance to hold they , there indeed the few will follow the more , but where there be due order of discipline and good rule , there the better shall go foremost , and the worst shall follow . and therefore since Ireland be full of her own nacon , that may not be root [ out ] , and somewhat store with english already , and more to be , i think it best by a unyon of manner , and conformytye of mind , to bring they to be one people , and to put away the dislikeful conceit both of the one , and of other , which will|be by no mean better than by this interminglinge of they : that neither all the irish may dwell together , nor all the english , but by translate of they and scatter they in small number among the english , not only to bring they by daily conversatyon unto better like of each other , but also to make both of they less able to hurt . and therefore when i come to the tithe , i will tithe they one with another , and for the most part will make the irish man the tithingman , whereby he shall take the less exception to partiality and yet be the more tie thereby . but when i come to the head Borough , which be the head of the lath , he will i make a Englishman , or irish man of no small assurance : as also when i come to appoint the elderman , that be the head of the hundred , he will i sure choose [ to be ] a english man of special regard , that may be a stay and pillar of all the borough under he . Eudox : what do you mean by your hundred ? and what by your borough ? by that , which i have read in ancient record of England , one hundred do contain a hundred village , or as some say a c . plowlande , be the same which the saxon call canter ; the which canter , as i find it record in the black book of Ireland , do contain 30 , Villattas terr@aelig ; , which some call , quarter of land , and every Villatta can maintain 400 cow in pasture , and the 400. cow to be divide in 4 herd , so as none of they shall come near another : every Villata contain 17 plowlande , as be there set down . and by that which i have read of a borough , it signyfi a free town , which have a principal officer , call a head borough , to become ruler , and undertake for all the dweller under he , have for the same franchise and privilege grant they by the king , whereof it be call a free boroughe , [ and ] of the lawyer Franciplegium . iron : both that which you say , eudox : be true , and yet that which i say not untrue ; for that which you speak of divide the country into hundred , be a devise of the land of the realm , but this which i tell , be of the people , who be thus divide by the poll : so that a c . in this sense signyfy a c . pledge , which be under the command and asurance of their alderman , the which , as i suppose , be also call a waapentacke , so name of touch the weapon or spark of their alderman , and swear to follow he faithful , and serve their prince true . but other think that a weapontacke be ten humdred or borough : likewise a boroughe , as i here use it , and as the old law still use it , be not a borough town , as they now call it , that be a franchist town , but a main pledge of c . free person , therefore call a from borough or as you say Franciplegium : for borh in old saxon say signyfi pledge or surety , and yet it be so use in some speech , as Chaucer say saint John to barrow , that be for assurance and warranty . Eudox : i conceive the difference . but now that you have thus divide the people into these tythinge , and hundred , how will you have they so preserve and continue ? for people do often change their dwelling , and some must dye , while othersome doe grow up into strength of year , and become man . iron : these hundred i will [ wish ] to assemble themselves once every year with their pledge , and to present themselves before the justice of peace , which shall|be thereunto appoint , to be survey and number , to see what change have happen since the year before ; and , the defect to supply of those young plant late grow up , which be diligent to be overloke and view of what condicon and demeanour they be , so as pledge may be take for they , and they put into order of some tythinge : of all which alteracon note be to be take , and book make thereof accord . Eudox : now i think Irenius , you be to be warn to take good heed , jest unaware you fall into the inconvenience which you former find fault with in other ; namely , that by this bokinge of they , you do not gather they into another head , and have break their former strength , do not again unite they more strong : for every alderman , have all his from pledge of his hundred under his command , may i think , if he be ill dispose , draw all his company into any evil action . and likewise , by this assemble of they once a year unto their alderman by their weapontacke , take heed lest you also give they occasion and mean to practise any harm in any conspiracy . iron : neither of both be to be doubt ; for the alderman and headborrowe will not be such man of power and countenance of themselves , be to be choose thereunto , as need to be fear : neither , if he be , be his hundred at his command further than his prince service ; and also every tithing man may control he in such a case . and as for the assemble of the hundred , much less be any danger thereof to be doubt , sing it be before a justice of peace , or some high constable to be thereunto appoint : so as of these tythinge there can no peril ensue , but a certain assurance of peace and great good ; for they be thereby withdraw from their lord , and subject to their prince . Moreover for the [ better ] break of these head and sect , which i tell you be one of the great strength of the irish , i think , it shall do very well to renew that old statute that be make in reign of Edward the four in England , by which it be command , that whereas all man that use to be call by the name of their sect , accord to their several nacon , and have no surname at all , that from thenceforth each one shall take unto himself a several surname , either of his trade or faculty , or of some quallety of his body or mind , or of the place where he dwell , so as every one shall be distinguish from other , or from the most part , whereby they shall not only not depend upon the head of their sect , as now they do , but also shall in short time learn quite to forget this irish nation . and herewithal will i also wish all the o and the macke which the head of the sect have take to their name , to be utter forbid and extinguish ; for that the same be a old manner ( as some say ) first make by o Brin , for the strengthen of the irish , the abrogatinge thereof will as infable they . Eudox : i like this ordinance very well ; but now that you have thus divide and distinguish they , what other order will you take for their manner of life ? for all that , though perhaps it may keep they from disobedyence and disloyalty , yet will it not bring they from their barbarism and savage life . iron : the next [ thing ] that i will do shall|be to appoint to every one , that be not able to live of his frehoulde , a certain trade of life , to which he shall find himself fit , and shall|be think able , the which trade he shall|be bind to follow , and live only thereupon . all trade therefore [ it ] be to be understand [ be to be ] of iij kind , manual , intellectual , and mix , one contain all such as need the exercise of bodily labour to the performance of their profession ; the|other consist only of the exercise of the wit and reason ; the three part of bodily labour , and part of the wit , but depend [ most ] of industry and carefulness . of the first sort be all handicraft and husbandry labour . of the second be all science , and those which be call the liberal art of the third be merchandise and chafferye , that be , buy and sell ; and without all these iij there be no commonwealth can almost consist , or at the jest be perfect . but the wretched realm of Ireland want the most principal of they , that be , the intellectual ; therefore in seek to restore her state it be special to be look unto . but because of husbandry , which suppli unto we all thing necessary for food , whereby we chief live , therefore it be first to be provide for . the first thing then that we be to draw these new tithe man unto , aught to be husbandry . first , because it be most natural and most needful ; then , becuase it be most natural ; and last , because it be most enemy to war , and most hate inquietness , as the poet say , ---- ' bella execrata collonis : ' but husbandry be the nurse of thrift , and the daughter of industry and labour , detest all that may work her scathe , and destroy the travel of her hand , who hope be all her life comfort unto the plough : therefore be all those kearne , Stochaus , and horsboye , to be draw and mad to employ that ableness of body , which they [ be ] wont to use to theft and villainy , hencforth to labour and husbandry . in the which , by that time they have spend but a little pain , they will find such sweetness and happy contentment , that they will hardly afterwards be hail away from it , or draw to their wont lewd life in thievery and rogerye . And be thus once enter thereunto , they be not only to be countenance and encoradge by all good mean , but also provide that their child after they may be bring up in the same , and succeed in the room of their father . to which end there be a statute in Ireland already well provide , which comaund that all the son of hubandman shall|be train up in their father trade , but it be , God wot , very slender look unto . Eudox : but do you not count , in this trade of husbandry , pasture of cattle , and keep of their cow ? for that be reckon as part of husbandry . iron : i know it be , and nedfull to be use , but i do not mean to allow any of these able body , which be able to use bodily labour , to follow a few cow graze , but such impotent person , as be unable for strong travel , be yet able to drive cattle to and fro the pasture ; for this keep of cow be of it self a very idle life , and a fit nursery for a thief . for which cause , you remember , i dislyke the Irishman for keep of bollye in summer upon the mountain , and live after that savadg sort . but if they will always feed any cattle , or keep they on the mountain , let they make some town near to the mountain side , where they may dwell together with neighbour , and be conversante in the view of the world . and to say truth , though Ireland be by nature count a great soil of pasture , yet i have rather have few cow keep , and man better mannred , than to have such huge increase of cattle , and no increase of condicon . i will therefore wish that there be some ordinance make among they , that whatsoever keep twenty cow shall keep a plough go , for otherwise all man will fall to pasture , and none to husbandry , which be a great cause of this dearth now in England , and a cause of the usual stealth now in Ireland : for look in all country that live in such sort by keep of cattle , and you shall find that they be both very barbarous and uncivil , and great give to war . the tartaryan , the Muscovite , the Norway , the Goth , the armenyans , and many other do witness the same . and therefore since now we purpose to draw the irish from desire of war and tumult , to the love of peace and civylitye , it be expedient to abridge their custom of heardinge , and augment their trade more of tyllinge and hubandrye . as for other occupacon and trade , they ned not to be enforce ot , but every man bind only to follow that he think himself apt for . for other trade of artificer will|be occupy for very necessity , and constrain use of they ; and so likewise will merchandise for the gain thereof ; but learning and bring up in liberal science , will not come of it self , but must be draw on with straight law and ordinance : and therefore it be meet that such a act be ordain , that all the son of lord and gentleman , and such other as be able to bring they up in learning , shall be train up herein from their childhode . and for that end every parish shall|be force to keep one petty scholemater , adjoin unto the parish charge , to be the more in veiwe , which shall bring up their child in the first rudiment of letter : and that , in every country of baroney , they shall keep another able scholemasiter , which shall instruct they in grammar , and in the princyple of science , to who they shall be compel to send their youth to be discyplyne , whereby they will in short time grow up to that civyll conversasyon , that both the child will loathe the former rudeness in which they be breed , and also their parent will , even by the ensample of their young child , perceive the foulness of their own brutish behaviour compare to they : for learning have that wonderful power of it self , that it can soften and temper the most stern and savage nature . Eudox : sure i be of your mind , that nothing will bring they from their uncivil life soon than learning and discypline , next after the knowledge and fear of God . and therefore i do still expect , that you shall come thereunto , and set some order for reformacon of religion , which be first to be respect ; accord to the say of Christ , ' first seek the kingdom of heaven , and the righteousness thereof ' . iron : i have in mind so to do ; but let i , i pray you , first finish that which i have in hand , whereby all the ordinance which shall after be set down for religion may abide the more firm , and be observe more diligent . now that this people be thus tithe and order , and every one bind to some trade of life , which shall|be particular enter and set down in tythinge book , yet perhaps there will some straggler and runagate which will not of themselves come and yield themselves to this order , and yet after the well finish of the present war , and establish of the garrison in every strong place of the country , where their wont refuge be most , i suppose there will few stand out , or if they do , they will soon be bring in by the ear : but yet afterwards , lest any one of these shall swerve , or any that be tie to a trade shall afterwards not follow the same , accord to this institution , but shall straggle up and down the country or mich in corner amongst their friend idllye , as carrowe , bard , jester , and such like , i will wish that there be a provost Marshall appoint in every shire , which shall continual walk through the country , with half a dozen , or half a score horseman , to take up such lose person as they shall find thus wander , who he shall punish by his own authoretye , with such pain as the person shall seem to deserve : for if he be but once so take idelye roginge , he may punish he more light , as with stock , or such like : but if he be find again so loiter , he may scourge he with whip , or rod , after which if he be take again , let he have the bitterness of the martial law . likewise if any relic of the rebellion be find by he , that either have not come in and submit he self to the law , or that have once come in , break forth again , and walk disorder , let they taste of the same cup in God name ; for it be due to they for their first guilt , and now be revive by their late lose nes , let they have their first desert , as now be find unfit to live in a commonwealth . Eudox : this be a good manner ; but i think it be a unnecessary charge , and also unfit to continue the name or form of any martial law , when as there be a proper oficer appoint already for these turn , to wit the sheriff of the shire , who particular ofice it be to walk continual up and down his Bayliwicke , as you will have a martial , to snatch up all those runagate and unprofitable member , and to bring they to his gaol to be punish for the same . therefore this may well be spare . iron : not so , i seem ; for though the sheriff have this authorytye upon himself to take upe all such traitor , and imprison they , yet shall he not do so much good , nor work that terror in the heart of they , that a martial will , who they shall know to have power of life and death in such case , and special to be appoint for they : neither do it hinder but that though it pertain to the sheriff , the sheriff may do therein what he can , and yet the marshal may walk his course beside ; for both of they may do the more good , and may terrify the idle rogue , know that though he have a watch upon one , yet he may light upon the|other . but this proviso be nedfull to be have in this case , that the sheriff may not have the like power of life as the marshal have , and as heretofore they have be accustom ; for it be dangerous to give power of life into the hand of he which may have benefit by the party death , as , if the say lose liver have any good of his own , the sheriff be to seize thereupon , whereby it have come often to pass , that some who have not perhaps deserve judgement of death , though otherwise perhaps offend , have be for their good sake catch up , and carry straight to the bough ; a thing indeed pitiful and very horrible . therefore by no mean will i wish the sheriff to have such authoretye , nor yet to imprison that loosel till the session , for so all gaol may soon be fill , but [ to ] sn he to the martial , who , eftsoon find he faulty , shall give he mete correction , and ride he away forthwith . Eudox : i do now perceive your reason well . but come we now to that wherofe we erst speak , i mean , to religion and religious man ; what order will you set among they ? iron : for religion little have i to say , my self be as i say not profess therein , and it self be but one , so as there be but one way therein ; for that which be true only be , and the rest be not at all , yet in plant of religion this much be nedfull to be observe , that be not seek forceable to be impress into they with terror and sharp penalty , as now be the manner , but rather deliver and intymate with myldnes and gentleness , so as it may not be hate before it be understand , and their professor despise and reject . for this i know that most of the irish be so far from understand the popish religion as they be of the protestant profession ; and yet do they hate that though unknown , even for the very hatred which they have of the Eng [ lish ] , and of their government . therefore it be expedient that some discreet minister of their own countryman be first send among they , which by their mild perswasyon and instruction , as also by their sober life and conversacon , may draw they first to understand , and afterwards to embrace , the doctrine of their salvacon ; for if that the ancient godly father , which first convert they , be infidel , to the faith , be able to draw they from infidelyte and pagansye to the true belief in Christ , as saint Pattricke , and saint Columb , how much more the godly teacher bring they to the true understand of that which they already profess ? wherein it be great wonder to see the odds which be between the zeal of popish priest , and minister of you gospel ; for they spare not to come out of Spain , from room , from Rheims , by long toil and dangerous travel hither , where they know peril of death await they , and no reward nor riches be to be find , only to draw the people to the church of Rome ; whereas some of our idle minister , have a way for credit and estymacon thereby open unto they , and have the living of the country offer they , without pain , without peril , will neither for the same , nor for any love of God , nor zeal of religion , nor for all the good which they may do by win of so many soul to God , be draw forth from their warm nest and their sweet love side to look out into god harvest , which be even ready for the sickle , and all the field yellow long ago : doubtless these good old father will , i fear i , rise up in the day of judgement to condemn they . Eudox : sure , it be great pity , irin [ i ] we , that there be none choose out of the minister of Eng [ land ] , good sober , and discreet man , which may be send over thither to teach and instruct they , and that there be not as care have of their soul as of their body ; for the care of both lie upon the prince . iron : be there never so many send over thither they shall do small good till one enormity be take from they , that be , that both they be restrain from send their young man abroad to other universytye beyond sea , as Rheims , Douai , Louvain , and the like , and that other from abroad be restrain from come to they ; for their lurk secret in their house and in corner of the country do more hurt and hindrance to religion with their private perswasyon , than all the other can do with their public instruction ; and though for these latter there be a good statute their ordain , yet the same be not execute , and as for the former their be no law nor order for their restraint at all . Eudox : i mervell that it be no better look unto and not only this , but also that which , i remember , you mention in your abuse concern the profit and reveneue of the land of fugitive in Ireland , which by pretence of certain collorable conveyance be send continual over unto they , to the comfort of they and other against her majesty , for which here in Eng [ land ] there be good order take : and why not then aswell in Ireland ? for though there be no statute there yet enact therefore , yet may her majesty , by her only prorgative , seize the fruit and profit of those fugitive land into her hand , till they come over to testefye their true allegiance . iron : indeed she may so do ; but the cumbrous time do perhaps hinder the regard thereof , and of many other good intencon . Eudox : but why then do they not mind it in peaceable time ? iron : leave we that to their grave consideracon , but proceed we forward . next care in religion be to build up and repair all the ruin [ d ] church : there , the most part lie even with the ground , and some [ that ] have be late repair , and thatch be so unhandsome patch , and thatch , that man do even shun the place for the uncomlynes thereof : therefore i will wish that there be order take to have they build in some better form , accord to the church of England ; for the outward show , assure your self , do great draw the the rude people to the reverence and frequye [ n ] tinge thereof , what ever some of our to nice fool say , there be nothing in the seemly form and comely order of the church . And , for so keep and continue they , there shall likewise churchwarden of the grave man in the parish be appoint , as there be here in England , which shall take the yearly charge both hereof , and also of the schole-house , which i wish to be build near to the say church ; for maintenance of both which , it be meet that some several porcon of land be allot , sing no more mortmain be to be look for . Eudox : indeed i seem it will be so convenyente ; but when all be do , how will you have this church serve , or your minister maintain ? since the living ( as you say ) be not sufficient scarce to make they a new gown , much less to yield meet maintenance accord to the dignity of their degree . iron : there be no way to help that , but to lay two or three of they together , until such time as the country grow more rich and better inhabit , at which time the tithe and other obvencon will also be more augment and better value : but now that we have thus go throough all their sort of trade , and set a course for their good establishment , let we if you please , go next to some other nedfull point of other public matter , no less concern the good of the commonwealth , though but accydent depend on the former . and first i wish that order be take for the cut down and open of all pace through wood , so that a wide way of the space of c . yard may be lay open in every of they for the safety of traveller , which use often in such perilous place to be rob , and sometime murder . next , that bridge be build upon all river , and all the ford mar and spill , so as none may pass any other way , but by those bridge , and every bridge to have a gate and a small gatehouse set thereon ; whereof this good will come that no night stealth , which be common drive in byway and by blind Ford unused of any but such like , must be convey out of one country into another , as they use , but that they must pass by those bridge , where they may be haply encounter , or easy track , or not suffer to pass at all , by mean of those gatehouse therein : also that in all strait and narrow passage , as between twoe bog , or through any deep ford or under any mountain side , there shall be some little fortillage , or wooden castle set , which shall keep and command that straight , whereby any rebel that shall come in the country may be stop the way , or pass with great peril . Moreover , that all high way shall be fence on both side , leave only forty foot breadth for passage , so as none shall be able to pass but through the high way , whereby thief and night robber may be the more easy pursue and encoutre , when there shall no other way to drive their steal cattle but therein [ as ] i former declare . further , that there shall in sundry covenyent place , by the high way [ be ] town appoint to be build , the which shall [ be ] town appoint to be build , the which shall be from borrow , and incorporate under bailiff , to be by their inhabitant well and strong trench , or otherwise fence with gate at each side thereof , to be shut night , like as there be [ in ] many place in the english pale , and all the way about it to be strong shut up , so that none shall pass but thoorough those town : to some of which it be good that the privilege of a market be give , the rather to strengthen and enable they to their defence , for nothing do soon cause civillitye in any country then many market town , by reason that the people repair often thither for their needs , will daily see and learn civyll manner of the better sort . beside , there be nothing do more stay and strengthen the country then such corporate town , as by proof in many rebellyon have be prove , in all which when the country have swerve , the town have stand still and fast , and yield good relief to the soldier in all occasion of service . and last there do nothing more enrich any country or realm then many town ; for to they will people draw and bring the fruit of their trade , aswell to make money of they , as to supply their needful use ; and the countryman will also be the more industrious in tillage , and rear all husbandry comoditye , know they shall have ready sale for they at those town : and in all those town shall there convenyent inn be erect for the lodging and harboringe of all traveller , who be now oftentimes spoil by lodging abroad in weak thatch house , for want of such place to shroud themselves in . Eudox : but what profit shall your market town reap of their market , whereas each one may sell their corn and cattle abroad in the country , and make their secret bargain among themselves , as now i understand they use ? iron : indeed , eudox : they do so , and thereby no small incovenyence do rise to the commonwealth ; for now when any one have steal a cow or a garon , he may secrett sell it in the country without privytie of any , whereas if he bring it into a market town it will perhaps be know , and the thief discover . therefore it be good that a straight ordinance be make , that none shall buy or sell any cattle but in some open market ( there be now market town every where at hand ) upon a great penalty neither shall they likewise by any corn to sell the same again unless it be to make malt thereof ; for by such engross and regratinge we see the dearth that now common reign here in England to have be cause . hereunto also be to be add that good ordinance , which i remember be once proclaim throughout all Ireland . that all man shall mark their cattle with a open several mark upon their flank or buttock so as if they happen to be steal , they may appear who they be , and they which shall buy they may thereby supecte the owner , and be warn to abstain from buy of they of a suspect person with such a unknown mark . Eudox : sure these ordinance seem very expedient , but special that of from town , of which i wonder that there be such small store in Ireland , and that in the first peoplinge and plant thereof they be neglect and omit . iron : they be not omit ; for there be , thorough all place of the country convenyente , many good town seat , which through that inundacon of the irish , which i first tell of , be utter waste and deface , of which the ruin be yet in many place to be see , and of some no sign at all remain , save only their bare name , but their seat be not to be find . Eudox : but how then come it to pass , that they have never since recover , nor their habitacon be reedify , as of the rest which have be no less spoil and waste ? iron : the cause thereof be for that , after their desolacon , they be beg by gentleman of the king under colour to repair they and gather the poor relic of the people again together , of who have obtain they , there so far from reedyfy of they , as that by all mean they have endeavour to keep they waste , lest that , be repair , their charter may be renew and the bugess restore to their land , which they have now in their possession ; much like as in those old monument of abbey , and religious house , we see they likewise use to do : for which cause it be judge that king Henry the eight bestow they upon they , know that thereby they shall never be able to rise again . and even so do those lord , in these old poor coporate town , of which i can name diverse but for kindle of displeasure . therefore as i wish many corporate town to be erect , so will i again wish they to be free , not depend upon the service , nor under the commandment of any but the governor . And be so , they will both strengthen all the country round about they , which by their mean will|be the better replenish and enrich , and also be as continual hold for her majesty , if the people shall revolt and break out again ; for without such it be easy to foray and overrun the whole land . let be , for example , all those freboroughe in the lowe-countrye , which be now all the strength thereof . Theise and other like ordinance may be deliver for the good establishment of this realm , afteryt be once subdue and reform , in which it may afterwards [ be ] very easy keep and maintain with small care of the governor and council there appoint , so as that it shall in short space yield a plentiful revenewe to the crown of England ; which now do but suck and consume the treasury thereof , through those unsound plot and chagfull order which be daily devise for her good , yet never effectual prosecute or perform . Eudox : but in all this your discourse i have not mark any thing by you speak touch the appointment of the principal officer , to who you wish the charge and performance of all this to be commit : only i observe some foul abuse by you note in some of the late governor , the reformacon whereof you leave for this present time . iron : i delight not to lay open the blame of great magistrate to the rebuke of the world , and therefore their reformacon i will not meddle with , but leave unto the wisdom of great head to be consider ; only this much i will speak general hereof , to satisfy your desire , that the government and chief majestracye i wish to continue as it do , to weet , that it be rule by a lord deputy or justice , for that it be a very safe kind of rule : but therewithal i wish that over he there wereplace a lord leiftenante , of some of the great personage in England ( such a one i can name ) upon who the eye of all England be fix , ( and our last hope now rest ) who be entitle with that dignity , and be always here resident , may back and defend the good cause of the government against all malignor , which else will , through their cunning work under hand , deprave and pull back whatsoever thing shall well begin or intend there , as we common see by experience at this day , to the utter ruin and desolacon of the poor realm , and this leiftenancye shall be no discoutenaunce of the lord deputy , but rather a strengthen and maintain of all his do ; for now the chief evil in that government be , that no governor be suffer to go one with any one course , but upon the least informacon here of this or that , he be either stop or cross , and other course appoint he from hence which he shall run , which how [ in ] convenient it be , be at this hour to well feel . and therefore this shall be one principle in the appointment of the lord deputy authority , that it shall be more ample and absolute then it be , and that he shall have a uncontrolled power to do any thing that he , with the advisement of the council , shall think meet to be do : for it be not possible for the council here , to direct a governor there , who shall|be force oftentimes to follow the nessitye of present occayson , and to take the soddayne advantage of time , which be once lose will not be recover ; while , through expect directyon from hence , the delay whereof be oftentimes through great affair most irksome , the oportunitye there in the mean time pass away , and great danger often grow , which by such timely prevencon may easy be stop . and this i remember be worthy observe by Matchavell in his discorse upon lyvye , where he commend the manner of the roman government , in give absolute power to all their consul and governor , which if they abuse , they shall afterward der answer : and the contrary thereof he reprehend [ in ] the state of Venice , of Florence , and many other pricipalytye of ittlaye , who use to lymytt their chief officer so straight , as that thereby they have oftentimes lose such happy occasion as they can never come unto again . the like whereof , who so have be conversante in that government of Ireland , have to often see their great hindrance and hurt . therefore this can i wish to be redress , and yet not so , but that in particular thing he shall be restrain , though not in general government ; as namely in this , that no ofice shall be sell by the lord deputy for money , nor no pardon , nor no protectyon buy for reward , nor no beve take [ for ] captencye of contrye , nor no share of bishopric for nominatinge their bishop , nor no forfayture , nor dispensacon with penal statute give to their servant or friend , nor no sell of licence for exportacon of prohibit war , and special of corn and flesh , with many the like ; which need some manner of restraint , or else very great trust in the honourable disposytion of the lord deputy . thus i have , eudox : as brief as i can , and as my remembrance will serve , rund through the state of that whole country , both to let you see what it now be , and also , what it may be by good care and amendment : not that i take upon i to change the policy of so great a kingdom , or prescribe rule to such wise man as have the handle thereof , but only to show you the evil , which in my small experience i have observe to be the chief hindrance of the reformacon thereof ; and by the way of conference to declare my simple opinion for redress thereof , and establish a good course for that government ; which i do not deliver for a perfect plot of my own invensyon to be only follow , but as i have learn and understand the same by the consultacon and actyon of very wise governor and counselor who i have sometime hear treat thereof . so have i think good to set down a remembrance of they for my own good , and your satisfaction , that who listen to overloke they , although perhaps much wise than they which have thus advise of that state , yet at jest , by comparison hereof , may perhaps better his own judgement , and by the light of other forego , he may follow after with more ease , and haply find a fair way thereunto then they which have go before . Eudox : i thank you , Irenyus , for this your gentle pain ; withal not forget now in the shut up to put you in mind of that which you have former half promise -- hereafter when we shall meet again upon the like good occasion , you will declare unto we those your observacon which you have gather of the [ antiquity ] of Ireland . Finis 1596 E. S. 