a brief and summary discourse upon the intend voyage to the hithermost part of America : write by captain Carlile in April , 1583. for the better inducement to satisfy such 
 merchant of the moscovian company and other , as in disburse their money towards the furniture of the present charge , do demand forthwith a present return of gain , albeit their say particular disbursement be require but in very slender sum , the high be 25. livre . the second at 12. livre . 10. s . and the low at 6. pound five shilling . 
 hen the goldsmith desire to find the certain goodness of a piece of gold , which be new offer unto he , he present bring the same to the touchstone , where , by compare the show or touch of this new piece with the touch or show of that which he 
 know of old , he forthwith be able to judge what the value be of that , which be new offer unto he . after the example whereof i have think it good to make some brief repetition of the particular estate of many other foreign voyage and trade already frequent and know unto we , whereby we may be the better 
 134 
 Christopher CARLILE’S discourse a.d. 
 ... they - 
 able to conceive and judge what certain likelihood of good there be to be expect in the voyage , which be present recommend unto your knowledge and resolution . 
 and first to lay down that of Moscovia , who Moscovie . beginning be yet in the remembrance of many : it be well know , that what by the charge of the first discovery , and by the great gift bestow on the emperor and his nobili tie , together with the lewd deal of some of their servant , who thought themselves safe enough from orderly punishment , it cost the company above fourscore thousand pound , before it can be bring to any profitable reckon . and now that after so long a patience and so great a burden of expense , the same begin to frame to some good course and commodity : it rall to very ticklish term , and to as slender likelihood of any further goodness , as any other trade that may be name . 
 for first the estate of those country and the emperor deal , be thing more fickle than be by every body understand . 
 next , the Dutchman be there so creep in as they Dutchmen . daily augment their trade thither , which may well confirm that uncertainty of the emperor disposition to keep promise with our nation . 
 third , the quality of the voyage , such as may not be perform but once the year . 
 four , the charge of all ambassador between that prince and her majesty , be always bear by the merchant stock . 
 and last , the danger of the king of Denmark , who Denmark . beside that present he be like to enforce a tribute on we , have likewise a advantage upon the ship in their voyage , either homeward or outward whensoever he list to take the opportunity . 
 the bid ‘ deal of the Easterling be sufficient Easterling . know to be such towards our merchant of that trade , as they do not only offer they many injury 
 i3 
 overlong to be write , but do seek all the mean they can , to deprive they whole of their occupy that way : and to the same purpose have of late clean debar they their accustom and ancient privilege in all their great town . 
 Turkle . the traffic into turquoise , beside that by some it be think a hard point to have so much familiarity with the profess and obstinate enemy of Christ : it be likewise a voyage which can not be make but at the devotion , and as it be in the danger of many state , who for sundry respect be apt to quarrel with we upon sudden occasion , and the present to be give away in turquoise this year , cost little less than two thousand pound . 
 Levant . as for the trade into all the part of Italy , it may easy be consider by every one of judgement , that the same stand in the like term touch the passage , as that of turquoise , and that many time our ship be take in the way by the galley of Alger , our poor mariner after the loss of their good and travel ! , be set at such excessive ransom before they can be free of their slavery , as for the most part they be no way able to discharge . as for example , at this instant there be some prisoner , poor ordinary mariner , for who release there must be pay two hundred ducat the man , for some three hundred , yea , four or five hundred ducat the man for some of they . and how envious the venetian do already oppose themselves against our frequent into their part , may appear by the late custom which they have impose as well upon our english merchandise which we bring they , as also upon such their merchandise which we fetch from they . 
 Barbary . the trade into Barbary grow likewise to worse term than before time , and when it be at the best , our merchant have be in danger of all their good they have there , whensoever it happen the king to die . for until a new be choose , the liberty of all disorder person be such , as they spoil and wrong who they listen , without any redress at all . 
 136 
 Christopher CARLILE’S discourse a.d. 
 1583 - 
 touch Spain and Portugal , with who we have Spain . 
 very great trade , and much the great , by mean of their vent a good part of our ware in their Indies , as also of the provision they have from the same , wherewith be make many of our return from they again : it fall out that twice the year ordinary we send our fleet into those part : so that whensoever the king of remember the Spain list to take the opportunity , he may at these season deprive we not only of a great number of er . our very good ship , but also of our honest and 1598. able sort of mariner that be to be find in our 
 whole realm again , which be a matter of no small consequence : for it be to be note , that when he shall take a quarrel in hand , though it be but his own particular , yet have he the mean to put in hazard as well those our ship which be in his own country of Spain and Portugal , as also all other which shall be bind to any the part of all Italy or of turquoise either . and further whosoever he be that be but mean affect in religion , as of necessity become every ordinary man and good Christian to be , can but be aggrieve in his heart to consider , that his child and servant who he desire to have well bring up , be in these trade of Spain and Portugal , and all Italy , force to deny their own profession , and make to acquaint themselves with that which the parent and master do utter deny and refuse , yea which many of they do in their own heart abhor as a detestable 
 and most wicked doctrine . 
 but who shall look into the quality of this voyage , be direct to the latitude of forty degree or thereabouts , of that hithermost part of America , shall find it have as many point of good moment belong unto it , as may almost be wish for . 
 1 as first it be to be understand , that it be not any long course , for it may be perform too and fro in four month after the first discovery thereof . 
 2 second , that one wind suffice to make the pas - 
 137 
 commodity of this voyage in shortness . 
 commodity of the country more than those of moscovy . 
 sage , whereas most of your other voyage of like length , be subject to 3. or 4. wind . 
 3 third , that it be to be perform at all time of the year . 
 4 four , that the passage be upon the high sea , whereby you be not bind to the knowledge of danger , on any other coast , more than of that country , and of we hear at home . 
 5 five , that those part of England and Ireland , which lie apt for the proceed outward or homeward upon this voyage , be very well store of goodly harbour . 
 6 six , that it be to be account of no danger at all as touch the power of any foreign prince or state , when it be compare with any the best of all other voyage before recite . 
 7 and to the godly mind , it have this comfortable commodity , that in this trade their factor , be they their servant or child , shall have no instruction or confession of idolatrous religion enforce upon they , but contrary shall be at their free liberty of conscience , and shall find the same religion exercise , which be most agreeable unto their parent and master . 
 as for the merchandise , which be the matter especial look for , albeit that for the present we be not certain able to promise any such like quantity , as be now at the best time of the moscovian trade bring from thence : so likewise be there not demand any such proportion of daily expense , as be at the first , and as yet be consume in that of Moscovia and other . 
 but when this of America shall have be haunt and practise thirty year to a end , as the other have be , i doubt not by God grace , that for the ten ship that be now common employ once the year into Moscovia , there shall in this voyage twice ten be employ well , twice the year at the least . and if for the present time there do fall out nothing else to be find then the bare fish , yet doubt i not after the first year plant , but by that matter only to serve 138 
 Christopher CARLILE’S discourse a.d. 
 1583-halfe a dozen of your best sort of ship , although my supply of people do not follow i so substantial , as in all reason may be well look for . 
 but when it be ask what may be hope from thence overall after some year , it be first to be consider , that this merchandtse-situation in fourty degree , shall be very apt to gather the commodity either of those part which stand to the southward of it , as also of those which be to the northward . 
 in the northerly may be expect not only a especial good fish for salmon , Codde , and whale , but also any other such commodity , as the eastern country doe yield we now : as pitch , tar , hemp , and thereof cordage , mast , losshe hide , rich fur , and other such like without be in any sort behold to a king of Denmark , or other prince or state that shall be in such sort able to command our ship at their pleasure , as those do at this day , by mean of their strait passage and strong ship . 
 as for those part which lie west and to the southward , it may well be hope they will yield wine with a small help , since the grape do grow there of themselves already very fair and in great abundance . olive be once plant , will yield the like oil as Spain , province and Italy . the country people be make to know , that for wax and honey , we will give they such trifle thing as they desire of we , and show they once the mean how to provide the same , the labour thereof be so light , no doubt but in short time they will earnest care to have the same in good quantity for we . beside , what great likelihood there be of good mean to make salt , which may serve for the fish of lake of salt those part , may well enough appear unto they , who ™ his can judge the quality of such place as be require to make the same in . 
 thus much for the beginning , because they may be have with a easy kind of travel ! : but when it may have please God to establish our people there any such time 
 139 
 as they may have plant among they in sundry part of the country , and that by gentle and familiar entreat they , they be make to see what be better for they than they do as yet understand of , and that in so many sort of occasion as be infinite to be set down : it be to be assure hope , that they will daily by little and little forsake their barbarous and savage live , and grow to such order and civility with we , as there may be well expect from thence no less quantity and diversity of merchandise then be now have out of Dutchland , Italy , France or Spain . and as the border neighbour be common the apt to fall out with we , so these part be somewhat remote , be the like to take , or give less occasion of disquiet . but when it be consider that they be our own kindred , and esteem our own country nation which have the government , mean by those who shall be there plant , who can look for any other than the deal of most love and most assure friend ? 
 there be far to be consider these two point of good importance , concern the matter of trade . the one be , that by the good prosper of this action , there must of necessity fall out a very liberali utterance of our english clothes into a main country , describe to be big than all Europe , the large part whereof bend to the northward , shall have wonderful great use of our say English clothes , after they shall come once to know the commodity thereof . the like will be also of many other thing , over many to be reckon , which be make here by our artificer and labour people , and of necessity must be provide from hence . 
 the other be , if there be any possible mean to find a sea passage or other fresh water course , which may serve in some reasonable and convenient sort , to transport our merchandise into the east indian sea , through any of these northerly part of America , it shall be soon and most assure perform by these who shall inhabit and first grow into familiarity with the inland people . 
 140 
 what Minerali matter may fall out to be find , be a thing leave in suspense , until some better knowledge , because there be many man , who have long since expect some profit herein , upon the great promise that have be make they , and be as yet in no point satisfy , do thereupon conceive that they be but word purposely cast out for the induce of man to be the more ready and willing to furnish their money towards the charge of the first discovery . 
 but now to answer some other who begin with a other objection , say : that it be not for the merchant purse to continue the charge of transport and plant : and that since these hundred man which be now to be plant , will cost four thousand pound : it be then to be think , that the charge of a far great number , will be also a far great sum of money . 
 whereunto i answer , that in all attempt unknown , especial such a one as this be , wherewith we be present in hand , the first charge be common adventure in more desperate kind , than those that follow upon some better knowledge : and therewith it fall out , that whereas one adventure in the first enterprise , a hundred for that one will of themselves be willing and desirous to adventure in the next , if there be never so little more appearance , that the intend matter be by some knowledge of our own , find true in some point of our first presumption . 
 the example be many , and may easy be remember by those who be merchant , even in their ordinary and daily trade , as well as in extraordinary attempt , which of late year have fall into those term of some likelihood , as be aforesaid . so then no doubt , but when certain report shall be bring by they who direct come from thence , that such a country and people they have themselves see , as be by we speak off , but that then there will come forward a great number of those , who now neither have hear any thing of the matter , as also of other , who present make such 
 141 
 A.D. 
 objection . 
 answer . 
 the ewer of metal bring by m. Frobisher , cause two several supply , the two year nextfollow ; whereof the latter be of thirteen tall ship . 
 frivolous scruple , and will not otherwise be satisfy , then by the report of saint Thomas . i speak not this by the merchant who for their freedom of trade 1 will not have press to any further charge than this first preparation , but rather by such as have great affection to hazard the change of their estate , and will be well content to go in the voyage if they may only be assure that there be such a country , and that their money shall not be waste to nothing in the preparation . 
 the right examination of this point must be the contrary sequel of the common proverb that be use , nothing venture , nothing have : so on the other side by venture , many great good profit be find out , to the wonderful benefit of the common weal , and to those especial in private , who take on they the hazard of their life and travel , or substance in the first attempt : and therefore i will wish that they , who ( God be thank ) be well able to spare that which be require of each one towards the undertake of this adventure , be well content and willing to employ the same , since the sequel in good and substantiali reason do promise , not only a great commodity in particular to the merchant , who shall here at home exercise the trade of merchandise : but also to a infinite number of other , who present live in poor estate , and may by take the opportunity of this discovery , alter the same to a far better degree . wherefore to make some conclusion upon this point of the merchant misdoubt , who suspect lest this first disbursement without return of present gain , shall not be all his charge , but that afterward he may yet further be urge to continue the like again , as have happen in the discovery of the moscovian trade : it may suffice to consider , that this be not a action which concern only the merchant particular , but a great deal more the general sort of people throughout all England : and that when such relation shall be return , as that it may be find a matter worthy the follow , the whole generality will not refuse to contribute towards the furtherance 
 142 
 Christopher CARLILE’S discourse a.d. 
 .. 1583* 
 thereof , rather than it shall sink for want of any reasonable supply . 
 but as it be a very little time , since i have be thorough resolve to try my fortune in the matter , so it be more than time the preparation be in hand already , and therefore no fit time now to make any number of ignorant man to understand with reason the circumstance that belong to a matter of so great consideration and importance . 
 to those who have any forward mind in well do to the generality of mankind , i say thus much more , that christian charity do as great persuade the furtherance of this action , as any other that may be lay before we , in as much as thereby we shall not only do a most excellent work , in respect of reduce the savage people to Christianity and civility , but also in respect of our poor sort of people , which be very many among we , live altogether unprofitable , and often time to the great disquiet of the better sort . for who know not , how by the long peace , happy health , and bless plentifulness , wherewith God have endue this realm , that the people be so mighty increase , as a great number be bring up , during their youth in their parent house , without any instruction how to get their live after their parent decease , be drive to some necessity , whereby very often for want of better education they fall into sundry disorder , and so the good sort of people , as i say before , be by they ordinary trouble , and themselves lead on to one shameful end or other , whereas if there may be find some such kind of employment as this will be , no doubt but a great part of they will be withhold from fall into such vile ' deed : and in stead thereof , prove great serviceable in those affair , where they may be so employ . 
 this i speak of my own experience , have see master cardiver come over to the war of the low country ^es ™ ne during my residence in the same , who here have be very expenence-evill and idle liver , and by some little continuance with 
 143 
 we , have grow to be very industrious in their faculty , which i can assure you , be a more painful manner of live then in this action be like to fall out , and withaU to a purpose of far less value , in respect of their particular recompense , then with a assure kind of good hope be look for in this . 
 thus you see in every point that may be wish for in a good action and voyage , there be matter and reason enough to satisfy the well dispose . but now to grow somewhat near the quick , and to show you some great appearance , then have be yet speak of touch the trade which be the only subject wherewith i do mean to intermeddle at this time , because my address hereby , be chief to man of such like faculty : you may understand by that which follow , the circumstance of a little discourse , which do concern these matter very direct . 
 in the year 1534. James Carthier , of saint Malo make his first discovery of those part of America , which lie to the westwards , and as it be on the backside of Newfoundland . in which voyage his principali intention be to seek out the passage , which he presume may have be find out into the east indian sea , otherwise call the passage to Cathaya , but this year he go no high than the island of the assumption in the great bay of saint Laurence , and so return back into France . 
 the next year follow he go with great provision into the grand bay again , where he keep the northerly shore , run up the great river that come down from Canada and other place , until at last with his small pinnace , ( have leave his great ship by the way ) he arrive at Hochelaga town , be three hundred league within the entrance of the grand bay . in which travail he have spend so much of the year , that it be now the month of October , and therefore think it convenient , for the better inform himself at large in this discovery , to winter it out in those part , which he do at a place call by himself holy cross . 
 144 
 Christopher CARLILE’S discourse a.d. 
 .. I583 - 
 this winter fall out to be a very long and hard winter , as many time the like happen with we in these part , and the savage people , who for the most part make but a slender kind of provision , even as it be from hand to mouth , fall into some scarcity of victual ; yet do they not refuse to serve the Frenchman , with any thing they have all the winter long , albeit at somewhat high price towards the end when the need be most , as with our self the like happen at such time . 
 but when the french have their want serve all the year , and that as yet they see not any appearance of their intend matter , which be the discovery of the passage , and yet imagine by the sign wherewith the willing people endeavour to declare their knowledge in that point , that some good matter may be have from they , if they may have be well understand , they resoulve with themselves to take some of the sufficient man of that country home into France , and there to keep they so long , as that have once achieve the french tongue , they may declare more substantial their mind , and knowledge in the say passage , con-eluding this to be the mean of least charge , of least travail , and of least hazard . 
 and when they come to bethink themselves , who may be meet for it , they determine to take the king , as the person who may be best inform of such part as be somewhat remote from his own country , as also that for the respect of he , the people will be always ready , and content to do they any further service , when it shall happen they to return thither again about the discovery . 
 thus the poor king of the country , with two or three other of his chief companion come aboard the french ship , be require thither to a banquet , be traitorous carry away into France , where he live four year , and then die a christian there , as Thevet the french king cosmographer do make mention . this outrage and injurious deal do put the whole vni 145 king 
 the trenchmens trade re* new in Canada , in the year 1581. 
 the south fart best fir inhabit and traffic . 
 country people into such dislike with the french , as never since they will admit any conversation or familiarity with they , until of late year , the old matter begin to grow out of mind , and be the rather draw on by gift of many trifle thing , which be of great value with they , they be as ( i say ) within these two or three year content again to admit a traffic , which two year since be begin with a small bark of thirty ton , who return be find so profitable , as the next year follow , be the last year , by those merchant , who mean to have keep the trade secret unto themselves , from any other of their own country man , there be hire a ship of fourscore ton out of the isle of Jersey , but not any one mariner of that place , save a shipboy . this ship make her return in such sort , as that this year they have multiply three ship , to wit , one of nine score ton , another of a hundred ton , and a three of four score ton : which report be give by very substantiali and honest man of Plymouth , who see the say ship in readiness to depart on their voyage , and be aboard of some of they . 
 here be at this instant in the town a man of Gernesey , Lewis de Vike , who report to have credible hear , that by this last year voyage the Frenchman get fourteen or fifteen hundred for every one hundred : but how soever it be , it carry good likelihood of some notable profit , in asmuch as they do so great , and thus sudden increase the burden and number of their ship this present year . 
 now , if in so little as two year time this voyage of the northern part be grow to such good pass as have be declare unto you : it be worth the think on to consider what may be hope for from the southern part , which in all reason may promise a great deal more . and so , as one who be never touch with any indirect meaning , i presume to wish and persuade you to some better take of this matter to heart , as a thing which i 146 
 Christopher CARLILE’S discourse a.d. 
 do very think will turn to your great and more assure commodity , than you receive by any other voyage , as yet frequent of so short and safe a course as this have : deal herein no otherwise with you for your several small sum , than i do with my self , both for moor of my own , then be require of any one of you : beside the hazard and travail of my person , and the total employment of my poor credit , which ( i thank God ) have hitherto pass clear and unspotted in matter of great importance and difficulty , then be like to fall out in this matter between you and i . 
 . 