the preface of m. Rene Laudonniere . 
 here be two thing , which accord to my opinion have be the principali cause , in consideration whereof aswell they of ancient time , as those of our age have be induce to travel into far and remote region . the first have be the natural desire which we have 
 to search out the commodity to live happy , plentiful , and at ease : be it whither one abandon his natural country altogether to dwell in a better , or be it that man make voyage thither , there to search out and bring from thence such thing as be there to be find , and be in great estimation and in most request in our country . the second cause have be the multitude of people too fruitful in generation , which be no long able to dwell in their native soil , have enter upon their neighbour limit , and oftentimes pass further have pierce even unto the uttermost region . after this sort the north climate , a fruitful father of so many nation have oftentimes send forth this way and that way his valiant people , and by this mean have people infinite country : so that most of the nation of Europe draw their originali from these part . contrariwise the more southern region , because they be too barren by reason of their insupportable heat which reign in they , need not any such send forth of their inhabitant , and have be oftentimes constrain to receive other people more often by force of arm then willing . all Africa , Spain , and Italy can also testify the same , which never so abound with people that they have need to send they abroad to inhabit elsewhere : as on the contrary Scythia , Norway , Gotland , and France have do . the posterity of which nation remain yet not only in Italy , Spain and Africa , but also in fruitful and fair Asia . nevertheless i find 446 
 that the roman proceed further , or rather add unto these two chief cause aforesaid , ( as be most curious to plant not only their ensign and victory , but also their law , custom , and religion in those province which they have conquer by force of arm ) have oftentimes by the decree of their sovereign senate plant of send forth inhabitant , which they call colony ( think - colomese by this way to make their name immortali ) even to the unfurnish of their own country of the force which shall have preserve the same in her perfection : a thing which hinder they much more , then advance they to the possession of the universal monarchy , whereunto their intention do aspire . for it come to pass that their colony here and there be miserable sack by strange people do utter ruin and overthrow their empire . the brink of the river of Rhine be yet red , those of Danubius be no less bloody , and our France become fat with their blood which they lose . these be the effect and reward of all such as be prick forward with this roman and tyrannical ambition will go about thus to subdue strange people : effect , i say , contrary to the profit which those shall receive , which only be affection to the common benefit , that be to say , to the general policy of all man , and endeavour to unite they one with another as well by traffic and civil conversation , as also by military virtue , and force of when force of arm , when as the savage will not yield unto their a ™ s be t0 endeavour so much tend unto their profit . ' 
 for this cause prince have send forth out of their dominion certain man of good activity to plant themselves in strange country , there to make their profit to bring the country to civility , and if it may be , to reduce the inhabitant to the true knowledge of our god : a end so much more commendable , as it be far from all tyrannical ! and cruel government : and so they have always thrive in their enterprise , and by little and little gain the heart of they which they have conquer or win unto they by any mean . hereof 
 447 
 we may gather that sometime it be good , yea very expedient to send forth man to discover the pleasure twocondition a ( j commodity of strange country : but so , that the n^uests* ? country out of which these company be to pass country remain not weaken , nor deprive of her force : and new do - again in such sort that the company send forth be off cover . so just and sufficient number , that it may not be defeat °ta‘ by stranger , which every foot endeavour nothing else but to surprise the same upon the sudden . as within these few day past the french have prove to my great grief , be able by no mean possible to withstand the same , consider that the element , man , and all the favour which may be hope for of a faithful and Christian alliance fight against we : which thing i purpose to discover in this present history with so evident truth , that the king majesty my sovereign prince shall in part be satisfy of the diligence which i have use in his service , and my adversary shall find themselves so discover in their false report , that they shall have no place of refuge . but before i begin , i will brief set down the situation and description of the land whereunto we have sail and where we have inhabit from the year 1561. unto sixty five , to the end that those thing may the more easy be bear away , which i mean to describe in this discourse . 
 . 