the relation of the navigation and discovery which captain Fernando Alarchon make by the order of the right honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa viceroy of new Spain , date in Colima , a haven of new Spain . 
 Chap. 1. 
 Fernando Alarchon after he have suffer a storm , arrive with his fleet at the haven of saint Iago , and from thence at the haven of Aguaiaval : he be in great peril in seek to discover a bay , and get out of the same he discover a river on the coast with a great current , enter into the same , and coast along he descry a great many of Indians with their weapon : with sign he have traffic with they , and fear some great danger return to his ship . 
 n Sunday the nine of May in the year 1540 i set sail with two ship , the one call saint Peter be admiral , and the other saint Catherine , and we set forward mean to go to the haven of saint Iago of good hope : but before we arrive there we have a terrible storm , 
 wherewith they which be in the ship call saint Catherine , be more afraid than be need , cast over board nine piece of ordinance , two anchor and one cable , and many other thing as needful for the enterprise wherein we go , as the ship it self . assoon as we be arrive at the haven of saint Iago i repair the haven of my loss which i have receive , provide my self of stint jag > . thing necessary , and take aboard my people which look for my come , and direct my course towards the haven of Aguaiavall . And be there arrive i the haven of understand that the general Francis Vazquez de Coronado be depart with all his people : whereupon take 
 279 
 the ship call saint Gabriel which carry victual for the army i lead she with i to put in execution your lordship order . afterwards i follow my course along the coast without depart from the same , to see if i can find any token or any indian which can give i knowledge of he : and in sail so near the shore i discover other very good haven , for the ship whereof captain Francis de ullua be general for the marquess de Valle neither see nor find they . and these shoald when we be come to the flat and shoald from whence “ ofmarbe^ f°resaid fleet return , it seem aswell to i as mrin nr th , to the rest , that we have the firm land before we , and bay of Cali - that those shoald be so perilous and fearful , that it fimia . be a thing to be consider whither with our skiff we can enter in among they : and the pilot and the rest of the company will have have we do as captain Ullua do , and have return back again . but because your lordship command i , that i shall bring you the secret of that gulf , i resolve , that although i have know i shall have lose the ship , i will not have cease for any thing to have see the head thereof : and therefore i command Nicolas Zamorano pilot major , and Dominico deal Castello that each of they shall take a boat , and their lead in their hand , and run in among those shoald , to see if they can find out the channel whereby the ship may enter in : to who it seem that the ship may sail up high ( although with great travel and danger ) and in this sort i and he begin to follow our way which they have take , and within a short while after we find our self fast on the sand with all our three ship , in such sort that one can not help another , neither can the boat succour we , because the current be so great that it be impossible for one of we to come unto another : whereupon we be in such great j eopardie that the deck of the admiral be oftentimes under water , and if a great surge of the sea have not come and drive our ship right up , and give her leave as it be to breathe a while , 
 280 
 1540 ’ we have there be drown : and likewise the other two 
 ship find themselves in very great hazard , yet because they be lesser and draw less water , their danger be not so great as we . now it please God upon the return of the flood that the ship come on float , and so we go forward . and although the company will have return back , yet for all this i determine to go forward , and to pursue our attempt voyage : and we pass forward with much ado , turn our stem now this way , now that way , to seek to find the chanel . and it please God that after this sort we come to the very bottom of the bay ; where we find a very mighty river , which run with so great fury of a stream , that we can hardly sail against it . in this sort i determine as well as i can to go up this river , and with two boat , leave the three with the ship , and twenty man , my self be in one of they with Roderigo Maldonado treasurer of this fleet , and Gaspar de Castilleia comptroller , and with certain small piece of artillery i begin to sail up the river , and charge all my company , that none of they shall stir nor use any sign , but he who i appoint , although we find Indians . the same day , which be Thursday the six and twenty of August , follow our voyage with draw the boat with halser we go about some 6 league : and the next day which be Friday by the break of day thus follow our way upward , i see certain Indians which go towards cer 
 the bottom of the bay of California . 
 they go up the river of buena guia the 26. of August . 
 taine cottage near unto the water , who assoon as they see we , ten or twelve of they rise up furious , and cry with a loud voice , other of their companion come run together to the number of 50 which with all haste carry out of their cottage such thing as they 
 have , and lay they under certain shrub and many of they come run towards that part whether we approach , make great sign unto we that we shall go back again , use great threaten against we , one while run on this side and a other 
 281 
 he carry a interpreter with he . 
 a very good course take to appease unknown savage . 
 while on that side . i see they in such a rage , cause our boat to launch from the shore into the mid of the river , that the Indians may be out of fear , and i ride at anchor , and set my people in as good order as i can , charge they that no man shall speak , nor make any sign nor motion , nor stir out of his place , nor shall not be offend for any thing that the Indians do , nor shall show no token of war : and by this mean the Indians come every foot near the river side to see we : and i gate by little and little towards they where the river seem to be deep . in this mean space there be above two hundred and fifty Indians assemble together with bow and arrow , and with certain banner in warlike sort in such manner as those of new Spain do use : and perceive that i draw towards the shore , they come with great cry towards we with bow and arrow put into they , and with their banner display . and i go unto the stem of my boat with the interpreter which i carry with i , who i command to speak unto they , and when he speak , they neither understand he , nor he they , although because they see he to be after their fashion , they stay themselves : and see this i draw near the shore , and they with great cry come to keep i from the shore of the river , make sign that i shall not come any far , put stake in my way between the water and the land : and the more i linger , the more people still flock together . which when i have consider i begin to make they sign of peace , and take my sword and target , i cast they down in the boat and set my foot upon they , give they to understand with this and other token that i desire not to have war with they , and that they shall do the like . also i take a banner and cast it down , and i cause my company that be with i to sit down likewise , and take the ware of exchange which i carry with i , i call they to give they some of they : yet for 
 282 
 all this none of they stir to take any of they , but rather flock together , and begin to make a great murmur among themselves : and sudden one come out from among they with a staff wherein certain shell be set , and enter into the water to give they unto i , and i take they , and make sign unto he that he shall come near i , which when he have do , i embrace he , and give he in recompense certain bead and other thing , and he return with they unto his fellow , begin to look upon they , and to parley together , and within a while after many of they come towards i , to who i make sign to lay down their banner , and to leave their weapon : which they do incontinent , than i make sign that they shall lay they altogether , and shall go aside from they , which likewise they do : and they cause those Indians which new come thither to leave they , and to lay they together with the rest . after this i call they unto i , and to all they which come i give some small trifle , use they gentle , and by this time they be so many that come throng about i , that i think i can not stay any long in safety among they , and i make sign unto they that they shall withdraw themselves , and that they shall stand all upon the side of a hill which be there between a plain and the river , and that they shall not press to i above ten at a time . and immediate the most ancient among they call unto they with a loud voice , will they to do so : and some ten or twelve of they come where i be : whereupon see my self in some security , i determine to go on land the more to put they out of fear : and for my more security , i make sign unto they , to sit down on the ground which they do : but when they see that ten or twelve of my companion come a shore after i , they begin to be angry , and i make sign unto they that we will be friend , and that they shall not fear , and herewithal they be pacify , and sit down as they do before , and i go 283 
 A.D. i54° - 
 unto they , and embrace they , give they certain trifle , command my interpreter to speak unto they , for i great desire to understand their manner of speech , and the cry which they make at i . and that i may know what manner of food they have , i make a sign unto they , that we will glad eat , and they bring i certain cake of Maiz , and a loaf of mizquiqui , and they make sign unto i that they desire to see a harquebus shoot oflf , which i cause to be discharge , and they be all wonderful afraid , except two or three old man among they which be not move at all , but rather cry out upon the rest , because they be afraid : and through the speech of one of these old man , they begin to rise up from the ground , and to lay hold on their weapon : who when i seek to appease , i will have give he a silken girdle of diverse colour , and he in a great rage bite his nether lip cruel , and give i a thump with his elbow on the breast , and turn in a great fury to speak unto his company . after that i see they advance their banner , i determine to return my self gentle to my boat , and with a small gale of wind i set sail , whereby we may break the current which be very great , although my company be not well please to go any far . in the mean space the indian come follow we along the shore of the river , make sign that i shall come on land , and that they will give i food to eat , some of they suck their finger , and other enter into the water with certain cake of Maiz , to give i they in my boat . 
 Chap. 2. 
 of the habit , armour and stature of the Indians . a relation of many other with who he have by sign traffic , victual and many courtesy . 
 in this sort we go up two league , and i arrive near a clifle of a hill , whereupon be a arbour make new , where they make sign unto i , cry 284 
 that i shall go thither , show i the same with their hand , and tell i that there be meat to eat . but i will not go thither , see the place be good forecast . apt for some ambush , but follow on my voyage , within a while after issue out from thence above a thousand arm man with their bow and arrow , and after that many woman and child show themselves , towards who i will not go , but because the sun be almost set , i ride in the midst of the river . Theise Indians come deck after sundry fashion , some come with a paint that cover their face all over , some have their face half cover , but all besmouch with Indians be-cole , and every one as it like he best . other carry visard before they of the same colour which have the ' shape of face . they wear on their head a piece of a dear skin two span broad set after the manner of a helmet , and upon it certain small stick with some sort of feather . their weapon be bow and arrow of hard wood , and two or three sort of mace of wood harden in the fire . this be a mighty people , well feitured , and without any grossness . they have hole bore in their nostril whereat certain pendent hang : and other wear shell , and their ear be full of hole , whereon they hang bone and shell . all of they both great and small wear a girdle about their waste make of diverse colour , and in the middle be fasten a round bunch of feather , which hang down behind like a tail . likewise on the brawn of their arm they wear a strait string , which they wind so often about that it become as broad as one hand . 
 they be certain piece of dear bone fasten to their arm , wherewith they strike off the sweat , and at the other certain small pipe of cane . they carry pipe and also certain little long bag about a hand broad tie to their left arm , which serve they also in stead of dam continue ' braser for their bow , full of the powder of a certain herb , whereof they make a certain beverage . they have their body trace with coal , their hair cut before , 285 
 and behind it hang down to their waste . the woman go naked , and wear a great wreath of feather behind they , and before paint and glue together , and their hair like the man . there be among these Indians three or four man in woman apparel . now the next day be Saturday very early i go forward on my way up the river , set on shore two man for each boat to draw they with the rope , and about break forth of the sun , we hear a mighty cry of Indians on both side of the river with their weapon , but without any banner . i think good to attend their coming , aswell to see what they will have , as also to try whether our interpreter can understand they . when they come over against we they leap into the river on both side with their bow and arrow , and when they speak , our interpreter understand they not : whereupon i begin to make a sign unto they that they shall lay away their weapon , as the other have do . some do as i will they , and some do not , and those which do , i will to come near i and give they some thing which we have to truck withal , which when the other perceive , that they may likewise have their part , they lay away their weapon likewise . i judge my self to be in security leap on shore with they , and stand in the midst of they , who understand that i come not to fight with they , Skels and begin to give some of those shell and bead , and some bead . bring i certain skin well dress , and other 
 maiz and a roll of the same naughty grind , so that none of they come unto i that bring i not some - thing , and before they give it i go a little way from i they begin to cry out amain , and make a sign with their body and arm , and afterward they approach to give i that which they bring . and now that the sun begin to set i put off from the shore , and ride in the midst of the river . the next morning before break of day on both side of the river we hear great cry and of more Indians , which 286 
 leap into the river to swim , and they come to bring i certain gourd full of Maiz , and of those wreathe which i speak of before . i show unto they wheat and bean , and other seed , to see whether they have any of those kind : but they show i that they have no knowledge of they , and wonder at all of they , and by sign 1 come to understand that the thing which they most esteem and reverence be the sun : and i signify unto they that i come from a notable the sun . whereat they marveil , and then they begin to behold i from the top to the toe , and show i more favour than they do before ; and when i ask they for food , they bring i such abundance that i be enforce twice to call for the boat to put it into they , and from that time forward of all the thing which they bring i they fling up into the air one part unto the sun , and afterward turn towards i to give i the other part : and so i be always better serve and esteem of they as well in draw of the boat up the river , as also in give i food to eat : and they show i so great love , that when i stay they will have carry we in their arm unto their house : and in no kind of thing they will break my commandment : and for my surety , i will they not to carry any weapon in my sight : and they be so careful to do so , that if any man come new thither with they , sudden they will go and meet he to cause he to lay they down far from i : and i show they that i take great pleasure in their so do : and to some of the chief of they i give certain little napkin and other trifle ; for if i shall have give somewhat to every one of they in particular , all the small ware in swarm of new Spain will not have suffice . sometime it fall m / ' k out ( such be the great love and good will which they show i ) that if any Indians come thither by chance with their weapon , and if any one be warn to leave they behind he , if by negligence , or because he understand they not at the first warning , he have not lay they 
 287 
 a exceed great current of the river . 
 away , they will run unto he , and take they from he by force , and will break they in piece in my presence . afterwards they take the rope so love , and with strive one with another for it , that we have no need to pray they to do it . wherefore if we have not have this help , the current of the river be exceed great , and our man that draw the rope be not well acquaint with that occupation , it will have be impossible for we to have get up the river so against the stream . when i perceive that they understand i in all thing , and that i likewise understand they , i think good to try by some way or other to make a good entrance to find some good issue to obtain my desire : and i cause certain cross to be make of certain small stick and paper , and among other when i give any thing i give they these as thing of most price and kiss they , make sign unto they that they shall honour they and make great account of they , and that they shall wear they at their neck : give they to understand that this sign be from heaven , and they take they and kiss they , and lift they up aloft , and seem great to rejoice thereat when they do so , and sometime i take they into my boat , show they great good will , and sometime i give they of those trifle which i carry with i . and at length the matter grow to such issue , that i have not paper and stick enough to make cross . in this manner that day i be very well accompany , until that when night approach i seek to launch out into the river , and go to ride in the midst of the stream , and they come to ask leave of i to depart , say that they will return the next day with victual to visit i , and so by little and little they depart , so that there stay not above fifty which make fire over against we , and stay there all night call we , and before the day be perfect break , they leap into the water and swim unto we ask for the rope , and we give it they with a good will , thank God for the good provision which 
 288 
 1540-hee give we to go up the river : for the indian be so many , that if they have go about to let our passage , although we have be many more than we be , they may have do it . 
 Chap. 3. 
 one of the indian understanding the language of the interpreter , ask many question of the originali of the Spaniard , he tell he that their captain be the child of the sun , and that he be send of the sun unto they , and they will have receive he for their king . they take this indian into their boat , and of he they have many information of that country . 
 in this manner we sail until Tuesday at night , go as we be wont , cause my interpreter to speak unto the people to see if peradventure any of they can understand he , i perceive that one answer he , whereupon i cause the boat to be stay , and call he , which he understand , charge my interpreter that he shall not speak nor answer he any thing else , but only that which i say unto a wise devise . he : and i see as i stand still that that indian begin to speak to the people with great fury : whereupon all of they begin to draw together , and my interpreter understand , that he which come to the boat say unto they , that he desire to know what nation we be , and whence we come , and whither we come out of the water , or out of the earth , or from heaven : and at this speech a infinite number of people come together , which marvele to see i speak : and this indian turn on this side and on that side to speak unto they in . another language which my interpreter understand not . whereas he ask i what we be , i answer that we be Christians , and that we come from far to see they : and answer to the question , who have send i , i say , i be send by the sun , point unto he by sign as at the first , because they shall 
 ix 289 t 
 not take i in a lie . he begin again to ask i , how the sun have send i , see he go aloft in the sky and never stand still , and see these many year neither he nor their old man have ever see such as we be , of who they ever have any kind of knowledge , and that the sun till that hour have never send any other . i answer he that it be true that the sun make his course aloft in the sky , and do never stand still , yet nevertheless that they may well perceive that at his go down and rise in the morning he come near unto the earth , where his dwelling be , and that they ever see he come out of one place , and that he have make i in that land and country from whence he come , like as he have make many other which he send into other part , and that now he have send i to visit and view the same river , and the people that dwell near the same , that i shall speak unto they , and shall join with they in friendship , and shall give they thing which they have not , and that i shall charge they that they shall not make war one against another . whereunto he answer , that i shall tell he the cause why the sun have not send i no soon to pacific the war which have continue a long time among they , wherein many have be slay . i tell he the cause hereof be , because at that time i be but a child . than he ask the interpreter whether we take he with we perforce have take he in the war , or whether he come with we of his own accord . he answer he that he be with we of his own accord , and be very well apay of our company . he return to inquire , why we bring none save he only that understand we , and wherefore we understand not all other man , see we be the child of the sun : he answer , that the sun also have beget he , and give he a language to understand he , and i , and other : that the sun know well that they dwell there , but that because he have many other business , and because 
 290 
 i be but young he send i no soon . and he turn unto i say sudden : come thou therefore hither to be our lord , and that we shall serve thou ? i suppose that i shall not please he if i shall have say yea , answer he , not to be their lord , but rather to be their brother , and to give they such thing as i have . he ask i , whether the sun have beget i as he have beget other , and whether i be his kinsman or his son : i answer he that i be his son . he proceed to ask i whether the rest that be with i be also the child of the sun , i answer he not , but that they be bear all with i in one country , where i be bring up . than he cry out with a loud voice and say , see thou do we so much good , and will not have we to make war , and art the child of the sun , we will all receive thou for our lord , and always serve thou , therefore we pray thou that thou will not depart hence nor leave we : and sudden he turn to the people , and begin to tell they , that i be the child of the sun , and that therefore they shall all choose i for their lord . those Indians hear this , be astonish beyond measure , and come near still more and more to behold i . that indian also ask i other question , which to avoid tediousness i do not recite : and in this wise we pass the day , and see the night approach , i begin by all mean i can devise to get this fellow into our boat with we : and he refuse to go with we , the interpreter tell he that we will put he on the other side of the river , and upon this condition he enter into our boat , and there i make very much of he , and give he the best entertainment i can , put he always in security , and when i judge he to be out of all suspicion , i think it good to ask he somewhat of that country . and among the first thing that i ask he this be one , whether he have ever see any man like we , or have hear any report of they . he answer i not , save that he 
 291 
 the sun worship as God . 
 have sometime hear of old man , that very far from that country there be other white man , and with beard like we , and that he know nothing else . i ask he also whether he know a place call Cevola , and a river call Totonteac , and he answer i not . whereupon perceive that he can not give i any knowledge of Francis Vazquez nor of his company , i determine to ask he other thing of that country , and of their manner of life : and begin to inquire of he , whether they hold that there be one God , creator of heaven and earth , or that they worship any other idol . and he answer i no : but that they esteem and reverence the sun above all other thing , because it warm they and make their crop to grow : and that of all thing which they do eat , they cast a little up into the air unto he . i ask he next whether they have any lord , and he say no : but that they know well that there be a great lord , but they know not well which way he dwell . and i tell he that he be in heaven , and that he be call Jesus Christ , and i go no far in divinity with he . i ask he whether they have any war , and for what occasion . he answer that they have war and that very great , and upon exceed small occasion : for when they have no cause to make war , they assemble together , and some of they say , let we go to make war in such a place , and then all of they set forward with their weapon . i ask they who command the army : he answer the elder and most valiant , and that when they say they shall proceed no far , that sudden they retire from the war . i pray he to tell i what they do with those man which they kill in battle : he answer i that they take out the heart of some of they , and eat they , and other they burn ; and he add , that if it have not be for my come , they shall have be now at war : and because i command they that they shall not war , and that they shall cease 
 292 
 from arm , therefore as long as i shall not command they to take arm , they will not begin to wage war against other , and they say among themselves , that see i be come unto they , they have give over their intention of make war , and that they have a good mind to live in peace . he complain of certain people which dwell behind in a mountain certain war-which make great war upon they , and slay many of people bethem 1 1 answer hun } that from henceforward they taint shall not need to fear any more , because i have command they to be quiet , and if they will not obey my commandment , i will chasten they and kill they . 
 he inquire of i how i can kill they see we be so few , and they so many in number . and because it be now late and that i see by this time he be weary to stay any long with i , i let he go out of my boat , and therewith i dismiss he very well content . 
 Chap. 4. 
 of naguachato and other chief man of those Indians they receive great store of victual , they cause they to set up a cross in their country , and he teach they to worship it . they have news of many people , of their diverse language , and custom in matrimony , how they punish adultery , of their opinion concern the dead , and of the sickness which they be subject unto . 
 the next day betimes in the morning come the chief man among they call naguachato , and wish i to come on land because he have great store of victual to give i . and because i see my self in security i do so without doubt ; and incontinent a old man come with roll of that Maiz , and certain little gourd , and call i with a loud voice and use many gesture with his body and arm , come near unto i , and cause i to turn i unto that people , and he himself also turn unto they say unto 
 293 
 [ hl 431-1 these people be great incline to learn the christian faith . 
 they , Sagueyca , and all the people answer with a great voice , hu , and he offer to the sun a little of every thing that he have there , and likewise a little more unto i ( although afterward he give i all the rest ) and do the like to all that be with i : and call out my interpreter , by mean of he i give they thank , tell they that because my boat be little i have not bring many thing to give they in exchange , but that i will come again another time and bring they , and that if they will go with i in my boat unto my ship which i have beneath at the river mouth , i will give they many thing . they answer that they will do so , be very glad in countenance . here by the help of my interpreter i seek to instruct they what the sign of the cross mean , and will they to bring i a piece of timber , whereof i cause a great cross to be make , and command all those that be with i that when it be make they shall worship it , and beseech the lord to grant his grace that that so great a people may come to the knowledge of his holy catholic faith : and this do i tell they by my interpreter that i leave they that sign , in token that i take they for my brethren , and that they shall keep it for i careful until i return , and that every morning at the sun rise they shall kneel before it . and they take it incontinent , and without suffer it to touch the ground they carry it to set it up in the midst of their house , where all of they may behold it ; and i will they always to worship it because it will preserve they from evil . they ask i how deep they shall set it in the ground , and i show they . great store of people follow the same , and they that stay behind inquire of i , how they shall join their hand , and how they shall kneel to worship the same ; and they seem to have great desire to learn it . this do , i take that chief man of the country , and go to our boat with he , i follow my journey up the 
 294 
 river , and all the company on both side of the shore accompany i with great good will , and serve i in draw of our boat , and in hail we off the sand , whereupon we often fall : for in many place we in 
 find the river so shall , that we have no water for 
 , . 1 ri fall ofshelfe . 
 our boat . as we thus go on our way , some or the Indians which i have leave behind i , come after we to pray i that i will thorough instruct they , how they shall join their hand in the worship of the cross : other show i whither they be well set in such and such sort , so that they will not let i be quiet . near unto the other side of the river be great store of people , which call unto i very often , that i will receive the victual which they have bring i . and because i perceive that one envy the other , because i will not leave they discontent , i do so . and here come before i another old man 
 like unto the former with the like ceremony and another old 
 offering : and i seek to learn something of he as man ' 
 i have do off the other . this man say likewise to 
 the rest of the people , this be our lord . now you see how long ago our ancestor tell we , that there be beard and white people in the world , and we laugh they to scorn . i which a old and the rest which be here , have never see any such people as these . and if you will not believe i , behold these people which be in this river : let we give they therefore meat , see they give we of their victual : let we willing serve this lord , which wish we so well , and forbid we to make war , and embrace all of we : and they have mouth , hand and eye as we have , and speak as we do . 1 give these likewise another cross as i have do to the other beneath , and say unto they the self same word : which they listen unto with a better will , and use great diligence to learn that which i say . afterwards as i pass far up the river , i find another people , who my interpreter understand not a whit : wherefore i show they by sign the self - 
 their ancestors tell they thattherewere beard and white man in the world . 
 another nation . 
 295 
 same ceremony of worship the cross , which i have teach the rest . and that principal old man which i take with i , tell i that far up the river i shall find people which will understand my interpreter : and be now late , some of those man call i to give i victual , and do in all point as the other have do , dance and play to show i pleasure . i desire to know what people live on the bank of this people of 23. river : and i understand by this man that it be inlanguage habit by 23 language , and these be border upon mrs. river the river > beside other not far off , and that there be beside these 23. language , other people also which he know not , above the river . i ask he whether every people be live in one town together : and he answer i , no : but that they have many house stand scatter in the field , and that every people have their country several and distinguish , and that in every habitation there be great store of people . JcueoasGo - he show i a town which be in a mountain , mara write a ( j to | j i that fhere be there great store of people ouiuabse^ °f bad condition , which make continual war upon they : which be without a governor , and dwell in that desert place , where small store of Maiz grow , come down into the plain to buy it in truck of dear skin , wherewith they be apparel with long garment , which they do cut with razor , and sew with great house needle make of dear bone : and that they have great of stone . house of stone . i ask they whether there be any there of that country ; and i find one woman which wear a garment like a little mantle , which clad she from the waste down to the ground , of a dear skin well dress . than i ask he whether the people which dwell on the river side , dwell always there , or else sometime go to dwell in some other place : he answer i , that in the summer season they abide there , and sow there ; and after they have gather in their crop they go their way , and dwell in other house which they have at the foot of the mountain far from the 296 
 river . and he show i by sign that the house be of wood compass with earth without , and i understand that they make a round house wherein the man Roundhouses . and woman live all together . i ask he whither their woman be common or no : he tell i not , and that he which be marry , be to have but one wife only . i desire to know what order they keep in marry : and he tell i , that if any man have a daughter to marry , he go where the people keep , and say , i have a daughter to marry : be there any man here that will have she ? and if there be any that will have she , he answer that he will have she : and so the marriage be make . and that the father of he which will have she , bring some thing to give the young woman ; and from that hour forward the marriage be take to 
 be finish , and that they sing and dance : and that when dance and night come , the parent take they , and leave they to - nn&ngatma-gether in a place where no body may see they . and 6 
 i learn that brethren , and sister , and kinsfolk marry not together : and that maid before they be marry converse not with man , nor talk not with they , but 
 keep at home at their house and in their possession , and wrought : and that if by chance any one have company with man before she be marry , her husband forsake she , and go away into other country : and that those woman which fall into this fault , be account naughty pack . and that if after they be marry , any man be take in adultery with another woman , they put he to death : and that no man may have more than one wife , but very secret . they tell i that 
 they burn those which die : and such as remain they bume widow , stay half a year , or a whole year before their dead-they marry . i desire to know what they think of such as be dead . he tell i that they go to another world , but that they have neither punishment nor glory . the great sickness that this people dye of , be vomit of blood by the mouth : and they have physician which cure they with charm and blow 
 297 
 which they make . the apparel of these people be pipe to drink like the former : they carry their pipe with they to tobacco with . perfume themselves , like as the people of new Spain use tobacco . i inquire whether they have any governor , and find that they have none , but that every family have their several governor . Theise people have beside Maiz , gourd , their maiz certain gourd , and another corn like unto mill : they have grindstone and earthen pot , wherein earthenpot , they boil those gourd , and fish or the river , which goodfish . be very good . my interpreter can go no far than 
 this place : for he say that those which we shall find far on our way , be their enemy , and therefore i send he back very well content . not long after i espy many Indians to come cry with a loud voice , and run after i . i stay to know what they will have ; and they tell i that they have set up the cross which i have give they , in the midst of their dwelling as i have appoint , but that i be to this river wit , that when the river do overflow , it be wont to ‘ banks^fcer*1 reac^ to P^aceJ therefore they pray i to give they take season . eave to remove it , and to set it in another place where the river can not come at it , nor carry it away : which i grant they . 
 Chap. 5. 
 of a indian of that country they have relation of the state of Cevola , and of the condition and custom of these people , and of their governor : and likewise of the country not far distant from thence , whereof one be call Quicoma , and the other coama : of the people of Quicoma , and of the other Indians not far distant they receive courtesy . 
 thus sail i come where be many Indians , and another interpreter , which i cause to come with cold and i in my boat . and because it be cold , and my 
 rain - people be wet , i leap on shore , and command a 
 fire to be make , and as we stand thus warm our 
 298 
 w-selve , a indian come and strike i on the arm , point with his finger to a wood out of which i see two company of man come w‘ their weapon , and he tell i that they come to set upon we : and because i mean not to fall out with any of they , i retire my company into our boat , and the Indians which be with i swim into the water , and save themselves on the other side of the river . in the mean season i inquire of that indian which i have with i , what people they be that come out of the wood : and he tell i that they be their enemy , and therefore these other at their approach without say any word leap into the water : and do so , because they mean to turn back again , be without weapon , because they bring none with they , because they understand my will and pleasure , that they shall carry none . i inquire the same thing of this interpreter which i have do of the other of the thing of that country , because i understand that among some people one man use to have many wife , and among other but one . now i understand by he , that he have be at Cevola , and that it be a month journey from his country , and that from that place by a path that go along that river a man Cevola 40 might easy travel thither in forty . day , and that the occasion that move he to go thither , be only to see tk^river* ? Cevola , because it be a great thing , and have very high house of stone of 3. or 4. loft , and window on each side ; that the house be compass about with a wall contain the height of a man and a half , and that aloft and beneath they be inhabit with people , and that they use the same weapon , that other use , which we have see , that be to say , bow and arrow , mace , staff and buckler : and that they have one governor , and that they be apparel with mantle , and with ox-hides , and that their mantle have a paint about they , and that their governor wear a long shirt very fine gird unto he , and over the same diverse mantle : and that the woman wear very long garment , and that they be 
 299 
 white , and go all cover : and that every day many Indians wait at the gate of their governor to serve turquese in he , and that they do wear many azure or blue stone , Cevola . which be dig out of a rock of stone , and that they have but one wife , with who they be marry , and that when their governor die , all the good that they have be bury with they . and likewise all the while they eat , many of their man wait at their table to court they , and see they eat , and they eat with napkin , and that they have bath . on Thursday morning at break of day the Indians come with the like cry to the bank of the river , and with great desire to serve we , bring i meat to eat , and make i the like good cheer , which the other have do unto i , have understand what i be : and i give they cross , with the self same order which i do unto the former . And go far up the river , i come to a country where i find better government : for the inhabitant be whole obedient unto one only . but return again to confer with my interpreter touch the dwelling of those of Cevola , he tell i , that the lord of that country have a dog like that which i carry with i . afterwards when i call for dinner , this interpreter see certain dish carry in the first and late service , whereupon he tell i that the lord of Cevola have also such as those be , but that they be green , and that none other have of they save their governor , and that they be 4. which he have get together this be then with that dog , and other thing , of a black man wentwlth which have a beard , but that he know not from what ™ rier Marco quarter he come thither , and that the king cause he the Niza . afterward to be kill , as he hear say . i ask he whether he know of any town that be near unto that place : he tell i that above the river he know some , and that among the rest there be a lord of a Quicoma . town call Quicoma , and another of a town call 
 coama . Coama : and that they have great store of people under 
 they . and after he have give i this information , he 
 300 
 i54°-craved leave of i to return unto his companion . from hence i begin again to set sail , and within a day sail i find a town dispeople : where assoon as i be enter , by chance there arrive there 500 Indians with their bow and arrow , and with they be that principali Indian call naguachato , which i have leave behind , and bring with they certain cony cony and and yucas : and after i have friendly entertain they all , depart from they , i give they licence to return to their house . as i pass further by the desert , i come to certain cottage , out of which much people come towards i with a old man before they , cry in a language which my interpreter well understand , and he say unto those man : brethren , you see here that lord ; let we give he such as we have , see he do we pleasure , and have pass through so many discourteous people , to come to visit we . and have thus say , he ofired to the sun , and then to i in like sort as the rest have do . Theise have certain great bag and well make of the skin of fish call sea-bremes . and i understand that this be a town belong unto the lord of Quicoma , which people come thither only to gather the fruit of their harvest in summer ; and among they i find one which understand my interpreter very well : whereupon very easy i give they the like instruction of the cross which i have give to other behind . Theise people have cotton , but cotton . they be not very careful to use the same : because there be none among they that know the art of weave , and to make apparel thereof . they ask i how they shall set up their cross when they be come to their dwelling which be in the mountain , and whether a mountain . it be best to make a house about it , that it may not be wet , and whether they shall hang any thing upon the arm thereof . i say no ; and that it suffice to set it in a place where it may be see of all man , until i return : and lest peradventure any man of war shall come that way , they ofired i more man to go with 
 301 
 i , say that they be naughty man which i shall find above ; but i will have none : nevertheless 20. of they go with i , which when i draw near unto those which be their enemy , they warn i thereof : and i find their centinel set upon their guard on their border . on Saturday morning i find a great squadron of people sit under a exceed great arbour , and another part of they without : and when i see that they rise not up , i pass along on my voyage : when they behold this , a old man rise up which say unto i , sir , why do you not receive victual to eat of we , see you have take food of other ? i answer , that i take nothing but that which be give i , and that i go to none but to such as request i . here without any stay they bring i victual , say unto i , that because i enter not into their house , and stay all day and all night in the river , and because i be the son of the sun , all man be to receive i for their lord . i make they sign to sit down , and call that old man which my interpreter understand , and ask he who that country be , and whether the lord thereof be there , he say , yea : and i call he to i ; and when he be come , i embrace he , show he great love : and when i see that all of they take great pleasure at the friendly entertainment which i give he , i put a shirt upon he , and give he other trifle , and will my interpreter to use the like speech to that lord which he have do to the rest ; and that do , i give he a cross , which he receive with a very good will , as the other do : and this lord go a great way with i , until i be call unto from the other side of the river , where the former old man stand with much people : to who i give another cross , use the like speech to they which i have unto the rest , to wit , how they shall use it . then follow my way , i meet with another great company of people , with who come that very same old man who my interpreter under - 
 302 
 stand ; and when i see their lord which he show unto i , i pray he to come with i into my boat , which he do very willing , and so i go still up the river , and the old man come and show i who be the chief lord : and i speak unto they always with great courtesy , 8c all of they show that they rejoice much thereat , 8c speak very well of my coming thither . at night i withdraw my self into the midst of the river , 8c ask he many thing concern that country : and i find he as willing 8c well dispose to show they i , as i be desirous to know they . i ask he of Cevola : and he tell i he have be there , and that it be a goodly thing , 8c that the lord thereof be very well obey : and that there be other lord thereabouts , with who he be at continual war . i ask he whether they have silver 8c gold , and he behold certain bell , say they have metal of their colour . i inquire whether they make it there , and he answer i not , but that they bring it from a certain mountain , where a old woman dwell . i demand whether he have any knowledge of a river call Totonteac , he answer i not , but of another exceed mighty river , wherein there be such huge crocodile , that of their hide they make buckler , and that they worship the sun neither more nor less than those which i have pass : and when they offer unto he the fruit of the earth , they say : receive hereof , for thou have create they , and that they love he much , because he warm they ; and that when he break not forth , they be cold . herein reason with he , he begin somewhat to complain , say unto i , i know not wherefore the sun use these term with we , because he give we not clothe , nor people to spin nor to weave they , nor other thing which he give to many other , and he complain that those of that country will not suffer they to come there , and will not give they of their corn . i tell he that i will remedy this , whereat he remain very well satisfy . 
 3°3 
 A.D. 
 1540 
 Cevola a goodly thing . 
 gold and silver in a mountain near Cevola . 
 a mighty river . 
 this river seem to be northward by the cold . 
 they be advertise by the Indians , wherefore the lord of Cevola kill the negro , which go with Frier Marco , and of many other thing : and of a old woman call Guatazaca , which live in a lake and eat no food . the description of a beast , of the skin whereof they make target . the suspicion that they conceive of they , that they be of those Christians which be see at Cevola , and how they cunning save themselves . 
 the next day which be Sunday before break of day , begin their cry as they be wont : and this be the cry of 2. or 3. sort of people , which have lie all night near the river side , wait for i : and they take Maiz and other corn in their mouth , and sprinkle i therewith , say that that be the fashion which they use when they sacrifice unto the sun : afterward they give i of their victual to eat , and among other thing , they give i many white peason . i give they a cross as i have do to the rest : and in the mean season that old man tell they great matter of my do , and point i out with his finger , say , this be the lord , the son of the sun : and they make i to comb my beard , and to set my apparel handsome which i wear upon my back . and so great be the confidence that they have in i , that all of they tell i what thing have pass , and Dick pass among they , and what good or bad mind they bear one towards another . i ask they wherefore they impart unto i all their secret , and that old man answer i : thou be our lord , and we ought to hide nothing from our lord . after these thing , follow on our way , i begin again to inquire of he the state of Cevola , and whether he know that those of this country have ever see people like unto we : he answer i not , save one negro which wear about his leg and arm certain thing which do ring . your lordship 3°4 
 be to call to mind how this negro which go with friar 2% negro Marco be wont to wear bell , and feather on his arm and leg , and that he carry plate of diverse colour , and that it be not much above a year ago since he come into those part . i demand upon what occasion he be kill ; and he answer i , that the lord of Cevola inquire of he whether he have other brethren : he answer that he have a infinite number , and that they have great store of weapon with they , and that they be not very far from thence . which when he have hear , many of the chief man consult together , and resolve to kill he , that he may not give news unto cause these his brethren , where they dwell , and - that for this w^refire^te-cause they slay he , and cut he into many piece , the negro be which be divide among all those chief lord , that slalne . they may know assure that he be dead ; and also that he have a dog like i , which he likewise kill a great while after . i ask he whether they of Cevola 
 have any enemy , and he say they have . and he reckon they off unto i 14. or 15. lord which have war with they : c^^have and that they have mantle , and bow like those above d^their mention : howbeit he tell i that i shall find go enemy . up the river a people that have no war neither with their neighbour , nor with any other . he tell i that they have 3. or 4. sort of tree bear most excellent 
 fruit to eat : and that in a certain lake dwell a old anoldewoman woman , which be much honour and worship of call guatu-them : and that she remain in a little house which or-e be there , and that she never do eat any thing : and ship . 
 that there they make thing which do sound , and that many mantle , feather and Maiz be give unto she . Antonio d^es-i ask what her name be , and he tell i that she be call Guatuzaca , and that thereabouts be many 1^ lord which in their life and death , use the like order which they of Cevola do , which have their dwelling in the summer with paint mantle , and in the winter dwell in house of wood of 2. or 3. loft high : and that he have see all these thing , save the old woman . 
 ix 305 u 
 this may be the crook back ox of Quivira . 
 the sea side . 
 and when again i begin to ask he more question , he will not answer i , say that he be weary of i : and many of those Indians come about i , they say among themselves : let we mark he well , that we may know he when he come back again . the Monday follow , the river be beset with people like to they , and i begin to request the old man to tell i what people be in that country , which tell i he think i will soon forget they : and here he reckon up unto i a great number of lord , and people at the least 200. And discourse with he of their armour , he say that some of they have certain very large target of leather , above two finger thick . i ask he of what beast skin they make they : and he describe unto i a very great beast , like unto a ox , but long by a great handful , with broad foot , the leg as big as the thigh of a man , and the head seven handful long , the forehead of three span , and the eye big than one fist , and the home of the length of a man leg , out of which grow sharp point , a handful long , the forfeit and hinderfeete above seven handful big , with a wreathe tail , but very great ; and hold up his arm above his head , he say the beast be high than that . after this he give i information of another old woman which dwell towards the sea side . i spend this day in give cross to those people as i have do unto the former . this old man that be with i leap on shore , 8c fall in conference with another which that day have often call he ; and here both of they use many gesture in their speech , move their arm , and point at i . therefore i send my interpreter out , will he to draw near unto they , and listen what they say ; and within a while i call he , and ask he whereof they talk , and he say , that he which make those gesture say unto the other , that in Cevola there be other like unto we with beard , and that they say they be Christians , and that both of they say that we be all of one company , 306 
 and that it be a good deed to kill we , that those other may have no knowledge of we , lest they may come to do they harm : and that the old man have answer he , this be the son of the sun , and our lord , he do we good , and will not enter into our house , although we request he thereunto : he will take away nothing of we , he will meddle with none of our woman , and that to be short , he have speak many other thing in my commendation and favour : and for all this the other steadfast affirm that we be all one , and that the old man say , let we go unto he , and ask he whether he be a christian as the other 
 1540 
 the savage treason to be take heed of . 
 be , or else the son of the sun : and the old man 
 come unto i , and say : in the country of Cevola whereof you speak unto i doe other man like unto you dwell . than i begin to make as though i wonder , and answer he , that it be impossible ; and they assure i that it be true , and that two man have see they which come from thence , which report that they have thing which do shoot fire , and sword as we have . i ask they whether they have see they with their own eye ? and they answer no ; but that certain of their companion have see they . than he ask i whether i be the son of the sun , i answer he yea . they say that those Christians of Cevola say so likewise . and i answer they that it may well be . than they ask i if those Christians of Cevola come to join themselves with i , whether i will join with they : and i answer they , that they need not to fear any whit at all , for if they be the son of the sun as they say , they must needs be my brethren , and will use towards all man the like love 
 certain news of the span yard at Cevola . 
 and courtesy which i use : whereupon hereat they seem to be somewhat satisfy . 
 307 
 [ Chap. 7 
 it be tell he that they be ten day journey distant from Cevola , and that there be Christians there , which make war against the lord of that country . of the sodomy which those Indians use with four young man appoint for that service , which wear woman apparel . see they can not send news of their be there to they of Cevola , they go back again down the river to their ship . 
 Cevola ten r ■ ^en i pray they to tell i how many day that ^fromms^lace kingdom of Cevola , which they speak of , be distant a desert of fr°m that river : and that man answer , that there be ten dayesjour - the space of ten day journey without habitation , ne3 - and that he make none account of the rest of the way , because there be people to be find . upon this advertisement i be desirous to certify captain Francis Vazquez of my be there , and impart my mind with my soldier , among who i find none that be willing to go thither , although i offer they many reward in your lordship name , only one negro slave though with a evil will offr ed himself unto i to go thither : but i look for the come of those two Indians which they tell i of , and herewithal we go on our way up the river against the stream in such sort as we have do before . here that old man show i as a strange thing a son of his clad in woman apparel , exercise their office : i ask he how many there be of these among they , and he tell i there be four ; and that when any of they die , there be a search make of all the woman with child which be in the country , and that the first son which be bear of they , be appoint to do that duty belong unto woman , and that the woman clad he in their apparel , say , that see he be to do that which belong to they , he shall wear their apparel : these young man may not have carnail copulation with any woman : but all the young man of the country which be to marry , 308 
 may company with they . Theise man receive no kind of reward for this incestuous act of the people of that country , because they have liberty to take whatsoever they find in any house for their food . i see likewise certain woman which live dishonest among man : and i ask the old man whether they be marry , who answer i noe , but they be common woman , which live apart from the marry woman . i come at length after these discourse to pray they to send for those Indians , which they say have be at Cevola , and they tell i that they be eight day journey distant from that place , but that notwithstanding there be one among they which be their companion and which have speak with they , as he meet they on the way , when they go to see the kingdom of Cevola , and that they tell he that he be not best to go any far , for he shall find there a fierce nation like we , and of the same quality and make , which have fight much with the people of Cevola , because they have kill a negro of their company , say , wherefore , have you kill he ? what do he to you ? do he take any bread from you , or do you any other wrong ? and such like speech . and they say moreover , that these people be call Christians , which dwell in a great house , and that many of they have ox like those of Cevola , and ox of other little black beast with wool and home , and that evola-some of they have beast which they ride upon , which run very swift ; and that one day before their departure , from sun rise until sun set these Christians be all day in come thither , and all of they lodge in that place where other have lodge , and that these two meet with two Christians , which ask they whence they be , and whether they have field sow with corn ; and they tell they that they dwell in a far country , and that they have corn , and that then they give each of they a little cap , and they give they another to carry to their other companion , which they promise to do , and depart quick . when i understand this , i speak 
 3°9 
 again with my company , to see if any one of they will go thither , but i find they unwilling as at the first , and they lay against i great inconvenience . than i call the old man to see if he will give i any people to go with i , and victual to travel through a desert , that wilderness , but he lay before i many inconvenience and danger , which i may incur in that voyage , show i the danger that there be in pass by a Cumana , lord of Cumana , which threaten to make war upon they , because his people have enter into the other country to take a stag , and that i shall not therefore depart thence without see he punish . and when i reply that in any wise i must needs go to Cevola , he will i to surcease from that purpose , for they look that that lord without all doubt will come to annoy they , 8c that therefore they can not leave their country naked to go with i , and that it will be better , that i will make a end of that war between they , and that then i may have their company to Cevola . and upon this point we grow to such variance , that we begin to grow into choler , and in a rage he will have go out of the boat , but i stay he , and with gentle speech begin to pacific he , see that it import i much to have he my friend : but for all my courtesy which i show he , i can not alter he from his mind , wherein he still remain obstinate . in this mean while i send a man away unto my ship to give they knowledge of the journey that i have determine to make . after this i pray the old man that he will fetch he back again , because i have determine , that see i see no mean to be able to go to Cevola , 8c because i will stay no long among those people , because they shall not discover i , and likewise because i mean in person to visit my ship , with determination to return again up the river , carry with i other companion , 8c leave there some which i have sick , and tell the old man and the rest that i will return , and leave they satisfy the best i 
 310 
 can ( although they always say that i go away for fear ) i return down the river : and that way which i have go against the stream up the river in 15. day and a half , i make in my return in 2. day and a half , because the stream be great and very swift . in this wise go down the river , much people come to the bank , say , sir , wherefore do you leave we ? what discourtesy have be do unto you ? do you 
 he return in 2. day and a half to his ship . 
 not say that you will remain continual with we , and be our lord ? and turn back again ? if any man above the river have do you any wrong we will go with our weapon with you and kill he ; and such like word full of love and kindness . 
 Chap. 8. 
 when they come to their ship the captain name that coast la Campanna de la Cruz , and build a chapel unto our lady , and call the river el Rio de buena guia , and return up the same again : when he come to Quicona and Coama the lord of those place use he very courteous . 
 upon my arrival at my ship i find all my people in health , although very heavy for my long stay , and because the current have fret four of their cable , and that they have lose two anchor which be recover . after we have bring our ship together , i cause they to bring they into a good harbour , and to give the carena to the ship call sanct Peter , and to mend all thing that be needful . and here assemble all my company together , i open unto they what knowledge i have receive of Francis Vasquez ; and how it may be that in those sixteen day space which i be in sail up the river he may peradventure have some knowledge of i , and that i be mind to return up the river once again to try if i can find any mean to join my self with he : and although some speak against my determination , i cause all my boat to be make ready , because the ship have no need of 
 311 
 mark what the . i cause one of they to be fill with ware thing then of exchange , with corn and other seed , with hen spamardes and cock of Castille , and depart up the river , leave in new dis - order that in that province call Campanna de la Cruz emery . they shall build a oratory or chapel , and call it the chapel of our lady de la buena guia , and that Rio de bvena they shall call this river Rio de buena guia because guia - that be your lordship devise : i carry with i Nicolas Zamorano pilot mayor , to take the height of the pole . and i depart on Tuesday the fourteenth of September , and on Wednesday i come unto the first dwelling of the first Indians , which come run to hinder my passage , suppose that we have be other people , for we carry with we a fifer , and a drummer , and i be clad in other apparel than i go in before , when they see i first of all : and when they know i they stay , though i can not grow unto perfect friendship with they , whereupon i give they some of those seed which i bring with i ; teach they how they shall sow they : and after i have sail 3 league , my first interpretor come even to my boat to seek i with great joy , of who i demand wherefore he have leave i , he tell i that certain companion of his have lead he away . i make he good countenance and better entertainment , because he shall bear i company again , consider how much it do import i to have he with i . he excuse himself because he 
 parrot in stay there to bring i certain feather of parrot , these part . which he 
 give i . i ask he what people these be , and whether they have any lord : he answer i , yea ; and name three or four unto i , of four or 25 name of people which he know and that they have house paint within , and that they have traffic with two moon those of Cevola , and that in two moon he come into to Cevola . the country . he tell i moreover many other name lord , and other people , which i have write down particular of in a b°oke ot i , which 1 will bring my self unto that country . your lordship . but i think good to deliver this 
 312 
 ...... I54°‘ brief relation to Augustine Guerriero in this haven of Colima , that he may send it overland to your lordship , to who i have many other thing to impart . 
 but to return to my journey , i arrive at Quicama , Quicoma . where the Indians come forth with great joy and gladness to receive i , advertise i that their lord wait for my come ; to who when i be come i find that he have with he five or six thousand man without weapon , from who he go apart with some two hundred only , all which bring victual with they , and so he come towards i , go before the rest with great authority , and before he and on each side of he be certain which make the people stand aside , make he way to pass . he wear a garment close before and behind and open on both side , fasten with button , wrought with white and black chequer work , it be very soft and well make , be of the skin of certain delicate fish call sea bream . assoon as he be come to the water side his servant take he up in their arm , and bring he into my boat , where i embrace he and receive he with great joy , show unto he much kindness : upon which entertainment his people stand by and behold the same seem not a little to rejoice . this lord turn himself to his people will they to consider my courtesy , and that he be of his own accord come unto i with a strange people , they may see how good a man i be , and with how great love i have entertain he , and that therefore they shall take i for their lord , and that all of they shall become my servant , and do whatsoever 1 will command they . there i cause he to sit down , and to eat certain conserves of sugar which i have bring with i , and will the interpreter to thank he in my name for the favour which he have do i in vouchsafe to come to see i , recommend unto he the worship of the cross , and all such other thing as i have recommend to the 
 313 
 rest of the Indians ; namely that they shall live in peace , and shall leave off war , and shall continue always good friend together : he answer that of long time they have continue in war with their neighbour , but that from thence forward he will command his people that they shall give food to all stranger that pass through his kingdom , and that they shall do they no kind of wrong , and that if any nation shall come to invade he , he say he will tell they how i have command that they shall live in peace , and if they refuse the same , he will defend himself , and promise i , that he will never go to seek war , if other come not to invade he . than i give he certain trifle , as well of the seed which i bring , as of the hen of Castille , wherewith he be not a little please . and at my departure i carry certain of his people with i , to make friendship between they and those other people which dwell above the river : and here the interpreter come unto i , to crave leave to return home ; and i give he certain gift wherewith he depart great satisfy . 
 coama . the next day i come to Coama , and many of they know i not , see i clad in other aparrel , but the old man which be there as soon as he know i leap into the water , say unto i , sir , lo here be the man which you leave with i , which come forth very joyful and pleasant declare unto i the great courtesy which that people have show he , say that they have stroven together who shall have he to his house , and that it be incredible to think what care they have at the rise of the sun to hold up their hand and kneel before the cross . i give they of my seed , and thank they hearty for the good entertainment which they have show my man , and they beseech i that i will leave he with they , which i grant they until my return , and he stay among they very willing . thus i go forward up the river , take that old man in my company , which tell i , that two 
 314 
 indian come from Cumana to inquire for the christian , Cumana . and that he have answer they that he know none such , but that he know one which be the son of the sun , and that they have persuade he to join with they treason of they to kill i and my companion . i wish he to lend i two Indians , and i will send word by they , that i will come unto they , and be desirous of their friendship , but if that they on the contrary will have war , i will make such a war with they , that shall displease they . and so i pass through all that people , and some come and ask i , why i have not give they cross as well as the rest , and so i give they some . 
 Chap. 9 
 they go on land , and see the people worship the cross which they have give they . the captain cause a indian to make a draught of the country : he send a cross to the lord of Cumana , and go down the river with the stream , he arrive at his ship . of the error of the pilot of Cortes as touch the situation of this coast . 
 the next day i go on land to see certain cottage , and i find many woman and child hold up their hand and kneel before a cross which i have give they . when i come thither i do the like my self ; and confer with the old man , he begin to inform i of as many people and province as he know . and when evening be come i call the old man to come and lodge with i in my boat ; he answer that he will not go with i because i will weary he with ask he question of so many matter : i tell he that i will request he nothing else but that he will set i down in a chart as much as he know concern that river , and what manner of people those be which dwell upon the bank thereof on both side : which he do willing . and then he request i that i will describe my country unto he , as he have do his unto i . and for to 
 315 
 content he , i cause a draught of certain thing to be make for he . the next day i enter between certain very high mountain , through which this river pass with a strait chanel , and the boat go up against the stream very hardly for want of man to draw the same . here certain Indians come and tell i , that in the same place , there be certain people of Cumana , a enchanter , and among the rest a enchanter , who inquire which way we will pass ; and they tell he that we mean to pass by the river , he set certain cane on both side thereof , through which we pass , without receive any kind of damage which they intend against we . thus go forward i come unto the house of the old man which be in my company , and here i cause a very high cross to be set up , whereupon i engrave certain letter to signify that i be come thither : and this i do , that if by chance any of the people of the generail Vasquez de Coronado shall come thither , they may have knowledge of my be there . at length see i can not attain to the knowledge of that which i seek for , i determine to return back unto my ship . And be ready to depart there arrive two Indians , which by mean of the interpreter of the old man , tell i that they be send to i , and that they be of Cumana , and that their lord can not come himself , because he be far from that place , but desire i to signify unto he what my pleasure be . i tell they , that i wish that he will always embrace peace , and that i be come to see that country , but be enforce to return back down the river i can not now do it , but that hereafter i will return , and that in the mean season they shall give that cross unto their lord , which they promise i to do , and they go direct to carry he that cross with certain this river feather which be on the same . of these i seek to he^up^n ' understand what people dwell upward upon the bank he^tra^ they and iverJ which give i knowledge of many people , veil . and tell i that the river go far moor up into the 
 316 
 land than i have yet see , but that they know not the head thereof , because it be very far into the country , and that many other river fall into the same . 
 have learn thus much the next day morning i return down the river , and the day follow i come where i have leave my Spaniard , with who i speak , and tell he that all thing have go well with i , and that at this time and the former i have go above 30 league into the country . the Indians of that place inquire of i what the cause be of my departure , and when i will return ; to who i answer , that i will return short . thus sail down the stream , a woman leap into the water cry unto we to stay for she , and she come into our boat , and creep under a bench , from whence we can not make she to come out : i understand that she do this , because her husband have take unto he another wife , by who he have child , say that she mean not to dwell any long with he , see he have take another wife . thus she and another Indian come with i of their own accord , and so i come into my ship , and make they ready we proceed home on our voyage , coast and oftentimes go on land , and enter a great way into the country , to see if i can learn any news of captain Francis Vasquez and his company ; of who i can have no other knowledge , but such as i learn in the aforesaid river . i bring with i many act of take possession of all that coast . and by the situation of the river , and the height which i take , i find that that which the master and pilot of the marquess take be false , and that they be deceive by 2 degree , and i have sail beyond they above 4 degree . i sail up he sail it , the river 8 5 league , where i see and learn all the the 
 particular before mention , and many other thing ; ' whereof when it shall please God to give i leave to kiss your lordship hand , i will deliver you the full and perfect relation . i think my self to have have 
 317 
 very good fortune , in that i find don Luis de Castilia , the port of and Augustine Ghenero in the port of Colima : for the Colima . Galiot of the adolantado come upon i , which be there with the rest of his fleet , and command i to strike sail , which seem a strange thing unto i , and not understand in what state thing be in Nueva Espanna , i go about to defend my self , and not to do it . in the mean while come don Luis de Castilia in a boat and confer with i , and i lay at anchor on the other side of the haven where the say fleet road , and i give unto he this relation ( and to avoid strife i determine to sail away by night ) which relation i carry about i brief write ; for i always have a purpose to send the same , as soon as i shall touch upon Nueva Espanna , to advertise your lordship of my proceed . 
 . 