a letter of Francis Vazquez de Coronado , governor of Nueva Galicia , to the lord don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy of Nueva Espanna . Dated in saint Michael of culiacan the 8. of march , 1539 
 of the hard passage from saint Michael of culiacan to Topira . the description of that province , and of another near unto the same , very rich in gold and precious stone . the number of the people which Vazquez carry with he in his journey thither ; and how great friar Marcus of Ni^a be honour by the Indians of Petatlan . 
 y the help of God i mean to set forward from this city of saint Michael of culiacan towards Topira the 10. of April : neither can i any soon set forward , because the powder and match which your lordship send i , can be bring thither before that time , and i think it be now 
 in Compostella . beside this , i be to pass many league over mighty high mountain , which reach up to the sky , and over a river , which at this present be so big and swell , that it can in no place be wade over . 
 118 
 and if i depart at the time aforesaid , they say we may wade over it . they tell i that from hence to Topira be not above 50. league ; and i have learn since that it be above four score league . i do not remember that i have write to your lordship the information which i have of Topira : and though i have write thereof unto Topira . you , yet because that since that time i have learn something moor , i think it meet to signify the same unto your lordship in these my letter . it may please your honour therefore to understand , that they tell i , that Topira be a very populous province , lie between two river , and that there be above 50. inhabit town therein . and that beyond the same there be another - another country great than it , the name whereof the Indians Sreater can not tell i , wherein there be great store or victual of Maiz , french peason , Axi or Pepper , Melon , and gourd , and great store of hen of the country . the people wear on their body gold , emerald , and other precious stone , and be serve common in gold and silver , wherewith they cover their house : and the chief man wear great chain of gold well wrought , about their neck , and be apparel with paint garment , and have store of wild cow ; and they say they enter not into their country , because themselves have no great store of people : those Indians be many in number , and very valiant . that which here i say , i learn by two other relation of Indians dwell near unto they . i mean to set forward at the time before mention , and i carry with i 150. horseman , and twelve spare horse , and 200. footman , crossebowman , and gunner . i take also with i live hog , sheep , and all such thing as i can get for money : assure your lordship that i mean not to return to Mexico , until i be able to inform your honour more perfect , what the state of that place be : and if i find aught that we may do good in , i will stay there , until i have advertise your lordship , that you may command what you will have do : and if it fall out so unlucky , 
 119 
 [ three . 364. i these may seem to be the pintado mention by Frier Marco de Niza in his 2. Chap. 
 A.D. 
 J539 - 
 that there be nothing of importance , i will seek to discover too . league far , wherein ( i hope in God ) there will be something find in which your lordship may employ all these gentleman , and those which shall come hither hereafter . i think i can choose but stay there : and the water , the season , and disposition of the country , and other accident will direct i what be best to be do . Frier Marco de Ni^a enter a good way into the country , accompany with Stephan Dorantez , the 7. of February last pass : when i depart from they , i leave they with above 100 Indians of Petatlan , and from the time of their come thither they great honour the father , show he all the courtesy they can possible . i can send you , nor describe unto you his entrance among they better than i have do in all my relation which i write in my letter from Compostella , and i signify unto you all thing to the full from the city of saint Michael : and though there be but the ten part of those thing , it be a great matter . herewithal i have send your lordship a letter , which i receive from the say father : the Indians tell i , that all the people of the country do great reverence he : and i believe he may travel many league far in that sort . he say , that if he find any good country , he will write to i thereof : i will not go thither without inform your lordship of my journey . i hope in God , that by one way or other we shall discover some good thing . 
 . 