169 
 170 
 171 
 172 
 173 
 175 
 Suelasdevaca . 
 ix 177 m 
 quire . 
 179 
 180 
 7 , uni . , o Cibola . 
 185 
 [ a brief 
 a brief relation of two notable voyage , the first make by friar Augustin Ruyz a franciscan , in the year 1581 : the second by Antonio de Espejo in the year 1583 : who together with his company discover a land wherein they find fifteen province all full of town , contain house of four and five story high , which they name new Mexico ; for that in many respect it resemble the province of old Mexico . this land be situate to the north of Nueva Espanna , and stretch from 24 to 34 degree and better : by the which and by other inhabit land it be think that man may travel even to terra de Labrador . take out of the history of China write by friar Juan Gonzales de Mendosa , and print in Madrid 1586. 
 the first voyage make by FrierAngus tin Ruiz to the province de los tiguas . 
 have now declare in the title of this present discourse , that in the year 1583 there be discover fifteen province , which the discoverer call new Mexico , situate on the firm land of Nueva Espanna , and i promise to give notice of the say discovery , which i will do 
 with as much brevity as be possible : for if i shall record at large all particular which they see and come to the knowledge of , it will require a full history . the substance thereof be as follow . 
 in the year of our lord 1581 a certain franciscan friar call Augustin Ruiz which dwell in the valley of saint Bartholomew , be inform by the report of certain Indians call Conchos , which have deal and conversation with other of their neighbour call pas-186 
 1581-83 . saguates ; that towards the north , travel always by land , there be certain great town not hitherto know nor discover by our Spaniard : move with a zeal of charity , and a desire to save soul , crave licence of the conde of Corunna as then viceroy of Nueva Espanna , and of his superior , to go to the say town , and to endeavour to learn their language , and have learn the same , to baptize they , and to preach the holy gospel unto they . after he have obtain licence of the party aforesaid , take with he other two companion of his own order , and eight soldier , 23 « « f who of their own good will offer to bear he company , he depart to put in execution his christian prancisc0 and zealous intent . who after certain day travel Sanchez come unto a country call the province de los tiguas Xamuzcado distant from the mine of Santa Barbara , from whence they begin their journey , 250 league towards the north : in which province the inhabitant , upon a certain occasion , slay one of the say friar two companion . the soldier that go with he see this mishap , and perceive the success , and likewise fear , that thereof may happen some great danger , determine with a common consent to return unto the mine from whence they depart : consider that their company be too small to resist the danger that may happen , be so far distant from the dwelling of the Spaniard , and from all necessary succour . but the two friar which remain alive do not only refuse their determination , but rather see fit occasion to put their good desire in execution , and so great a harvest ripe for the lord table , because they can not persuade the soldier to proceed any further in that discovery , remain behind in the say province with three indian boy , and one Mestizo , who they have carry with they ; think that although they remain alone , yet shall they be there in security , by reason of the great affability and love which the people of that place show unto they . 
 187 
 which intercept be come to our hand . 
 the province de los tiguas distant 250 league northward from the mine of Santa Barbara . 
 the mine of SantaBarbara 160 league distant from Mexico . 
 the second voyage . 
 las quatro Cienegas in the province offue five of Biscaya 70 league from the mine of Santa Barbara . 
 the eight soldier be return to their wish home , immediate send news of all that have pass to the viceroy unto the city of Mexico , which be distant from the say mine of Santa Barbara 160 league . 
 the friar of Sant Francis be very much aggrieve at the stay of their brethren behind in the country , and fear least the savage will kill they see they leave alone , they begin to move the mind of certain soldier to make another voyage to the say province in the company of another friar of the foresay order call Frier Bernardin Beltran , to deliver the aforesaid two religious man out of danger , and to prosecute their former enterprise . 
 at the same time there be at the foresay mine upon some occasion a citizen of Mexico call Antonio de Espejo , a rich man , and of great courage and industry , and very zealous in the service of king Philip his sovereign , and be bear in Cordova . who understand the desire of the foresay friar , and the importance of the action , offer himself to go on that voyage , and also to spend part of his substance , and to adventure his life therein ; conditional that licence may be grant he to the same purpose from some person sufficient authorise by his majesty . which licence at the say friar procurement be grant unto he by the governor Juan de Ontiveros the king Alcalde may6r or chief justice in the town call las quatro Cienegas situate within the jurisdiction of Nueva Biscaya seventy league from the say mine of Santa Barbara ; authorize he both to take in hand the say voyage , and also to assemble such people and soldier as he can , which may accompany and aid he in the performance of this his christian intent . 
 the say Antonio de Espejo be so earnest in this matter , that in very few day he have gather a company of soldier , and make provision of thing necessary for his voyage , spend therein a good part of his substance . and he depart with his whole company from the valley 188 
 of s. Bartholomew the ten of November 1582 ; take with he ( for whatsoever shall happen ) 115 horse and mule , with great store of weapon , munition , and victual , and some Indians to serve he in his journey . 
 direct his course towards the north , after two day journey he meet with great store of the foresay Indians call Conchos , which dwell in village or hamlet of cottage cover with straw . who , so soon as they understand of his approach , have news thereof long before , come forth to receive he with show of great joy . the food of this people and of all the rest of that province , which be great , be cony , hare , and dear which they kill , of all which they have great abundance . also they have great store of Maiz or indian wheat , gourd , and melon very good and plentiful : and there be many river full of excellent fish of diverse sort . they go almost naked , and the weapon that they use be bow and arrow , and live under the government and lordship of cacique like those of Mexico : they find no idol among they , neither can they understand that they worship any thing , whereupon they easy consent that the Spaniard shall set up cross , and be very well content therewith , after they be inform by our friar of the signification thereof , which be do by the interpreter that they carry with they ; by who mean they understand of other town , whither the say Conchos do conduct they , and bear they company above four and twenty league , all which way be inhabit with people of their own nation : and at all place where they come they be peaceable receive by advice that be send by the cacique from one town to another . 
 have pass the four and twenty league aforesaid , they come unto another nation of Indians call Passaguates , who live after the manner of the foresay Conchos their borderer , and do unto they as the other have do , conduct they forward other four day journey , with advice of the caciques as before . the 189 
 A.D. 
 1581-83 . 
 Antonio de Espejo his set forth from the valley of saint Bartholomew the ten of November 1582. 
 indian call Conchos . 
 many river . 
 Spaniard find in this journey many mine of silver , which accord to the judgement of skilful man , be very plentiful and rich in metal . 
 a day journey from thence they meet with another nation call Tobosos , who so soon as they behold the countenance of our people flee unto the mountain , leave their town and house desolate . afterwards we understand that certain year pass there come unto that place certain soldier to seek mine , who carry away captive certain of the people of the country , which cause the rest of they to be so shey and fearful . the captain send messenger to call they back again , assure they that they shall not sustain any harm , and handle the matter so discreet , that many of they return , who he make much of , and give they gift , use they kind , and declare unto they by the interpreter , that their come be not to hurt any man : whereupon they be all quiet , and be content they shall set up cross , and declare the mystery of the same , make show that they be high please therewith . for proof whereof they accompany they on their voyage , as their neighbour have do , until they have bring they to a country inhabit by another nation , which be distant from they some 12 league . they use bow and arrow and go naked . 
 the nation unto which the say Tobosos conduct they , be call jumanos , who the Spaniard by another name call Patarabueyes : their province be very great , contain many town and great store of people : their house be flat-rooffed , and build of lime and stone , and the street of their town be place in good order . all the man and woman have their face , arm and leg raze and pounce : they be a people of great stature , and of better government , than the rest which they have see in their former journey : and be well provide of victual , and furnish with plenty of wild beast , fowl and fish , by reason of mighty river which come from the north , whereof one be as great as 190 
 guadalquivir , which fall into the north sea or bay of Mexico . here be also many lake of salt water , which at a certain time of the year wax hard , and becomes very good salt . they be a warlike people , and soon make show thereof : for the first night that our people encamp there , with their arrow they slay five horse , and wound five other very sore , nor will not have leave one of they alive , if they have not be defend by our guard . have do this mischief , they abandon the town , and withdraw themselves to a mountain which be hard by , whither our captain go betimes in the morning , take with he five soldier well arm , and a interpreter call Peter a indian of their own nation , and with good persuasion appease they , cause they to descend to their town and house , and persuade they to give advice unto their neighbour , that they be man that will hurt no body , neither come they thither to take away their good : which he obtain easy by his wisdom , and by give unto the cacique certain bracelet of glass bead , with hat and other trifle , which he carry with he for the same purpose : so by this mean , and by the good entertainment which they give they , many of they accompany our Spaniard for certain day , always travel along the bank of the great river abovesaid ; along the which kit del'norte . there be many town of the Indians of this nation , which continue for the space of twelve day travel , all which time the caciques have receive advice from one to another , come forth to entertain our people without their bow and arrow , and bring they plenty of victual , with other present and gift , especial hide and chamois-skin very well dress , so that those of Flanders do nothing exceed they . Theise people be all clothe , and seem to have some light of our holy faith : for they make sign of God , look up towards heaven , and call he in their language Apalito , a pall to . and acknowledge he for their lord , from who bountiful hand and mercy they confess that they have 
 191 
 receive their life and be , and these worldly good . many of they with their wife and child come unto the friar ( which the captain and soldier bring with they ) that he may cross and bless they . who demand of they , from who they have receive that knowledge of God , they answer , from three Christians , and one negro which pass that way , and remain certain day among they , who by the sign which they make , be Alvero nunnez , Cabe ? a de Vaca , and Dorantes , and Castillo Maldonado , and a negro ; all Pamphilo de which escape of the company which Pamphilo the Narvaex Narvaez land in Florida ; who after they have be 
 Florida 1527. many day captive and slave , escape and come to these town , by who God show many miracle , and heal only by the touch of their hand many sick person , by reason whereof they become very famous in all that country . all this province remain in great peace and security ; in token whereof , they accompany and serve our man certain day , travel along by Rio deal norte , the great river aforesaid . 
 another within few day after they come unto another great province . province of Indians , from whence they come forth to receive they , upon the news which they have hear of their neighbour , and bring they many very curious thing make of feather of diverse colour , and many mantle of cotton strake with blue and white , like those that be bring from China , to barter and truck they for other thing . all of they both man , woman and child be clad in chamois skin very good and well dress . our people can never understand what nation they be for lack of a interpreter : howbeit they deal with they by sign ; and have show very great unto they certain stone of rich metal , and inquire quantity of whither there be any such in their country : they 
 stver ' answer by the same sign , that five day journey 
 westward from thence there be great quantity thereof , and that they will conduct they thither , and show it unto they ; as afterward they perform their 192 
 1581-83 . promise , and bear they company 22 league , which be all inhabit by people of the same nation . 
 next unto the foresay province they come unto another pro - another further up the great river aforesaid , be mnce ' much more populous than the former , of who they be well receive , and welcome with many present , especial of fish , whereof they have exceed great store , by reason of certain great lake not far from great lake . thence , wherein they be breed in the foresay plenty . they stay among these people three day ; all which time both day and night they make before they many dance , accord to their fashion , with signification of speciali joy . they can not learn the name of this nation for want of a interpreter , yet they understand that it extend very far , and be very great . among these people they find a indian of the foresay nation of the Conchos , who tell they , and show they by sign , that fifteen day journey from thence towards the west there be a very broad lake , and near unto a mighty lake . it very great town , and in they house of three or four story high , and that the people be well apparel , and the country full of victual and provision . This Concho offer himself to conduct our man thither , whereat our company rejoice , but leave off the enterprise , only to accomplish their intent for which they undertake the voyage , which be to go northward to give aid unto the two friar aforesaid . the chief and principali thing that they note in this province be , that it be of very good temperature , and a very rich soil , and have great store of wild beast , and wildfowl , and abundance of rich metal , and other excellent thing , and very pro - rich metal . fitable . 
 from this province they follow their journey for the space of fifteen day without meet any people all that while , pass through great wood and grove of pine toe of pine tree bear such fruit as those of Castille : at the end tree ' whereof , have travel , to their judgement , fourscore league , they come unto a small hamlet or village of few 
 ix 193 n 
 people , in who poor cottage cover with straw they find many deeres-skinne as well dress as those of Flanders , with great store of excellent white salt . they give our man good entertainment for the space of two day while they remain there , after which they bear they company about twelve league , unto certain great town , always travel by the river call Rio deal norte abovesaid , till such time as they come unto the new Mexico , country call by they new Mexico . here all along o°°lar°and t^le sh°re say river grow mighty wood of poplar walnut tree be in some place four league broad , and great vine . store of walnut tree , and vine like those of Castillia . 
 have travel two day through the say wood of poplar and Walnut tree , they come to ten town situate on both side of the say river , beside other which they may see further out of the way , wherein there seem to be great store of people , and those which they see be above ten thousand person . in this province they receive they very courteous , and bring they to their town , whereas they give they great plenty of victual and hen of the country , with many other thing , and that with great good will . house of 4 here they find house of four story high , very stone high . weq with gallant lodging , and in most of they be 
 stoove for the winter season . their garment be of cotton and of dear-skin , and the attire both of the man and woman be after the manner of the Indians of the kingdom of Mexico . but the strange thing of all be to see both man and woman wear shoe and boot with good sole of neat leather , a thing which they never see in any other part of the Indies . the woman keep their hair well comb and dress , wear nothing else upon their head . in all these town they have cacique which govern their people like the cacique of Mexico , with sergeant to execute their commandment , who go through the town proclaim with a loud voice the pleasure of the caciques , command the same to be put in execution . in this 194 
 province our man find many idol which they worship , and particular they have in every house a oratory for the devil , whereinto they ordinary carry he meat : and another thing they find , that as it be a use among the Christians to erect cross upon the high way , so have this people certain high chapel , in which they say the devil use to take his ease , and to recreate himself as he travel from one town to another ; which chapel be marvellous well trim and paint . in all their arable ground , whereof they have great plenty , they erect on the one side a little cottage or shed stand upon four stud , under which the labourer do eat , and pass away the heat of the day , for they be a people much give to labour , and do continual occupy themselves therein . this country be full of these high mountain and forest of pine tree . the weapon m°untainesa ™ that they use be strong bow and arrow head with c ! ) two , nes offa flint , which will pierce through a coat of male , and country . macana which be club of half a yard long , so beset with sharp flint , that they be sufficient to cleave a man asunder in the midst : they use also a kind of target make of raw hide . 
 have remain four day in this province , not the province far off they come to another call the province of °ftisuas-tiguas contain sixteen town , in one whereof , call Poala , they understand that the inhabitant have slay the Poala . two father aforesaid , to wit , friar Francis Lopez , and friar Augustus Ruyz , who they go to seek , together with the three indian boy , and the mestizo . so soon as the people of this town and their neighbour see our man there , their own conscience accuse they , and fear that our man come to punish they , and to be avenge of the death of the foresay father , they dare not abide their come , but leave their house desolate they flee to the mountain next adjoin , from whence they can never cause they to descend , although our man attempt the same by diverse devise and enticements . they find in the town and house good store 
 j9 
 of victual , with infinite number of hen in the country , and many sort of metal , whereof some seem to be very good . they can not perfect understand what number of people this province may contain , by reason they be flee into the mountain , as i have say before . 
 have find those to be slay which they go to seek , they enter into consultation , whether they shall return to Nueva Biscaya , from whence they come , or shall proceed further in their journey ; whereabout there be diverse opinion : howbeit , understand there , that towards the orient or east part of that province , and very far distant from thence , there be great and rich town : and find themselves so far on the way , the say captain Antonio de Espeio with the consent of the foresay friar call Frier Bernardine Beltran , and the great part of his soldier and companion determine to proceed on the discovery , till such time as they do see to what end it will come ; to the end they may give certain and perfect knowledge thereof to his majesty , as eye-witness of the same . and so with one accord they determine , that while the army lie still there , the captain and two more of his company shall prosecute their desire , which they do accord . and within two day journey they come unto another province , where they find eleven town , and much people in they , which in their judgement be above forty thousand person . the country be very fertile and plentiful , who confine border upon the territory of Cibola , where there be great store of cow , with who hide and with cotton they apparel themselves , imitate in the form of their government their next neighbour . in this place be sign of very rich mine , some quantity of the metal whereof they find in the house of the Indians ; which Indians have and do worship idol . they receive our man peaceable , and give they victual . have see thus much , and the disposition of the country , they return to the camp , from whence they 196 
 1581-83 . depart , to inform their companion of the thing above mention . 
 be return to the camp they have intelligence of quiresb°rder it another province call los quire , which stand six uPm l0 league high up the river call Rio deal norte . and e °rte ' in their journey thitherward , be arrive within a league of the place , there come forth very many Indians to receive they in peace , request they to bear they company to their town : which they do , and be marvellous well entertain and cherish . in this province they find five town only , wherein be great store of people , and those which they see be above 14000 
 soul , who worship idol as their neighbour do . in one of these town they find a pie in a cage after the manner of Castille , and certain shadow or canopy like unto those which be bring from China , wherein be paint the sun , the moon , and many star . where have take the height of the polestar , they find themselves to be in 37 degree and of northerly latitude . 
 they depart out of this province , and keep still the same northerly course , fourteen league from thence they find another province call the cuname , where they see other five town , the great whereof be call Cia , be so large , that it contain eight marketplace , the house whereof be plaster and paint with diverse colour , be better than any which they have see in the province before mention : the people which they here see , they esteem to be above twenty thousand person . they present to our man many curious mantle , and victual excellent well dress ; so that our man deem this nation to be more curious , and of great civility , and better government , than any other that hitherto they have see . they show they rich metal , and the mountain also not far off whereout they dig they . here our people hear of another province stand towards the northwest , whereunto they purpose to go . 
 197 
 seven and thirty degree and a half . 
 have travel about six league , they come to the amey , or say province , the people whereof be call amey , emex . wherein be seven very great town , contain , to their judgement , above thirty thousand soul . they report that one of the seven town be very great and fair , which our man will not go to see , both because it stand behind a mountain , and also for fear of some mishap , if in case they shall be separate one from another . this people be like unto their neighbour of the former province , be as well provide of all necessary as they , and of as good government . 
 about fifteen league from this province , travel always towards the west , they find a great town call AcomaorAco - Acoma , contain above six thousand person , and man a town situa^e upon a high rock which be above fifty pace above 6000 have no other entrance but by a ladder or pair person . of stair hew into the same rock , whereat our people marvel not a little : all the water of this town be keep in cistern . the chief man of this town come peaceable to visit the Spaniard , bring they many mantle , and chamois-skinne excellent dress , and great plenty of victual . their cornfield be two league from thence , and they fetch water out of a small river never thereunto , to water the same , on the brink whereof they see many great bank of rose like those of Castille . sign of here be many mountain that bear show of metal , 
 metal . but they go not to see they , because the indian 
 dwell upon they be many in number , and very warlike . our man remain in this place three day , upon one of the which the inhabitant make before they a very solemn dance , come forth in the same with gallant apparel , use very witty sport , wherewith our man be exceed delight . 
 twenty four league from hence towards the west , they come to a certain province call by the inhabitant zunyorsunne . themselves zuny , and by the Spaniard Cibola , contain great number of Indians ; in which province Francisco Vazquez de Coronado have be , and have erect many 198 
 cross and other token of Christianity , which remain as yet stand . here also they find three indian Christians which have remain there ever since the say journey , who name be Andrew the culiacan , Gaspar de Mexico , and Antonio de Guadalajara , who have almost forget their own language , but can speak that country speech very well ; howbeit after some small conference with our man , they easy understand one another . by these three Indians they be inform , that threescore day journey from this place there be a very mighty lake , upon the bank whereof stand many great and good town , and that the inhabitant of the same have plenty of gold , a evident argument whereof be their wear of golden bracelet and earring : and also that after the say Francis Vasquez de Coronado have perfect intelligence thereof , he depart out of this province of Cibola to go thither , and that have proceed twelve day journey , he begin to want water ; and thereupon determine to return , as he do indeed , with intention to make a second voyage thither at his better opportunity ; which afterward he perform not , be prevent of his determine journey by death . 
 upon the news of these riches the say captain Antony de Espeio be desirous to go thither ; and though some of his companion be of his opinion , yet the great part and the friar be of the contrary , say that it be now high time to return home unto new Biscay from whence they come , to give account of that which they have see : which the say great part within few day put in execution , leave the captain with 
 a mighty lake 60 dale journey from Cibola . 
 plenty ofgolde . 
 nine companion only that willing follow he : who after he have full certify himself of the riches abovesaid , and of the great quantity of excellent metal that be about that lake , depart out of this province of mightiepro - 
 another 
 Cibola with his companion ; and travel direct towards Vince w " five - 
 the west , after he have pass 28 league , he find 
 another very great province , which by estimation con - ^iied^mo - 
 tein above 50000 soul : the inhabitant whereof 199 
 a witty politic to be use by the english in like case . 
 assoon as they understand of their approach , send they word , upon pain of death to come no near to their town : whereto the captain answer , that their come be in no wise to hurt they , as they shall well perceive , and therefore request they not to molest he in his intend voyage , and withal give to the messenger a reward of such thing as they bring with they : who thereupon make so good report of our people , and so appease the trouble mind of the Indians , that they grant they free access unto their town , and so they go thither with 15. Indians their friend of the province of Cibola aforesaid , and the three Mexican Indians before mention . when they be come within a league of the first town , there come forth to meet they above 2000 Indians lade with victual , who the captain reward with some thing of small value , which they make great account of , and esteem more precious than gold . as they approach near unto the town which be name Zaguato , a great multitude of Indians come forth to meet they , and among the rest their cacique , with so great demonstration of joy and gladness , that they cast much meal of Maiz upon the ground for the horse to tread upon : with this triumph they enter the town , where they be very well lodge and much make of , which the captain do in part requite , give to the chief among they hat , and bead of glass , with many such trifle , which he carry with he for the like purpose . the say cacique present give notice to the whole province of the arrival of these new guest , who they report to be a courteous people , and such as offer they no harm : which be occasion sufficient to make they all come lade with present unto our people , and to entreat they to go and make merry with they in their town ; which they yield unto , though always with great foresight what may follow . whereupon the captain use a certain policy , make the cacique believe , that forasmuch as his horse be very fierce ( for they 
 200 
 have tell the Indians that they will kill they ) therefore it be necessary to make a fort of lime and stone to enclose they , for the avoid of such inconvenience as otherwise may happen unto the indian by they . this tale be so steadfast believe by the casque , that in five hour they assemble such store of people together , that with incredible celerity they build the say fort which our man require . 
 moreover , when the captain say that he will depart , they bring unto he a present of 40000. mantle of cotton , both white and of other colour , and great store of hand-towel , with tassel at the corner , with diverse other thing , and among the rest rich metal , which seem to hold much silver . rich metal . among these Indians they learn very much concern the great lake aforesaid , who report agree whole with the relation of the former , as touch the riches and great abundance of gold about that lake . great abun - 
 the captain repose great confidence in this people 8c in their good disposition towards he determine after certain day , to leave there five of his companion with the rest of his indian friend , that they may return with his carriage to the province of Zuni , while himself with the four other which remain shall ride in post to discover certain very rich mine , whereof he have perfect information . And put this his purpose in execution he depart with his guide , and have travel due-west 45. league he come unto the say mine , and take out of the same with his Exceedingrich own hand exceed rich metal hold great quantity mine of of silver : arid the mine which be of a very broad ' vein be in a mountain whereon they may easy ascend , by reason of a open way that lead up to the same . near unto these mine be certain town of Indians dwell upon the mountain , who show they friendship and come forth to receive they with cross on their head , and other token of peace . hereabout they find two river of a reasonable bigness , 
 201 
 upon the bank whereof grow many vine bear excellent grape , and great grove of walnuttree , and much a mighty flax like that of Castille : and they show our man by 
 river °f eight sjgne ) that behind those mountain there be a river 
 run - about 8. league broad , but they can not learn how 
 ward the near it be : howbeit the indian make demonstration 
 ' north sea . that it run towards the north sea , and that upon both 
 ^river snowfall s^es thereof stand many town of so great bigness , that into^theChese - c°mparison thereof those wherein they dwell be but piouk bay , or small hamlet . 
 into the great after he have receive all this information , the say itaeoftadoac . captain return towards the province of Zuni , whither ' he have send his say companion : and be arrive there in safety , have travail upon a very good way , he find in the same place his 5. companion , and the say father Frier Bernardin Beltran , with the soldier which be determine to return , as be aforesaid , but upon certain occasion be not as yet depart : who the inhabitant have most friendly entreat , and furnish with all thing necessary in abundance , as afterward likewise they use the captain , and those that come with he , come forth to meet they with show of great joy , and give they great store of victual to serve they in their journey homeward , and request they to return again with speed , and to bring many castilian with they ( for so they call the Spaniard ) to who they promise food sufficient . for the better performance whereof they sow that year more grain and other fruit , than they have do at any time before . 
 at this present the friar and soldier aforesaid resolve themselves in their former determination , and agree to return unto the province from whence they come with intention before mention , to seek the two friar that be slay , to who also Gregorio Hernandez who have be standard-bearer in the journey , join himself . who be depart , the captain accompany only with 8. soldier , determine to prosecute his former attempt , and to pass up high than say river 
 202 
 call Rio deal norte , which he do accord . and have travel about 60. league towards the province 60. league . of the quire aforesaid , 12 league from thence towards the orient or east they find a province of Indians call Hubates , who receive they peaceable , and give Hubates . they great store of victual , inform they also of very rich mine which they find , whereout they get very rich glister and good metal , and therewith return to the mine . town from whence they come . this province contain by their estimation 25000. person all very well apparel in colour mantle of cotton , and chamois-skin very well dress . they have many mountain full of pine and cedar , and the house of their town be house of 4. of 4. and 5. story high . here they have notice of five story another province distant about one day journey from it thence inhabit by certain Indians call Tamos , and Tamos . contain above 40000. soul : whither be come the inhabitant will neither give they any victual , nor admit they into their town : for which cause , and in regard of the danger wherein they be , and because some of the soldier be not well at ease , and for that they be so few ( as we have say ) they determine theirretume . to depart thence , and to return towards the land of the christian , which they put in execution in the begin of July 1583 , be guide by a indian that go with they , who lead they another way than they go forth by , down a river , which they call Rio de las vacas ; that the las be to say , the river of ox , in respect of the great multitude of ox or cow that feed upon the bank thereof , by the which they travel for the space of 
 120. league , still meet with store of the say cattle . 120. league . from hence they go forward to the river of Conchos by which they enter , and thence to the valley of saint Bartholomew , from whence they first enter into their discovery . upon their come thither they find that the say friar Bernardin Beltran and his company be safe arrive at the say town many day before , and be go from thence to the town of Guadiana . in Guadiana . 
 203 
 this town the foresay captain Antony de Espejo make most certain relation of all that be aforesaid , which relation present he send unto the conde of Corunna Vizroy of Nueva Espanna , who send the same to his majesty , and to the lord of his royal counsel of the Indies , to the end they may take such order as they think best , which they have already perform with great care and circumspection . 
 almighty God vouchsafe his assistance in this business , that such number of soul redeem by his blood may not utter perish , of who good capacity , wherein they exceed those of Mexico and Peru ( as we be give to understand by those that have deal with they ) we may bold presume that they will easy embrace the gospel , and abandon such idolatry as now the most of they do live in : which almighty God grant for his honour and glory , and for the increase of the holy catholique faith . 
 . 