the travail of Job Hortop , which sir John Hawkins set on land within the bay of Mexico , after his departure from the haven of S. John de ullua in nueva espanna , the 8. of October 1568. 
 ot untrue nor without cause say Job the faithful servant of God ( who the sacred scripture tell we , to have dwell in the land of hus ) that man be bear of a woman , live a short time , be replenish with many misery : which some know by read of history , many 
 by the view of other calamity , and i by experience in my self , as this present treatise ensue shall show . it be not unknown unto many , that i job Hortop powder-maker be bear at Bourne , a town in Lincolnshire , from my age of twelve year bring up in redriffe near London , with m. Francis Lee , who be the queen majesty powder-maker , who i serve , until i be press to go on the 3. voyage to the west Indies , with the right worshipful sir John Hawkins , who appoint i to be one of the gunner in her majesty ship call the Jesus of Lubeck , who set sail from Plymouth in the month of October 1567. have with he another ship of her majesty , call the minion , and four ship of his own , namely the angel , the swallow , the Judith , and the William and John. he direct his vice-admiral , that if foul weather do separate they , to meet at the hand of tenerif . after which by the space of seven day and seven night , we have such storm es at sea , that we lose our long boat and a pinnace , with some man : come to the isle of 445 
 a temedie against foy-soned arrow . 
 the river of Calousa . 
 tenerif , there our general hear that his viceadmiral with the swallow , and the William and John be at the hand call Gomera , where find his viceadmiral , he anchor , take in fresh water , and set sail for cape blank , where in the way we take a Portugal caravel , lade with fish call mullet : from thence we sail to cape Verde . in our course thither we meet a Frenchman of rochel call captain Bland , who have take a Portugal caravel , who our vice admiral chase and take . captain Drake , now sir Francis Drake be make master and captain of the caravel , and so we keep our way till we come to cape Verde , and there we anchor , take our boat , and set soldier on shore . our general be the first that leap on land , and with he captain Dudley : there we take certain negro , but not without damage to our self . for our general , captain Dudley , and 8. other of our company be hurt with poison arrow : about nine day after , the 8. that be wound die . our general be teach by a negro , to draw the poison out of his wound with a clove of garlic , whereby he be cure . from thence we go to Sierra leona , where be monstrous fish call shark , which will devour man . i among other be send in the angel with two pinnaces into the river call Calousa , to seek two caravel thaf be there trade with the negro : we take one of they with the negro , and bring they away . 
 in this river in you night time we have one of our pinnaces bulge by a sea-horse , so that our man swim about the river , be all take into the other pinnace , except two that take hold one of another , and be carry away by the sea-horse . this monster have the just proportion of a horse , save that his leg be short , his tooth very great , and a span in length : he use in the night to go on land into the wood , seek at unaware to devour the negro in their cabin , who they by their vigilancy prevent , and kill he in this manner . the negro keep watch , and diligent attend their come , and when they be go into the wood , 446 
 they forthwith lie a great tree overthwart the way , so that at their return , for that their leg be so short , they can go over it : then the negro set upon they with their bow , arrow and dart , and so destroy they . 
 from thence we enter the river call the Casserroes , where there be other caravel trade with the negro , and they we take . in this hand betwixt the river and the main , tree grow with oyster upon they . there grow Palmito tree , which be as high as a ship main mast , and on their top grow nut , wine and oil , which they call Palmito wine and Palmito oil . the plantain tree also grow in that country ; the tree be as big as a man thigh , and as high as a fir pole , the leaf thereof be long and broad , and on the top grow the fruit which be call Plantanos : they be crooked , and a cubit long , and as big as a man wrist , they grow on cluster : when they be ripe they be very good and dainty to eat : sugar be not more delicate in taste than they be . 
 from thence with the angel , the Judith , and the two pinn ess , we sail to Sierra leona , where our general at that time be , who with the captain and soldier go up into the river call Taggarin , to take a town of the river of the negro , where he find three king of that country Taggarin . with fifty thousand negro besiege the same town , which they can not take in many year before , when they have war with it . our general make a breach , enter and valiant take the town , wherein be find five Portugal which yield themselves to his mercy , and he save their life : we take and carry thence for traffic to the west Indies 500 negro . the three 5°° - negro king drive 7000 negro into you sea at low water , ta^en ' at the point of the land , where they be all drown in the Oz , for that they can not take their canoas to save themselves . we return back again in our pinnace to the ship , and there take in fresh water , and make ready sail towards Rio grande . at our come thither Rio grande . we enter with the angel , the Judith , and the 2 pinnace , 
 447 
 burboroata . 
 and find there seven Portugal caravel , which make great fight with we . in the end by god help we win the victory , and drive they to the shore , from whence with the negro they flee , and we fetch the carvel from the shore into the river . the next morning m. Francis drake with his carvel , the swallow , and the William and John come into the river , with captain Dudley and his soldier , who land be but a hundred soldier , and fight with seven thousand negro , burn the town , and return to our general with the loss of one man . 
 in that place there be many musk-cat , which breed in hollow tree : the negro take they in a net , and put they in a cage , and nourish they very dainty , and take the musk from they with a spoon . 
 now we direct our course from Guinea towards the west Indies . 
 and by the way die captain Dudley . 
 in sail towards the Indies , the first land that we escry , be the hand call Dominica , where at our come we anchor , and take in fresh water and wood for our provision : which do , we sail towards the hand call Margarita , where our general in despite of the Spaniard anchor , land , and take in fresh victual . a mile off the hand there be a rock in the sea , wherein do breed many fowl like unto barnacle : in the night we go out in our boat , and with cudgel we kill many of they , and bring they with many of their egg aboard with we : their egg be as big as Turkey egg , and speckle like they . we do eat they , and find they very good meat . 
 from thence we sail to Burboroata , which be in the main land of the west Indies : there we come in , more our ship , and tarry two month trim and dress our ship , and in the mean time trade with certain Spaniard of that country . there our general send we unto a town call Placencia , ( which stand on a high hill ) to have entreat a bishop that dwell there for 448 
 i56& his favour and friendship in their law , who hear of our come , for fear forsake you town . 
 in our way up the hill to Placencia , we find a Placencia in monstrous venomous worm with two head : his body the main , be as big as a man arm , and a yard long : our master Robert Barret do cut he in sunder with his sword , and it make it as black as if it be colour with ink . 
 here be many tiger , monstrous and furious beast , which by subtlety devour and destroy many man : they use the trade way , and will show themselves twice or thrice to the traveller , and so depart secret , lurk till they be past , then sudden and at unaware they leap upon they and devour they : they have so use two of our company , have not one of they look behind . our general send three ship unto the hand call Coragao , to make provision for the rest , where they remain until his come . he send from thence the angel and the Judith to Rio de Hacha , where we anchor before the town . the Spaniard shoot three piece at we from the shore , who we requite with two of we , and shoot through the governor house : we weigh anchor , and anchor again without shot of the town , where we ride five day in despite of the Spaniard and their shot . in the mean space there come a caravel of advice from saint Domingo , who with the angel , and the Judith we chase and drive to the shore : we fetch he from thence in spite of 200. Spaniards harquebus shoot , and anchor again before the town , and rid there with they , till our general come , who anchor , land his man , and valiant take the town , with the loss of one man , Rio de la who name be Thomas surgeon : we land and ^acJia take , plant on the shore for our safety , our field ordinance : we drive the Spaniard up into the country above two league , whereby they be enforce to trade with our general , to who he sell most part of his negro . 
 in this river we kill a monstrous Lagarto or crocodile in this port at sun set : seven of we go in the 
 ix 449 2 f 
 Cartagena . 
 campeche . 
 pinnace up into the river , carry with we a dog , unto who with ropeyarne we bind a great hook of steel , with a chain that have a swivel , which we put under the dog belly , the point of the hook come over his back fast bind , as aforesaid : we put he over board , and vex out our rope by little and little , row away with our boat : the lagarto come and present swallow up the dog , then do we row hard , till we have choke he : he plunge and make a wonderful stir in the water : we leap on shore , and hale he on land : he be 23. foot by the rule , head like a hog , in body like a serpent , full of scale as broad as a saucer : his tail long and full of knot as big as a fawcon shot : he have four leg , his foot have long nail like unto a dragon : we open he , take out his gut , flay he , dry his skin , and stuff it with straw , mean to have bring it home , have not the ship be cast away . this monster will carry away and devour both man and horse . 
 from hence we shape our course to Santa Martha , where we land , trade , and sell certain negro : there two of our company kill a monstrous adder , go towards his cave with a conie in his mouth : his body be as big as any man thigh , and seven foot long : upon his tail he have sixteen knot , every one as big as a great walnut , which they say , do show his age : his colour be green and yellow : they open he , and find two cony in his belly . 
 from thence we sail to Cartagena , where we go in , more our ship , and will have trade with they , but they dare not for fear of the king : we bring up the minion against the castle , and shoot at the castle and town : than we land in a hand , where be many garden : there in a cave we find certain Botijos of wine , which we bring away with we , in recompense whereof , our general command to be set on shore woollen and linen cloth , to the value thereof . from hence by foul weather we be force to seek the port of saint John de ullua . in our way thwart of campeche 45° 
 we meet with a Spaniard , a small ship , who be bind for Santo Domingo : he have in he a Spaniard call Augustin the villa nueva , who be the man that betray all the noble man in the Indies , and cause they to be behead , wherefore he with two friar flee to saint Domingo : they we take and bring with we into the port of saint John de ullua . our general make great account of he , and use he like a noble man : howbeit in the end he be one of they that betray we . when we have more our ship , and land , we mount the ordinance that we find there in the island , and for our safety keep watch and ward . the next day after we discover the spanish fleet , whereof lu^on a Spaniard be general : with he come a Spaniard call don Martin Henriquez , who the king of Hon Martin Spain send to be his viceroy of the Indies . he send Henriquez . a pinnace with a flag of truce unto our general , to know of what country those ship be that ride there in the king of Spain port ; who say , they be the queen of England ship , which come in there for victual for their money : wherefore if your general will come in here , he shall give i victual and all other necessary , and i will go out on the one side of the port , and he shall come in on the other side . the Spaniard return for answer , that he be a viceroy , and have a thousand man , and therefore he will come in . our general say , if he be a viceroy , i represent my queen person , and i be a viceroy as well as he : and if he have a thousand man , my powder and shot will take the better place . then the viceroy after counsel among themselves , yield to our general demand , swear by his king and his crown , by his commission and authority that he have from his king , that he will perform it , and thereupon pledge be give on both part . our general bear a godly and Christian mind , void of fraud and deceit , judge the Spaniard to have do the like , deliver to they six gentleman , not doubt to have receive the like from 
 451 
 Augustine de villa nueva a most thankless trey tour . 
 the spanish viceadmiral fire . 
 they : but the faithless Spaniard , in costly apparel give of the base of their company , as afterwards it be well know . Theise thing finish , proclamation be make on both side , that on pain of death no occasion shall be give , whereby any quarrel shall grow to the breach of the league , and then they peaceable enter the port , with great triumph on both side . 
 the Spaniard present bring a great hulk , a ship of six hundred , and more she by the side of the minion , and they cut out port in their other ship , plant their ordinance towards we , in the night they fill the hulk with man , to lay the minion aboard , as the sequel do show , which make our general doubtful of their deal : wherefore , for that he can speak the spanish tongue , he send Robert Barret aboard the viceroy , to know his meaning in those deal , who will he with his company to come in to he , who he command present to be set in the bilboe , and forthwith a cornet ( for a watchword among the false Spaniard ) be sound for the enterprise of their pretend treason against our general , who Augustine the villa nova sit at dinner with he , shall then present have kill with a poynado which he have privy in his sleeve , which be espy and prevent by one John Chamberlayne , who take the poynado out of his sleeve . our general hasty rise up , and command he to be put prisoner in the steward room , and to be keep with two man . the faithless Spaniard , think all thing to their desire have be finish , sudden sound a trumpet , and therewith three hundred Spaniard enter the minion , whereat our general with a loud and fierce voice call unto we , say , God and saint George , upon those traitorous villain , and rescue the minion , i trust in God the day shall|be we : and with that the mariner and soldier leap out of the Jesus of Lubeck into the minion , and beat out the Spaniard , and with a shot out of she fire the Spaniard vice admiral , where the most part of 300. Spaniard be 45 2 
 spoil , and blow over board with powder . their admiral also be on fire half a hour : we cut our cable , wound off our ship , and present fight with they : they come upon we on every side , and continue the fight from ten of the clock until it be night : they kill all our man that be on shore in the hand , save three , which by swim get aboard the Jesus of 0 « of those Lubeck . they sink the general ship call the angel , be 
 and take the swallow : the Spaniard admiral have reof ' 
 above threescore shot through she : many of his man be spoil : four other of their ship be sink . four Spanish there be in that fleet , and that come from the shore sum ” ko-to rescue they , fifteen hundred : we slay of they five hundred and fourty , as we be credible inform by a note that come to Mexico . in this fight the Jesus of Lubeck have five shot through her main mast : her foremast be strike in sunder under the hound with a chain shot , and her hull be wonderful pierce with shot , therefore it be unpossible to bring she away . they set two of their own ship on fire , intend therewith to have burn the Jesus of Lubeck , which we prevent by cut our cable in the halse , and wind off by our sternefast . 
 the minion be force to set sail and stand off from we , and come to a anchor without shot of the island . our general courageous cheer up his soldier and gunner , and call to Samuel his page for a cup of beer , who bring it he in a silver cup , and he drink to all man will the gunner to stand by their ordinance lusty like man . he have no soon set the cup out of his hand , but a demy culverin shoot stroke away the cup and a Cooper plane that stand by the main mast , and run out on the other side of the ship : which nothing dismay our general , for he cease not to encourage we , say , fear nothing , for God , who have preserve i from this shot , will also deliver we from these traitor and villain . then captain Bland mean to have turn out of the port , have his main 
 453 
 about a hundred . Englishmen land . 
 mast strike over board with a chain shoot that come from the shore , wherefore he anchor , fire his ship , take his pinnace with all his man , and come aboard the Jesus of Lubek to our general , who say unto he , that he think he will not have run away from he : he answer , that he be not mind to have run away from he , but his intent be to have turn up , and to have lay the weathermost ship of the spanish fleet aboard , and fire his ship in hope therewith to have set on fire the spanish fleet , he say if he have do so he have do well . with this , night come on . our general command the minion , for safeguard of her mast to be bring under the Jesus of Lubeck lee : he will m. Francis drake to come in with the Judith , and to lay the minion aboard , to take in man and other thing needful , and to go out , and so he do . 
 at night when the wind come off the shore , we set sail , and go out in despite of the Spaniard and their shot , where we anchor , with two anchor under the island , the wind be northerly , which be wonderful dangerous , and we fear every hour to be drive with the lee shore . in the end when the wind come large , we weigh anchor , and set sail , seek the river of Panuco for water , whereof we have very little , and victual be so scarce , that we be drive to eat hide , cat , rat , parrot , monkey , and dog : wherefore our general be force to divide his company into two part , for there be a mutiny among they for want of victual : and some say that they have rather be on the shore to shift for themselves among the enemy , than to starve on shipboard . he ask they who will go on shore , and who will tarry on shipboard , those that will go on shore , he will to go on foremast , and those that will tarry , on baft mast : fourscore and sixteen of we be willing to depart . our general give unto every one of we six yard of Rouen cloth , and money to they that demand it . when we be land , he come unto we , where friendly embrace every one of 
 454 
 we , he be great grieve that he be force to leave we behind he , he counsel we to serve God , and to love one another , and thus courteous he give we a sorowfol farewell , and promise if God send he safe home , he will do what he can , that so many of we as live shall by some mean be bring into England , and so he do . 
 since my return into England i have hear that many mislike that he leave we so behind he , and bring away negro : but the reason be this , for they he may have have victual , or any other thing needful , if by foul weather he have be drive upon the island , which for gold nor silver he can not have have . 
 and thus our general depart to his ship , and we remain on land , where for our safety , fear the wild Indians that be about we , we keep watch all night , and at sun rise we march on our way , three and three in a rank , until that we come into a field under a grove , where the Indians come upon we , ask we what people we be , and how we come there . two of our company , namely Anthony Goddard and John cornish , for that they can speak the spanish tongue , go to they , and say we be Englishman , that never come in that country before , and that we have fight with the Spaniard , and for that we lack victual , our general set we on shore : they ask we whither we intend to go , we say to Panuco . the captain of the indian will we to give unto they some of our clothes and shirt , which we do : then he bid we give they all , but we will not so do , whereupon John cornish be then slay with a arrow , which a indian boy that stand by the captain shoot at he , wherefore he strike the boy on the neck with his bow , that he lie for dead , and will we to follow he , who bring we into a great field , where we find fresh water : he bid we sit down about the pond and drink , and he with his company will go in the mean space to kill five or six deer , and bring they 455 
 John cornish slay . 
 James collier . 
 8. Englishmen slay . 
 Anotherriver . 
 seven day travel to Panuco . 
 we . we tarry there till three of the clock , but they come not : there one of our company who name be John Cooke , with four other depart from we into a grove to seek relief , where present they be take by the Indians , and strip as naked as ever they be bear , and so return to we . 
 then we divide our self into two part , half to Anthony Goddard , and the rest to James collier , and thus several we seek for Panuco . Anthony Goddard with his company , bid we farewell , they pass a river , where the Indians rob many of they of their clothes , and so pass on their way , come to a stony hill , where they stay . James collier with his company that day pass the same river , and be also rob , and one of they slay by chance : we come that night unto the hill , where Anthony Goddard and his company rest , there we remain till morning , and then we march altogether from thence , enter between two grove , where the Indians rob we of all our clothes , and leave we naked , they hurt many , and kill eight of we . three day after we come to another river , there the indian show we the way to Panuco , and so leave we : we pass the river into the wilderness , where we make wreath of green grass , which we wound about our body , to keep we from the sun , and gnat of that country . we travel there seven day , and seven night , before we come to Panuco , feed on nothing but root , and guiavo , a fruit like figs. at our come to the river of Panuco two spanish horseman come over unto we in a canowe : they ask we how long we have be in the wilderness , and where our general be , for they know we to be of the company that have fight with their countryman : we tell they seven day and seven night , and for lack of victual our general set we on shore , and he be go away with his ship . they return to their governor , who send they with five canow to bring we all over , which do , they set we in array , where a hundred horseman with their lance , 456 
 come forcible upon we , but do not hurt we , they carry we prisoner to Panuco , where we remain one night . in the river of Panuco there be a fish like a calf , the Spaniard call it a Mallatin , he have a stone in his head , which the Indians use for the disease of the colic , in the night he come on land , and eat grass . i have eat of it , and it eat not much unlike to bacon . from thence we be send to Mexico , which be 90 league from Panuco . in our way thither , 20 league from the sea side , i do see white crab run up and down the sand , i have eat of they , and they be very good meat . there grow a fruit which the Spaniard call avocotte , it be proportion like a egg , and as black as a coal , have a stone in it , and it be a excellent good fruit . there also grow a strange tree which they 
 call magueis , it serve they to many use , below by a manifold use the root they make a hole , whereat they do take out of tfMagueis . it twice every day a certain kind of liquour , which they see in a great kettle , till the three part be consume , and that it wax thick , it be as sweet as any honey , and they do eat it . within 20. day after that they have take all the liquour from it , it wither , and they cut it down , and use it as we use our hemp here in England , which do , they convert it to many use : of some part they make mantle , rope , and thread : of the end they make needle to sow their saddle , pannei , and other furniture for their horse : of the rest they make tile to cover their house , and they put it to many other purpose . 
 and thus we come to Mexico , which be seven or eight mile about , seat in a great fen , environ with 4 hill , it have but two way of entrance , and it be full of creek , in the which in their canow they pass from place to place , and to the island there within . in the Indies ordinary three time a year be wonderful earthquake , which put the people in great fear and danger : during the time of two year that i be in Mexico , i see they six time : when they come they throw down tree , 
 457 
 house , and church . there be a city 25. league from Mexico , call Tlaxcalla , which be inhabit with a hundred thousand Indians , they go in white shirt , linen breech , and long mantle , and the woman wear about they a garment much like unto a flannel petticoat . the king palace be the first place we be bring unto in Mexico , where without we be will to sit down . much people , man , woman , and child come wonder about we , many lament our misery , and some of their clergy ask we if we be Christians , we say , we praise God , we be as good Christians as they : they ask how they may know that , we say , by our confession . from thence we be carry in a Canow to a tanner house , which stand a little from the city : the next morning two friar and two priest come thither to we , and will we to bless our self , and say our prayer in the latin tongue , that they may understand we , many of our company do so , whereupon they return to the viceroy , and tell he that we be good Christians , and that they like we well , and then they bring we much relief , with clothes , our sick man be send to their hospital , where many be cure , and many die . from the tanner house we be lead to a gentleman place , where upon pain of death we be charge to abide , and not to come into the city , thither we have all thing necessary bring we : on Sunday and holy day much people come , and bring we great relief . 
 the viceroy practise to hang we , and cause a pair of new gallows to be set up , to have execute we , whereunto the nobleman of that country will not consent , but pray he to stay until the ship of advice bring news from the king of Spain , what shall be do with we , for they say they can not find any thing by we , whereby they may lawful put we to death . 
 the viceroy then command we to be send to a island there by , and he send for the bishop of Mexico , 4S8 
 who send four priest to the island , to examine and confess we , who say , that the viceroy will burn we , when we be examine and confess accord to the law of the country . they return to the bishop , and tell he that we be very good Christians . the bishop certify the viceroy of our examination and confession , and say that we be good Christians , therefore he will not meddle with we . then the viceroy send for our master , R. Barret , who he keep prisoner in his palace , until the fleet be depart for Spain . the rest of we he send to a town seven league from Mexico call Tescuco , to card wool among the indian slave , which drudgery we disdain , and conclude to beat our master , and so we do : wherefore they send to the viceroy , desire he for god sake and our lady , to send for we , for they will not keep we any long , they say that we be devil and no man . 
 the viceroy send for we , and imprison we in a house in Mexico , from thence he send Anthony Goddard , and some other of our company with he into Spain , with Lu. ? on , the general that take we : the rest of we stay in Mexico two year after , and then be send prisoner into Spain , with don Juan de Velasco de Varre , admiral and general of the spanish fleet , who carry with he in his ship , to be present to the king of Spain , the anatomy of a giant , which be send from China to Mexico , to the viceroy don Martin Henriquez , to be send to the king of Spain for a great wonder . it do appear by the anatomy , that he be of a monstrous size , the skull of his head be near as big as half a bushel , his neck-bone , shoulder-plate , arme-bone , and all other lineament of his other part , be huge and monstrous to behold , the shank of his leg from the ankle to the knee be as long as from any man ankle up to his waste , and of bigness accord . 
 at this time , and in this ship , be also send to be present to the king of Spain , two chest full of earth 459 
 1570. 
 Havana . 
 with ginger grow in they , which be also send from China , to be send to the king of Spain . the ginger run in the ground like to liccoras , the blade grow out of it in length and proportion like unto the blade of wild garlic , which they cut every fifteen day , they use to water they twice a day , as we do our herb here in England , they put the blade in their pottage , and use they in their other meat , who excellent savour and taste be very delightful , and procure a good appetite . 
 when we be ship in the port of saint John de ullua , the general call our master Robert Barret and we with he into his cabin , and ask we if we will fight against Englishmen if we meet they at the sea , we say that we will not fight against our crown , but if we meet with any other , we will do what we be able . he say if we have say otherwise he will not have believe we , and for that we shall be the better use , and have allowance as other man have : and he give a charge to every one of we , accord unto our knowledge , Robert Barret be place with the pilot , i be put in the gunner room , William cause with the boatswain , John bear with the quartermaster , Edward rider , and Geffrey Giles , with the ordinary mariner , Richard the master boy attend on he and the pilot : short after we depart from the port of saint John de ullua with all the fleet of Spain , for the port call Havana : we be 26. day sail thither . there we come in , anchor , take in fresh water , and stay 16. day for the fleet of number de dios , which be the fleet that bring the treasure from Peru. 
 the general of that fleet be call Diego flores de Valdes . after his come , when he have water his ship , both the fleet join in one , and don Juan de Velasco de Varre be the first fifteen day general of both the fleet , who turn through the channel of Bahama , his pilot have like to have cast away all the fleet upon the cape call cannaveral , which be prevent by i John Hortop , and our master Robert Barret : for i 460 
 be in the second watch escry land , and call to Robert Barret , bid he look over board , for i see land under the lee-bow of the ship : he call to the boatswain , and bid he let fly the fore sail sheet , and lie the helm upon the lee , and cast the ship about . when we be cast about , we be but in seven fathom water : we shoot off a piece , give advice to the fleet to cast about , and so they do . for this we be belove o the general , and all the fleet . the general be in a great rage , and swear by the king , that he will hang his pilot : for he say , that twice before he have almost cast away the admiral . when it be day , he command a piece to be shoot off , to call to council : the other admiral in his ship come up to he , and ask what the matter be , he say , that his pilot have cast away his ship and all the fleet , have it not be for two of the Englishman , and therefore he will hang he . the other admiral with many fair word persuade he to the contrary . 
 when we come in the height of Bermuda , we this - a sea-monster cover a monster in the sea , who show himself three ™ ttesliafe time unto we from the middle upward , in which part °^a man ' he be proportion like a man , of the complexion of a Mulato , or tawny indian . the general do command one of his clerk to put it in writing , and he certify the king and his noble thereof . present after this , for the space of sixteen day we have wonderful foul weather , and then God send we a fair wind , until such time as we discover the hand call faial . 
 on s. James day we make racket , wheel , and other firework , to make pastime that night , as it be the order of the Spaniard . when we come near the land , our master R. Barret confer with we , to take the pinnace one night , when we come on the hand call Ter ? era , to free our self from the danger and bondage that we be go into , whereunto we agree : none have any pinnace astern then but our ship , which give great courage to our enterprise : we prepare a bag of bread , and a Botijo of water , which will have serve we nine day , and 461 
 provide our self to go : our master borrow a small compass of the master gunner of the ship , who lend it he , but suspect his intent , and close make the general privy to it , who for a time dissemble the matter . in the end see our pretense , he call R. Barret , command his head to be put in the stock , and a great pair of iron bolt on his leg , and the rest of we to be set in the stock by the leg . than he will a piece to be shoot off , and he send the pinnace for the other admiral , and all the captain , master and pilot of both fleet to come aboard of he . he command the mainyard to be strike down , and to put 2. pilley , on every yard-arme one ; the hangman be call , and we be will to confess our self , for he swear by the king that he will hang we . 
 when the other admiral , and the rest be come aboard , he call they into his counsel-chamber , and tell they that he will hang the master of the Englishman , and all his company . the admiral , who name be Diego Flores de Valdes , ask he wherefore : he say , that we have determine to rise in the night with the pinnace , and with a ball of firework to set the ship on fire , and go our way : therefore , say he , i will have you the captain , master , and pilot , to set your hand unto that , for i swear by the king that i will hang they , Diego flores de Valdes answer , i nor the captain , master , and pilot will not set our hand to that , for he say , if he have be prisoner as we be , he will have do the like himself . he counsel he to keep we fast in prison , till he come into Spain , and then send we to the contratation house in Sivil , where , if we have deserve death the law will pass on we , for he will not have it say that in such a fleet as that be , six man and a boy shall take the pinnace , and go away , and so he return to his ship again . 
 when he be go , the general come to the main mast to we , and swear by the king , that we shall not come out of the stock till we come into Spain : within 462 
 16 day after we come over the bar of saint Lucar , and come up to the hurcado , than he put we into a pinnace in the stock , and send we prisoner to the contratation house in Seville . from thence after one year we break prison , on saint Stevens day at night , 7. of our company escape , Robert Barret , i job Hortop , John Emerie , Humphrey Roberts , and John Gilbert be take , and bring back to the contratation house , where we remain in the stock till twelve tide be pass . than our keeper put up a petition to the judge of the contratation house , that we may be send to the great prison house in Seville , for that we break prison , whereupon we be present lead thither , where we remain one month , and then from thence , to the castle of the inquisition house in Triana , where we continue one year : which expire , they bring we out in procession , every one of we have a candle in his hand , and the coat with saint Andrew cross on our back : they bring we up on a high scaffold , that be set up in the place of saint Francis , which be in the chief street of Seville : there they set we down upon bench , every one in his degree , and against we on another scaffold sit all the judge , and the clergy on their bench : the people wonder , and gaze on we , some pity our case , other say , burn those heretic . when we have sit there two hour , we have a sermon make to we : after which one call Bresinia , secretary to the inquisition , go up into the pulpit with the process , and call Robert Barret and John Gilbert , who two familiar of Robert Barret the inquisition bring from the scaffold before the judge , where the secretary read the sentence , which ' 
 be that they shall be burn , and so they return to the scaffold , and be burn . 
 then i job Hortop , and John bone be call , and Job Hortop bring to the place , as before , where we hear our hls cmdm-sentence , which be , that we shall go to the game , and there row at the oar end ten year , and then to be bring back to the inquisition house , to have the coat with saint Andrew cross put on our back , and 
 463 
 from thence to go to the everlasting prison remediless , and so we be return from the scaffold from whence we come . Thomas mark , and Thomas Ellis be call , and have sentence to serve in the galley eight year , and Humphrey Roberts , and John Emery to serve five year , and so be return to the bench on the scaffold , where we sit till four of clock in the afternoon . than we be lead again to the inquisition house , from whence we be bring . the next day in the morning Bresinia the treasurer come thither to we , and deliver to every one of we his sentence in write . i with the rest be send to the galley , where we be chain four and four together : every man daily allowance be 26. ounce of course black biscuit and water , our clothing for the whole year two shirt , two pair of breech of course canvas , a red coat of course cloth , soon on , and soon off , and a gown of hair with a friar hood : our lodging be on the bare board , and bank of the galley , our head and beard be shave every month , hunger , thirst , cold , and stripe we lack none , till our several time expire . and after the time of 12. year , for i serve two year above my sentence , i be send back to the inquisition house in Seville , and there have put on the coat with saint Andrew cross , i be send to the everlasting prison remediless , where i wear the coat 4. year , and then upon great suit , i have it take off for 50 ducat , which Hernando the Soria treasurer of the king mint lend i , who i serve for it as a drudge 7. year , and until the month 1590. of October last , 1590 , and then i come from Seville to 
 s. Lucar , where i make mean to come away in a flyboat , that be lade with wine and salt , which be Fleming good , the king of Spain subject , dwell in Sivil , marry to spanish woman , and swear to their king . in this month of October last , depart from saint Lucar , at sea , off the southermost cape , we meet a english ship , call the Galeon Dudley , who take the Fleming , and i out of he , and bring i to ports-464 
 1590. mouth , where they set i on land , the 2. day of December last pass , 1590. from thence i be send by 1590. 
 m. muns the lieutenant of Portsmouth , with letter to the R. honourable the earl of Sussex , who command his secretary to take my name and examination , how long i have be out of England , and with who i go , which he do . and on Christmas even i take my leave of his honour , and come to redriffe . 
 the computation of my imprisonment . 
 i suffer imprisonment in Mexico two year . 
 in the contratation house in Seville one year . 
 in the inquisition house in Triana one year . i be in the galley twelve year . 
 in the everlasting prison remediless , with the coat with 
 s. Andrews cross on my back 4. year . 
 and at liberty i serve as a drudge Hernando de Soria 3. year , which be the full compliment of 23. year . 
 since my departure from England , until this time of my return , i be five time in great danger of death , beside the many peril i be in , in the galley . 
 first in the port of saint John de ullua , where be on shore , with many other of our company , which be all slay save i , and two other that by swim get aboard the Jesus of Lubek . 
 second , when we be rob by the wild Indians . 
 third , after we come to Mexico , the viceroy will have hang we . 
 four , because he can not have his mind to hang we , he will have burn we . 
 five , the general that bring we into Spain , will have hang we at sea . 
 thus have true set down unto you my travel , misery and danger , endure the space of 23. year , i end . 
 . 