diverse voyage make by Englishman to the famous city of Mexico , and to all or most part of the other principali province , city , town and place throughout the great and large kingdom of new Spain , even as far as Nicaragua and Panama , and thence to Peru : together with a description of the Spaniard form of government there : and sundry pleasant relation of the manner and custom of the natural inhabitant , and of the manifold rich commodity and strange rarity find in those part of the continent : and other matter most worthy the observation . 
 the voyage of Robert Tomson merchant , into nova Hispania in the year 1555. with diverse observation concern the state of the country : and certain accident touch himself . 
 Obert Tomson bear in the town of Andover in Hampshire begin his travail out of England in An. 1553. in the month of march : who depart out of the city of Bristol in a good ship call the bark young , in company of other merchant of the say city , within 
 8. day after arrive at Lisbon in Portugal , where the say Robert Tomson remain 15. day , at the end of which he ship himself for Spain in the say ship , and within 4. day arrive in the bay of Cadiz in Andalusia , which be under the kingdom of Spain , and from thence go up to the city of Sivil by land , which be 20. league , and there he repair to one John field house a english merchant , who have dwell in the say city of Sivil 18. or 20. year marry with wife and 338 
 child : in who house the say Tomson remain by the space of one whole year or thereabouts , for two cause : the one to learn the castillian tongue , the other to see the order of the country , and the custom of the people . at the end of which time have see the fleet of ship come out of the Indies to that city , with such great quantity of gold and silver , pearl , precious stone , sugar , hide , ginger , and diverse other rich commodity , he do determine with himself to seek mean and opportunity to pass over to see that rich country from whence such great quantity of rich commodity come . and it fall out that within short time after , the say John field ( where the say Tomson be lodge ) do determine to pass over into the west Indies , himself , with his wife , child , and family , and at the request of the say Tomson , he purchase a licence of the king to pass into the Indies , for himself , his wife and child , and among they also for the say Tomson to pass with they : so that present they make preparation of victuali and other necessary provision for the voyage . but the ship which be prepare to perform the voyage be all ready to depart , upon certain consideration by the king commandment be stay and arrest till further shall be know of the king pleasure . whereupon the say John field , with Robert Tomson depart out of Sivil and come down to saint Lucar 15. league off , and see the stay make upon the ship of the say fleet , and be not assure when they will depart , determine to ship themselves for the isle of the canary , which be 250. league from saint Lucar , and there to stay till the say fleet shall come thither : for that be continual their port to make stay at 6. or 8. day , to take in fresh water , bread , flesh , and other necessary . 
 so that in the month of February in An. 1555. then say Robert Tomson with the say John field and his company , ship themselves out of the town of saint Lucar in a carvel of the ci tie of Cadiz , and within 6. 
 339 
 day they arrive at the port of the grand Canaria , where at our come the ship that ride in the say port begin to cry out of all measure with loud voice , in so much that the castle which stand fast by begin to shoot at we , and shoot 6. or 7. shot at we , and strike down our main mast , before we can hoist out our boat to go on land , to know what the cause of the shoot be , see that we be spanish ship , and be come into his country . so that be on land , and complain of the wrong and damage do unto we ; they answer , that they have think we have be French rover , that have come into the say port to do some harm to the ship that be there . for that 8. day pass there go out of the say port a carveil much like unto we , laden with sugar and other merchandise for Spain and on the other side of the point of the say hand , meet with a Frenchman of war , who take the say carvell , and unlade out of she into the say french ship both man and good . And be demand of the say Spaniards what other ship remain in the port whence they come , they answer that there remain diverse other ship , and one lade with sugar ( as they be ) and ready to depart for Spain : upon the which news the Frenchman put 30. tall man of their ship well appoint into the say carvel which they have take , and send she back again to the say port from whence she have depart the day before . and somewhat late towards the evening come into the port , not show past 3. or 4. man , and so come to a anchor hard by the other ship that be in the say port , and be see by the castle and by the say ship , they make no reckon of she , because they know she , and think that she have find contrary wind at the sea , or have forget something behind they , they have return back again for the same , and so make no account of she , but let she alone ride quiet among the other ship in the say port : so that about midnight the say carvel with the Frenchman in she go aboard the other ship that lie 
 340 
 hard by lade with sugar , and drive the Spaniard that be in she under hatch , and present let slip her cable and anchor , and set sail and carry she clean away , and after this sort deceive they : and they think or fear that we be the like , do shoot at we as they do . This be pass , the next day after our arrival in the say port , we do unbark our self and go on land up to the city or head town of the great Canaria , where we remain 18. or 20. day : and there find certain Englishman merchant servant of one Anthony ^ngushfactors Hickman and Edward Castelin , merchant of the city the grand or . London that lie there in traffic , or who we receive great courtesy and much good cheer . after the which 20. day be pass , in the which we have see the country , the people , and the disposition thereof , we depart from thence , and pass to the next he of the canary 18. league off , call TenerifFe , and be come on land , go up to the city call la Laguna , where we remain 7. month , attend the come of the whole fleet , which in the end come , and there have take that which they have need of , we ship our self in a ship of Cadiz , be one of 
 the say fleet , which be belong to a Englishman John sweat marry in the city of Cadiz in Spain , who name be 
 John sweat , and there come in the say ship for Cadiz , send captain also a Englishman marry in Cadiz , and son a ship of he in law to the say John sweat , who name be own int0 Leonard Chilton : there come also in the say ship another Englishman which have be a merchant of dust of his the city of Exeter , one of 50. year or thereabouts , who son in law name be Ralph Sarre . so that we depart from Leonard chil-the say hand in the month of October the fore - rre^^ say year , 8. ship in our company , and so direct ’ our course towards the bay of Mexico , and by the way towards the hand of S. Domingo , otherwise call Hispaniola . so that within 32. day after we depart from the isle of canary we arrive with our ship at the port of saint Domingo , and go in over the 
 341 
 many of our man die of these noorme at the take of Puerto rico . 
 bar where our ship knock her keel at her entry : and there our ship rid before the town , where we go on land , 8c refresh our self 16. day , where we find no bread make of wheat , but biscuit bring out of Spain , and out of the bay of Mexico : for the country it self do yield no kind of bread to make grain withal . but the bread they make there , be certain cake make of root call Cassavi , which be something substantiali , but it have but a unsavoury taste in the eat thereof . flesh of beef and mutton they have great store : for there be man that have 10000 head of cattle , of ox , bull and cow , which they do keep only for the hide : for the quantity of flesh be so great , that they be not able to spend the hundred part . hog flesh be there good store , very sweet and savoury , and so wholesome , that they give it to sick folk to eat in stead of hen and capon , although they have good store of poultry of that sort , as also of guinycock 8c Guinyhens . at the time of our be there , the city of saint Domingo be not off above 500 household of Spaniards , but of the indian dwelling in the suburb there be more . the country be most part of the year very hot , 8c very full of a kind of fly or gnat with long bill , which do prick 8c molest the people very much in the night when they be asleep , in prick their face and hand , and other part of their body that lie uncover , 8c make they to swell wonderful . also there be another kind of small worm which creep into the sole of man foot 8c especial of the black moor and child which use to go barefoot , 8c make their foot to grow as big as a man head , 8c do so ache that it will make one run mad . they have no remedy for the same , but to open the flesh sometime 3. or 4. inch 8c so dig they out . the country yield great store of sugar , hide of ox , bull and cow , ginger , Cana fistula 8c Salsa perillia : mine of silver 8c gold there be none , but in some river there be 
 342 
 find some small quantity of gold . the principal coin that they do traffic withal in that place , be black money make of copper and brass : and this they say they do use not for that they lack money of gold and silver to trade withal out of the other part of India , but because if they shall have good money , the merchant that deal with they in trade , will carry away their gold and silver , and let the country commodity lie still . and thus much for saint Domingo . so we be come from the isle of canary to saint Domingo , and there stay until the month of December , which be 3. month . about the begin of January we depart thence towards the bay of Mexico and new Spain , towards which we set our course , and so sail 24. day till we come within 15. league of saint John de ullua , which be the port of Mexico of our right discharge : and be so near our say port , there rise a storm of northerly wind , which come off from terra Florida , which cause we to cast about into the sea again , for fear lest that night we shall be cast upon the shore before day do break , and so put our self in danger of cast away : the wind and sea grow so foul and strong , that within two hour after the storm begin , eight ship that be together be so disperse , that we can not see one another . one of the ship of our company be of the burden of 500 tun call the hulk of carrion , will not cast about to sea as we do , but go that night with the land , think in the morning to purchase the port of saint John de ullua , but miss the port go with the shore and be cast away . there be drown of that ship 75. person , man , woman and child , and 64. be save that can swim , and have mean to save themselves : among those that perish in that ship , be a gentleman who have be present the year before in saint Domingo , his wife and 4. daughter with the rest of his servant and household . we with the other 7. ship cast about into the sea , the storm 
 343 
 A.D. 
 1556. 
 during 10. day with great might , boisterous wind , fog and rain : our ship be old and weak be so toss , that she open at the stern a fathom under water , and the best remedy we have be to stop it with bed and pilobier , and for fear of sink we throw and lighten into the sea all the good we have or can come by : but that will not serve . than we cut our main mast and throw all our ordinance into the sea save one piece , which early in a morning when we think we shall have sink , we shoot off , and as please God there be one of the ship of our company near unto we , which we see not by mean of the great fog , which hear the sound of the piece , and understand some of the company to be in great extremity , begin to make towards we , and when they come within hear of we , we desire they for the love of God to help to save we , for that we be all like to perish . they will we to hoist our foresail as much as we can and make towards they , for they will do their best to save we , and so we do : and we have no soon hoist our foresail , but there come a gale of wind and a piece of a sea , strike in the foresail , and carry sail and mast all overboard , so that than we think there be no hope of life . and then we begin to embrace one another , every man his friend , every wife her husband , and the child their father and mother , commit our soul to almighty God , think never to escape alive : yet it please God in the time of most need when all hope be pass , to aid we with his help hand , and cause the wind a little to cease , so that within two hour after , the other ship be able to come aboard we , and take into she with her boat man , woman and child , naked without hose or shoe upon many of our foot . i do remember that the last person that come out of the ship into the boat , be a woman black moor , who leap out of the ship into the boat with a young suck child in her arm , leap too short and fall into the sea , and be a good while under 
 344 
 the water before the boat can come to rescue she , and with the spread of her clothes rise above water again , and be catch by the coat and pull into the boat have still her child under her arm , both of they half drown , and yet her natural love towards her child will not let she let the child go . and when she come aboard the boat she hold her child so fast under her arm still , that two man be scant able to get it out . so we depart out of our ship and leave it in the sea : it be worth four hundred thousand ducat , ship and good when we leave it . and within three day after we arrive at our port of saint John de ullua in new Spain . i do remember that in the great and boisterous storm of this foul weather , in the night , there come upon the top of our main yard and main mast , a certain little light , much like unto the light of a little candle , which the Spaniard call the 
 cuerpo santo , and say it be S. Elmo , who they cuerpo Santo . take to be the advocate of sailor . at the which sight the Spaniard fall down upon their knee and worship it , pray God and S. Elmo to cease the torment , and save they from the peril that they be in , with promise he that at their come on land , they will repair unto his chapel , and there cause mass to be say , and other ceremony to be do . the friar cast relic into the sea , to cause the sea to be still , and likewise say gospel , with other cross and ceremony upon the sea to make the storm to cease : which ( as they say ) do much good to weaken the fury of the storm . but i can not perceive it , nor give no credit to it , till it please God to send we the remedy and deliver we from the rage of the same , his name be praise therefore . this light continue aboard our ship about three hour , fly from mast to mast , and from top to top : and sometime it will be in two or three place at once . i inform my self of learned man afterward what that light shall be , and they say , that it be but a congelation of the wind and vapour of the sea congeal with the ex - 
 345 
 tremitie of the weather , which fly in the wind , many time do chance to hit on the mast and shrowd of the ship that be at sea in foul weather . and in truth i do take it to be so : for that i have see the like in other ship at sea , and in sundry ship at once . by this man may see how the papist be give to believe and worship such vain thing and toy , as God , to who all honour do appertain , and in their need and necessity do let to call upon the live God , who be the giver of all good thing . 
 the 16. of April in anno 1556. we arrive at the port of saint John de ullua in new Spain , very naked and distress of apparel , and all other thing , by mean of the loss of our foresay ship and good , and from 
 he arrival at thence we go to the new town call vera Cruz , five 
 yera Cruz , league from the say port of saint John de ullua , march 
 still by the sea side , where we find lie upon the 
 sand great quantity of mighty great tree with root and all , some of they off four , five , and six cart load by our estimation , which , as the people tell we , be in the great stormy weather , which we endure at sea , Florida 300. root out of the ground in Terra Florida , which be league from three hundred league over by sea , and bring thither . ^ullua^ $° we carne to the say town of Vera cruz , where we remain a month : and there the say John field chance to meet with a old friend of his acquaintance in Spain , call Gongalo Ruiz de Cordova , a very rich man of the say town of Vera cruz : who hear of his come thither with his wife and family , and of his misfortune by sea , come unto he and receive he and all his household into his house , and keep we there a whole month , make we very good cheer , and give we good entertainment , and also give we that be in all eight person of the say John field house , double apparel new out of the shop of very good cloth , coat , cloak , hose , shirt , smock , gown for the woman , hose , shoe , and all other necessary apparel , and for our way up to the city of Mexico , horse , moile , 346 
 and man , and money in our purse for the expense by the way , which by our account may amount unto the sum of 400. crown . and after we be enter two day journey into the country , i the say Robert Tomson fall so sick of a ague , that the next day i be not able to sit on my horse , but be fain to be carry upon Indians back , from thence to Mexico . and when we come within half a day journey of the city of Mexico , the say John field also fall sick , and within three day after we arrive at the say city , he die : and present sicken one of his child , and two more of his household people , and within eight day die . so that within ten day after we arrive at the city of Mexico , of eight person that be of Mexico . we of the say company , there remain but four alive , and i the say Tomson be at the point of death of the sickness that i get upon the way , which continue with i the space of six month . at the end of which time it please almighty God to restore i my health again , although weak and great disable . And be some thing strong , i procure to seek mean to live , and to seek a way how to profit my self in the country , see it have please God to send we thither in safety . then by friendship of one Thomas Blake a Scottishman bear , who have dwell and have be marry in the say city above twenty year before i come to the say city , i be prefer to the service of a gentleman a Spaniard dwell there , a man of great wealth , and one of the first conqueror of the say ci tie , who name be Gongalo Cerezo , with who i dwell twelve month and a half . at the end of which i be malicious accuse by the holy house for matter of religion , and so apprehend and carry to prison , where i lie close prisoner seven month , without speak to any creature , but to the jailer that keep the say prison , when he bring i my meat and drink . in the mean time be bring into the say prison one Augustin Boacio a italian of Genoua also for matter 
 347 
 of religion , who be take at Sacatecas 80. league to the northwest of the city of Mexico : at the end of the say seven month , we be both carry to the high church of Mexico , to do open penance upon a high scaffold , make before the high altar , upon a Sunday , in the presence of a very great number of people , who be at the least five or six thousand . for there be that come one hundred mile off , to see the say Auto ( as they call it ) for that there be never none before , that have do the like in the say country , nor can not tell what lutheran be , nor what it mean : for they never hear of any such thing before . we be bring into the church , every one with a saint Benito upon his back , which be half a yard of yellow cloth , with a hole to put in a man head in the midst , and cast over a man head : both flap hang one before , and another behind , and in the midst of every flap , a saint Andrew cross , make of red cloth , sow on upon the same , and that be call saint Benito . the common people before they see the penitent come into the church , be give to understand that we be heretic , infidel , and people that do despise God , and his work , and that we have be more like devil than man , and think we have have the favour of some monster , or heathen people . and when they see we come into the church in our player coat , the woman and child begin to cry out , and make such a noise , that it be strange to see and hear , say , that they never see goodly man in all their life , and that it be not possible that there can be in we so much evil as be report of we , and that we be more like angel among man , than such person of such evil religion as by the priest and friar we be report to be , and that it be great pity that we shall be so use for so small a offence . so that be bring into the say high church , and set upon the scaffold which be make before the high altar , in the presence of all the people , until high mass be do , and the sermon 
 348 
 make by a friar , concern our matter , they do put we in all the disgrace they can , to cause the people not to take so much compassion upon we , for that we be heretic , and people that be seduce of the devil , and have forsake the faith of the catholique church of Rome , with diverse other reproachful word , which be too long to recite in this place . high mass and sermon be do , our offence , as they call they , be recite , every man what he have say and do , and present be the sentence pronounce against we . that be , that the say Augustine Boacio be condemn to wear his saint Benito all the day of his life , and put into perpetuali prison , where he shall fulfil the same , and all his good confiscate and lose . and i the say Tomson to wear the saint Benito for three year , and then to be set at liberty . and for the accomplish of this sentence or condemnation , we must be present send down from Mexico , to vera Cruz , and from thence to saint John de ullua , and there to be ship for Spain , which be 65. league by land , with strait commandment , that upon pain of 1000 ducat , the master every one shall look strait unto we , and carry we to Spain , and deliver we unto the inquisitor of the holy house of Seville , that they shall put we in the place , where we shall fulfil our penance that the archbishop of Mexico have enjoin unto we , by his sentence there give . for performance of the which , we be send down from Mexico , to the sea side , which be 65. league , with fetter upon our foot , and there deliver to the master of the ship , to be carry for Spain , as before be say . and it be so , that the italian , fear that if he have present himself in Spain before the inquisitor , that they will have burn he , to prevent that danger , when we be come homeward , and be arrive at the island of Ter ? era , one of the ysle of the azore , the first night that we come into the say port to a anchor , about midnight he find the mean to get he naked out of the ship into the sea , and swim 349 
 naked a shore , and so present get he to the further side of the island , where he find a little Carvel ready to depart for Portugal , in the which he come to Lisbon , and pass into France , and so into England , where he end his life in the city of London . and i for my part keep still aboard the ship , and come into Spain , and be deliver to the inquisitor of the holy house of Seville , where they keep i in close prison , till i have fulfil the three year of my penance . which time be expire , i be free put out of prison , and set at liberty : and be in the city of Sivil a casher of one Hugh Typton , a english merchant of great do , by the space of one year , it fortune that there come out of the city of Mexico , a Spaniard , call John de la Barrera , that have be long time in the Indies , and have get great sum of gold and silver , and with one only daughter ship himself for to come for Spain , and by the way chance to die , and give all that he have unto his only daughter , who name be marie de la Barrera , and be arrive at the city of Sivil , it be my chance to marry with she . the marriage be worth to i 2500. pound in bar of gold and silver , beside jewel of great price . this i think good to speak of , to show the goodness of God to all they that put their trust in he , that i be bring out of the Indies , in such great misery and infamy to the world , shall be provide at God hand in one moment , of more than in all my life before i can attain unto by my own labour . 
 after we depart from Mexico , our saint benitoe be set up in the high church of the say city , with our name write in the same , accord to their use and custom , which be and will be a monument and a remembrance of we , as long as the romish church do reign in that country . the same have be see since by one John Chilton , and diverse other of our nation , which be leave in that country long since , by sir John Hawkins . and because it shall|be know wherefore it be 
 35° 
 that i be so punish by the clergy hand , as before be mention , i will in brief word declare the same . 
 it be so , that be in Mexico at the table , among many principali people at dinner , they begin to inquire of i be a Englishman , whether it be true , that in England they have overthrow all their church and house of religion , and that all the image of the saint of heaven that be in they be throw down , break , and burn , and in some place high way stone with they , and whether the english nation deny their obedience to the pope of Rome , as they have be certify out of Spain by their friend . to who i make answer , that it be so , that in deed they have in England put down all the religious house of friar and monk that be in England , and the image that be in their church and other place be take away , and use there no more : for that ( as they say ) the make of they , and put of they where they be adore , be clean contrary to the express commandment of almighty God , thou shall not make to thy self any grave image , etc and that for that cause they think it not lawful that they shall stand in the church , which be the house of adoration . one that be at the declare of these word , who be my master Gonsalo cereso , answer and say , if it be against the commandment of God , to have image in the church , that than he have spend a great deal of money in vain , for that two year past he have make in the monastery of Santo Domingo , in the say city of Mexico , a image of our lady of pure silver and gold , with pearl and precious stone , which cost he 7000 and odd peso , and every peso be 4. S. 8.d . of our money : which indeed be true , for that i have see it many time my self where it stand . at the table be another gentleman , who presume to defend the cause more than any other that be there , say , that they know well enough that they be make but of stock and stone , and that to they be no worship give , but that there be a certain veneration due unto they 
 351 
 after they be set up in the church , and that they be set there to a good intent : the one , for that they be book for the simple people , to make they understand the glory of the saint that be in heaven , and a shape of they to put we in remembrance to call upon they , to be our intercessor unto God for we , for that we be such miserable sinner , that we be not worthy to appear before God , and that use devotion to saint in heaven , they may obtain at God hand the soon , the thing that we demand of he . as for example , say he , imagine that a subject have offend his king upon the earth in any kind of respect , be it for the party to go bold to the king in person , and to demand pardon for his offence ? no , say he , the presumption be too great , and possible he may be repulse , and have a great rebuke for his labour . better it be for such a person to seek some private man near the king in his court , and make he acquaint with his matter , and let he be a mediator to his majesty for he , and for the matter he have to do with he , and so may he the better come to his purpose , and obtain the thing which he do demand : even so say he , it be with God and his saint in heaven : for we be wretched sinner : and not worthy to appear nor present our self before the majesty of God , to demand of he the thing that we have need of : therefore thou have need to be devout , and have devotion to the mother of God , and the saint of heaven , to be intercessor to God for thou , and so may thou the better obtain of God the thing that thou do demand . to this i answer , and say , sir , as touch the comparison you make of the intercessor to the king , how necessary they be , i will but ask you this question . set the case that this king you speak of , if he be so merciful , as , when he know that one , or any of his subject have offend he , he send for he to his own town , or to his own house , or palace , and say unto he , come hither , i know that thou have offend 
 352 
 many law , if thou do know thereof , and do repent thou of the same , with full intent to offend no more , i will forgive thy trespass , and remember it no more : say i , if this be do by the king own person , what then have this man need to go seek friendship at any of the king private servant hand , but go to the principal , see that he be ready to forgive thou , than thou be to demand forgiveness at his hand ? Even so be it with our gracious God , who call and cry out unto we throughout all the world , by the mouth of his prophet , apostle , and by his own mouth , say , come unto i all you that labour and be over lade , and i will refresh you : beside 1000 other offer and proffer which he do make unto we in his holy scripture . what then have we need of the saint help that be in heaven , whereas the lord himself do so free offer himself unto we ? at which say , many of the hearer be astonish , and say , that by that reason , i will give to understand , that the inn - vocation of saint be to be disannul , and by the law of God not command . i answer , that they be not my word but the word of God himself : look into the scripture your self , and you shall so find it . the talk be perceive to be prejudicial ! to the romish doctrine , and therefore it be command to be no more entreat of , and all remain unthink upon , have it not be for a villainous Portugal that be in the company , who say , basta ser ingle para saber todo esto y mass : who the next day , without impart any thing to any body , go to the bishop of Mexico , and his provisor , and say , that in a place where he have be the day before , be a Englishman , who have say , that there be no need of saint in the church , nor of any invocation of saint , upon who denomination i be apprehend for the same word here rehearse , and none other thing , and thereupon be use , as before be write . 
 now to speak somewhat of the description of the country , you shall understand , that the port of saint John de Sant Juan de ullua be a very little island low by the water side , the ullua - 
 ix 353 z 
 broad or long part thereof not above a bow shoot over , and stand within two furlong of the firm land . in my time there be but one house , and a little chapel to say mass in , in all the island : the side to the land ward be make by man hand , with freestone and gravel , and be 4. fathom deep down right , wherefore the great ship that come in there do ride so near the shore of the island , that you may come and go aland upon their beak nose . they use to put great chain of iron in at their halser , and a anchor to the landward , and all little enough to more well their ship for fear of the northerly wind , which come off the coast of Florida , that sometime have carry ship , and house , and all away to the shore . the king be wont to have 20. great mighty negro , who do serve for nothing else , but only to repair the say island , where the foul weather do hurt it . the country all thereabouts be very plain ground , and a mile from the sea side a great wilderness , with great quantity of red deer in the same , so that when the mariner of the ship be dispose , they go up into the wilderness , and do kill of the same , and bring they aboard to eat , for their recreation . 
 the way and from this port to the next town , which be call distance from yera quoth 
 be c . league almost by the sea side , till San Juan de ’ ... i 7 r . i , j 
 ullua to vera you come within one league or the place , and than you Cruz , be five turn up towards the land , into a wood , till you come league . to a iide river hard by the say town side , which sometime of the year be dry without water . the town of Vera Cruz in my time , have not pass 300. household , and serve but for the folk of the ship , to buy and bring their good aland , and deliver it to their owner , as also the owner and their factor to receive their good of the master of the ship . this town stand also in a very plain on the one side the river , and the other side be environ with much sand blow from the sea side with the tempest of weather , many time come upon that coast . this town also 
 354 
 • • .. 15581 be subject to great sickness , and in my time many of the mariner and officer of the ship do die with those disease , there accustom , and especial those that be not use to the country , nor know the danger thereof , but will common go in the sun in the heat of the day , and do eat fruit of the country with much disorder , and especial give themselves to woman company at their first come : whereupon they be cast into a burn ague , of the which few escape . 
 half a day journey from Vera Cruz , towards Penta de Rin-Mexico , be a lodging of five or six house , call the cona^°-rinconado , which be a place , where be a great pinnacle make of lime and stone , fast by a river side , where the Indians be wont to do their sacrifice unto their god , and it be plain and low ground betwixt that and vera Cruz , and also subject to sickness : but afterward half a day journey that you do begin to enter into the high land , you shall find as fair , good , and sweet country , as any in the world , and the far you go , the goodly and sweet than country be , till you come to Pueblo de los angel , which may be some 43 league Ruebh de las from vera Cruz , which be in my time a town of 600. Angeles . household , or thereabouts , stand in a goodly soil . between Vera Cruz and that you shall come through many town of the Indians , and village , and many goodly field of meadow ground , river of fresh water , forest , and great wood , very pleasant to behold . from Pueblo de los angel , to Mexico , be 20. league of very fair way and country , as before be declare . Mexico Mexico . be a city in my time , of not above 1500. household of Spaniards inhabit there , but of indian people in the suburb of the say city , dwell above 300000. as it be think , and many more . this city of Mexico be 65. league from the north sea , and 75. league from the south sea , so that it stand in the midst of the main land , betwixt the one sea and the other . it be situate in the midst of a lake of stand water , and environ round about with the same , save in many place , go 
 355 
 this be to be understand of his second come into Spain . 
 out of the city , be many broad way through the say lake or water . this lake and city be environ also with great mountain round about , which be in compass above thirty league , and the say city , and lake of stand water , do stand in a great plain in the midst of it . this lake of stand water do proceed from the shed of the rain , that fall upon the say mountain , and so gather themselves together in this place . 
 all the whole proportion of this city do stand in a very plain ground , and in the midst of the say city be a square place of a good bow shoot over from side to side : and in the midst of the say place be the high church , very fair and well build all through , at that time not half finish , and round about the say place , be many fair house build : on the one side , be the house where Mutezuma the great king of Mexico that be , dwell , and now there lie always the viceroy that the king of Spain send thither every three year . and in my time there be for viceroy a gentleman of Castil , call don Luis de Velasco . and on the other side of the say place , over against the same , be the bishop house , very fair build , and many other house of goodly build . and hard by the same , be also other very fair house , build by the mark de Valle , otherwise call Hernando Cortes , who be he that first conquer the say city and country , who after the say conquest which he make with great labour and travail of his person , and danger of his life , and be grow great in the country , the king of Spain send for he , say that he have some particular matter to impart unto he . and when he come home , he can not be suffer to return back again , as the king before have promise he . with the which , for sorrow that he take , he die ; and this he have for the reward of his good service . 
 the say city of Mexico have the street make very broad , and right , that a man be in the high place , 356 
 at the one end of the street , may see at the least a good mile forward , and in all the one part of the street of the north part of their city , there run a pretty lake of very clear water , that every man may put into his house as much as he will , without the cost of any thing , but of the let in . also there be a great cave or ditch of water , that come through the city , even unto the high place , where come every morning at the break of the day twenty or thirty canoas , or trough of the Indians , which bring in they all manner of provision for the city , which be make , and grow in the country , which be a very good commodity for the inhabitant of that place . and as for victual in the say city , of beef , mutton , and hen , capon , quail , guiny-cock , and such like , all be very good cheap : to say , the whole quarter of a ox , as much as a slave can carry away from the butcher , for five Tomynes , that be , five royal of plate , which be just two shilling and six penny , and a fat sheep at the butcher for three royal , which be 18. penny and no more . bread be as good cheap as in Spain , and all other kind of fruit , as apple , pear , pomegranate , and quince , at a reasonable rate . the city go wonderful forward in build of friary and nunnery , and chapel , and be like in time to come , to be the most populous ci tie in the world , as it may be suppose . the weather be there always very temperate , the day differ but one hour of length all the year long . the field and the wood be always green . the wood full of popinjay , and many other kind of bird , that make such a harmonic of sing , and cry , that any man will rejoice to hear it . in the field be such odoriferous smell of flower and herb , that it give great content to the sense . about the city of Mexico two , three , or four league off , be diverse town of Indians , some of 4000 or 6000. household , which do stand in such a goodly soil , that if Christians have the inhabitation thereof , it will be put to a further benefit . in my time be 
 357 
 dwell and alive in Mexico , many ancient man that Mexico be of the conqueror at the first conquest with conquer Hernando Cortes : for than it be about 36. year ^ ” 1520^ a§oe ’ at sa^ country be conquer . 
 about Mexico there be diverse mine of silver , and also in other place there about , but the principali Mines that be in all new Spain be in Sacatecas , 80. league from Mexico , and the mine of S. Martin , thirty league , both to the northwestward of Mexico , where be great store of gold and silver . also there be a place call the Misteca , fifty league to the northwest , which do yield great store of very good silk , and Cochinilla . wine and oil there be none grow in the country , but what come out of Spain . also there be many goodly fruit in that country , whereof we have none such , as Plantanos , guyave , Sapotes , Tunas , and in the wilderness great store of black cherry , and other whol-cochinilla be some fruit . the Cochinilia be not a worm , or a fly , not a worm as some say ft be > but a berry that grow upon certain beny bush in the wild field , which be gather in time of the year , when it be ripe . also the indigo that do come from thence to die blue , be a certain herb that grow in the wild field , and be gather at one time of the year , and burn , and of the ash thereof , with indigo . other confection put thereunto , the say indigo be make . 
 balm , Salsa perilla , Cana fistula , sugar , ox hide , and many other good and serviceable thing the country do yield , which be yearly bring into Spain , and there sell and distribute to many nation . 
 Robert Tomson . 
 . 