a relation of a memorable fight make the 13. of June 1591. against certain spanish ship and galley in the west Indies , by 3. ship of the honourable sir George Carey knight , then martial of her majesty household , and captain of the he of wight , now lord Hunsdon , lord Chamberlaine , and captain of the honourable band of her majesty pensioner . 
 he 13. of June 1591. being Sunday , at 5. of the clock in the morning we descry 6. sail of the king of Spain his ship . four of they be armada , ( viz. the admiral and viceadmiral of 700. tun apiece , and the other 2. of 600. apiece ) and the other 2. be small ship , each of 
 they about 100 tun . we meet w‘ they off the cape de Corrientes , which stand on the hand of Cuba . the 
 sight of the foresay ship make we joyful , hope that they shall make our voyage . but assoon as they descry we , they make false fire one to another and gather their fleet together , lie all close by a wind to 178 
 the southwards . we therefore at 6. of the clock in the morning ( the wind be at east ) have make our prayer to almighty God , prepare our self for the fight : and ( in hope they have be of the Cartagena fleet ) we bear up with our admiral and viceadmiral , to determine of the combat for the better direction thereof . our parley be end , our admiral , viceadmiral , and the hopewel give their admiral the prow , bring themselves to leeward of he . we in the content bear up with their viceadmiral , and ( range along by his broad side aweather of he ) give he a volley of musket and our great ordinance : then come up with another small ship ahead of the former , we hail she in such sort , that she pay room . thus be in fight with the little ship , we see a great smoke come from our admiral , and the hopewel and Swallow forsake he with all the sail they can make : whereupon bear up with our admiral ( before we can come to he ) we have both the small ship to windward of we , purpose ( if we have not be too hot for they ) to have lay we aboard . thus ( the fight continue between we and they 3. hour ) we be force to stand to the northward , the hopewel and the swallow not come in all this while to aid we , as they may easy have do . our admiral by this time be in fight with their viceadmiral , and another great ship of they , stand off to sea with his topgallant sail , and all the sail he can make : then may the hopewel and the swallow have pay room to second he , but they fail he as they do we , stand off close by a wind to the eastward . all this time we be force to the northward with 2. of their great ship and one of their small . they have a loom gale ( we be altogether becalm ) with both their great ship come up iaire by we , shoot at we , and on the sudden furl their spritsail and mainsail , think that we can not escape they . then fall to prayer , we ship our oar that we may row to shore , and anchor in shallow water where their great ship can not come 
 179 
 nigh we , for other refuge we have none . than i . of their small ship be man from i . of their great , and have a boat to row themselves in , ship her oar likewise and row after we , think w‘ their small shot to have put we from our oar , until you great ship may come up with we : but by you time she be within musket shoot , the lord of his mercy do send we a fair 
 gale of wind at the northwest off the shore . what time ( they be all to leeward of we ) we stand to the east . the small ship be under our lee within falcon shoot , and another great ship lie to the westward , so that we can not way possible escape they upon that board : then ( we think to avoid they by cast about to the westwards ) the other great ship gate under our lee , and the small ship on our weather quarter , purpose to make we pay room with the great ship , by force of her small and great shot . than ( we be lerboord tack , and they sterboord ) we make her spring she looffe , and by a fortunate shot which our gunner make , pierce she betwixt wind and water . hereupon she be force to lay herself upon the carena , and to stand with one of the other ship for aid . afterwards ( commend our self to almighty God in prayer , and give he thanks for the wind which he have send we for our deliverance ) we look forth and descry two sail more to the offen : these we think to have be the Hopewell , and the swallow that have stand in to aid we : but it prove far otherwise , for they be two of the king galley . now have a loom gale of wind , we ship our oar , and row off the shore : and our watch be no soon set , but we espy one galley under our lee hard by we , boge up with we . than ( because it be evening ) one of the great ship discharge six great shot at we , to the end the galley shall know that we be the ship they look for . then the galley come up , and ( hail we of whence our ship be ) a Portugal which we have with we , make they answer , that we be of 
 180 
 the fleet of Tierra firma , and of Sivil : with that they bid we amain english dog , and come upon our quarter starboard : and give we five cast piece out of her prow , they seek to lay we aboard : but we so gall they with our musket , that we put they from our quarter . than they wind their galley , come up into our stern , and with the way that the galley have , do so violent thrust in the board of our captain cabin , that her nose come into it , mind to give we all their prow , and so to sink we . but we be resolute , so ply they with our small shot , that they can have no time to discharge their great ordinance : and when they begin to approach , we heave into they a ball of fire , and by that mean put they off : whereupon they once again fall astern of we , and give we a prow . then have the second time put they off , we go to prayer , and sing the first part of the 25. psalm , praise God for our safe deliverance . This be do , we may see 2. galley and a frigate all three of they bend themselves together to encounter we : hereupon we ( eftsoon commend our estate into the hand of God ) arm our self , and resolve ( for the honour of God , her majesty , and our country ) to fight it out till the last man . then shake a pike of fire in defiance of the enemy , and weave they amain , we bid they come aboard : and a Englishman in the galley make answer , that they will come aboard present . So manage ourselves to our furniture , and every moment expect the assault , we hear they parley to this effect , that they determine to keep we company till the morning , and then to make a end with we : then give we another shot from one of the galley , they fall astern . thus our fight continue with the ship and with the galley , from seven of the clock in the morning till eleven at night . howbeit God ( which never fail they that put their trust in he ) send we a gale of wind about two of the clock in the morning at Eastnortheast , which be for the prevent of their cruelty , and the save of our 181 
 a fight from 7. in the morning till 11. at night . 
 live . also ( the lord be praise for it ) in all this dangerous fight , we have not one man slay , and . but 2. hurt : but our sail and rope be so rend with their shot , that it be wonderful to behold : our main mast also be shoot clean through , whereby we be in exceed great danger . thus our consort forsake we , and leave we in these extremity . the next day be the 14. of June in the morning , we see all our adversary to leeward of we , and they espy we , chase we till 10. of the clock , and then see they can not prevail , give we over . so that day about 5. of the clock in the afternoon , we bear up to the southwest , in hope to find our consort , but we have no sight of they at that time , nor afterward . then stand we in all that night for the cape of S. Anthony , hope there to see our admiral accord to his direction . the 15. day of June early in the morning , we descry the spanish fleet again , be within 5. league of cape S. Anthony . than ( have no sight of our consort ) we stand for the place accord to the direction of our owner sir George Carey , where we do ply for the space of 23. day , and never can see any sail but two frigate , which we give chase unto the 24. of June , and can not fetch they up . thus we give God most humble thanks for our safe deliverance from the cruel enemy , which have be more mighty by the providence of God , than any tongue can express : to who be all praise , honour , and glory , both now and ever , amen . 
 Appendix . 
 the bark call the content have but one minion ; 
 one falcon , one saker , and 2. port-base . she continue fight ( from seven in the morning till sunset ) with 3. armada of 600. and 700. ton apiece , and one small ship of 100 ton , not be above musket shoot from any of they . and before the sun be set , there come up to her two of the king galley . beside , the armada shoot their great ordinance continual at she , not so few 182 
 as 500 time . and the side , hull , and mast of the content be sow thick with musket bullet . Moreover , all their sheat , top and shrowd be almost cut insunder with their great and small shot . there pass from the galy ( each whereof come thrice up to she , and discharge five great piece at a time , out of every their prowess forthright , within three yard of her poop ) through her main sail 19 great shot , through her main topsail four : through her foresail seven : through her fore-top-saile five : and through her main mast one . the upper part of the content be hurt in five place . only 13 man continue this fight , the rest be in hold . 
 a frigate of the Spaniard ( be afterward take ) confess , that there be in the galley above 40. Spaniards slay , and many be hurt in that combat . 
 person that continue the 
 ' Charles cream . Thomas Godfrey . Giles Thornton . John pell . 
 John bourel . Ralph grey . William their . 
 the name of those 13 fight . 
 Nicolas Lisle , captain . m. major , lieutenant . William king , master . John Barwick , mrs. mate . William Clement , gunner . Thomas houldship , boatswain . 
 the name of the rest be 
 John John John John John 
 Pie. 
 smith . 
 white . 
 butcher . 
 brook . 
 these follow . 
 ' John Towpenie . Edmund Giggs . William Bateman . William white . Laurence shelly . 
 . 