a true relation of the voyage undertake by sir Anthony Shirley knight in anno 1596. intend for the he of San Tome , but perform to saint Iago , Dominica , Margarita , along the coast of Tierra firma , to the he of Jamaica , the bay of the Honduras , 30 league up Rio dolce , and homeward by Newfoundland . with the memorable exploit achieve in all this voyage . 
 e depart from Hampton the 23 of April with nine ship and a galley . the bevice admiral be 300 ton , the Galeon vice-admiral be 240 ton . the George rearadmiral be 160 ton . the Archangel be 250 ton . the swan 200 ton , the 
 George Noble be 140 ton , the wolf 70 ton , the mermaid 120 ton , the little John 40 ton the galley and a pinnace . all which ship we sufficient victual and furnish for ten month , with all necessary fit for the voyage . they be also man with soldier and sailor , exceed well appoint with all furniture necessary for the intend purpose of our general to the full number of 900. ratable and orderly distribute into every ship . we arrive at Plymouth the 29 of April , where we find the right honourable earl of Essex ready for the attempt of his Cadiz action , with who our general leave three ship and 500 soldier well victual and furnish . So the 21 of may we depart from Plymouth with the bevice , the Gallion , the George , the George noble , the wolf and the galley and pinnace , determine our voyage for the he of saint Tom6 . but if our whole force have remain with we our general purpose be to have first sack the Madera he , and 266 
 so to have proceed for saint Tome . the 27 of may we arrive upon the coast of Spain , coast all the shore , hope to meet with some of the king ship . from thence we pass in sight of the coast of Barbary , and come to masagant , within shot of the fort , which the fort of our general report to be a excellent fortification , masagant . where the Spaniard be in strong garrison . And bend our course for the canary isle there purpose to water , our galley lose her rudder ; so our general direct the George noble to go for the lie mogador , there to repair the galley want . between which place and the canary isle we take a flyboat of two flyboat 
 hundred ton bind for Brasill , have nothing aboard ta^en‘ her but some small portion of victual for their relief . the captain of this flybote take upon he to be a perfect pilot of S. Tome , and willing consent to stay with we , be a fleming . have water at the canary , by the counsel of this Fleming we shape our course for the isle of cape Verde , he assure we that we shall there meet the fleet of saint Tome , for the year be so far pass , that we know they be all depart from saint Tome . 
 the first of July we fall with the isle Maio , where we see small hope of any fleet to be expect , and therefore depart for cape Verde , the appoint place * for the George noble to meet we : where we arrive the five of July , and there find he . and so instant we proceed for our voyage , because the year be far spend . at this place most unfortunate our general fall exceed sick , and we want water be enforce to go with a place name pescadore in 10 degree of north latitude , where we have many skirmish with the barbarous negro . our general now hopeless of life , and we all dismay and comfortless through that his exceed extremity , have his memory very perfect , he call all his captain , master , and officer unto he , unto who he make a very pithy and brief speech , tend to this purpose : that as we 
 267 
 be christian and all baptise and breed up under one and the true faith , so we shall live together like Christians in the fear and service of God : and as we be the subject of our most excellent sovereign , and have vow obedience unto she : so we shall tend all our course to the advancement of her dignity , and the good of our country , and not to enter into any base or unfit action . and because we come for his love into this action that for his sake we will so love together as if himself be still live with we , and that we will follow ( as our chief commander ) he , unto who under his hand he will give commission to succeed himself : all which with solemn protestation we grant to obey . then for that the year be pass , and find the cost of guinea most tempestuous , he see in reason that the bay of . / Ethiopia will be our utter overthrow , and infect we all to death : whereupon he advise we to be respective of our self , and to divert our purpose from saint Tome , either for Brasil or the west India , yield many reason that it be our best course : but we all with one voice desire to proceed for saint Tome . and so depart from this contagious filthy place , we direct our course for saint Tome , but can by no mean double the shold of Madrabomba , but very dangerous run into shall water , still hope of the best . in fine we be enforce to bear up and take some other course ; for the time waste , our man fall sick , and the coast be contagious always rage and tempestuous . the water fall from the heaven do stink , and do in 6 hour turn into maggot where it fall either among our clothes , or in wad of Ocombe . 
 so by a general consent it be hold to be our best course to go for the west India ; and so much the rather , because we have good pilot for that place , who undertake more than be after perform . so we bend our course for the isle of cape Verde , and arrive at the isle of S. Iago the 30 of August , we present land at Praia , 
 268 
 1596. where we find a small bark in the road lade with wine and meal . 
 after we be depart from this vile coast of Guyny our general to our great comfort begin to recover strength ; so that be now at Praia , he be able to the town of land with we . in our land the people make a show $ 
 of great resistance , but we enter the town without ta^n 0 ‘ hindrance , be a very pretty town , have a small fort in it , with 6 or 8 cast piece . 
 be here on shore , and find nothing leave in the town , diverse of our company be very importunate with our general , that he will go to the city of saint Iago be 6 mile off : through their importunity he yield consent , and so we march towards the city with 280 soldier . as we pass by the negro and herdsman , they will cry unto we guarda s. Iago . that night we lose our way , and lie under a hedge . the next morning the ordinance of saint Iago be shoot off to give we notice where the town be : so we march towards it at the break of the day . the country then be all spread over with people make show of fear only to draw we into the town : but we far march with our colour fly by the drum . the gentleman will come gallop by we and view we very much . but when we come in sight of the town , we can see no way how to get into it , but by one little path down a very steep hill , only man by man to go down . the strength a description and situation of this town be sufficient to have daunt town °f a man of very good courage , for it stand between two ? ' it take 
 steep cliff strong house , and three exceed good drake fort command the whole , the chief and best stand upon the top of the hill right over the town : so that from thence with musket they command every street , the other 2 fort stand by the water side , all three command then ride , and these two every street in the town . upon the front of the town the sea beat , the rest stand between two mighty cliff , not accessible 
 269 
 but by one small path , by which we be enforce to go . our general see himself thus straight , and perceive the drift of the Portugal be to draw he into this trench , and know well that he can not return as we come , by reason of many straight and advantageable place , with a excellent resolution ( like unto himself ) cry out , all courage my heart : assure your self that the device of the Portugal shall serve our turn this day ; for they will suffer we quiet to pass down into their suppose trap , and then will pursue we , than which nothing can happen better . the day be we now show your self as i know you will : and so present we descend into the trench . And be down the enemy pursue with a mighty cry , and all the cliff on both side be beset full of man ; shot , and stone we want none from they on every side in great plenty ; for this natural trench be not half a musket shoot over . those that attempt our rearward by our general policy be so receive that they make a stand , and never more come near we . we have now half a mile to the town , into the which when we come , we be receive with the street full of soldier , who join with we at the push of the pike . but their captain and diverse of they be slay ( fear possess they ) the town of they flee : and our general pursue with such furious * ien speed , do so dismay they that they flee the town , and Sherle^ the three of August we possess both the low fort . 
 be now master of the town , we present by the general direction ( who skill , spirit , and diligence can never have sufficient commendation ) barricade up all the street , and bring our self into a very convenient strength . after we have be six hour in the town the Portugal still come in great multitude to the upper fort , begin to sally down upon we , and to assault we at every barricado : so that in the first assault they slay and wound eighty of our man , to our very great weaken . but they have small cause of triumph , for their loss be thrice more than we : but they still 270 
 .... I596 ’ prosecute their assault , not give we ●ime either to sleep or eat , so that we be in exceed extremity ; for their force do daily increase to the number of three thousand person : but we daily lose of our poor number . while we be thus keep the town , our ship come about unto we , who receive many dangerous shot from the upper castle . our general find himself thus straight , and discreet look into the policy and strength of the enemy , and scarce able to defend any one assault more , send to the fort and to his ship that about ten of the clock in the dark of the night they shall shoot at the upper fort with all possible diligence , and send all the boat ashore , which be accord perform . and we likewise keep a tumult in the town , the enemy suppose that our purpose be to assault the upper fort , ( which God know be most impregnable for we ) retire from their plot purpose for the defence thereof . so we in a soldierlike order with very good safety depart the town , although the Portugal have espy our general policy come very furious upon the back of we , after we have keep it two day and two night . 
 in the road of saint Iago we take a ship with wine and cloth , which do great refresh our man . from hence we sail to a isle call Fuego , be a very Isla deal Fuego . small isle , with a very high hill in the midst of it , which continual burn : this isle be invincible by nature , high cliff round about , yet by diligent search we find a small path where we land our man with exceed much difficulty , and so be master of the isle the eleven of September , where we take in water , but the isle yield we nothing but miserable infection . one night we have a shower of ash which fall so thick into our ship from that burn hill of Fuego , that you may write your name with your finger upon the upper deck . 
 depart from this place the twenty of September , we shape our course for Dominica a isle in the 
 271 
 west India : but before we come thither our man fall general down , so that the hole can not relieve the sick , the disease be so vile that man grow loathsome unto themselves , frantic and desperate rave , among who our good general part be not the least ; for his disease be vehement , the grief of his mind , the lamentation of his man , and the loss of those who he love be to he torment more than durable : all which with patience and humility in prayer he humble himself unto . but have not his mind be invincible and his desire above the ordinary course of man , it have be impossible that life shall now have rest in he : but God ( i hope ) have preserve he to some exceed good purpose . 
 Dominica . arrive at Dominica the seventeenth of October , with two excellent all our man sick and feeble , we find there two hot hot bath . bath , wherein our weak man wash themselves be great comfort : and the Indians of this place use we with great kindness , so that we be all perfect well before we depart from this place . for here we stay Margarita . until the 2 5 of November . from Dominica we sail to Margarita , between the isle and the main , think to meet with the pearl dredger , but we find they not . And come to the point of Araia in the road of Cumana , we see a flemish ship ride ; the merchant and man whereof come aboard we , and bring with they my lord admiral pass . by which mean our general will in no sort meddle with they , yet they be very rich . depart thence by cape Coadera , go for cape de la Vela at the isle buenaire our fliboat be cast away , and some of the man lose , but the most part save . coast all the shore from cape de la Vela , be bind for saint Martha , we take a small frigate lade with guiny corn , the eleven of September : she have in her money to the value of 500 pound , linen cloth and china silk , all which our general bestow upon his company to comfort they after their long sustain misery : out of which 
 272 
 Antonius scherleyns ANGLVS , e-qucs aurat . magni Sophi perfarum ad cxfarem 6s chriftianos principe extero , legate we . 
 sir Anthony Shirley 
 frigate we have 2 good pilot for those coast : for our pilot , that promise many thing before we come thither , be now absent in the wolf , who , we think , do wilful loose we . arrive at saint Martha , two Santa Marta league west from the town in a fair bay , we land the 12 of September , and so march to the town be often time encounter by the way , and in a narrow way at our descent down a hill , they have place two cast piece of brass , which we recover , and so enter the town , the enemy fly before we . while we abide in this town , there come one don Martin de Castilia , a gentleman of good education and a very great traveller , who know the whole state of the west India , Malucos , and philippinas : he have be in China , and make many relation to our general , his purpose be to save the town from burn , wherein he prevail , but ransom i know of none we have : for this gentleman make many great protestation of great poverty to be in that place . 
 so we depart , only take their ordinance , and a prisoner lose there by sir Francis Drake , with some relief of victual . Having stay there all the time of Christmas , we depart thence on newyere day , with term of great content to our general in the Spaniard great submission unto he , for they be now within a league of we with 700 soldier . And be challenge by he to defend their town like man of worth , they do notwithstanding entreat favour with great humility . while we be at saint Martha , the wolf come again unto we : so we shape our course for Jamaica , and miss the road , be constrain to sail round about the isle , a thing not before do . in this place the wolf absolute again forsake we with the small bark that we take at saint Iago , and return for England with hard news of our ruin , but by God favourable help we arrive in the road of Jamaica the 29 of January , which be very dangerous to enter by reason of the shold and rock that lie before it . here we land and march 6 mile into the country , where the town stand ; 
 ten 273 sister 
 the I|will and chief town oj Jamaica take . 
 the people all on horseback make show of great matter , but do nothing . now be master of the town and whole isle , the people submit themselves to our general mercy : and here they provide for we great store of dry beef , and cassavi meal , a base food , yet the best that the country yield , to continue at sea . this isle be a marvelous fertile isle , and be as a garden or store house for diverse part of the main . it be full of plain champion ground , which in the rest of the Indies we have not see : it abound with beef and cassavi , beside most pleasant fruit of diverse sort . we have not find in the Indies a more pleasant and wholesome place . during the time that we remain in this isle the captain of the isle come often aboard we , we have pledge for the security of their promise . they be in fine at our general devotion , to dispose of all thing , and in all thing as he please , so that now we be as one people and in one peace together . be almost ready to depart , m. captain Parker of Plymouth come into the road in his ship boat the second of march , with who our general consort to go for the bay of Honduras , where by his persuasion we have great hope of a very good voyage . And depart from Jamaica the 6 of march , we sail to cape de Corrientes in Cuba , to look for a bark of m. Parkers for our better strength : but not find she , we go for the cape of Honduras , where we purpose to entrap the watch , and so to sack the town of Truxillo , but the watch discover we , make great fire , and the town present shoot off a great piece , and answer with fire . notwithstanding the next day be the 31 of march we bring our ship under the fort , and land our man , but it be a vain purpose : for the town be not to be take but by exceed multitude , for it be invincible by nature . it stand upon the top of a very steep hill , border close to the sea : so environ with wood of such exceed thickness , that there be no passage among the 
 274 
 tree , which if they be go , yet there be no climb up the hill , only have one narrow lane to go into the town ; at the end whereof be a great gate very strong fortify , so that it be not to be approach unto , so that with the loss of some few man , we retire from this enterprise , be altogether impossible to be achieve by our few and weak man . 
 we depart from Truxillo the second of April and Puerto de go for Puerto de Cavallos lower down in the bay , ken^ still nourish our hope of good success : and come - ‘ ming thither find it reasonable fortify , but we present prevail and take it the 7 of April , be the most poor and miserable place of all India . now our hope be all frustrate and no likelihood remaining how we can by any mean make a voyage : our general reserve unto himself his silent inward impatience , labour to do some memorable thing . and in fine conclude by Rio dolce to search with his boat some narrow passage or Isthmos for the south sea , allege that if he can but find a boat there , it shall serve he to great purpose ; against which there can be no reasonable contradiction . all his 
 chief sea man consent hereunto , but especial the captain of the admiral . So sail with the ship to cape de tres puntas in the bottom of the bay , there leave the ship well more the ten of April he depart with his boat for Rio dolce , which in many Charts have his passage through the land . up this river by many uncertain wind we pass 30 league and better , where we find a strong build fort , a town , and diverse storehouse : but for money or merchandise we find none . we learn by the miserable people that we take , that the south sea be 
 20 league from the near of that river , and that it be 50 league to Guatimala , 40 league to sonsonate , and 30 league to Sacatocaluca , be town which we hope to march unto : so that now we be in worse case than before : for we be fall sick with the 
 Guatemala , Sanson eat , and Sacatocaluca . 
 275 
 unholsomenesse of this air , and our victual so waste , as that we be desperate how to recover our country . theirreturne . whereupon with most unwilling mind we return to our ship , and with all possible expedition weigh , and so labour upon the tack to turn out of this very deep bay , be 60 league within the point of land . be out of the bay , we shape our course for cape S. Anthony . our general , who restless spirit continual labour to avoid the frown of fortune , have now plot with the bevice and Galeon to go for Newfoundland , and there to revictual , and to have fresh man , of which we stand in good assurance , and so to depart for the streit of Magellan , and so by his very good policy will have conclude his voyage in the east India , which plat i think it unnecessary here to reveal , be put in principali trust by he . 
 be thwart Havana , by what chance i know not , but all his ship forsake he the 13 of may , and here in a desperate place he be leave desperate alone . the George depart by consent with his letter , the Galeon i know not how : but our misery in the admiral be very great , for there be not one in the ship that be ever before in the Indies , beside our miserable want of victual , the danger of the place , and the furious current of the chanel . notwithstanding we be enforce without stay to disemboque : which happy be perform , we shape our course for Newfoundland . and by God mercy we arrive there the fifteen of June , not have one hour victual to spare , and there by our countryman we be well refresh : where we stay till the 24 of June , still expect the Galeon , for the execution of this his last purpose : but she not come , and that plat overthrow , we return for England , where we find the right honourable the earl of Essex bind to the sea , with who we present depart in his lordship ship , to do he our humble service . 
 . 