the second voyage to Guiana . 
 Unday the 26. of January , in the year of our lord 1596. we depart from Portland road , in the darling of London , have in company the discoverer , a small pinnace , who we lose at sea , in foul weather , the Thursday next follow . Friday , the 13. of February , we fall with 
 the Canarie island , where we expect our pinnace , accord to our appointment , seven or eight day . here we take two boat , the one a passenger , we bulge , the other we tow at our ship stern , steer southsouthwest for the island of cape Verde . therehence we set sail the 28. of February , keep a westsouthwest 
 452 
 course . in this passage we find very smooth sea , fair weather , and steady wind , blow ordinary between the east and Northeast point . near 30. league from these island , we come into a grow sea , the swell water make a strange noise and hurtle together , as if it may be two strong current encounter each other . the 12. of march we sound , and have sandy ground in 47. fathom . at midnight in twelve fathom we come to a anchor , the ground sandy oaze . Sunday the 14. towards night , about some six league from the shore , we descry a low land in the bottom of a bay . from the 9 of march until this time , we keep for the most part a southsouthwest course . the water in this place be smooth , but muddy , and the colour red or tawny . from the westermost of the cape verde-island unto this bay i do estimate the distance to be near 550. league . it seem to most of our seaman , to be the very bank of a shall upon a lee-shore : the rather because without it , in the clean green sea we have but 7. fathom depth : but after by proof find that there be no sudden alteration in any part of the coast , and that the sea be smooth near the land , we always at night seek to anchor in three or four fathom . and doubtless as the hand of God be wonder in all 
 his work : so herein his merciful providence be most at notable admirable , that upon a lee-shore subject unto a perpetuali observation . easterly gale , neither much wind can endanger ship , by reason that the foul heavy water be not capable of vehement motion , and the soft light oaze , if they touch , can bruise they : nor be there any jeopardy in be wind-bound , or imbay : for the most forcible wind make the great flood-tide , whereby the freshet when they take their ordinary course of ebb , do grow strong 
 and swift , set direct off to sea against the wind . they anchor in we by turn go clear of all bay : howbeit in this the mouth of case , as also in the river , the use of a drove sail seem a , rrowari a good and ready help . the first place wherein we anchor , be in the mouth of Arrowari , a fair and great ute , . * 
 453 
 river . it stand in one degree and fourty minute : for we fall so far to the southward by your lordship direction . the bar without have at the least three fathom , at the shoald place , when it be low ebb . the depth within be eight and ten fathom . the water always brackish . we find not any inhabitant in this place near the sea coast . i omit here to recite the name of the nation that be borderer , their town , captain and commodity that their country do yield , as also the sounding , tide , and how the coast lie etc think it fit to reduce these disjoin and scatter remembrance to one place . as we pass we always keep the shore within view and stop the flood , still anker at night in three or four fathom . when we come to the north headland of this bay ( which we name cape Cecyl ) we see two high mountain like two island , but they join with the main . in this tract lie northnorthwest near 60. league , there fall into the sea these several great river , Arrowari , iwaripoco , Maipari , Coanawini , Caipurogh . we anchor in two fathom not far from these hill , and fill all our cask with fresh water by the ship side , for in the sea thirty mile from the mouth of any river it be fresh and good . this second bay extend it self above thirty league to the westward , and contain within it these river Arcooa , Wiapoco , Wanari , Caparwacka , Cawo , Caian , Wia , Macuria , cawroor , curassawini . here leave the ship at anchor , i take into the boat John provost , my indian interpreter , John Linsey , and eight or nine other , intend to search some of these river , and to seek speech with the Indians . in Wiapoco , at the foot of the eastermost mountain , where the river fall into the sea , we find twenty or thirty house , but not inhabit . we stay there but one night . Wanari we overpass , because the entrance be rocky and not deep . in Caperwacka we sail some fourty mile , but can see no indian . at one of their port under the side of a hill , we take in so much Brasill wood as our 
 454 
 boat can carry . among other tree we cut down one for a example , which i do very believe to be the same sort of cinnamon , which be find in the strait of Magellan . from Caperwacka we pass to Cawo , and there meet with a Canoa , wherein be two Indians . it be long time before we can procure they to come near we , for they doubt lest we be Spanish . when my interpreter have persuade they the contrary , and that we come from England , they without far speech or delay , bring we to Wareo their captain , who entertain we most friendly , and then at large declare unto we , that he be late chase by the Spaniard from Moruga , one of the neighbour river to Raleana , or Orenoque : and that have burn his own house , and destroy his fruit and garden , he have leave his country and town to be possess by the Arwaccas who be a vagabond nation of Indians , which find no certain place of abode of their own , do for the most part serve and follow the Spaniard . he show i that he be of the nation of the laos , who be a mighty people , and of a late time be lord of all the sea coast so far as Trinidad , which they likewise possess . howbeit , that with a general consent , when the Spaniard first begin to borrow some of their wife , they all agree to change their habitation , and do now live unite for the most part towards the river of Amazones . but the especial cause of his present remove be , because two or three year past , twenty Spaniards come to his town , and seek to take his best wife from he : but before they carry she away , he at time and place of advantage kill half of they : the rest flee , most of they sore hurt . now in this case he think it best to dwell far enough from they . your indian pilot Ferdinando , who conduct you by Amana , and now abide near the 
 1596. 
 the lao a mlghtle nation . 
 Ferdinando the indian pilot of sir 
 head of Dessekebe , be one of this man subject : by Walter who ( as it may seem ) he have take good notice Ralegh . of our princess and country . for he descend more [ three . 674. particular to inquire what force be come with we , 
 455 
 assure i of the Spaniard be in Trinidad , and that the Indians our friend betwixt hope and fear , have earnest expect our return from England these four or five month . when i have answer he , that at our departure we leave no Spaniards alive to annoy they ; that we now come only to discover , and trade with they ; and that if her majesty shall have send a power of man , where no enemy be to resist , the Indians may perhaps imagine , that we come rather to invade , than to defend they : he reply , that this course very well sort with the report which they have hear of our princess justice , rare grace , and virtue : the fame of who power in be able to vanquish the Spaniard , and singular goodness in undertake to succour and defend the afflict Indians , be now so general , that the nation far and near be all agree to join with we , and by all mean possible to assist we in expelling and root out the Spaniard from all part of the land : and that we be deceive , if we think this country not large enough to receive we , without molestation or intrusion upon the Indians , who want not choice of dwellingplace , if they forsake one to live in another : but stand in need of our presence at all time to aid they , and maintain their liberty , which to they be dear than land or live . he then far desire , that he with his people may have our favour against the Arwaccas , who not be content to enjoy their ground and house , have take from they many of their wife and child , the best of who fortune be , if they live , to live in perpetuali slavery under the Spaniard . we put he in good hope and comfort thereof . and he to deserve some part of this friendship , commend unto we a elderly man to be our pilot in bring we to Raleana . when we be ready to depart , he demand whether we 
 brasil-wood , want any Urapo , which be the wood , that be usual carry from these part to Trinidad in canoas , and be there sell to the french for trade : he offer , if we will bring our ship near his port , to put in her lade thereof , 456 
 but because most of our cask be not iron-bound , and in make stowage-way to remove it , will have be the loss of our cider and other drink ; i therefore refer the take of any quantity to fit opportunity : think it sufficient at this time , to have only my boat lade thereof : which afterward in extremity of foul weather , before we can get aboard our ship , we be enforce in a dark night to heave all overboard : think our self happy , to have recover thither at seven day end , with safety of life only . all which time we can not where set foot on shore , but rest day and night wet and weatherbeaten in our covertlesse boat , which be sometime ready to sink under we . for we have in this place without comparison more rain , wind , and gust , then else where at any time . to be brief , my man become weak and sick , and if we have stay any long time out , i doubt whether the great part of we have ever come aboard again . i afterward understand by my indian pilot , that this weather be for most part of the year usual , near the island oncaiarie , which lie north from the unseasonable river Capurwacka some six league into the sea : and out that they hold opinion how this hand be keep by some qncaia°ie evil spirit : for they very believe , that to sleep in the day time near it ( except it be after much drink ) be present death . the only season wherein little rain do fall there , be ( as i gather by their speech , they divide all time by their moon ) at our winter solstice . the mother-wind of this coast be for the most part to the northward of the east , except when the sun be on this side of they . equinoctial ! , for than it often veare southerly , but most in the night . this our guide be of the laos , who do all mark themselves , thereby to how the bee know from other nation after this manner . with natim °ftke the tooth of a small beast like a rat , they raze some their ^^emshvet to face , some their body , after diverse form , as if it be know be with the scratch of a pin , the print of which rasure from other can never be do away again during life . when 
 457 
 port Howard otherwise call Gowateri . 
 he have sometime converse with our Indians , that go from England with we , he become willing to see our country . his sufficiency , trustiness , and knowledge be such , that if the pretend voyage for Guiana do take place , you shall ( i doubt not ) find he many way able to steed your lordship in your design and purpose . for beside his precise knowledge of all the coast , and of the indian town and dwelling , he speak all their language , be breed in Guiana , be a swear brother to Putima , who slay the Spaniard in their return from Manoa , can direct we to many gold mine , and in nothing will undertake more , than he assure will perform . 
 to the westward this bay have many good road under small island , whereof the great name Gowateri , be inhabit by the shebaios : and beside the plenty of foul , fish , fruit , wild pork and dear , which be there to be have , where Caiane fall into the sea , ( for it stand in the mouth of Wia and Caiane ; ) it yield safe and good harbour in four and five fathom for ship of great burden . on all that coast we find not any like it : we therefore honour this place by the name of port Howard . the road under Triangle island , which be the westermost from the rest and stand in five degree , which have also store of fish , foul , dear and Iwanas , be good , but not comparable with this other , where in all wind and weather , ship , though they be many , may all ride secure . the hill and high land be limit to this bay on each side : for to the eastward beyond it appear none at all , and to the westward of mount Hobbeigh very few . where the mountain fail , there Brasill wood be no far to be seek for : but in all part cotton , pepper , silk and balsamum tree do grow in abundance . the root of the herb wia-passa be here most plentiful : i find they in taste nothing different from good ginger , and in operation very medicinable against the flix and headache . Theise river , as also other near Raleana , do all fall out of the plain of this empire over rock , as the river 458 
 Caroli do into Raleana : and in most place within the utmost hedge of wood , the land within be plain , void of tree , and bear short grass like arromaiaries country . 
 next adjoin unto these , be the river Cunanamma , uracco , Mawara , Mawarparo , amonna , marawini , Oncowi , wiawiami , Aramatappo , Camaiwini , Shurinama , Shurama , Cupanamma , Inana , Guritini , Winitwara , berbice , Wapari , Maicaiwini , Mahawaica , Wappari , lemdrare , Dessekebe , caopui , pawrooma , moruga , waini , barima , amacur , aratoori , Raleana . from cape Cecyl to Raleana , the from cape coast trend two hundred league next hand west - 200 northwest . in this variety of goodly river , amonna among the rest pour himself into the sea in a large and deep channel : his swiftness suffer no bar , nor refuse any ship of what burden soever they be : within his mouth for good and hopeful respect be port Burley place . the inhabitant that dwell eastward , do never pass low than berbice to trade . above Curitini in the wood they gather great quantity of honey . 
 far to the eastward then Dessekebe , no Spaniard ever travel . in which respect , and that no sea-card that i have see at any time , do in any sort near a truth , describe this coast : i think the liberty of impose English name to certain place of note , of right to belong unto our labour ; the rather because occasion thereby offer it self grateful to acknowledge the honour due unto they that have be , and i hope will still continue favourer of this enterprise . 
 the Indians to show the worthiness of Dessekebe ( for Dessekebe it be very large and full of island in the mouth ) doe calle^ the call it the brother of Orenoque . it lie southerly into the land , and from the mouth of it unto the head , they pass in twenty day : then take their provision they carry it on their shoulder one day journey ; afterward they return for their canoas , and bear they likewise to the side of a lake , which the laos call Roponowini , the charibe , Parime : which be of such 
 459 
 the great lake whereon Manoa or el Dorado stand . 
 in September . 
 this Spaniard understand the guianian language , and be repute a very sufficient man . 
 bigness , that they know no difference between it and the main sea . there be infinite number of canoas in this lake , and ( as i suppose ) it be no other then that , whereon Manoa stand : in this river , which we now call Devoritia , the Spaniard do intend to build they a town . in Moruga it be , that they hunt Wareo and his people , about half a year since . arromaiarie , who win so great credit by overthrow the Tivitivas of Amana , and make free the passage of that river ( but now again live in disgrace , by reason that the charibe of Guanipa have kill most of his follower , and burn his town ) be present with they , and take away many of the woman of that place . Arracurri , another Indian of the nation of the Arwaccas inhabit in Barima , be likewise present , and conduct the Spaniard to all the indian dwelling . they be not of Anthony de Berreo his company , that follow this chase , but be the Spaniard of Margarita , and the Caraccas , with who * Santiago forsake his governor Berreo join himself . for which fact he now lie in fetter at Trinidad , every day expect sentence of death . the occasion hereof grow as follow . 
 when Berreo , have lose his man , be leave with Fasshardo at Cumana all alone , as forlese , and never likely to compass his intend conquest of Guiana : the governor of the Caraccas and Margarita consult together , send with all speed into Spain , to advertise their king , that Berreo be utter able to follow this enterprise , that he have give it over , and do now sojorne in his old day at Fasshardo his house , mind nothing else but his solace , and recreation . they far declare , of how great importance this matter be : and that a english gentleman of such reckon , as they name your lordship to be , have be in Guiana , and understand so much of the state thereof , and the nation thereunto adjoin , as topiawarie , be both old and wise , can inform you of , who also in confirmation of friendship , have give you his only son , to who 460 
 the inheritance of the country do belong after he : there be no other likelihood , but that you , who adventure so far , and in such sort as you do , only to see , and know a certainty , will leave nothing unattempted to possess so rich a country , and without all doubt will return present . that mean time , you have leave this age sire alive , to be a block in their way , to who after his decease , this enterprise by patent do belong , and to be a weak adversary against your self , who at all time you know easy how to distress : and that therefore it may be behooveful for his majesty to revoke Berreo his grant , and to use their service , who be ready and willing without any delay to undertake the charge . Theise news be at large amplify and deliver to the king : Domingo de vera , Berreo his campmaster , who be send into Spain , five month before your arrival at Trinidad , with a sufficient quantity of gold get out of Guiana , to levy and furnish 500 man , have get knowledge of this practice , so solicit this cause in Berreo his behalf , that present order be give for the victual and man of ten ship to be send to Berreo : and far , this gold bear such weight , that the king command other 18. of his ship to stop at Trinidad , and not to follow their other direction , before they see that place secure from enemy . 
 Berreo suppose that these governor in send with such speed into Spain , mean he no good ; to approve his care and constancy , and that he never will yield under the burden of his adverse fortune ; give no time or breath to his adversary nor himself : return forthwith to Carapana his port , only with fifteen man , be the scatter remnant of those who you late dispossess of Trinidad . Theise governor follow he , and assure themselves of present employment from their king , preoccupate the time of their directions* to be return from Spain , enter Guiana with their man , with full determination to murder Berreo , and to dispatch all his company . they indeed 
 461 
 kill two or three , but Berreo flee towards Caroli , where he stay hope for succour from his son Antony de Ximenes , to come down the river from Nuevo Reyno de Granada . the margaritane with their accomplice busy themselves , some in search the country , other in purvey of victual out of the river that do lie eastward , of which number these be , that enter into Moruga with twenty canoas . Santiago pass up into topiawaries country , and there take Francis sparrow sir George Gifford his man prisoner , who with plenty of gold ransom his life , and be now abide in Cumana . this do , they all return to Trinidad , and begin to build their town there , when unhappy to their small comfort the eight and twenty sail arrive , and take Santiago prisoner . the other actor in this interlude vanish , and in canoas recover Margarita and Cumana again . eighteen of the say ship leave all thing in good order , depart from Trinidad to follow their other direction : ten doe yet remain fortify at Conquerabia , and expect our come . 
 this particular relation i have from a indian , servant to Berreo , that can speak Spanish , who i take in the river . he be of the nation of the laos , and from a child breed up with Berreo . i give he trade to buy he a Canoa to return into his country , and so leave he glad , that he have meet with we . 
 now the Indians of Moruga be chase from their dwelling , do seek by all mean possible to accord all the nation in one , so to invade the Arwaccas who be guide to the Spaniard , in show their town , and betray they . for they be full persuade , that by drive these Arwaccas , who serve the Spaniard ( for a great part of this nation do also hate , or not know they ) out of their territory , and Trinidad , the Spaniard for want of bread , will be enforce to seek habitation far off , or at the least in time consume and be waste . 
 462 
 the 6. day of April we come to a anchor within the 2% mouth of the river Raleana , have spend twenty and or three day in discovery upon this coast . the channel Qreno^ of this river have six or seven fathom depth , nine or ten mile off at sea , the bar lie far out , and at low water have not full two fathom . it high not above five foot , except at a spring tide . we anchor in ten fathom the first night : the next morning twelve canoas come unto we , furnish and provide of victual after their manner for the war . their captain name be Anwara , and Aparwa . Theise cassique , when the Spaniard make the last inroad in those part , be in the inland among the iwarawakeri their neighbour , by which occasion have lose some of their wife ( for not - spanish withstand their profession of Christianity , some of these Spaniard keep ten or twelve woman , think themselves well and sure bless , howsoever they live , if their town and house be religious cross ) they keep together 30. canoas , hope at our come , which they have now long expect to recover this loss upon they and the Arwaccas , who in their absence have do this wrong . they show i this their purpose , and require to be join in league of friendship with we against our enemy . when of they i have learn so much of the present estate of the country , as they do know : they demand whether we have bring no more force with we , but only one ship ? i answer they as before i do the other , that we now come only to trade , not know until this present that any Spaniards be in Guiana ; that upon our return our whole fleet will hasten to set forward , and that in the mean time , we will now visit our friend , and help they so far as we can in any thing that we shall find needful present to be do . after long discourse ( for their chief man stay with i all night ) when he have cause i to spit in my right hand , with many other ceremony which they use in confirm friendship , he go to the shore , and one of his canoas he send to bring forwards the 
 463 
 muchikeri the name of the province where macu-rigueray the frst town of 
 Guiana be situate . 
 Parime an 
 inland sea of salt water . 
 other twenty : one other he cause to go up the river before we , to bring intelligence . then call together the chief of his company , they make small fire , and sit in their Hamacas , or indian bed , each one sort himself with his companion , recount among themselves the worthy deed , and death of their ancestor , execrate their enemy most despiteful , and magnify their friend with all title of praise and honour , that may be devise ; thus they sit talk , and take tobacco some two hour , and until their pipe be all spend ( for by they they measure the time of this their solemn conference ) no man must interrupt , or disturb they in any sort : for this be their religion , and prayer , which they now celebrate , keep a precise fast one whole day , in honour of the great prince of the north , their patroness and defender . their canoas be make ready , they accompany we , and in their way show we , where the shoalde of the river do lie . by this captain i learn , that Muchikeri be the name of the country where Macureguerai the first town of the empire of Guiana , that lie towards Raleana , be seat in a fair and exceed large plain , below the high mountain , that bear northwesterly from it , that it be but three day journey distant from Carapana his porte , and that Manoa be but six day far . that they themselves do pass in three day into the country of the iwarewakeri by the river amacur , which though it be not the direct , yet it be the ready way to Macureguarai , for that which lead to Carapana his dwell , be in some place difficult , and mountainous . that a nation of clothe people , call Cassanari , do dwell not far from the place , where the river do first take the name of Orenoque , and that far within , they border upon a sea of salt water , name Parime . that a great river , call Macurwini , pass through their country into Orenoque . that Manoa stand twenty day journey from the mouth Wiapoco : sixteen day from Barima , 
 464 
 thirteen day from Amacur , and ten day from Aratoori . that the best way unto it , be not by macureguerai . that of all other the charibe that dwell high up in Orenoque , know most the inland , and of those nation , and they speak no other language , than such as John your interpreter do well understand . he certify i of the headless man , and that their mouth in their breast be exceed wide . the name of their nation in the charibe language be Chiparemai , and the guianians call they Ewiapanomos . what i have hear of a sort of people more monstrous , i omit to mention , because it be no matter of difficulty to get one of they , and the report otherwise will appear fabulous . last he tell i of a inland river , name Cawrooma , adjoin to Aratoori , and that the quepyn mountains , where Carapana dwell , be hardly accessible . that the Amapagotos have image of gold of incredible bigness , and great store of unman horse of the Caracas breed : and they dwell five day journey up the river about Caroli . we with our fleet of canoas be now not far from carapanas port , when our intelligencer return and inform we that ten spaniards be late go with much trade to Barima , where these Indians dwell , to buy Cassavi bread ; and that within one day two other canoas of Spaniards be appoint to come by the river Amana , to Carapana his port. 
 upon this occasion they take counsel , and in the end desire to return to their house , lest the spaniards find they from home , and imagine that they do purposely absent themselves , shall take away their wife and spoil their dwelling . they far resolve if it be possible to cut they off : which afterwards they do perform . for when they be disperse in their house seek Cassavi , sudden at one time , in all place they be assault , and not one of they escape . Carapana , who hand be in lay this plot , send we this news , as we return down the river . 
 ten 465 2 g 
 they have eminent head like dog , and live all the day time in the sea , they speak the charibe language . 
 a sudden as salt of the Spaniard by the Indians . 
 the two other canoas that come from Trinidad by Amana , notwithstanding that we keep a league before the ship with our boat , see the ship before we have sight of they , and present with all speed go to Berreo to advertise he of our come . he forthwith dispatch two or three messenger to Trinidad . one of his canoas meet with our spy , who the Indians of Barima have leave to go with we : they rifle he of his victual , give he knife , and dismiss he .. 
 in eight day sail still before a wind , we arrive at topiawaries porte , in all which time no indian that we know came aboard we . for the time of our return promise at your lordship departure from thence be expire ; they in despair sever they - self among the other nation . here the Spaniard a ranchma have seat their Rancheria of some twenty or thirty “ kmtedbj the house . the high rocky island , that lie in the Spaniard at midst of the river , against the mouth of Caroli , be a port of their fort or refuge , when they misdoubt safety in 
 toftawary . their town , or have notice of any practice against they : but now leave both town and island , they join themselves altogether , and return to the mouth of river Caroli , place there a secret ambush , to defend the passage to those mine , from whence your oar and white stone be take the last year : we all not without grief to see ourselves thus defeat , and our hungry hope make void , be witness of this their remove . as we ride at a anchor within musket shoot of their town , a indian come unto we with lean cheek , thin hair , and a squint eye , to inform we that they be very strong , that Berreo his son be with he , that they have but two small pinniss at Trinidad , which they daily look for to come up the river , and last to view our ship well , and our provision , but especial to learn whether Gualtero , topiawarie his son be with we . 
 this informer very countenance give he to be 466 
 suspect , and therefore partly by threaten , partly by promise of reward we win he to confess the truth . which he do , assure we that Berreo have not full fifty five man with he , whereof twenty come late from Trinidad , twenty from Nuevo Reyno , and the rest he bring with he about six month since , when he flee from Carapana his porte , and be drive with his small company to keep the aforesaid island near Caroli . and that though now his number be thus increase yet dare he not adventure at any time to leave the fast wood , and to go but half a league from his hold into the plain . that some few of the Arwaccas be abide with he . that he daily look for his son from Nuevo Reyno , for his campemaster from Trinidad , and for horse from the Caraccas . that topiawarie be dead : the Indians of that coast all flee , and disperse , except the son of one Curmatoi , and another woman of account , who the Spaniard hold prisoner , for consent to the death of their nine man , and the holy friar in morekito his time . This Curmatoi be flee topiawarie towards Guanipa , and be a man of speciali note among the Indians . that iwiakanarie Gualtero his near kinsman , have hold the country to his use , by his father appointment , ever since your be in the river . that there be ten ship , and many Spaniard at Trinidad . 
 that the Indians our friend do fear , lest you with your company be all slay , and your ship sink at Cumana ( for so the Spaniard noise it among the common they , ) that some of Gualtero his friend with Putijma , be in the mountain not far from the hill aio . fantar esand that Berreo have send for six piece of ordinance , which he mean to plant , where they may best command the river . 
 when we have stay here two day , consider that where no hope be leave of do good , to abide there in harm way do nothing , will be bootless : i resolve to seek Putijma in the mountain : and 467 
 turn down the river with the force of the stream some twenty mile in six hour : the next morning with ten shot i go ashore , intend if the Indians shall think themselves too weak , with our help to displant the Spaniard : to set some of they on work , for hatchet and knife to return we gold grain , and white stone from such place , as they shall be direct unto . when we come to the place of their usual abode ; we see that they late have be there , but can speak with none of they . it may be that fear ( which be easy of belief ) persuade they that we be Spaniards . Gilbert my pilot here offer to bring we either to the my of white stone near winicapora , or else to a gold my , which Putijma have show he , be but one day journey overland , from the place where we now stay at a anchor . i see far off the mountain adjoin to this gold my , and have measure their path near the same place this last year , can not judge it to be fifteen mile from we . i do well remember how come that way with Putijma the year before , he point to this same mountain , make sign to have i go with he thither . i understand his sign and mark the place , but mistake his meaning , imagine that he will have show i the overfall of the river cur-wara from the mountain . my Indian show i in what sort without dig they gather the gold in the sand of a small river , name Macawini , that spring and fall from the rock where this my be . and far tell i , that he be with Putijma , at what time morekito be to be execute by the Spaniard , and that then the chief of morekito his friend be in consultation , to show this my unto they if so they may redeem their captain life , but upon better advice , suppose they in this case to be implacable , and that this may prove a mean to loose not only their king , but their country also : they have to this day conceal it from they , be of all other the 
 468 
 rich and most plentiful ! . the age sort to keep this from common knowledge , have devise a fable of a dangerous dragon that haunt this place and de - vour all that come near it . but our indian , if when we return , we do bring store of strong wine ( which they love beyond measure ) with it will undertake so to charm this dragon , that he shall do we no harm . 
 i , that for this end come from home , and in this journey have take much more pain to less purpose , will very glad from this mountain have take so good a proof to witness my be in the country : but withal consider that not one Indian of our know friend come unto we : that don Juan the cousin of Gualtero , who live here a revolt from the Spaniard , be now in election to be chief commander of all the indian force in these part , can in policy , for Gualtero his sake , who inheritance he seek to usurp , be a fast friend unto we : that the Spaniard abide in Winicapora ( for there be ten ) may well before we can do any thing , and return , cause some other of Berreo his man to join with they , in the way to intercept we : and forthink withal , that there be no mean but our self , to make know our discovery , if we return not ; in our misfortune the hope of follow this voyage will be bury : but beside all this , and the respect of such spial , as the Spaniard keep to observe our do , foreknow that if the enemy shall by our linger , stop our passage , which in one or two place of advantage , few of they may easy doe : it will be a question how with our ship to get out of the river , except first we can remove they : i think it best ( all other possibility set apart ) to seek in time to be free from the hazard of the aforesaid evil passage . 
 while we be search at the shore for the Indians , my barge take a Canoa , with three man in 
 469 
 this transplant of Indians be worthy of consideration . 
 her : the one a servant to Berreo , ( as before be mention ) the other two merchant of Cassavi . they have a letter send from the governor to be convey to Trinidad , which i receive . there be also a great hatchet , and twenty knife , wherewith this indian servant shall buy a Canoa , and hire Indians to carry she up the river towards Nuevo Reyno . This Canoa forsooth with four other be to be send to bring down Berreo his son with all his force , which now have be , i think , full three year in prepare . if five such boat be sufficient to convoy he , his man and all their provision : it may seem , he come with no great strength . 
 this servant as he be a man of especial trust , and near Berreo : so appear he to have some insight in his proceed . he show i that the Indians , who with these knife shall be hire , be to pass up so high , as where some of the Cassanari do dwell in small village . that Berreo his purpose be , when they come thither to leave they there , and make they officer over the other Indians : and in their place some of the Cassanari shall return , who likewise shall be make justice and constable over they of Guiana : that from Trinidad he mean to remove most of the old inhabitant , that will be tractable ; and interpose they among the cassanarians of Guiana , and the guianians of the Cassanari . that the Arwaccas shall whole possess Trinidad , and the river side of Raleana . that they already be provide of threescore negro , to work the mine in these place . and that by this mean Berreo hope to keep these several nation in mutual enmity each against other , all to serve his turn , and never to become strong , or likely to join themselves against he . he far show i , that Topiawary , soon after our departure from the river , flee into the mountain , carry huge Godwyn with he , and leave a substitute in his country , as aforesaid : and that the next news 
 470 
 » 596-they hear of he be , that he be dead , and the english boy eat by a tiger . that the Spaniard believe neither the one nor the other . that about the end of June , when the river shall be impassable , the ten ship shall depart from Trinidad . and that Berreo ever since his come to Guiana , have spend his time altogether in purvey of victual , whereof there be such scarcity , by reason that the Indians forsake their house , have not this half year plant any of their ground , so that the Spaniard be enforce to seek their bread far off , and content themselves to live with little . 
 in sail up the river , we pass by Toparimacko the port of his port , which in one place be very shoalde , the channel Toparimacko . lie close aboard the shore . we return therefore another way by the main river on the south side : this branch we find large , deep , and without danger . when we be come near Carapana his the port of port , he send five or six several canoas , promise carofana-this day and the next , that he will come and speak with we . thus we linger six or seven day , but he come not . in the end he send one of his age follower , to certify we , that he be sick , old , and weak : that the way near his dwelling be not easy : and that therefore he desire we to hold he excuse for not come . this old man dilate unto we , that Carapana in hope of our return , have ever since your lordship be in that country , keep the mountain , where the Spaniard can hardly any way enforce he ; that they have take from he and his people many of their wife , because they refuse to furnish they weekly with a certain proportion of bread and victual : that don Juan otherwise call Eparacano have the commandment of all his subject , except only a choice guard of man sufficient to keep the place he now dwell in . that it repent he of his ambition , ever to have seek by the Spaniard mean , to have enlarge his country and 
 471 
 people . for true it be that from the beginning he be a lord of no other then ordinary power among they , until he have enter into friendship with Berreo : for than the indian on all side leave some their habitation , and many their commander to become his subject , that they may have the privilege to trade with the Spaniard for hatchet and knife , which be jewel of great price among they : that he now see no other choice , but that the Indians must , if they will do well , without far dissemble of their necessity , either entertain we their friend , or else give place to the Spaniard their enemy . for the plenty of gold that be in this country , be now know and discover , there be no possibility for they to keep it : on the one side they can feel no great misery , nor fear more extremity , than they be sure to find , if the Spaniard prevail , who perforce do take all thing from they , use they as their slave , to run , to row , to be their guide , to carry their burden , and that which be worst of all , to be content , for safety of their life , to leave their woman , if a Spaniard chance but to set his eye on any of they to fancy she : on the otherside they can hope for , nor desire no better state and usage , than her majesty gracious government , and princely virtue do promise , and assure unto they . for , say he , the other year , when we flee into the mountain , and measure your do by the Spaniard in like case , we make no other account » but that your commander be able , as he be , will doubtless have persecute we to the uttermost , as the only maintainer and supporter of your enemy , and will at the least , if he can not reach we , take our town , and make we ransom our wife and child : we find it far otherwise , and that none of your well govern company dare offer any of we wrong or violence , no not by stealth , when unknown they may have do it . we then believe it to be 
 472 
 true , that your grand captain report of his princess , take this for a good proof of her royal commandment and wisdom , that have frame her subject to such obedience , and of your happiness , that enjoy the benefit thereof : that Carapana weigh the good and Carapana a friendly course of our proceed , do humble crave p ™ * of her Maj estie for himself and his people , that with upon the rest of the Indians , which whole depend on she crave her princely regard towards they , he also may enjoy majesty she favourable protection : that he do this , not fntectiim-as a man leave unto himself and forsake by the Spaniard , but as one that know their injustice , hate their cruelty , and take it for his best choice , utter to disclaim their friendship . it may be pertinent ( as sure it be a thing worth the note ) to consider how this precedent of your moderation and good order , which to we seem a matter but of small and ordinary respect , have both alienate their heart altogether from the Spaniard , and stir up in they true love and admiration thereof . for as government be the only bond of common society : so to man lawless , that each one to another be , omnes hoc jure molesti , quo fort : to man , i say , that live in daily tumult , fear , doubt , suspicion , barbarous cruelty , never sleep secure , but always either drink , or practise one another death : to such man as these bee , who want discipline , justice and good order to confirm they in a quiet and peaceable course of live , know not where to find it : the sense and sweetness thereof be as the dew of Hermon : it be as the harmony of a well tune instrument : to be brief , it carry in it self not only a due and worthy commendation ; but be available without stroke strike to gain a kingdom . for the indian in all part within and near Guiana , do offer their service , and promise to provide victuali , and what else their country yield , desire only that some force of man may remain with they , to deliver they from oppression 
 473 
 and tyrannic . and now by generail consent ( though hatchet and knife be the only thing of request and useful unto they ) they have agree by no mean to trade with the Spaniard for any thing . 
 far this old man show i , whence most of their gold come , which be form in so many fashion : whence their spleen-stone , and other of all sort be to be have in plenty : where gold be to be gather in the sand of their river : from what part the Spaniard , both by trade , and otherwise , have return much gold . this he utter with Carapana his consent ( i doubt not ) hope thereby to induce we to return again . for contrary to their law of secrecy , which in this case they do all general observe , sharp punish the breaker thereof , as enemy unto their native country : i find this man no whit scrupulous , but very free and liberali of speech in all thing . 
 and because we may know , that we shall not want hand or help , in this or any other our enterprise , if perhaps we shall find cause to pass up to the head of this river : he declare that the Spaniard have no Indians to trust unto but some of the Arwaccas , which since they be not many , can be but of small force : that the charibe of Guanipa , the ciawanna among the Tivitivas , the shebaios , laos , Amaipagotos , Cassipagotos , Purpagotos , Samipagotos , Serowos , etai-guinams , Cassamari , with the rest of the nation far and near , be all ready , on what side soever the Spaniard shall stir , to fight against they : that the Pariagotos , through who country they must first pass , be alone sufficient to encounter they , such be the strength of their country , and the valour of the man . the indian hold opinion , that they be notable sorcerer , and invulnerable . in the mountain where they dwell , white stone be find of such hardness , that by no art or mean they can be pierce ; they imagine that these Pariagotos become invulnerable , by 474 
 eat these stone . the fable omit , happy they may prove good diamond . 
 then he show how the Iwarewakeri have nou_r_ - 
 ish grass in all place , where passage be , these three year , and that it be at this present so high , as some of the tree ; which they mean to burn , so soon as the Spaniard shall be within danger thereof . last , he show i that Wariarimagoto the emperor chief captain for those part , have gather together many thousand of the Epuremei , to keep the border of the empire ; and that he lie now on the south side of the mountain , some one day journey or little moor from the Spaniard . to be short , he certify i , that they all be resolve not to seek upon they ( for indeed they fear their shot ) but to defend their own , and to expect our come . in the mean time they take opportunity , when they find any of they straggle or divide from their strength , by little and little to lessen their number . 
 wariaritna-goto one of the emperor of Guiana his chief cap-•taines up in arm against the Spaniard . 
 the place where we be at anchor be but one day journey from Carapana : i therefore make motion to this captain to stay with two or three of his company aboard the ship , and to cause his man to bring i with my interpreter to Carapana his dwell : he answer i that it be not good so to do , lest perhaps some spy may inform the Spaniard thereof , whereby danger will grow to Carapana . for they have many time use many mean to reconcile he unto they : but he from time to time have daly with they , neither profess himself their enemy , nor in aught show they any friendship . now ( say he ) if the Spaniard shall by any mean come to knowledge , that you have confer together , they will take this occasion to persecute he with all extremity , as their open enemy , who they now neglect , or at the least fear not , as be a harmless old man . and for this cause only have Carapana forbear to come 
 unto you . 
 47 
 by this i perceive , that to stay long for he ( though glad i can have be content to spend one sevennight more to speak with he ) will be purposeless . wherefore have assure so many of the Indians as at any time come unto we , of our speedy return , promise they plenty of knife , bead , and hatchet , if they will reserve their Cassavi , and provide store of their piece of gold for we : i desire this captain to be a mean that our friend of Trinidad may understand of our be in the river and that we mean to relieve they so soon , as convenient may be . he promise in Carapana his behalf , that this shall not be forget . one of the captain of the cyawanna , who do now dwell in the river Arawawo , near Trinidad , undertake also without fail to ascertain they thereof . i be the more careful herein , because so many , ship be here , i doubt lest they will take order that no indian shall speak with we . for so indeed it fall out . 
 this captain of the cyawanna come likewise to join with we , and have provide fifteen canoas for that purpose . their dwell be late in Macureo , where the Spaniard one night steal on they , kill twenty of their man , and burn their house , because they refuse to trade with they for certain image of gold make with many head which they have get out of Guiana . i send a present of iron to Carapana , and then set sail . 
 in turn down the river we spend eight day . in many place where the channel lie we find twenty fathom depth : where it be shall , we have two fathom and a half , and that but in one or two place . of the worthiness of this river , because i can say enough , i will speak nothing . we have presume to call it by the name of Raleana , because your self be the first of our nation that ever enter the same , and i think it nothing inferior to Amazones , which be best know by the name of Orellana , the first discoverer thereof . by turn only , without help of oar to pass so long 476 
 away in so short a time , against the wind , may sufficient prove , that the channel be very large , good , and the chanel likely to second our hope in all that we can desire . ( > f^-aleana^or without the mouth of this river , our pinnace , the this - very°i ™ ge y coverer , who we lose near the coast of England , good . they come unto we . Shee fall with this land somewhat to meet with the southward of cape Cecyl , and have spend three pinnace . week and odd day in range alongst the coast , when she meet with we . William down the master inform i that they enter , and search these four river . in Wiapoco they sail so far , until the rock stop their passage . in Caiane they go up one day journey . in Cunanama they find many inhabitant . Curitini be the last river they have be in . whence , have no other mean to find Raleana , they be enforce to borrow a pilot against his will : who afterward i will have return with reward to his contentment ; but he will not . 
 our english that to steal the first blessing of a untraded place , will perhaps secret hasten thither , may be behold to i for this caveat , if they take notice a good caveat . thereof . they may be assure , that this people , as they no way seek our harm , but use our man with all kindness : so be they impatient of such a wrong , as to have any of their people perforce take from they , and will doubtless seek revenge . the example of the like practice upon the coast of guinie , in the year 1566 , and again at Dominica , where Aiderman wat his ship hardly escape be take , may serve for our warning in like case to look for no good , before they be satisfy for this injury . 
 when we have take aboard we such victual as be in the pinnace : we set fire in she , ( for her rudder can serve she to no long use ) and stop the flood , ply to windwarde with the ebb near the shore , until we be sixteen league to the eastward of the river mouth , and then stand off to sea , we fall in twenty four hour sail with Punta de galera 477 
 the northeaster most part of Trinidad . but have tabaco-island in sight , we first go thither . this island be plentiful of all thing , and a very good soil . it be not now inhabit , because the charibe of Dominica be evil neighbour unto it . they of Trinidad have a meaning and purpose to fly thither , when no long they can keep Trinidad . their only doubt be , that when they be seat there , the Spaniard will seek to possess it also . the governor of Margarita go late in a pinnace to view this island . Gilbert my pilot who sometime live there , note it for the best and fruitful ground that he know . 
 thence we return to Punta de galera and anchor in ten fathom under the north side of the island some five or six mile from the say point . the flood-tide strike alongst the coast to the eastward very strong . we discharge a piece of ordinance , and afterward go to the shore in our boat : but no indian come unto we . i will have send John of Trinidad to procure some of they to speak with we : but he be altogether unwilling , allege that their dwelling be far within the mountain , and that he know no part of that side of the island . from this place we set sail for Santa Lucia , but fall with Granata , which we find not inhabit . saint Vincent we hardly recover , by turn under the lee of the island . the tobacco of this place be good : but the Indians be cannibal , promise we store , and delay we from day to day , seek only opportunity to betray , take , and eat we , as late they have devour the whole company of a french ship . this their treachery be by one of their slave reveal , from thenceforth they do all forbear to come unto we . to sit down on their low stool , when they by offer such ease , will seem to show courtesy , abode death to stranger , that shall trust they . at Matalino or Martinino we find not any inhabitant . last , we come to Dominica , where we can get no good tobacco . but have intelligence 
 478 
 of a spanish ship , that be take in of fresh water , at the northwest side of the island , we weigh anchor to seek he . he descry we , steal away by night . the Indians of this place have determine to remove , and joy ne with they of Guanipa , against the Spaniard , who late dispeople one of their island , and at our being there one of their canoas return from Guanipa , and certify we , that the ten spanish ship at Trinidad do ride , some of they at Conquerabia , the rest at the small hand near the disemboge place . here-hence we steer north and by east , take the direct course to shorten our way homeward . 
 thus have i empty your purse , spend my time and travel in follow your lordship direction for the full discovery of this coast , and the river thereof . concern they not make of a voyage for your private profit , i pretend nothing . sorry i be , that where i seek no excuse , by the Spaniard be there i find my defect remediless . and for my own part , i do protest , that if the consideration of the public good that may ensue , have not overpoise all other hope and desire : i will rather have adventure by such small and weak mean as i have , to do well with danger , than to return only with safety . now although in a cause not doubtful , my allegation be no way needful : yet because the weightiness thereof , and the expectation of other , seem of due and right to claim something to be say by i , who your especial trust and favour have credit and grace with this employment : pardon it ( i beseech your honour ) if , where my lamp have oil , it borrow light also ; and my speech , which be altogether unsavoury , season it self with some of the leaven of your own discourse touch this discovery . the particular relation of some certain thing i have reserve as proper belong to your self , who only , as know most , can make best use thereof . so much in general be here touch , as ( i hope ) may serve to refresh the memory of this worthy enterprise in those 
 479 
 who it may concern , and testify your care and expense in follow the same : that in a second age , when in time truth shall have credit , and man wonder at the riches , and strength of this place ( which nature it self have marvelous fortify , as her chief treasurehouse ) shall mourn and sigh to hold idle cicle , while other reap and gather in this harvest , it be not say , that sir Walter Ralegh be of all man live in his day , most industrious in seek , most fortunate in attain to the fullness of a inestimable public good : if , know that for envy and private respect , his labour be lessen , his information mistrust , his proffer not regard , and the due honour of his desert impart to other : if ( i say ) see , know and bear all this , he with patience have persist in so good a way in do he princess , and country service ; and have but perfect his first discovery by send a ship or two for that purpose : for then sure all let and doubt be removed , and so large a kingdom , so exceed rich , so plentiful of all thing , as this by his discourse appear to be , be offer : no devise and vain surmise can have take place , no illusion can have prevail : it have be blindness and deafness in those , that be near her majesty do spend their day in serve the common weal , not to see , and know in so weighty a matter : it have be malicious obstinacy , impotency of mind , and more than treason to the common wealth , the matter stand only upon acceptance , to seek either to foreslow so fit a occasion , or forsake so general a blessing . this ( if ) be now cut off through a singular and incomparable temper , in overcome evile with good . 
 this your second discovery have not only find a free and open entrance into Raleana , which the natural call Orenoque : but moreover yield choice of fourty several great river ( the lesser i do not reckon ) be for the most part with small vessel navigable for our merchant and other , that do now find little profit in set 
 forth for reprisal , to exercise trade in . to such as shall be willing to adventure in search of they , i can propose some hope of gold mine , and certain assurance of piece of make gold , of spleen-stone , kidney-stone , and other of better estimate . but because our belief seem to be mate in these great matter , and a certainty of small profit be the ready inducement to quicken our weak hope ; i not go so far as i own eye may warrant i , do only promise in the aforesaid river brasil-wood , honey , cotton , balsamum , and drug to help to defray charge : and further , because without a begin there can be no continuance of these benefit unto our country to any that shall be the first undertaker hereof , i be glad content to give such light and knowledge , as by conference with the Indians i have attain unto . 
 my self , and the remain of my few year , i have bequeathe whole to Raleana , and all my thought live only in that action . the prosecute whereof be in it self just , profitable , and necessary . just , because it be intend for the defence of harmless people , who fear thralldome and oppression , desire to protect themselves and their country under her majesty tuition : profitable , as may be gather not only by many spanish letter intercept , but also by the proof mention in the discourse of the first discovery , and since that , by the Indians own voluntary relation : and last , by the provision that the Spaniard do make to acquit we thereof . necessary it be , as be the only help to put a bit in the mouth of the unbridle Spaniard ; the only way to enter into his treasury of Nuevo Reyno , and Peru ; the only mean to animate the wrong Indians with our assistance to seek revenge for the extreme murder and cruelty , which they have endure , and to ruinate his • naked city in all those part of the inland ; who foundation have be lay in the blood of their parent and ancestor . 
 the force that the Spaniard have already send to 
 ten 481 2 h 
 Trinidad , to fortify there , and keep the passage of this river , be a evident argument that the king fear and doubt the sequel of this discovery . for can it be a small matter ? or have he so waste employment for his man and ship , that upon no ground , he will send eight and twenty ship , to keep we only from tobacco ? for what else that good be can Trinidad yield we ? no doubtless , if the return of Berreo his campmaster with ten of these ship be compare with precedent advertisement concern he : it will appear more than probable , that the guiana-golde wage these man and ship : and that they be now more careful to obtain this place , than to keep other , which they have already get , which note , except in matter of extraordinary account , be not incident to their policy and proceed . again , it can be think that either it be senseless madness in the governor of Margarita , and the Caracas , to bring their state and live in question , by seek , contrary to their king order , to enter Guiana , and kill Berreo with his follower : or else the abundance of pearl in Margarita , and the gold mine in the Caracas , seem matter of small account : Guiana only be in their judgement , rich , plentiful , and able of it self to redeem their trespass and offence , how great soever it shall be . 
 the sundry attempt and overthrow of the Spaniard be man of power , and honourable place , in labour threescore and three year and upwards , to enlarge the kingdom of Spain with this mighty and great empire , do plain show , that they long time seek a path , where in one month a high way be find : that the loss of their life witness their desire , and the worthiness of the thing , where to we the easiness of obtain discredit the greatness of the attempt : and that if now at the last they do prevail , they must hold by tyrannic that which they get by the sword ; where than our return nothing by the Indians be more wish for , nothing expect more earnest . 
 482 
 those objection , which have be make by many seem wise , and the impediment likely to arise , as they have suppose , be best answer by the unreproved witness of those man action . some have term these discovery fable , and fantasy , as if there have be no such land or territory : other allow both of the place , and that such a kingdom or country be discover , make conclusion , that if it have be so rich as we have suppose , that no doubt the king of Spain will by this time have possess it . but if they consider that the spanish nation have already conquer the two empire of Mexico and Peru , with so many other kingdom and province : we may very well answer , that his power be not infinite , and that he have do well for the time . and yet it be manifest , that this very empire have be by all those several Spaniard ( the catalogue of who name be by it self hereunto annex ) at sundry time undertake , and never perform . howbeit , the world have reason to admire their constancy , and their great labour , and we may well blush at our own idle , despairfull , and loiter disposition , that can find ability in another barren , and starve nation , to possess so much of the world , and can do nothing but frame argument against our self , as unfit and powerless to possess one province already discover , and of which our nation Kath assurance of the people love , and that all the chieftain and principal have vow their obedience to her majesty ; the navigation be withal so short , dangerless , and free from infectious sickness . if doubt of peril may moderate the mind of our man once move with steadfast hope , that gold shall be the reward of their travel : it may easy be perceive , that all those let and hindrance that can any way be allege , or wrest so much , as but to touch we , do deep and near concern the spanish king , and in a manner violent withhold he from that , which he notwithstanding carry with success , while we 483 
 out of season do affect the bare stile , to be name man stay and circumspect in our proceed . it be report , that Calanus the indian throw down before Alexander the great , a dry sere piece of leather , and then put his foot on one of the end of it : the leather be tread down at that side , rise on all part else . by this the wise man do show unto he a figure and similitude of his kingdom , which be exceed large , must of necessity in all other part , except the place of the king residence , be always full of stir , tumult , and insurrection . the end afterward confirm , that this empire consist of sundry nation , can not keep it self from dissolution . no potentate living have , or can have so faithful and incorrupt counseller , as be the example and history of forepass time and age . we may therefore be bold to think that the governor of the spanish affair shall mind it , that their king lustful desire , and ambitious thought to establish over all Europe one law , one lord , one religion , be build and erect on a dangerous ungrounded resolution : consider that many of the neighbour kingdom be of equal force in man , or great than he can make , be settle in a long continue estate , be entire within themselves , and hate to hear the voice of a stranger . it be not unlikely that they in this case shall lay before their king the fatal destiny of many worthy , that have be constrain for want of sufficient number of their natural subject , after many year spend in the war , to retire to their own country , and have be glad peaceable to hold their own signiory at home , resign all that unto other , which they have get abroad by hard adventure , and much effusion of blood . the king of Spain can but discern , that his spacious empire and kingdom be so many , and so far divide one from another , be like the member of a monstrous body , tie together with cable only . for take away the traffic of unnece - 
 484 
 sarie commodity transport out of Spain : those huge country of the Indies have no common link of affinity , law , language , or religion , and be of themselves able to maintain themselves without foreign commerce , be not so simple , as not to know their own strength , and to find , that they do rather possess Spaniard , then that they be possess by they . he can be ignorant that Spain it self be on all side environ with many puissant enemy , mighty and great prince , who know it to be rich without man , confident without reason , proud and adventurous without mean sufficient ; may happy confederate to chastise he , as a insolent intruder , and disturber of all quietness ; and go no further than Spain it self , may even there shake the foundation of his long contrive devise , and in one act redeem the time , control his aspire humour , and break the band in sunder that import servitude , and subversion to all the dominion of Christendom . again , his counsel may well inform he , that to dispeople and disable himself at home , in hope to obtain Guiana , be a country strong of it self , and defend with infinite multitude of indian enemy , be rich , and by the inhabitant offer unto the english : he contempt towards we will seem so intolerable and despiteful , as may be sufficient to provoke we , though otherwise we have no such inclination ; if he unprovide of able help to effect it , shall rest himself on a careless presumption , that we can , we dare not , we will not stir in a matter that promises we so great benefit , and may so high offend he . he may be persuade , that to leave no other succour or safety to his nakedness , but the old stale practice of spread rumour , and give out false intelligence of preparation to invade England , thereby to keep we at home ; or else of hire and suborn some machavellian under hand by secret conveyance , to stop the course of our proceed ; or last , of 485 
 procure some wild outlaw to disquiet our tranquillity ; be but a poor , weak , and uncertain stay to uphold his estate by . and yet set such like drift aside : what can be imagine likely to hinder we from prevail in Guiana , rather than he , who disadvantage be to be encumber with the self same , and manifold moor impediment , then can any way be suppose , with good cause to impeach , or divorce we from so profitable a attempt ? all this notwithstanding , if the spanish king not be able to dissemble his desire , or bear the loss of this one kingdom ; put himself out of his strength at home , and expose his people to the hazard of all casualty abroad , be resolve , whatsoever shall happen , not to relinquish Guiana , but to keep this one iron more in the fire , on no other assurance , but a peremptory disdain of prevention : if he appear so eager bend for Guiana , as if it be enact for a law among themselves , vii and modis to thrust for it , and not to hear , conceive , or believe any thing , that may dissuade or deter from the conquest thereof : it then appertain unto we , not to enforce those objection against our self , which he with less reason reject as frivolous ; since by how much the more earnest he be in follow this purpose , by so much the less cause have we to be divert from it . to such as shall be willing further to wade in this argument ; for brevity sake , i do propose only this bare assertion : that England and Guiana conjoin , be strong , and more easy defend , then if England alone shall repose her self on her own force , and powerfulness . the reason that may be infer to prove this need no rationail discourse : they be all intimate in the only example of Spain it self ; which without the Indies be but a purse without money , or a paint sheath without a dagger . in sum : it seem unto i , that whereas the difficulty of perform this enterprise have be produce for a discouragement : it be 486 
 a dull conceit of strange weakness in our self , to distrust our own power so much , or at least , our own heart and courage ; as value the spanish nation to be omnipotent ; or yield that the poor Portugal have that master spirit and conquer industry , above we ; as to be able to seat himself among the many mighty prince of the east Indies , to frontier China , to hold in subjection the philippinas , Zeilan , Calecut , goa , ormus , Mozambique , and the rest ; the navigation be so tedious and full of peril : to suffer our self to be put back for worthless cipher , out of place , without account . all which region be now also by the late conquest of Portugal , entitle to the spanish king : to who the colony of those part do yet general refuse to swear fealty and allegiance : and the care depend on he , not only in govern they in the east , so far off ; but also of order and strengthen of those disunit , scatter , and ill guard empire and province in the west : it may very well be allege to the say spanish king , that it be more wisdom for he to assure and fortify some part of those already get , than to begin the conquest of Guiana , so far separate from the rest of his Indies : in which he have have so many misfortune , and against who the natural people be so impetuous bend , and oppose : be it not , that it exceed all the rest in abundance of gold , and other riches . the case then so stand , be it not mere wretchedness in we , to spend our time , break our sleep , and waste our brain , in contrive a cavil false title to defraud a neighbour of half a acre of land : whereas here whole shire of fruitful rich ground , lie now waste for want of people , do prostitute themselves unto we , like a fair and beautiful woman , in the pride and flower of desire year : 
 if we do but consider , how unhappy Berreo his affair , with his assistant have of late year , in our own knowledge succeed : who can say , if the hand 487 
 of the almighty be not against they , and that he have a work in this place , in stead of papistry , to make the sincere light - of his gospel to shine on this people ? the effect whereof shall be a royal crown of everlasting remembrance to all other blessing , that from the beginning the lord have plentiful pour on our dread sovereign , in a eminent and supreme degree of all perfection . if the castilian , pretend a religious care of plant Christianity in those part , have in their do preach nought else but avarice , rapine , blood , death , and destruction to those naked , and sheeplike creature of God ; erect statue and trophy of victory unto themselves , in the slaughter of million of innocent : do not the cry of the poor succourless ascend unto the heaven ? have God forget to be gracious to the workmanship of his own hand ? or shall not his judgement in a day of visi-hermajestie . tation by the ministry of his choose servant , come on these bloodthirsty butcher , like rain into a fleece of wool ? aliquando manifesta ; aliquando occulta ; semper justa sunt dei judicia . 
 to leave this digression , it be fit only for a prince to begin , and end this work : the maintenance and order thereof require sovereign power , authority , and commandment . the river of Raleana give open and free passage , any provision that the Spaniard can make to the contrary notwithstanding , ( for once yearly the land near the river be all drown ) to convey man , horse , munition , and victuali for any power of man that shall be send thither . 
 i do speak it on my soul health , as the best testimony , that i can in any cause yield to aver a truth , that have now the second time be in this country , and with the help of time and leisure well advise my self upon all circumstance to be think on ; i can discern no sufficient impediment to the contrary , but that with a competent number of man , her majesty may to she and her successor enjoy 488 
 this rich and great empire : and have once plant there , may for ever ( by the favour of God ) hold and keep it , contra ludaeos and gentes . Subjects , i doubt not , may through her majesty gracious sufferance , join their strength together , invade , spoil , and overrun it , return with gold and great riches . but what good of perpetui tie can follow thereof ? or who can hope that they will take any other course then such , as tend to a private and present benefit ; consider that a empire once obtain , be of congruity , how , and wheresoever the charge shall grow , to be annex unto the crown ? the riches of this place be not fit for any private estate : no question , they will rather prove sufficient to cross and countervail the Spaniard his proceed in all part of christendom , where his money make way to his ambition . 
 if the necessity of follow this enterprise do nothing urge we , because in some case better a mischief , than a inconvenience : let the conveniency thereof somewhat move we , in respect both of so many gentleman , soldier , and young brother , who , if for want of employment they do not die like cloy cattle in rank easefulnesse ; be enforce for maintenance sake , sometime to take shameful and unlawful course : and in respect of so many handycraftsman have able body , that do live in cleanness of tooth and poverty . to sacrifice the child of Belial unto the common weal , be not to defile the land with blood , because the law of God do not prohibit it , and the execution of justice require it to be so : but yet if the waterboughe , that suck and feed on the juice , and nourishment that the fruitful branch shall live by , be to be cut down from the tree , and not regard : lucky and prosperous be that right hand , that shall plant and possess a soil , where they may fructify , increase , and grow to good : thrice honourable and bless be the memory of so charitable a deed , from one generation to another . 
 489 
 to conclude , your lordship have pay for the discovery and search , both in your own person , and since by i . you have frame it , and mould it ready for her majesty , to set on her seal . if either envy or ignorance , or other devise frustrate the rest , the good which shall grow to our enemy , and the loss which will come to her majesty and this kingdom , will after a few year show it self . we have more people , more ship , and better mean , and yet do nothing . the spanish king have have so sweet a taste of the riches thereof , as notwithstanding that he be lord of so many empire and kingdom already , notwithstanding his enterprise of France and Flanders , notwithstanding that he attend this year a home invasion : yet he send twenty eight sail to Trinidad , 
 . 