the second voyage ofM . William haukin to Brasil . a king of Brasil bring into England . 
 with the negro , and take of they elephant tooth , and other commodity which that place yield : and so arrive on the coast of Brasil , he use there such discretion , and behave himself so wise with those savage people , that he grow into great familiarity and friendship with they . insomuch that in his second voyage , one of the savage king of the country of Brasil , be content to take ship with he , and to be transport hither into England : whereunto m. haukin agree , leave behind in the country as a pledge for his safety and return again , one Martin cockeram of Plymouth . This Brasilian king be arrive , be bring up to London and present to king Henry the 8 , lie as then at Whitehall : at the sight of who the king and all the nobility do not a little marvel , and not without cause : for in his cheek be hole make accord to their savage manner , and therein small bone be plant , stand a inch out from the say hole , which in his own country be repute for a great bravery . he have also another hole in his nether lip , wherein be set a precious stone about the bigness of a pease : all his apparel , behaviour , and gesture , be very strange to the beholder . 
 have remain here the space almost of a whole year , and the king with his sight full satisfy , m. Hawkins accord to his promise and appointment , purpose to convey he again into his country : but it fall out in the way , that by change of air and alteration of diet , the say savage king die at sea , which be fear will turn to the loss of the life of Martin cockeram his pledge . nevertheless , the savage be full persuade of the honest deal of our man with their prince , restore again the say pledge , without any harm to he , or any man of the company : which pledge of they they bring home again into England , with their ship freight , and furnish with the commodity of the country . 
 RENIGER , BOREY and Pudsey a.d. 1540-42 . which Martin cockeram , by the witness of sir John Hawkins , be a officer in the town of Plymouth , be live within these few year . 
 . 