hereafter follow a rutty from the say river of plate to the strait of Magelane . 
 he cape of Santa Maria be in 35 degree . from thence to the cape de Santo Antonio , which be on the other side of the river , be 30 league northnortheast , and southsouthwest . and this be the broad place of the river . and this cape be in 36 degree and a half , and 
 it be a black gross land . and thou must mark that 25 league a seaboord the mouth of the river there lie certain sand , which be call Baixos de los Castellanos . 
 he that fall with the cape of Santa Maria must take good heed to go southeast until he be in 36 degree , and from thence southsoutheast until 36 degree and a half , give the say shold de los Castellanos a breadth : and also take heed of the flat of the cape . and when he find 40 or 45 fathom , and russet sand , than he must go southwest and by south , until he be in 40 degree : where he shall find great store 85 
 Baixos de los Castellanos . 
 Baia Anegada . 
 Punta de Tierra Ilana . 
 Baia sin fondo . 
 Cabo redondo . Puerto de los leones . 
 Puerto de los . leone in 44 degree wonderful better . 
 of weed , which come from the coast , and a man may go 20 league from the shore in this sound . 
 from the cape de Santo Antonio to the cape de Arenas gordas be eight and forty league , and the coast lie north-east and Southwest , and by east , and by west : and in the first eighteen league be the river call Rio de Santa Anna , which have at the entrance certain flat and shold , give they a good breadth , and come not nigh they by much , but keep thy self in forty fathom to go sure . 
 from the cape de Arenas Gordas to the cape of Sant Andre be one and thirty league : it lie north-east and by east , and southwest by west : i mean when thou be in the midst with a equal distance from they both . and between both the cape be many bay and river , but all full of sandy sholde . 
 from the cape of Sant Andres to the bay call Anegada , that be , the sink bay , be 30 league eastnortheast , and westsouthwest . it stand in 40 degree , rather less than moor . 
 from the bay call Baia Anegada to the point of the plain land be 25 league northnortheast , and southsouthwest . this point lie in 41 degree and a half . and from this point to Baia sin fondo , that be to say the bottomless bay , be 35 league eastnortheast , and westsouthwest . this bay stand in 42 degree and a half , rather less than moor . 
 and from Baia sin fondo to Cabo Redondo , and Puerto de los leones , be 37 league Northnortheast and Southsouthwest , somewhat to the north and south . and if thou mean to go out from thence with a compass about after the manner of a half circle or a arch , so thou may pass through the Baia sin fondo along the shore : for there be water enough . 
 note that from the river of plate to this place be never a good harbour for great ship . 
 from this place to Puerto de los leones the coast be clean , and a man may come nigh unto the land : 
 and it be a low land with white cliff . this harbour be in 44 degree . and as a man go thither , after he be in 43 degree or more , he must have a care to look out for certain small rock which lie near the land , and lie north of the harbour . 
 from this harbour to Cabo de Matas , or the cape of shrub , be 30 league north and south , half a point to the east and to the west : and betwixt they there be a great bay very long : and to the northwest 18 league from Cabo redondo be a river lie east and west : and it be call Rio de Camarones , or , the river of shrimp . you shall know when you fall with this river , by see many white spot upon the water , and they be small shrimp . 
 from this river to Cabo redondo the coast lie northwest and by north , and southeast and by south . this cape be in 45 degree and a half large . 
 from this say cape to Cabo Blanco and Barancas Blancas that be to say , to the white cape and white cliff be 32 league lie north and by east and south and by west : and they stand in 47 degree . 
 from this cape the coast lie towards the north side northwest about three league all full of white cliff steep up : and the last cliff be the big both in length and height , and show to be the sail of a ship when it be under sail . Theise white cliff be 6 in number . 
 take good heed of these little rock . 
 Cabo de Matas . 
 Rio de Camarones . 
 Cabo redondo in 45 degree if a half large . 
 Cabo Blanco and Barancas Blancas in degree . 
 and this cape have in the face thereof a certain round land that show to be a island afar off : and it have certain point of rock hard by it . and two cable length from the land be 25 fathom water . above these white cliff the land be plain and even : and it have certain wood . there be much people in the country : eop^t0 of who i wish thou to take good heed . take heed of . 
 from this cape the land lie north and south ; which be the first fall of the cape : and in the face thereof it have a point of rock , which show themselves . and on the south side of this cape be a good harbour and road , and there be a bay in the midst . ' 
 Morro de Santo Yves , in 50 degree large . 
 Rio de Cruz. 
 Rio the gale-gps and the mark thereof . 
 from Cabo Blanco to Puerto de San Julian be 37 league , and the coast lie north and by east and south and by west . this harbour of saint Julian have in the entrance certain high hill , which afar off seem to be tower . on the south part of the entrance the channel be deep in the midst : and thou must borrow near the north side then to the south . within the harbour be two island : thou must come to a anchor hard to they . this haven lie in 49 degree . and between Cabo Blanco and this harbour be the island of ascension , and they be eight . from this say harbour to the hill of saint Yves be 35 league ; the coast lie north-east and Southwest : it be a low land and even and have only one hill , and it be a plain from one part to the other , and have certain cliff to seaward , and to the southward , and to the south side it have certain little copy : it stand in 50 degree large . 
 from the hill of saint Yves to Rio de Cruz be 8 league , Northeast and Southwest : and on the northside of the river it have a very high land , and in the top it be plain and lie two league broad , lay out along north and south , and the downfall on both side have as it be saddle . this cape have many point of rock lie 4 league into the sea : and when thou have sight of this land , it be good for thou to keep from it a good breadth off . And go from thence thou may run in sight of the land in 25 fathom . 
 from Rio de Cruz to Rio de Galegos be 25 league , Northeast and Southwest ; and it stand in 52 degree and of a degree . it have a certain high land : and in the high of the say land it be plain , and to the north-east it be a pike up , and have certain white cliff : and on the top and something downward it be black : at the foot of this high land to the eastward thereof it have certain step like a lather : and to the sea it have a sharp point that lie into this cape almost half a league . to the southward of this cape where the lather be , there be a little bay , which be the entrance 88 
 of Rio de Galegos , it eb and flow here 12 fathom . a man must have a great care how he go in here for the cause abovesaid : but he must keep himself out and not anchor in it . 
 in the mouth of Rio de Galegos it 
 from Rio de Galegos to the streit of Magelan the flow iz fa-coast lie northnorthwest and southsoutheast : 8 league thome . unto Cabo de la virgin maria , which be the entrance into Cabo de la 
 the strait : and 4 league before a man come to this vir^n maria . cape there be white cliff with certain black spot in they ; and they be cause with the fall down of the water . here be water enough , and thou may come to a anchor hard aboard the shore , and haste a good defence for a southwest wind . and the cape it 
 self be the high land of all , and be like to cape saint Vincent in Spain : and it have on the east side a ledge of rock , and a point of sand , with diverse sand which show themselves at a low water : thou must take great heed here and give they a good breadth 
 ciudad de hombre de jesus call by m. candish port famine , because he 
 half a league or a quarter of a league off , until thou 
 bring the cape westnorthwest , and than thou may fiundal the 0 stir away southwest . and when thou come to the 
 - 0 0 0 - mtsh . and 
 ’ . - mish , and 
 low land and into ten or twelve fathom , than art fa tqwne 
 thou over against la purification . and half a league within the land the city of number de Jesus be build , east and west with the say cape right against a cliff , which come from the say cape , and go within the streit . this cape stand in 52 degree just . 
 and this be to be take for a warning , that he that come near this cape , and pass by it as i have say with the wind at Northeast , or any other wind off the sea incline to the southeast , must not come to anchor , but present be sure to pass by ; because in 
 self utter abandon , and ruin . where hombre de jesus stand . 
 Southwest wind reign much here in summer . 
 from march 
 summer this place be much subject to Southwest wind , which blow right in : and they put a man from his tackle , and make he to loose his voyage . and from march forward there blow favourable wind from the fi ™ ™ baptize the sea to go from this cape to enter into the streit , from favourabie for this say cape the streit go in to the northwest 14 the streit . 
 Cabo de San Gregorio a good roadstead for any wind from the northwest to the southwest . the indian about gape de san Gregorio in the streit be very treacherous . the second strait call Nuestra sen-nora de Gracia . 
 Punta de santa Anna in 53 deg . and a half . 
 Rincones . la Ciudad deal don Philippe : which be now utter ruin . 
 league : and the channel wax narrow and narrow unto the first strait which run eastnortheast , and westsouthwest . And come out of the mouth thereof a man must keep himself a point to the northward , because there be rock and shoald . and if you see bed of weed , take heed of they , and keep off from they : and after you be past this straight you must stir westsouthwest 8 league unto Cabo de San Gregorio , which be a high white cliff , and be a good road for any wind from the northwest to the southwest . but man must beware and not trust the Indians of this cape : for they be subtle and will betray a man . 
 from this cape begin the second strait which be call Nuestra sennora de Gracia , and lie eastnortheast and Westsouthwest 3 league . And come out of this strait thou shall see 3 little island , lie west off " this strait : thou may go between they , for there be no danger : provide always that thou keep well off from the bay on both side , lest thou be imbay . and from these island thou must keep forward in the channel Westsouth west two league : and then the coast lie north and south unto 53 degree and a half , unto a place call Punta de Santa Anna : and to the northwest thereof in a corner or nook ( which be one of the rincone or nook ) be the town build call la Ciudad deal don Philippe . thou must come to a anchor to the northward thereof , after thou be past the castle and a great tree . 
 . 