the voyage of m. John winter into the south sea by the strait of Magellan , in consort with m. Francis Drake , begin in the year 1577. by which straight also he return safe into England the second of June 1579. contrary to the false report of the Spaniard which give out , that the say passage be not repasseable : write by Edward Cliffe mariner . 
 they set forward from Plymouth the 13. of December . 
 n the year of our lord i^Tl ' the r9* of September there go out of the river of Thamis over the land end one good and new ship call the Elizabeth , of 80 ton in burden : in company whereof go also a small pinnace be 12 ton in burden call the Benedict . 
 the say ship with her pinnace arrive at Plymouth : in which haven be three ship more , one call the pelican in burden 120 ton , be admiral of the fleet : a bark call the marigold in burden thirty ton , with a flyboat of 50 ton . Theise ship have in they 164 man , and be victual and furnish with all kind of necessary provision to make a voyage into the south sea . we set sail the 15 of November , but be put into Falmouth by contrary wind : and afterward be constrain to put back again to Plymouth to repair the great hurt which diverse of our fleet have sustain in that tempest : and at length the 13 of December we set forward from thence upon our voyage . 
 the five and twenty of December we have sight of cape Cantin : this cape lie in the latitude of 32. cape Cantin . degree and 30. minute upon the coast of Barbary , Asaphi , near to a town call Asaphi . the land all along this coast be high and great mountain . sail from the say cape Southsouthwest about 18 league , we find 
 148 
 a little island call mogador a english mile distant from the main , we send our boat to sound the depth , and at the return thereof we understand by our man that the haven be without danger , have five fathom of water fist by the rock enter in upon the point of the island : wherefore we enter in with our whole 
 1577-mogador a island on the coast of Barbary . 
 fleet the 27 of December . the moor that be on the main see our ship ride there , come from the mountain to behold we : who our general , m. Francis Drake espy , show to they a white flag in token of friendship , and send his boat to shore with one of our man , which not long before have be captive in the country , and partly understand their language , to talk with they . when the boat come to shore , the say man go on land to they : to who they show many token of friendship , cast up their eye to heaven , and after look down upon the ground , as though they have swear by heaven and earth , promise peace . that do two of they come aboard to our general , and our man stay on shore for a pledge . 
 these two moor , after they have make good cheer , and receive certain gift of our general go to shore again , and our man come aboard also . but the crafty slave have devise to betray we , come the next day along the sea side with certain camel as though they have bring some merchandise to traffic with we : to who our general send certain of our man in 
 the boat to learn what they have bring , give charge that none of they shall go on land . but the boat be near the shore one of our man more hasty than wise leap to shore ; who the moor immediate take by force , and set he on horseback carry he away into the mountain , so that we see he no more after that time . in the mean time we set up a pinnace in the island , whereof we bring 4 loose out ^re . lmse of England : which be finish , the last of December out we weigh , and come out of the north part of the England . 
 149 
 island , the same way that we come in : for the south chanel be dangerous , have but 8 foot at low water , Mogadorin^i and be full of rock . this island stand in 31 m degree 2 of latitude , be one league in circuit , not ‘ inhabit ; and have infinite number of dove upon it . 
 at sea we meet with a contrary wind , so that we beat oflf and on , till the 4 of Januarie 1578 , at which time a more favourable wind begin to blow at Northeast , and then we set our course Southsouthwest , till cape de Guer on the 7 of Januarie we come as high as cape de Guer , m 30 degree , stand in 30 degree of latitude . here our new pinnace take 3 spanish fisherboat , call cantars . from thence we run Southwest and Southsouthwest , carry the say cantars along with we , till the 10 of the say month , at which time we find our self in 27 degree 4 min. be 10 league westcape bojador southwest from cape bojador , which lie on the main in Africa . from thence we run south and by 
 4. min. ‘ west , until the 13 day at noon , at which time we have sight of Rio del oro , where our pinnace take a Portugal caravel . the 15 , the marigold take a caravel de las about cape de las barbas . and thence we run along CateBlanco coast be low sandy land , till we arrive at cape in 20 degree . Blanco . this cape show it self like the corner of a 30 min. wall upright from the water , to they which come from the northward : where the north pole be elevate 20 degree 30 min. and the crocier be the guard of the south pole , be raise 9 degree 30 min. the say crocier be 4 star , represent the form of a cross , and be 30 degree in latitude from the south pole : and the low star of the say crocier be to be take , when it be direct under the uppermost ; and be so take as many degree as it want of 30 , so many you be to the northward of the equinoctial : and as many degree as be more than 30 , so many degree you be to the southward of the equinoctial . and if you find it to be just 30 then you be direct under the line . 
 150 
 within the say cape Blanco we take one ship more , all the man be flee away , save two . we bring this ship with all the rest which we have take before , into our harbour , 5 league within the cape , where we wash and trim our ship , and go to sea again the 22 of Januarie , leave all the Spaniard there with their ship , save one Cantar , for which our general give they the Benedict . in which course we run continual to the southwest , until the 26 day , when we find the north pole raise 15 degree 15 min. have the wind Northeast or Eastnortheast , which be common on that coast . for it do blow for the most part continual from the shore : and we keep the say course , until we come near the island Bonavista , within 2 league off the shore ; so that we hale off again northwest , the space of one hour , and then run Southwest again , till day light the 27 of Januarie : from which time we run southsouthwest , until 3 of the clock in the afternoon , at which time we approach near the island of Mayo , be high and hilly land , the isle of save that the north part of the island stretch out mat0-it self , a league into the sea very low . we come to anchor under the west part of this island the 28 day of Januarie , and stay there until the 30 of the same . during which time , our general appoint m. John winter and m. Thomas Doughtie , to go over to the east part of the island with 70 man , to get some fresh victual . and as we march through the island , about the midst thereof , we find one house have a garden belong to it , in which we find ripe grape , also ripe grape in ripe gourd , and melon , in the most dead time of our i ™ ™ ™ - winter . we find also a tree which bear the fruit 
 cocos , which be big than a man head , have within the coco the utter coat , which be about 3 inch thick , a certain nut as big as two fist , and have within a white substance , clean fast to the shell , which be half a inch thick , very pleasant to taste , and within that a certain hollowness or void place , wherein be contain a pure 
 151 
 brava . 
 nonnez de Silva . 
 and pleasant water in taste , and as some think , marvellous comfortable . as we pass through this island the inhabitant flee into the mountain , so that we can have no talk with they . 
 but we understand by the Portugal which come with we , that they be but servant to those of saint Iago , to keep their cattle and goat , which be very plentiful in this island : but we find they so wild , that we can take none save some young kid : wherefore we return back again to our ship . the Portugal have salt their well near to the sea , so that we can , not water . 
 then our general command every man aboard : afterward we weigh , and run over to Sant Iago the same night , be io league distant from thence : which seem to be a fruitful island and well people . for we see 3 town on the shore : two of which shoot at we , as we pass along . our general make a shot at one of they again . And sail along the shore , at the south part of the island , we take a Portugal ship lade with wine and other commodity . this island have 15 degree in latitude . 
 from hence we run southsouth west to the isle of Fogo , so call , because it cast continual flame of fire and smoke out of the top thereof , all the whole island be one high mountain . two league west from the isle of Fogo , be another island call Brava , where the sea be above 120 fathom deep near to the shore , so that we can not anchor for the depth of the sea , by reason whereof we be constrain to depart without water . here the general discharge the Portugal , give unto they our pinnace which we build at mogador : with wine , bread , and fish , and so dismiss they the first of February , take one of their company along with he , call nonnez de Silva . the 2 of February we set off from Brava , and direct our course southsoutheast , run so until the 9 of February , be within 4 degree of the equinoctial : at ! 52 
 which time , we have the air trouble with thunder and lightning , notwithstanding calm with extreme heat , and diverse time great shower of rain . 
 the 17 day we be right under the line , which be the most fervent place of the burn zone : where in the midst of February we sustain such heat , with often thunder and lightning , that we do sweat for the most part continual , as though we have be in a stove , or hothouse . here we see fly fish in flyingfish . great abundance , some a foot long , some less . their fynne wherewith they fly be as long as their body . they be great pursue by the dolphin and bonito , who as soon as the fly fish espy , immediate they mount out of the sea in great number , and fly as long as their fynne continue moist : and when they be dry , they fall down into the sea again . and here be to be note , that after we come within 4 degree of the equi - cmtmuall noctial , until we be so much past it , no day do pass , aineat without great store of rain . sm near ihe 
 from hence we direct our course towards the equinoctial . Southsouthwest until the 5 of April ; at which time , we have a very sweet smell from the land . the same day at noon we sound , and find the sea to be 32 fathom deep , the ground be soft oaze : and short after we have but 28 fathom , be 31 degree Landin 31 and 30 min. beyond the equinoctial , toward the south de&rees - 3° pole : and we have sight of the land about 3 of the clock in the afternoon the same day . this land be equinoctial . very low near the sea ; and high mountain up within the country . 
 from hence we run towards the southsouthwest , until the 14 of April ; when we find a little island , lie near the main land of cape Sant marie , by which be the entrance into the river of plate , be in 35 degree of southerly latitude . from this island we run 7 or 8 league along the main , where we come to a anchor under a cape , which our general call cape joy . here every ship take in fresh water . than we 
 cape sant marry at the mouth of the river of plate . 
 153 
 depart , and run about 15 league towards the westsouthwest , where we find a deep bay . in the bottom of this bay be a long rock , not far from the main : which rock so break the force of the sea , that ship may ride commodious under the same for southerly wind . hither come all our fleet to anchor , the 19 of April , and ride there until the 20 day at night . here we kill some seal . And . from thence we run about 20 league , where we find the water very much trouble and fresh , and we run in so far that " we have but 3 fathom water . here we take in fresh water , and run over to the southward , and fall with the land which lie on the south part of the river of plate , the 27 day . this land lie southsouthwest and Northnortheast , and be shall 3 or 4 league into the sea . here our flyboat lose our company in the night . 
 from hence we run towards the southwest , have much foul weather and contrary wind , until the 12 of may : and then we sound and have 28 fethome , with black sand and small stone , and have sight of the land the same morning about 10 of the clock . this land be 47 degree in latitude . our general name this land , cape hope . we come to anchor there , about 3 league from the shore the same night . the next morning our general , go to the main in a boat : by mean whereof he have be in great danger , if the marigold have not weigh , and run in with the shore , and so take up the boat and man : for there arise such foul weather , with a thick mist and a southeast wind , that they be not able to recover their ship again which ride without : which be force to weigh and run to sea . the prize weigh the 13 at night , and run to the southward : the other stay until the 14 in the morning and then run to sea , not be able to ride . 
 in the mean time while the marigold ride under the shore , our general with certain of his man go 
 154 
 on land , where they see two naked man , save that they have a certain skin ne wrap about their shoulder and roll upon their head . to who our general show a white cloth , in sign of friendship , who with certain gesture of their body and hand , show the like to he again , speak likewise and make a noise , which our man can not understand , but they will in no case come near our man . our general go the next day to the same place again : but he have no sight of the foresay man or any other . howbeit he find certain fowl , as ostrich , and other ostrich and sea fowl , which the say man have new kill , and seafoules-laid they on a heap together , as though they have do that for our man of purpose . there be also a certain bag with little stone of diverse colour , which together with the victual our general bring aboard , and then weigh , and come to sea the 15 of the say month : where all the rest of the fleet meet with he , save the prize , and the flyboat . the 16 day we run into a bay to the southward of cape hope , where we ride all that night . the next morning our general weigh , and run without the cape to the northward , and send the Elizabeth towards the south to look for the prize : leave the marigold and the canter to search if in the bay they can find any fit harbour for our ship . the same day be the 14 of may , our general meet with the flyboat ( which lose we the 27 of April ) and bring she into say bay . the 18 in the morning we have word from the ship , that they have find a safe harbour and we weigh and run in , the same day be Whitsunday . the Elizabeth weigh and put forth again to sea , the 20 day , to look for the prize , and not find she come in the next day . in the mean time our general discharge the flyboat , and run she upon the main , where we break she up for firewood . in the mean while there come about descrip-30 of the country people down to the sea side : and fanofuriaine when they be within 100 pase of our man , they set * ’ 
 J55 
 themselves in array very orderly cast their company into the form of a ring , every man have his bow and arrow : who ( when they have pight a staff on the ground , with certain glass , bead , and other trifle ) return back . then the country people come and take they and afterward approach near to our man , show themselves very pleasant , insomuch that m. winter dance with they . they be exceed delight with the sound of the trumpet , and vialy . they be of a mean stature , well lim , and of a duskish , tawny , or brown colour . some of they have their face spot with diverse colour , as red , white , and black . their apparel be a certain skin ( wherein they wrap themselves ) not reach so low as to cover their privy member , all the rest of their body be naked , save that they be certain roll upon their head , who end hang over their shoulder . every one bear his bow , be a ell in length , and arrow make of reed , have head , frame very strange and cunning of a flint stone . they be much give to mirth and jollity , and be very sly , and ready to steal any thing that come within their reach : for one of they snatch our general cap from his head ( as he stoop ) be of scarlet with a golden band : yet he will suffer no man to hurt any of they . they eat raw flesh , for we find seal bone , the raw flesh whereof they have gnaw with their tooth like dog . in this bay we water , and victual with seal : for there be such plenty that we slay above 200 in the space of one hour upon a little island . 
 the 3 of June we depart from thence , and be at sea we be put back again to cape hope , where we discharge our canter and let she float in the sea . afterwards we run to the 50 degree of the south pole , where we meet with the wind southerly , and so turn back again to the northward . and as we run along the shore , we meet with our prize the 19 of June , which we lose the 13 of May . the day follow we find 156 
 a harbour , into the which we enter with all our fleet the same day . this port be 49 degree and a half in latitude , and i suppose it to be the same which Magellan name port S. Julian : for we find a gibbet on a the port of hill , whereupon they be execute that do conspire ant Julian . against Magellan , and certain bone also of their dead body . the 22 of this month our general go to shore upon the main with 7 or 8 of his man , meet with 3 of the patagon , have bow and arrow , who come near to our man make they sign to depart . where - two 0^jur , upon a gentleman be there present , and have a bow p^g^ and arrow , make a shot to the end to show they the force of our bow , with the which shoot his string break : whereupon the patagon presume to encounter they , direct their arrow first at our m. gunner , who have a caliver ready bend to shot at they but it will not take fire : and as he level his piece one of they shoot he through the breast , and out at the back , wherewith he fall down stark dead . also the gentleman that shoot the arrow be so wound that he die the 2 day after and with the other be bury in a little island lie in the say port . our man leave the slay man on shore till night , and then fetch he in a boat . in the mean time the patagon have strip he of all his clothes , and view his body lay his clothes under his head , and so leave he untouched , save that they have stick the english arrow in his left eye . Theise man be of no such stature as the Spaniard report , be but of the height of english man : for i have see man in England tall than i can see any of they . but peradventure the Spaniard do not think that any english man will have come thither so soon to have disprove they in this and diverse other of their notorious lie : wherefore they presume more bold to abuse the world . the last of June m. the execution Thomas Doughty be bring to his answer , be °fM-Thomas accuse , and convict of certain article , and by m. ° ™ te ' drake condemn . he be behead the 2 of July 
 J57 
 1578 , who body be bury in the say island , near to they which be slay . we winter in this port 2 month , during which time we have such weather as be common in England in the depth of winter , or rather cold . after we have trim up our ship , and make provision of fuel and fresh water , we depart thence with 3 ship the 17 of August about noon . and the 20 of the say month we seize cape victory , the entrance by the which cape be the way into the south sea , call 
 the strait of Magellan , the first discoverer thereof . we find the mouth of the strait to be 52 degree southward of equinoctial . in this strait , we find the sea to have no such current as some do imagine , ( follow the course of the primum mobile from east ordinary to west ) but to ebb and flow as ordinary as upon other inthenrei^ht coast > rise 5 fathom upright . the flood rise out ’ of the east ocean , and stretch it self so far into the strait , that it meet the flood of the south sea near about the midst of the strait , where it bend like a elbow , tend to the westnorthwest into the south sea , whereas the east part from the mouth of the strait to this elbow lie south-west and by west , or south-west to 53 degree and j . 30 league within the strait there be 3 island . to the great our general give the name of Elizabeth : to the 2 Bartholomew , because we find it on saint bartholomews abundance of day : the 3 he name saint George island . here we ' go^s bland stay one day and victual our self with a kind of in the strait f°ule which be plentiful in that isle , and who flesh be of Magellan , not far unlike a fat goose here in England : they have no wing , but short pinion which serve their turn in swim . their colour be somewhat black mix with white spot under their belly , and about their neck . they walk so upright , that a far off a man will take they to be little child . if a man approach any thing near they , they run into hole in the ground ( which be not very deep ) whereof the island be full . so that to take they we have staff with hook fast to 
 158 
 the end , wherewith some of our man pull they out and other being ready with cudgel do knock they on the head , for they bite so cruel with their crooked bill , that none of we be able to handle they alive . the land on both part be very high : but especial towards the south sea , monstrous high hill and craggy rock do exalt themselves , who top be all hoary with snow , in the month of August , September , and October . notwithstanding the low part of the hill be replenish and beautify with impenetrable thick wood of strange and unknown tree , flourish all the year long . here we make provision of fuel and fresh water , and pass by cape Deseado into the south sea the 6 of September . And run along towards the northwest about 70 league , the wind turn direct against we , with great extremity of foul weather , as rain , hail , snow , and thick fog which continue so more than 3 week , that we can bear no sail , at which time we be drive 57 degr . to the south pole . the 15 of September the moon be there eclipse , and begin to be darken present after the set of the sun , about 6 of the clock at night , be then equinoctial vernal in that country . the say eclipse happen the 16 day in the morning before one of the clock in England , which be about six hour difference , agree to one quarter of the world , from the meridian of England towards the west . the last of September be a very foul night , and the sea sore grow , we lose the marigold , the general ship and the Elizabeth run to the eastward to get the shore , whereof we have sight , the 7 of October , fall into a very dangerous bay full of rock : and there we lose company of m. Drake the same night . the next day very hardly escape the danger of the rock , we put into the strait again , where we anchor in a open bay for the space of 2 day , and make great fierce on the shore , to the end that if m. Drake shall come into the 
 A.D. 
 1578. 
 high hill on both side of the strait . 
 cape Deseado where they entered into the south sea . 
 they be drive to degree southward . 
 they loose m. drake company . 
 strait , he may find we . after we go into a is9 
 they return out of the strait the 11 of November , have enter into the south sea the 6 of September . 
 sant tineent in Brasil in 24 degree . 
 sound , where we stay for the space of 3 week and name it the port of health , for the most part of our man be very sick with long watch , wet , cold , and evil diet , do hear ( God be thank ) wonderful recover their health in short space . here we have very great muscle ( some be 20 inch long ) very pleasant meat , and many of they full of seed-pearl . 
 we come out of this harbour the first of November , give over our voyage by m. winter compulsion ( full sore against the mariner mind ) who allege , he stand in despair , as well to have wind to serve his turn for Peru , as also of m. drake safety . so we come back again through the strait to saint George island , where we take of the fowl before name , and after depart . 
 and thus we pass by cape victory out of the strait the 11 of November , direct our course to the north-east , till the last of this month . what time we arrive at a island which lie at the mouth of the river of plate . upon this island there be such a infinite number of seal , as may seem incredible to any man that have not be there , some of they be 16 foot long , not fear the presence of man : for the most of our man be upon the island , for the space of 15 day to set up a pinnace , during which time the seal will come and sleep by they , and rather resist our man , then give place , unless mortali blow force they to yield . 
 when our pinnace be build , we go to another island , where we do water , and afterward depart the first of Januarie 157 9 , and run towards the north till the 20 of the say month , and then we arrive at a island which lie on the coast of Brasil , near to a town call sant Vincent inhabit by the Portugal . the say town lie 24 degree southward , almost under the Tropic of Capricorn . here , by reason of foul weather we lose our pinnace , and 8 man in she , and never see they since . here also our ship be in great 160 
 danger , by the mean of a strong current , which have almost cast we upon the shore before we be aware , insomuch that we be constrain to anchor in the open sea , and break our cable and lose a anchor , and present let fall another anchor ; in weigh whereof our man be sore spoil . for the capstan run about so violent with the rise of the ship in the sea , that it throw the man from the bar , and break out the brain of one man : one other have his leg break , and diverse other be sore hurt . at last we goat up our anchor and set sail , and run into a place call Tanay , where we ride under a island and take in wood and water . 
 and while we stay here , there come 3 Portugal aboard we in . a canoa , to know what we will have , or of what country we be . to who our captain make answer : that we be Englishman , and have bring commodity for their country , if they will traffic with we : whereat they great marveil . for they say that they never hear of any english ship to have be in that country before ; and so they go to land again , have one of our man with they to speak with the governor of the town , and we keep one of they for a pledge . Shortly after there come another canoa aboard we with one Portugal and all the rest naked man of the country : of who we have two small ox , one young hog , with certain hen : also pome-cytrons , limon , orange , and other fruit of the country . for the which our captain give to they , linen cloth , comb , knife , and other trifle . in the mean time the governor of the town send word that we shall have nothing , unless we will bring our ship into the haven . whereunto our captain will in no case consent : for all their practice be to have get we within their danger , nevertheless we come somewhat near the town with our ship , as though we will have go in ; but we never mean it . 
 here we take in our man ; and set the Portugal xi 161 l 
 A.D. 
 I579 - 
 a dangerous current . 
 Tanay a ptace in Brasil . 
 the isle of SantSebastian about the Tropic of Capricorn . 
 cape sant Augustine . 
 the isle of Fernando de Loronha . 
 the sea of weed , near the Tropic of Cancer . 
 their arrival at ilfoord-combe in Devonshire . 
 pledge on land . after that we go to a hand call the isle of Sant Sebastian ; where we take fish . here the Portugal have betray we , if a Brasillian one of their slave have not be . for he steal from they , and show unto we by sign , that the Portugal be come with their canoas to take we , as it fall out in deed : for the next morning they show themselves with 12 or 16 canoas , some of they have 40 man in they . the same night two of our man run away with our boat to the Portugal . and thus we come away from thence towards our own country the 17 of march : and have sight of the cape of sant Augustine , lie in 8 degree to the southward of the line . after that we have sight of a island lie within 3 degree of the equinoctial , call the isle of Fernando de Loronha . we cross the equinoctial the 13 of April , and have sight of the north star the 19 of the say month . 
 the 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 of may , we sail through the sea of weed , about the space of 100 league , be under the Tropic of Cancer . from whence we keep our course towards the north-east , until we have the pole raise 47 degree . the 22 of may we run Eastnortheast . 
 the 29 we sound and have 70 fathom with white oaze ; have the north pole raise 51 degree . the 30 of may we have sight of saint Ives on the north side of cornwall , and the 2 of June 1579 we arrive at ilfoord-combe in devonshire . 
 and thus after our manifold trouble and great danger in have pass the strait of Magellan into the south sea with our general m. Francis Drake , and have be drive with he down to the southerly latitude of 57 degree , and afterward pass back by the same strait again , it please God to bring we safe into our own native country to enjoy the presence of our dear friend and kinsfolk , to who be praise , honour , and glory , for ever and ever . amen . 
 Edward cliff , mariner . 
 . 