Hetha , he have Gotland on leerboord , and Silland , with Hetha but two diverse other island . in that country dwell English ^es man , before they come into this land . and these 2. day - m ean ‘ he have upon his leereboord the island that be subject to Denmark . it seem to be Witmer or Rostocke . wolstans navigation in the | | east sea , from Hetha to Trusco , which be about Dantzig . | | within the sound of Denmark . Olstan say , that he depart from Hetha , and arrive at Trusco , in the space of 7. day , and 7. night : during which time , his ship keep her course continual under sail . all this voyage Wenedland be still upon his steerboord , and on his leerboord be Langland , Layland , Falster , and sconie : all which country be subject to Denmark . upon his leerboord also , be Bargenland , which have a Bargenland , private king , unto who it be subject . have leave Bar - or Bornholme . genland , he pass by Blekingie , mere , Eland and Gotland , have they on his leerboord : all which country be subject to Sweden : and Wenedland be all the way upon his steerboord , until he come to Wixel mouth . Wixel Wixel be the be a very great river which run along betwixt Witland and Wenedland . Witland be appertain to the easter - 1 e ling : and the river of Wixel run out of | | Wenedland Dantzig . into eastmeere , which eastmeere be at the least 15. mile | | or , Prussia . in breadth . there run also another river call use from the east , and fall into eastmeere , out of another lake upon the bank , whereupon be situate Fruso . so Fruso . that use come out of two Eastland , and Wixel out of | | or , Wenedland , fall both together into eastmeere , and there tuania . Wixel deprive use of his name , and run thence west and north into the sea ; whereof the place be call Wixelmouth . Eastland be a very large land , and there be many city the descrip-and town within it , and in every one of they be a king : whereby there be continual among they great strife as a ' and contention . there be great plenty of honey and fish . mare milk of the wealthy man drink common mare milk , and chief dnnke . poor people and slave mead . there be no ale brew among the Easterling , but of mead there be plenty . the navigation of king Edgar , take out of Florentius Wigorniensis , Hoveden , and m. Dee his discourse of the british monarchic , page . 54 , 55 , etc have often time ( say he ) and many way look into the state of earthly kingdom , general the whole world over ( as far as it may be yet know to christian man common ) be a study of no great difficulty , but rather a purpose somewhat answerable to a perfect Cosmo - grapher , to find himself Cosmopolites , a citizen and member of the whole and only one mystical city universali , and so consequent to meditate of the cosmopolitical government thereof , under the king almighty , pass on very swift towards the most dreadful and most comfortable term prefix . and i find ( say he ) that if this british monarchic will heretofore have follow the advantage which they have have onward , they may very well , year this , have surpass by justice , and godly sort , any particular monarchic else , that ever be on earth since man creation : and that to all such purpose as to God be most acceptable , and to all perfect common wealth , most honourable , profitable , and comfortable . but yet ( say he ) there be a little lock of lady occasion flicker in the air , by our hand to catch hold on , whereby we may yet once more ( before all be utter pass , and for ever ) discreet and valiant recover and enjoy , if not all our ancient and due appurtenance to this 16 