race and blood of this kingdom . the aforesaid king Arthur obtain also in those day of the pope and court of room , that Norway shall be for ever annex to the crown of Britain for the enlargement of this kingdom , and he call it the chamber of Britain . for this cause the norse say , that they ought to dwell with we in this kingdom , to wit , that they belong to the crown of Britain : for they have rather dwell here then in their own native country , which be drieand full of mountain , [ i . 3. ] and barren , and no grain grow there , but in certain place . but this country of Britain be fruitful , wherein corn and all other good thing do grow and increase : for which cause many cruel battle have be oftentimes fight betwixt the Englishman and the people of Norway , and infinite number of people have be slay , and the norse have possess many land and island of this empire , which unto this day they do possess , neither can they ever afterward be full expel . but now at length they be incorporate with we by the receive of our religion and sacrament , and by take wife of our nation , and by affinity , and marriage . for so the good king Edward ( who be a notable maintainer of peace ) ordain and grant unto they by the generali consent of the whole kingdom , so that the people may , and ought from henceforth dwell and remain in this kingdom with we as our love swear brethren . a testimony out of the foresay Galfridus monumetensis , concern the conquest of Malgo , king of England . Lib. 11. cap . 7. Ortiporio successit Malgo , omnium fere britanniae pulcherrimus , multorum tyrannorum depulsor , robustus armis , largior caeteris , and ultra modum probitate praeclarus . hic etiam totam insulam obtinuit , and sex conprovinciales oceani insulas : hyberniam videlicet , atque islandiam , gotlandiam , Orcades , Noruegiam , daciam , adjecit dirissimis praeliis potestati svae . a it Algo succeed Vortiporius which be the goodly Eva man in person of all Britain , a prince that expulse many tyrant . he be strong and valiant in war , tall than most man that then live , and exceed famous for his virtue . this king also obtain the government of the whole island of Britain , and by most sharp battle he recover to his empire the six island of the ocean sea , which before have be make tributary by king Arthur , namely Ireland , island , Gotland , Orkney , Norway , and Denmark . the conquest of the isle of Anglesey and man by Edwin the saxon king of Northumberland write in the second book and five chapter of Beda his ecclesiastical history of the english nation . Duinus Nordanhumbrorum gentis , id est , ejus quae ad borealem Humbri fluminis plagam inhabitat , ----- majore potentia cunctis qui britanniam incolunt , anglorum pariter and Britonum populis praefuit , praeter cantuarios tantiim , necndn and menavias Britonum insulas , quae inter hiberniam and britanniam sitae sunt , anglorum subjecit potestati . the same in english . EDwin king of the people of Northumberland , that be to say , of they which inhabit to the north of the river Humber , be of great authority than any other potentate in the whole isle of Britain , bare rule as well over the english as the british nation , except only the people of Kent : who also bring in subjection under the english , the isle of man and Anglesey , and the other northwestern isle of the briton , which be situate between Britain and Ireland . 8 