a it Algo succeed Vortiporius which be the goodly Eva man in person of all Britain , a prince that expulse many tyrant . he be strong and valiant in war , tall than most man that then live , and exceed famous for his virtue . this king also obtain the government of the whole island of Britain , and by most sharp battle he recover to his empire the six island of the ocean sea , which before have be make tributary by king Arthur , namely Ireland , island , Gotland , Orkney , Norway , and Denmark . the conquest of the isle of Anglesey and man by Edwin the saxon king of Northumberland write in the second book and five chapter of Beda his ecclesiastical history of the english nation . Duinus Nordanhumbrorum gentis , id est , ejus quae ad borealem Humbri fluminis plagam inhabitat , ----- majore potentia cunctis qui britanniam incolunt , anglorum pariter and Britonum populis praefuit , praeter cantuarios tantiim , necndn and menavias Britonum insulas , quae inter hiberniam and britanniam sitae sunt , anglorum subjecit potestati . the same in english . EDwin king of the people of Northumberland , that be to say , of they which inhabit to the north of the river Humber , be of great authority than any other potentate in the whole isle of Britain , bare rule as well over the english as the british nation , except only the people of Kent : who also bring in subjection under the english , the isle of man and Anglesey , and the other northwestern isle of the briton , which be situate between Britain and Ireland . another testimony allege by Beda to the same purpose . Lib. 2. cap . 9 anno ab incarnation domini sexcentesimo vicesimo quarto , gens Nordanhumbrorum , hoc est , ea natio anglorum quae ad aquilonarem Humbri fluminis plagam habitat , cum rege suo eduino , verbum fidei ( praedicante Paulino , cujus supra meminimus ) suscepit : cvi videlicet regi in auspicium suscipiendae fidei , and regni coelestibus potestas , . and terreni creverat imperii : ita ut ( quod Nemo anglorum ante eum fecit ) omnes britanniae fine , qua vel ipsorum vel Britonum provinciae habitabantur , sub ditione acceperit . Quin and menavias insulas ( sicut and supra docuimus ) imperio subjugavit anglorum . Quarum prio quae ad austrum est , and situ amplior , and frugum proventu atque ubertate foelicior , nongentarum sexaginta familiarum mensuram , juxta aestimationem anglorum , secunda trecentarum and ultra spatium tenet . the same in english . [ i - 4 ] in the year from the incarnation of our lord , six hundred twenty and four , the people of Northumberland , to wit , those english people which inhabit on the north side of the river of Humber , together with their king Edwin , at the christian preach and persuasion of Paulinus above mention , embrace the gospel . under which king , after he have once accept of the christian faith , the power both of the heavenly and of his earthly kingdom be enlarge ; insomuch , that he ( which no english king have do before he ) bring under his subjection all the province of Britain , which be inhabit either by the english man themselves , or by the briton . Moreover , he subdue unto the crown of England ( as we have above signify ) the Hebrides , common call the western island . the principali whereof be more commodious and pleasant seat towards the south , and more abound with corn than the rest , contain accord to the estimation of the english , room enough for 960. family , and the second for 300. and above . the voyage of Bertus , generail of a army send into Ireland by Ecfridus king of Northumberland , in the year of our lord 684 , out of the 4. book and 26. chapter of Beda his ecclesiastical ! history . Nno Dominicae incarnationis sexcentesimo octogesimo quarto , Ecfridus rex nordanhumbrorum , misso hiberniam cum excer-citu duce Berto , vastavit misere gentem innoxiam , and nationi anglorum semper amicissimam , ita ut nec ecclesiis quidem aut monasteriis manus parceret hostilis . at insulani and quantum valuere armis arma repellebant , and invocantes divinae auxilium pietatis coelitus se vindicari continuis diu imprecationibus postulabant . et quamvis maledici regnum dei possidere non possint , creditum tamen est , quod hi qui merito impietatis svae maledicebantur , ocyiis domino vindice , poena svi reatus luerent . the same in english . in the year of our lord 684 , Ecfrid the king of Northumberland send captain Bert into Ireland with a army , which Bert miserable waste that innocent nation be always most friendly unto the people of England , insomuch that the fury of the enemy spare neither church nor monastery . howbeit the islander to their power repel arm with arm , and crave God aid from heaven with continual imprecation and curse , they plead for revenge . and albeit curse speaker can by no mean inherit the kingdom of God , it be think notwithstanding , that they which be accurse for their impiety do not long escape the vengeance of God imminent for their offence . 10 