| | or , straight . it seem to be about Elsenborg . ad . the english voyage c . 890. Swethland . south , lie Swethland , and against the same towards the queeneland . north , lie Queeneland . the queen sometime pass the mountain , invade and spoil the norman : and on the contrary part , the norman likewise sometime spoil their country . among the mountain be many and great lake in sundry place of fresh water , into the boat cart which the queen use to carry their boat upon their on man back , over janj } anj thereby invade and spoil the country of the norman . Theise boat of they be very little and very light . the voyage of octher out of his country of halgoland into the sound of Denmark unto a port call Hetha , which seem to be Wismer or Rostorke . OCther say that the country wherein he dwell , be call Halgoland : and affirm that there be no man dwell towards the north from he . from this country towards the south , there be a certain two port call sciring hall , whither , he say , that a man be not able to sail in a month space , if he lie still by night , although he have every day a full wind . and he shall sail all the way along the coast , have on his steereboord , first Jutland and the island which lie betwixt this country and Jutland , still along the coast of this country , till he come to sciring hall , have it on his larboard . at sciring hall there enter into the land a main gulf of the sea , which be so broad , that a man can see over it : and on the other side against the same , be Gotland , and then Silland . this sea stretch many hundred mile up into the land . from sciring hall he say that he sail in 5. day to the port which be call Hetha , which lie betwixt the country of two wendel , saxon , and angle , whereunto it be subject . and as he sail thitherward from sciring hall , he have upon his steereboord Denmark , and on his leereboord the main sea , for the space of 3. day : and 2. day before , he arrive in * + the description of the sound of Denmark . Gotland . | | Vandal . Hetha , he have Gotland on leerboord , and Silland , with Hetha but two diverse other island . in that country dwell English ^es man , before they come into this land . and these 2. day - m ean ‘ he have upon his leereboord the island that be subject to Denmark . it seem to be Witmer or Rostocke . wolstans navigation in the | | east sea , from Hetha to Trusco , which be about Dantzig . | | within the sound of Denmark . Olstan say , that he depart from Hetha , and arrive at Trusco , in the space of 7. day , and 7. night : during which time , his ship keep her course continual under sail . all this voyage Wenedland be still upon his steerboord , and on his leerboord be Langland , Layland , Falster , and sconie : all which country be subject to Denmark . upon his leerboord also , be Bargenland , which have a Bargenland , private king , unto who it be subject . have leave Bar - or Bornholme . genland , he pass by Blekingie , mere , Eland and Gotland , have they on his leerboord : all which country be subject to Sweden : and Wenedland be all the way upon his steerboord , until he come to Wixel mouth . Wixel Wixel be the be a very great river which run along betwixt Witland and Wenedland . Witland be appertain to the easter - 1 e ling : and the river of Wixel run out of | | Wenedland Dantzig . into eastmeere , which eastmeere be at the least 15. mile | | or , Prussia . in breadth . there run also another river call use from the east , and fall into eastmeere , out of another lake upon the bank , whereupon be situate Fruso . so Fruso . that use come out of two Eastland , and Wixel out of | | or , Wenedland , fall both together into eastmeere , and there tuania . Wixel deprive use of his name , and run thence west and north into the sea ; whereof the place be call Wixelmouth . Eastland be a very large land , and there be many city the descrip-and town within it , and in every one of they be a king : whereby there be continual among they great strife as a ' 15 