certain testimony concern king Arthur and t1 - ' • ] his conquest of the north region , take out of the history of the king of Britain , write by Galfridus Monumetensis , and new print at Heidelberge , anno 1587. Lib. 9 cap . 10. Nno Christi , 517. Arthurus , secundo regni svi anno , subjugatis totius hyberniae partibus , classem svam direxit in islandiam , eamque debellato populo subjugavit . Exin divulgato per caetera insulas rumore , quod ei nulla Provincia resistere poterat , Doldavius rex Gotlandiae , and gun - facius rex Orcadum ultrd venerunt , promiss6que vectigali subjectionem fecerunt . emensa deinde hyeme , reversus est in britanniam , statumque regni in firmam pacem renovans , moram dvodecim annis ibidem fecit . the same in english . in the year of Christ , 517. king Arthur in the second year of his reign , have subdue all part of Ireland , sail with his fleet into island , and bring it and the people thereof under his subjection . the rumour afterward be spread throughout all the other island , that no country be able to withstand he , Doldavius the king of Gotland , and Gunfacius the king of Orkney , come voluntary unto he , and yield he their obedience , promise to pay he tribute . the winter be spend , he return into Britain , and establish his kingdom in perfect peace , he continue there for the space of twelve year . Lib. 9 cap . 12. Missis deinde in diversa regna Legatis , invitantur tam ex Galliis , quam ex collateralibus insulis oceani , qui ad curiam venire deberent , etc et paulo post : ex collateralibus autem insulis , Guillaumurius rex hyberniae , Malvasius rex Islandiae , Doldavius rex Gotlandiae , gunnasius rex Orchadum , lot rex Noruegiae , Aschilius rex danorum . the same in english . after that king Arthur send his messenger into diverse kingdom , he summon such as be to come to his court , aswell out of France , as out of the adjacent island of the sea , etc and a little after : from those adjacent island come Guillaumurius king of Ireland , Malvasius king of island , Doldavius king of Gotland , Gunnasius king of Orkney , lot the king of Norway , and Aschilius the king of Denmark . Lib. 9 cap . 19 at reges caeterarum insularum , quoniam non duxerant in morem equite habere , pedite quot cuique debebat , promittunt , ita ut ex sex insulis , videlicet , hyberniae , Islandiae , Gotlandiae , Orcadum , Noruegiae , atque daciae , sexy viginti millia essent annumerata . [ i - 2 - ] the same in english . but the king of the other island , because it be not their custom to breed up horse , promise the king as many footman , as every man be bind to send : so that out of the six island , namely , of Ireland , island , Gotland , Orkney , Norway , and Denmark , the king have six score thousand soldier send he . 