ego TEdgarus anglorum Basileus , omniumque regum , insularum , oceanique britanniam circumjacentis , cunctardmque nationum , quae infra eam includuntur , imperator , and dominus . of his regality , as with the testimony annex of the state and noble of his empire , to commit to perpetuali memory , the stile of his chief worldly dignity , in this very tenor of word before also remember . note the queen majesty royalty over the british ocean sea , round about empire . the voyage of Edmund and Edward the son of king Edmund Ironside into Hungary , anno D. 1017. record by Florentius Wigorniensis page - 39 An. Dom. 1017. edit consilium edricus canuto regi , ut clitunculos eadwardum and Eadmundum regis eadmundi filio necaret . say quia magnum dedecus sibi videbatur , ut in anglia perimerentur , parvo elapso tempore , ad regem Suavorum occidendos misit . Qui , licet foedus esset inter eos , precibus illius nullatenus voluit acquiescere , sed illos ad regem hungarorum salomonem nomine misit nutriendos vitaeque reservandos . quorum unus scilicet Eadmundus processu temporis ibidem vitam finivit . Eadwardus vero Agatham filiam Germani Imperatoris henrici in matrimonium accepit , ex qua Margaretam scotorum reginam , and christinam sanctimonialem , and clitonem Eadgarum suscepit . [ I. io . ] the same in english . EDric counsel king Kanutus to murder the young prince Edward and Edmund the son of king Edmund . but because it seem a thing very dishonourable unto he to have they put to death in England , he send they , after a short space , unto the king of Sweden to be slay . who , albeit there be a league between they , will in no case con - descend unto Canute his bloody request , but send they unto Salomon the king of Hungary to be nourish and preserve alive . the one whereof namely Edmund in process of time there decease . but Edward receive to wife Agatha daughter unto the germane emperor Henry , of who he beget Margaret the queen of the Scot , and Christina a nun , and Clito Edgar . A.D. IO66 . a chronicle of the king of man , take out of m. camdens chorography . n the year of our lord 1066. Edward king of England , of famous memory decease , who Harald son of Godwin succeed in his kingdom ; against which Harald the king of Norwaie call Harald Harfager fight a battle at Stainford bridge , where the english win the field put all the norwegian to flight : out of which flight one Godredus surname Crovan ( the son of Harald the black , who have before time flee out of island ) repair unto godr son of Syrric , who then reign in man , and be right friendly and honourable entertain by he . in the very same year William the conqueror subdue England , and godr the son of Syrric , king of man , decease , after who succeed his son Fingal . Fingal . in the year 1066. Godredus Crovan gather a fleet of ship , and sail unto man , and give battle unto the people of the country , be vanquish and put to flight . the second time also have gather his army and ship together , he come unto man , fight with the inhabitant , lose the victory , and be chase away . yea , the three time he assemble a great multitude , and come by night unto the port which be call Ramsa , hide 300. of his man in a wood stand upon the side of the hill call Scacafel . the sun be no soon up , but the mannians arrange themselves and with great fury set upon godred . 25 