under king John ) in his book of the miracle of Ireland , have certain word altogether alike with these , videlicet : not far from these island ( namely the Hebrides , island etc ) towards the north there be a certain wonder whirlpool of the sea , whereinto all the wave of the sea from far have their course and recourse , as it be without stop : which , there convey themselves into the secret receptacle of nature , be swallow up , as it be , into a bottomless pit , and if it chance that any ship do pass this way , it be pull , and draw with such a violence of the wave , that eftsoon without remedy , the force of the whirlpool devour the same . the philosopher describe four indraught of this ocean sea , in the four opposite quarter of the world , from whence many do conjecture that as well the flow of the sea , as the blast of the wind , have their first originali . A.D. 1360. there be a notable whirlpool on the coast of Norway , call Malestrande , about the latitude of 68 a testimony of the learned mathematician master John Dee , touch the foresay voyage of Nicholas de Linna . Nno 1360. ( that be to wit , in the 34. year of the reign of the triumphant king Edward the three ) a friar of Oxford , be a good astronomer , go in company with other to the most northern island of the world , and there leave his company together , he travail alone , and purposely describe all the northern island , with the indrawing sea : and the record thereof at his return he deliver to the king of England . the name of which book be Inventio fortunata ( aliter fortunae ) qui libre Inventio incipit a gradu 54. usque ad polum . which friar for ^ » rtunata-sundry purpose after that do five time pass from England thither , and home again . it be to be note , that from the haven of Linne in Norfolk ( whereof the foresay francisan friar take his 303 the english voyage name ) to island , it be not above a fortnight sail with a ordinary wind , and have be of many year a very common and usual trade : which further appear by the privilege grant to the fisherman of the town of blacknie in the say county of Norfolk , by king Edward the three , for their exemption and freedom from his ordinary service , in respect of their trade to island . the voyage of Henry earl of Derbie , after duke of Hereford , and last king of England , by the name of Henry the four , An. Dom. 1390. into Prussia and Lettowe , against the infidel , record by Thomas of Walsingham . ominus henricus comes de Derbie per idem tempus profectus est in le Pruys , ubi cum adjutorio marescalli dictae patriae , and cujusdam regis vocati Wytot devicit exercitum regis de Lettowe , captis qua-tuor ducibus , and tribus peremptis , and amplius quam trecentis , de valentioribus exercitus supradicti pariter interemptis . Civitas quoque voco two will , in cujus castellum rex de Lettowe nomine Skirgalle confugerat , potenti virtute dicti comitis maxim , atque suorum capta est . namque qui fuerunt de familia sva primi murum ascenderant , and vexillum ejus super muros , caeteris vel torpentibus vel ignorantibus , posuerunt . captaque sunt ibi vel occisa quatuor millia plebanorum , fratre regis de Poleyn inter caetero ibi perempto , qui adversarius nostri fuit . obsessumque fuit castrum dictae civitatis per quinque hebdomada : say propter infirmitate , quibus vexabatur exercitus magistri de Pruys and de Lifland noluerunt diutius expectare . facti sunt Christiani de gente de Lettowe octo . et magister de Lifland duxit secum in svam patriam tria millia captivorum . fl alias Vilna . [ I. 123. ] An. Dorn . 139° . 3°4 