and before Calais , during the siege there , as it appear in the account of William norwel keeper of the king wardrobe , from the 21. day of April in the 18 year of the reign of the say king , unto the four and twenty day of November in the one and twenty year of his reign , be three . hundred xxxvii . thousand livre . ix . s . four . d . a note out of Thomas Walsingham touch the huge fleet of eleven hundred well furnish ship wherewith king Edward the three pass over unto Calais in the year * 359 - a no gratias 1359. Johannes rex francia sub umbra pacis , and dolose obtulit regi angliae flandriam , picardiam , aquitaniam , aliasque terras quas equitaverat and vastarat : pro quibus omnibus ratificandis idem rex edwardus in franciam nuncios suos direxit ; quibus omnibus Franci contradixerunt . unde motus rex Anglias , celeriter se and suos praeparavit ad transfretandum , ducens secum principem walliae edwardum suum primogenitum , ducem Henricum lancastriae , and fere proceres omnes , quos comitabantur vel sequebantur poene mille currus , habuitque apud sanwicum instructas optime undecies centum nave , and cum hoc apparatu ad humiliandum francorum fastum franciam navigavit , relicto domino Thoma de Woodstock filio suo juniore admodum parvulo , anglici regni custode , sub tutela tamen . the same in english . in the year of our lord 1359. John the french king crafty , and under pretence of peace , offer unto Edward the three king of England , Flanders , Picardy , Gascoigne , and other territory which he have spoil and waste : for the ratify of which agreement , the foresay king Edward send his ambassador into France , but the Frenchman gainsay they in all their article and 300 demand . whereupon the king of England be provoke , speedy prepare himself and his force to cross the sea , carry with he Edward prince of Wales his heir apparent , and Henry duke of Lancaster and almost all his noble , with a thousand wagon and cart attend upon they . and the say king have at Sandwich eleven hundred ship exceed well furnish : with which preparation he pass over the sea , to abate the frenchmens arrogancy : leave his young son Thomas of Woodstock , be very tender of age , as his vicegerent in the realm of England ; albeit not without a protector , etc the voyage of Nicholas de Lynna a franciscan friar , and a excellent mathematician of Oxford , to all the region situate under the north pole , in the year 1360. and in the reign of Edward the 3. king of England . the word of Gerardus Mercator , in the foot of his general map , upon the description of the uorth part . Uod ad descriptionem partium septentrionalium attinet , eam nos accipimus ex itinerario Jacobi Cnoyen buscodu-censis , qui quaedam ex rebus gestis arthuri Britanni citat , majorem autem partem and potiora , a sacerdote quodam apud regem Noruegiae , An. Dom. 1364. didicit . descenderat be ex illis quos Arthurus ad have habitandas insulas miserat , and referebat , An. 1360. mino-ritam quendam Anglum Oxoniensem Mathematicum in eas insulas venisse , ipsisque relictis ad ulteriora arte Magica profectum descripsisse omnia , and Astrolabio dimensum esse in hanc subjectam formam fere , uti ex Jacobo collegimus . Euripos illos quatuor dicebat tanto impetu ad interiorem voraginem rapi , ut nave semel ingressae nullo vento retroagi possent , neque vero unquam tantum ibi ventum esse , ut molae frumentariae circumagendae sufficiat . Simillima his habet Giraldus 301 