Algezer in Granado . Layas in Armenia . Froysart . lib . 3. cap . 40. Natalie in the main of Asia near rhod . Tremisen be in Barbary . | | or , palace Froysart lib . 3. cap . 40. turquoise . the time when Chaucer write , be thus mention in the end of his letter of Cupide . the english voyage at Algezer : and ride in Belmarye : at Leyes be he , and also at Satalye , when they be win : and in the great see at many a noble army have he bee . at mortali battle have he be fifteen , and fight for our faith at Tramissen , in list thry , and aye slay his foe : this ilk worthy knight have be also , sometime with the lord of two palathye against another heathen in turquoise . write in the lusty month of may in our palace , where many a million of lover true have habitation , the year of grace joyful and jocund , a thousand , four hundred and second . the original , proceed and success of the northern domestical and foreign trade and traffics of this isle of Britain from the time of Nero the emperor , who decease in the year of our lord 70. under the roman , briton , saxon , and Dane , till the conquest : and from the conquest , until this present time , gather out of the most authentical history and record of this nation . a testimony out of the fourteenth book of the Annales of Cornelius Tacitus , prove London to have be a famous mart town in the reign of Nero the emperor , which die in the year of Christ 70. t Suetonius mira constantia medios inter host Londinium perrexit , cognomento quidem coloniae non insigne , sed copia negociatorum and commeatu maxim celebre . 308 but Suetonius with wonderful constancy pass through the midst of his enemy , unto London , which though it be not honour with the name and title of a roman colony , yet be it most famous for [ i . I2j . ] multitude of merchant and concourse of people . a testimony out of venerable Beda ( which die Beda eaiesi-in the year of our lord 734. ) prove gentis angi0 . London to have be a city of great traffic rum lib . 2. and merchandise not long after the begin of the saxon reign . Nno Dominicae incarnationis sexcentesimo quarto Augustinus britanniarum archiepiscopus ordinavit duos episcopos , mellitum videlicet and justum : mellitum quidem ad praedicandum provinciae orientalium Saxonum , qui Tamesi fluvio dirimuntur a Cantia , and ipsi orientali Mari contigui , quorum metropolis Londonia Civitas est , super ripam praefati fluminis posita , and ipsa multorum emporium populorum , terra marique venien tium . the same in english . in the year of the incarnation of Christ 604. Augustine archbishop of Britain consecrate two bishop , to wit Mellitus and Justus . he appoint Mellitus to preach to the east Saxons , which be divide from Kent by the river of Thames , and border upon the eastern sea , who chief and metropolitan city be London , seat upon the bank of the aforesaid river , which be also a Marte town of many nation , which repair thither by sea and by land . [ the league 309 