the voyage of Thomas of Woodstock duke of Gloucester into Prussia , in the year 1391. write by Thomas Walsingham . | | filius natu minimus edwardi 3. reditus . Odem tempore dux gloverniae dominus two Thomas de Woodstock , multis moerenti-bus , iter apparavit versus le Pruys : quern non Londinensium gemitus , non communis vulgi moeror retinere poterant , quin proficisci vellet . nam plebs communis tam Urbana quam rustica metuebant quod eo absent aliquod novum detrimentum succresceret , quo praesente nihil tale timebant . siquidem in eo spes and solatium totius patriae reposita videbantur . ipse vero mox , ut fine patriae svae transiit , illico adversa agitatus fortuna , nunc hic nunc illae turbinibus procellosis circumfertur ; and in tantum destituitur , ut de vita etiam desperaret . tandem post daciam , post norwagiam , post scoticam barbariem non sine mortis pavore transcursam , pervenit northumbriam , and ad castellum se contulit de Tinnemutha velut assylum antiquitiis notum sibi : ubi per aliquot dies recreatus , iter assumpsit versus manerium suum de Plashy , magnum apportans gaudium toti regno , tam de ejus evasione , quam de adventu suo . the same in english . at the same time the duke of Gloucester lord Thomas of Woodstock ( the young son of Edward the three ) to the great grief of many , take his journey towards Prussia : who neither the Londoner moam nor yet the lamentation of the commonalty can restrain from his intend expedition . for the common people both of the city and of the country fear lest in his absence some new calamity may happen ; which they fear not while he be present . for in he the whole nation seem to repose their hope and comfort . howbeit have scarce pass as yet the bound of his own 306 country , he be immediate by hard fortune toss up and down with dangerous storm and tempest , and be bring into such distress , that he despair even of his own life . at length , have not without danger of death , sail along the coast of Denmark , Norway , and Scotland , he return into Northumberland , and go to the castle of Tinmouth as unto a place of refuge know of old unto he : where , after he have refresh himself a few day , he take his journey towards his manor of Plashy , bring great joy unto the whole kingdom , aswell in regard of his safety as of his return . the verse of Geoffrey Chaucer in the knight prologue , who live in the year 1402. ( as he write himself in his epistle of Cupide ) show that the english knight after the loss of Aeon , be wont in his time to travail into Prussia and Lettowe , and other heathen land , to advance the christian faith against infidel and miscreant , and to seek honour by feat of arm . [ i - i24d they english knight prologue . h knight there be , and that a worthy man , that from the time that he first begin to riden out , he love chivalry , troth , honour , freedom , and courtesy . full worthy be he in his lord war : and thereto have he ride no man far , as well in Christendom as in heathenness , and ever have honour for his worthiness . at Alisandre he be , when it be win : full oft time he have the board begin aboven all nation in pruce , in Lettowe have he riden , and in Ruce , no christian man so oft of his degree : in Granade at the siege have he be long travail . Alexandria . Lettowe , Ruce . 3°7 