a testimony of certain privilege obtain for William of the english and danish merchant of Con - imsb . iib . radus the emperor and John the bishop of Rome by Canute the king of England Anglorum . in his journey to roam , extract out of a letter of his write unto the clergy of England . it vobis notum quia magna congregatio nobilum in ipsa solemnitate Pascali , Romae cum domino Papa Joanne , and imperatore conrado erat , scilicet omnes principe gentium a monte Gargano , usque ad istum proximum mare : qui omnes i and honorifice suscepere , and magnificis donis honoravere . maxim autem ab imperatore donis variis and muneribus pretiosis honoratus sum , tam in vasis aurei and argenteis , quam in palliis and vestibus valde pretiosis . Locutus sum igitur cum ipso imperatore , and domino papa , and principibus qui ibi erant , de necessitatibus totius populi mei , tam Angli quam Dani , ut eis concederetur lex aequior , and pax securior in via romam adeundi , and ne tot clausuris per viam arcerentur , and propter injustum teloneum fatigarentur . Annuitque postulatis imperator , and rodul-phus Rex , qui maxim ipsarum clausurarum dominatur , cunctique principe edictis firmarunt , ut homines mei tam mercatore , quam alii orandi gratia viator , absque omni anguria clausurarum and teloneariorum , cum firma pace romam eant and redeant . the same in english . you be to understand , that at the feast of easter , there be a great company of noble with pope John and Conradus the emperor assemble at Rome , namely all the prince of the nation from mount Garganus unto the west ocean sea . who all of they 313 [ i . 127. ] Garganus a mountain of Apulia in italic . honourable entertain i , and welcome i with rich and magnificent gift : but especial the emperor bestow diverse costly present and reward upon i , both in vessel of gold and silver , and also in cloak and garment of great value . wherefore i confer with the emperor himself and the pope , and with the other prince who be there present , concern the necessity of all my subject both Englishman and Dane ; that a more favourable law and secure peace in their way to roam may be grant unto they , and that they may not be hinder by so many stop and impediment in their journey , and weary by reason of injust exaction . and the emperor condescend unto my request , and king Rodulphus also , who have great authority over the foresay stop and strait , and all the other prince confirm by their edict , that my subject , as well merchant , as other who travail for devotion sake , shall without all hinder - ance and restraint of the foresay stop and customer , go unto room in peace , and return from thence in safety . the flourish state of merchandise in the city of London in the day of Willielmus mal-mesburiensis , which die in the year 1142. in the reign of king Stephen . Gultel . Malmesb. de gestis font . Anglorum lib . 2. and long a Rofa quasi viginti quinque milliariis est Londonia Civitas nobilis , opima civium divitiis , constipata negociatorum ex omni terra , and maxim ex Germania venientium , commerciis . unde fit ut cum ubique in anglia caritas victualium pro sterili proventu messium sit , ibi necessaria distrahantur and emantur minore , quam alibi , vel vendentium compendio , vel ementium dispendio . peregrinas invehit merce civitatis finibus Tamesis fluvius famosus , qui citra urbem ad 80. milliaria fonticulo fusus , ultra plus 70. nomen profert . 314 