Malmesb. de gestis font . Anglorum lib . 2. honourable entertain i , and welcome i with rich and magnificent gift : but especial the emperor bestow diverse costly present and reward upon i , both in vessel of gold and silver , and also in cloak and garment of great value . wherefore i confer with the emperor himself and the pope , and with the other prince who be there present , concern the necessity of all my subject both Englishman and Dane ; that a more favourable law and secure peace in their way to roam may be grant unto they , and that they may not be hinder by so many stop and impediment in their journey , and weary by reason of injust exaction . and the emperor condescend unto my request , and king Rodulphus also , who have great authority over the foresay stop and strait , and all the other prince confirm by their edict , that my subject , as well merchant , as other who travail for devotion sake , shall without all hinder - ance and restraint of the foresay stop and customer , go unto room in peace , and return from thence in safety . the flourish state of merchandise in the city of London in the day of Willielmus mal-mesburiensis , which die in the year 1142. in the reign of king Stephen . and long a Rofa quasi viginti quinque milliariis est Londonia Civitas nobilis , opima civium divitiis , constipata negociatorum ex omni terra , and maxim ex Germania venientium , commerciis . unde fit ut cum ubique in anglia caritas victualium pro sterili proventu messium sit , ibi necessaria distrahantur and emantur minore , quam alibi , vel vendentium compendio , vel ementium dispendio . peregrinas invehit merce civitatis finibus Tamesis fluvius famosus , qui citra urbem ad 80. milliaria fonticulo fusus , ultra plus 70. nomen profert . 314 ot far from Rochester , about the distance of five and twenty mile , stand the noble city of London , abound with the riches of the inhabitant , and be frequent with the traffic of merchant resort thither out of all nation , and especial out of Germany . whereupon it come to pass , that Germany . when any generail dearth of victual fall out in England , by reason of the scarcity of corn , thing necessary may there be provide and buy with less gain unto the seller , and with less hindrance and loss unto the buyer , then in any other place of the realm . outlandish ware be convey into the same city by the famous river of Thames : which river spring out of a fountain 80. mile beyond the city , be call by one and the self same name . 70. mile beneath it . the aforesaid William of Malmesburie write of traffic in his time to Bristol in his four book de gestis pontificum anglorum , after this manner . n eadem valle est vicus celeberrimus Bristol nomine , in quo est navium portus ab Hibernia and Norwegia and caeteris transmarinis terris venientium receptaculum , ne scilicet genitalibus divitiis tam fortunata regio peregrinarum opum frauderetur commercio . the same in english . in the same valley stand the famous town of Bristol , with a haven belong thereunto , which be a commodious and safe receptacle for all ship direct their course for the same , from Ireland , Norway , and Norway . other outlandish and foreign country : namely that a region so fortunate and bless with the riches that nature have vouchsafe thereupon shall not be destitute of the wealth and commodity of other land . 315 