lish , and proclaim in your bailiwick , and firm to be observe , permit they to go and come , without the ancient impediment , accord to the due , right and ancient c ™ tome of custom use in your say bailiwick . witness arc ant . Qeofry Fitz-Peter earl of Essex at kinefard the 5. day of April . the same form of writing be send to the sheriff of Sudsex , to the mayor and communal tie of the ci tie of Winchester , to the bailiff of Southampton , the bailiff lenne , the bailiff of Kent , the sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk , the sheriff of Dorset and Somerset , the baron of the cinque-port , the sheriff of Southamptonshire , the sheriff of Hertford and Essex , the sheriff of Cornewal and Devon . | | 1216. literae regis henrici tertii ad Haquinum regem Norwegiae de pacis foedere and intercursu mer-candisandi | | anno 1. henrici 3. Enricus dei gratia etc haquino eadem gratia regi Norwegiae salutem . Immensas nobilitati vestrae referimus gratiarum actiones de he quae per litera vestras and prudentem virum abbatem de Lisa , nobis significasti , volente and desiderante foedus pacis and dilectionis libenter nobiscum inire , and nobiscum confoederari . Bene autem placet and placebit nobis quod terrae nostrae communes sint , and mercatore and homines qui sunt de potestate vestra libere and sine impedimento terram nostram adire possint , and homines and mercatore nostri similiter terram vestram . dum tamen litera vestras patentes super hoc nobis destinetis , and nos vobis nostras transmittemus . interim autem bene volumus and concedimus , quod mercatore tam de terra vestra quam nostra eant , veniant , and recedant per terras nostras . et si quid vestrae sederit voluntati , quod facere valeamus , id securi nobis significetis . detinuimus autem adhuc abbatem praedictum , ut de navi vestra and rebus in 320 ea content pro posse nostro restitutionem fieri faceremus : per quern de statu nostro and Regni nostri vos certificare curabimus , and quam citius etc testae i ipso apud Lamhithe decimo die octobris . Eodem modo scribitur s. duci Norwegiae ibidem and eodem die . the letter of king Henry the three unto [ i . 130. ] Haquinus king of Norway concern a treaty of peace and mutual traffic of merchandise , etc HEnry by the grace of God , etc unto Haquinus by the same grace king of Norway , send greeting . we render unto your highness unspeakable thank for those thing which by your letter , and by your discreet subject the abbot of Lisa , you have signify unto we , and also for that you be right willing and desirous to begin and to conclude between we both , a league of peace and amity . and we for our part both now be , and hereafter shall well content , that both our land be common , to the end that the merchant and people of your dominion may free and without impediment resort unto our land , and our people and merchant may likewise have recourse unto your territory . provide , that for the confirmation of this matter , you send unto we your letter patent , and we will send we also unto you . howbeit in the mean while we do will and free grant , that the merchant both of our and your land , may go , come , and return to and from both our dominion . and if there be aught in your mind , whereby we may stand you in any stead , you may bold signify the same unto we . we have as yet detain the foresay abbot , that we may , to our ability , cause restitution to be make for your ship , and for the thing therein contain : by who we will certify you of our own estate , and of the estate of our 1 321 ten | | Antiqua consuetudo Gildhalla Coloniensium Londini . the english voyage kingdom so soon , etc witness our self at lamhith the ten of October . another letter in the same form and to the same effect be there and then send unto S. duke of Norway . mandatum pro coga regis Norwegiae anno 13. henrici 3. andatum est omnibus ballivis portuum in quos ventura est coga de norwegia , in qua venerint in angliam milite regis Norwegiae and mercatore Saxoniae , quod cum praedictam Cogam in portus suos venire contigerit , salvo permittant ipsam Cogam in portubus suis morari , quamdiu necesse habuerit , and libere sine impedimento inde recedere quando voluerint . testae rege . the same in english . a mandate for the king of Norway his ship call the Cog. we will and command all baliff of Portes , at the which the cog of Norway ( wherein certain of the king of Norwaie his soldier , and certain merchant of Saxony be come for England ) shall touch , that , when the foresay cog shall chance to arrive at any of their haven , they do permit the say cog safe to remain in their say haven so long as need shall require , and without impediment also free to depart thence , whensoever the governor of the say ship shall think it expedient . witness the king . Carta pro mercatoribus de Colonia anno 20. henrici 3. Confirmata per regem edwardum primum 8. Julii anno Regni 18. prout extat in rotulo cartarum de anno 18. Regis edwardi primi . sex Archiepiscopis etc salutem . Sciatis nos quietos clamasse pro nobis and haeredibus nostris dilectos ------ nostros , Cives de Colonia , and mercandisam svam de illis dvobus solidis , | | quos solebant dare de Gildhalla sva 322 