the league between Carolus Magnus and Offa king of Mercia concern safe trade of the english merchant in all the emperor dominion . This Offa die in the year of our lord 795. Ffa interea carolum magnum regem malmsbur . de gestis regum anglorum lib . 1. cap . 4. Francorum frequentibus legationibus amicum paravit : quamvis non facile quod suis artibus conduceret in Caroli animo invenerit . discordarunt antea , adeo ut magnis motibus utrobique concurrentibus , etiam negociatorum commeatus prohiber - entur . est Epistola Albini hujusce rei index , cujus navigatio interdicta . negotiatorum Anglicanorum patrocinium . partem hic apponam . Nesico quid de nobis venturum sit . aliquid enim dissentionis diabolico fomento inflammante , nuper inter regem carolum and regem Offam exortum est : ita ut utrinque navigatio interdicta negociantibus cesset . sunt qui dicant nos pro pace in illa part mittendo . et nonnullis interpositis , nunc , inquit , ex verbis Caroli foedus firmum inter eum and Offam compactum subjiciam . Carolus gratia dei rex francorum , and Longobardorum , and patricius romanorum , viro venerando and fratri charissimo Offae regi Merciorum salutem . Primo gratias agimus omnipotenti deo , de salute animarum , de catholicae fidei sinceritate , quam in vestris laudabiliter paginis reperimus exaratam . de peregrinis vero qui pro amore dei , and salute animarum suarum beatorum Apostolorum limina desiderant adire , cum pace sine omni perturbation vadant . say si aliqui , non religioni serviente , sed lucra sectantes , inveniantur inter eos , locis opportunis statuta solvant telonia . negociatore quoque volumus ut ex mandato nostro patrocinium habeant in regno nostro legitime . et si aliquo loco injusta affligantur oppression , reclament ad nos vel nostros judice , and plenam videbimus justitiam fieri . 310 in the mean season Offa by often legacy solicit Charles le maigne the king of France , to be his friend : albeit he can not easy find king Charles any whit incline to further and promote his crafty attempt . their mind be so alienate before , that , bear haughty stomach on both part , even the mutual traffic of trajfyue their merchant be prohibit . the epistle of Albinus tnhtblted-is a sufficient testimony of this matter : part whereof i will here put down . i know not ( quoth he ) what will become of we . for there be of late , by the instigation of the devil , some discord and variance spring up between king Charles and king Offa : insomuch that sail to and fro be [ i . 126. ] forbid unto the merchant of both their dominion . navigation some say that we be to be send , for the obtain of a firbn < tien-peace , into those part . and again , after a few line . now ( quoth he ) out of Charles his own word , i will make report of the league conclude between he and Offa. Charles by the grace of God king of the Franks and Lombard and senator of the roman , unto the reverend and his most dear brother Offa king of the mercians send greeting . first we do render unto almighty god most humble thanks for the salvation of soul , and the sincerity of the catholique faith , which we , to your great commendation , have find signify in your letter . as touch those pilgrim , who for the love of God and their own soul health , be desirous to resort unto the church of the holy apostle , let they go in peace without all disturbance . but if any be find among they not honour religion , but follow their own gain , they be to pay their ordinary custom at place convenient . it be our pleasure also and commandment , that your merchant shall have lawful patronage and protection in our dominion . who , if in any place they chance to be afflict with any injust oppression , let they 311 a league between carol . Mag. and king Offa. protection of the english merchant . make their supplication unto we , or unto our judge , and we will see justice execute to the full . a ancient testimony translate out of the old saxon law , contain among other thing the advancement of merchant for their thrice cross the wide sea , set down by the learned gentleman master William Lambert pagina 500 of his perambulation of Kent . it be sometime in english law , that the people and the law be in reputation : and then be the wise of the people worshipworthy , every one after his degree : earl , and churl , Thein , and under-thein . and if a churl thrive so , that he have full five hide of his own land , a church and a kitchen , a belhouse , and a gate , a seat , and a several office in the king hall , then be he thenceforth the Theins right worthy . and if a Thein so thrive , that he serve the king , and on his message rid in his household , if he then have a Thein that follow he , the which to the king journey five hide have , and in the king seat his lord serve , and thrice with his errand have go to the king , he may afterward with his foreoth his lord part play at any great need . and if a Thein do thrive so , that he become a earl ; then be he afterward a earl right worthy . and if a merchant so thrive , that he pass thrice over the wide sea , of his own craft , he be thenceforth a Theins right worthy . and if a scholar so prosper through learning that he degree have , and serve Christ , he be then afterward of dignity and peace so much worthy , as thereunto belong : unless he forfeit so , that he the use of his degree use ne might . 312 