the league between Henry the second and Frederick Barbarossa emperor of germanic , wherein be mention of friendly traffic between the merchant of the empire and England , confirm in the year of our lord 1157. record in the first book and seventeenth chapter of Radevicus Canonicus Frisingensis , be a appendix to Otto Frisingensis . bidem tunc affuere etiam henrici regis angliae missi , varia and preciosa donaria multo lepore verborum adornata praestante . inter quae papilionem unum quantitate maximum , qualitate optimum perspeximus . cujus si quantitatem requiris , non nisi machinis and instru - mentorum genere and adminiculo levari poterat : si qualitatem , nec materia nec opere ipsum putem aliquando ab aliquo hujusce apparatu superatum iri . litera quoque mellito sermon plena pariter direxerat , quarum hic tenor fuit . Praecordiali amico suo , Frederico dei gratia romanorum imperatori invictissimo , henricus rex angliae , dux normanniae , and Aquitania ? , and come Andegavensis , salutem , and verae dilectionis concordiam . excellentiae vestrae quanta possumus referimus grate , dominantium optime , quod nos nunciis vestris visitare , salutare literis , muneribus praevenire , and quoth his charius amplectimur , pacis and amoris invicem dignatus estis foedera inchoare . exultavimus , and quodammodo animum nobis crescere , and in majus sensimus evehi dum vestra promissio , in qua nobis spem dedistis , in disponendis Regni nostri negociis , alacriores nos reddidit , and promptiores . exultavimus inquam , and tota mente magnificentiae vestrae assurreximus , id vobis in sincero cordis affectu respondentes , quod quicquid ad honorem vestrum spectare noverimus , pro posse nostro effectui mancipare 316 parati sumus . Regnum nostrum , and quicquid ubique nostras subjicitur ditioni vobis exponimus and vestrae committimus potestati , ut ad vestrum nutum omnia disponantur , and in omnibus vestri fiat voluntas imperii . sit igitur inter nos and populos nostros dilectionis and pacis unitas indivisa , commercia tuta : ita tamen ut vobis , qui dignitate praeminetis , imperandi cedat authori-tas , nobis non deerit voluntas obsequendi . et sicut vestrae serenitatis memoriam vestrorum excitat in nobis 1157. commercia inter germanos wonderful Anglos . munerum largitio , sic vos nostri quoque reminisci praeoptamus , mittente quae pulchriora penes nos erant , and vobis magis placitura . attendite itaque dantis affectum , non data , and eo animo quo dantur accipite . de manu beati Jacobi , super qua nobis scripsistis , in ore magistri hereberti and Guilielmi clerici nostri verbum posuimus . testae Thoma Cancellario apud Northanton . the same in english . there be present also the same time , the messenger of Henry king of England present diverse rich and precious gift , and that with great learning and eloquence of speech . among the which we see a pavilion , most large in quantity , and most excellent in quality . for if you desire to know the quanti tie thereof , it can not be erect without engine and a kind of instrument , and main force : if the quality , i think there be never any furniture of the same kind , that surpass the same either in stuff or workmanship . the say king direct his letter also , full of sugar speech , the tenor whereof be this that foliow . to his entire belove friend Frederick by the grace of God emperor of the roman most invincible , Henry king of England , duke of Normandy and Aquitaine , earl of Anjou wish health and concord of sincere amity . we do render unto your highness ( most renown and peerless prince ) exceed great thank for that you have so gracious vouchsafe by your messenger to visit we , in your letter to salute 3r7 we , with your gift to prevent we , and ( which we do more high esteem of then all the rest ) to begin a league of peace and friendship between we . we rejoice , and in a manner sensible feel our self to be great embolden , and our courage to increase , while your promise , whereby you put we in good comfort , do make we more cheerful and resolute , in manage the affair of our kingdom . we rejoice ( i say ) and in our secret cogitation do humble obeisance unto your majesty , give you at this time to understand from the sincere 8c unfeigned affection of our heart , that whatsoever we shall know to tend unto your honour , we be , to our power most ready to put in practice . our kingdom , and whatsoever be under our jurisdiction we do offer unto you , and commit the same unto your highness , that all matter may be dispose accord to your direction , and that your pleasure may in all thing be fulfil . let there be therefore between our self and our subject , a indivisible unity of friendship and peace , and safe trade of merchandise : yet so , as that unto you ( who excel in dignity ) authority in command may be ascribe , and diligence in obey shall not want in we . and as the liberality of your reward do often put we in remembrance of your majesty , even so in like manner send unto [ i . 129. ] your highness the most rare thing in our custody , and which we think shall be most acceptable unto you , we do most hearty wish that your self also will not altogether be unmindful of we . have respect therefore not unto the gift , but unto the affection of the giver , and accept of they with that mind , wherewith they be offer unto you . concern the hand of saint James , about which you write unto we , we have send you word by m. Herbert , and by William the clerk . witness Thomas our chancellor at Northanton . 3*8 