| | Antiqua consuetudo Gildhalla Coloniensium Londini . the english voyage kingdom so soon , etc witness our self at lamhith the ten of October . another letter in the same form and to the same effect be there and then send unto S. duke of Norway . mandatum pro coga regis Norwegiae anno 13. henrici 3. andatum est omnibus ballivis portuum in quos ventura est coga de norwegia , in qua venerint in angliam milite regis Norwegiae and mercatore Saxoniae , quod cum praedictam Cogam in portus suos venire contigerit , salvo permittant ipsam Cogam in portubus suis morari , quamdiu necesse habuerit , and libere sine impedimento inde recedere quando voluerint . testae rege . the same in english . a mandate for the king of Norway his ship call the Cog. we will and command all baliff of Portes , at the which the cog of Norway ( wherein certain of the king of Norwaie his soldier , and certain merchant of Saxony be come for England ) shall touch , that , when the foresay cog shall chance to arrive at any of their haven , they do permit the say cog safe to remain in their say haven so long as need shall require , and without impediment also free to depart thence , whensoever the governor of the say ship shall think it expedient . witness the king . Carta pro mercatoribus de Colonia anno 20. henrici 3. Confirmata per regem edwardum primum 8. Julii anno Regni 18. prout extat in rotulo cartarum de anno 18. Regis edwardi primi . sex Archiepiscopis etc salutem . Sciatis nos quietos clamasse pro nobis and haeredibus nostris dilectos ------ nostros , Cives de Colonia , and mercandisam svam de illis dvobus solidis , | | quos solebant dare de Gildhalla sva 322 London , and de omnibus aliis consuetudinibus and demand , [ i . 131. ] quae pertinent ad nos in London , and per totam terram nostram ; and quoth libere possunt ire ad ferias , per totam terram nostram and emere and vendere in villa London and alibi , salva libertate civitatis nostrae London . quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus pro nobis and haeredibus nostris , quod praedicti cives de Colonia praenominatas libertates and libera consuetudines habeant per totam terram nostram angliae sicut praedictum est . his testibus , venerabili patre waltero caerleolensi Episcopo , Willielmo de ferariis , Gilberto Basset , waltero de bello campo , hugo Disspenser , Waltero Marescallo , Galfrido Dispenser , Bartholomaeo Pech , Bartholomaeo de Saukevill , and aliis . data per manum venerabilis patris Radulphi cicis-trensis Episcopi , Cancellarii nostri apud davintre octavo die novembris , anno Regni nostri vicesimo . the same in english . a charter grant for the behalf of the merchant of Colen in the twenty year of Henry the three , confirm by king Edward the first , as it be extant in the roll of charter , in the eighteenth year of king Edward the first . the king unto archbishop etc greeting . be it know unto you , that we have quite claim , and for we and our heir release our well-beloved the citizen of Colen and their merchandise , from the payment of those two shilling which they be wont to pay out of their Gildhall at London , and from all other custom and ancient demand , which pertain unto we , either in London , or cq^^the in any other place of our dominion : and that they may q^ii in safe resort unto payer throughout our whole kingdom , London . and buy and sell in the city of London . wherefore we will and firm command for we and our heir , that the forename merchant of Colen may enjoy the liberty and free privilege abovementioned , throughout our 323 