may it please you by the bearer of these present to return a answer unto we . give at Windsor the 16. of April . another letter of Edward the second , to haquinus king of Norway , in the behalf of certain english merchant . a / f " agnifico principi Dom. haquino dei gratia regi IVA Norwegiae illustri , amico suo charissimo , edwardus eadem dei gratia rex angliae , dominus hyberniae , and dux Aquitaniae , salutem cum dilectione sincera . Querelam dilectorum mercatorum nostrorum Thomae de Swyn de waynfleete , and Simonis filii Alani de eadem recepimus , continentem , quod ciim ipsi nuper quosdam serviente suos infra regnum vestrum pro suis ibidem exercendis mercimoniis transmisissent , Thesaurarius vester bona and mercimonia praedictorum Thomae and Simonis ad valenciam quadraginta librarum , quae serviente praedicti in villa de Northberne in sva custodia habuerunt , die sancti michaelis ultimo praeterita fecit absque causa rationabili arestari , and ea adhuc taliter arestata detinet injusti , in ipsorum Thomae and Simonis damnum non modicum and depauperationem manifestam . et quia eisdem mercatoribus nostris subvenire volumus , quatenus suadente justitia poterimus in hac parte , vestram amicitiam requirimus cum affectu , quatenus audita querela praedictorum Thomae and Simonis , vel ipsorum atturnatorum super restitution bonorum and mercimoniorum praedictorum impendere velitis eisdem celeris justitiae complementum : ita quod pro defectu exhibitionis justitiae super arestatione praedicta non oporteat nos pro mercatoribus nostris praedictis de alio remedio providere . nobis autem quid ad hanc nostram instantiam duxeriti faciendum , rescribere velitis per praesentium portitorem . Datae ut supra . the same in english . to the mighty prince lord Haquinus , by the grace of God the famous king of Norway , his most dear friend Edward by the same grace of God king of 343 Northbern < e villa . England , lord of Ireland , and duke of Aquitaine , greeting and sincere love . we receive the complaint of our well-beloved merchant Thomas de Swyn of wayn-fleet , and Simon the son of Alanus of the same town : the content whereof be , that whereas off late , the say party send certain of their servant to traffic in your kingdom , your treasurer upon the feast of saint Michael last pass , without any just or reasonable occasion , cause the good and merchandise of the foresay Thomas and Simon , to the value of forty pound , which their say servant have under their custody at the town of northberne , to be arrest , and as yet also injurious detein the same under the same arrest , to the great damage and impoverish of the say Thomas and Simon . and forasmuch as our desire be to succour these our merchant so far forth as we can , justice require no less in this behalf , we do right earnest request you , that have hear the complaint and supplication of the foresay Thomas and Simon , or of their attorney , you will of your love and friendship , vouchsafe they speedy administration of justice , about the restitution of their good and merchandise aforesaid : lest that for want of the exhibit of justice about the foresay arrest , we be constrain to provide some other remedy for our merchant aforesaid . our request be , that you will by the bearer of these present , return a answer unto we , what you be determine to do , at this our instant motion . give as above . a three letter of king Edward the second , to Haquinus king of Norway in the behalf of certain english merchant . aagnifico principi domino haquino dei gratia regi ivi Norwegiae illustri , amico suo charissimo , edwardus eadem dei gratia rex angliae , dominus hyberniae , and dux Aquitaniae , salutem cum dilectione sincera . Pro mercatoribus nostris Lennae , and partium vicinarum , quos ballivus and officiarii vestri civitatis vestrae Bergen dudum 344 