England and France etc between the reverend father Henry bishop of Lincoln , chancellor , and the right honourable William lord de Roos , high treasurer of England , both of they counsellor unto the say sovereign king on the one party , and the right worshipful John Godeke , and Henry Moneke , send as messenger by the right reverend and religious personage , frater Conradus de Jungingen master generail of the dutch knight of the order of saint marry on the other party : it be , at the request and instancy of the say messenger , appoint , and mutual agree upon , that all the liege people and subject of the say sovereign lord and king shall have free licence and liberty until the feast of easter next ensue , safe to travel unto the land of Prussia aforesaid , there to remain , and thence , with their ship , merchandise , and other their good whatsoever , to return unto their own home : which on the other side , all the subject of the say master general may , within the term prefix , likewise do , in the foresay realm of England . provide always , that after the time above limit , neither the say merchant of the realm of England may in the land of Prussia , nor the merchant of that land , in the realm of England , exercise any traffic at all : unless it be otherwise ordain by some composition , between the foresay king of England , and the say master general in the mean time conclude . in witness whereof , one part of this present indenture be to remain in the custody of the foresay messenger . give in the chapter-house of the church of S. Paul at London , the day and year above write . the letter of the chancellor and treasurer of England , unto frater Conradus de Jungingen , master generail of Prussia 1403. right reverend and mighty lord , your honourable messenger John Godeke , and Henry Moneke , the bearer hereof come of late before the presence of our most sovereign lord the king of England and of 38 France , and be welcome by our say lord with a cheerful and favourable countenance , they present certain letter on your behalf unto the king majesty , with that reverence which beseem they : expound unto his highness , sundry piracy and molestation offer of late upon the sea , by his liege people 8c subject unto you , contrary to the league of peace and amity , which hitherto ( by God grace ) have be maintain and continue on both part . in consideration of which piracy and molestation , your messenger demand full restitution and recompense to be make , either unto the damnify party , or unto their procurator . we therefore at that time , especial be in the presence of our sovereign ( who with his puissant army take his progress towards the remote part of Wales be subject unto his dominion , to see justice execute upon his people of those part , who very rash have presume to rebel against he their sovereign , contrary to their allegiance ) right well perceive that it be his highness intention , that every one shall have due justice faithful administer unto he , especial your subject , and that with all favour , who he have always in time past right gracious entreat , as if they have be his own liege subject and native country man , who also he purpose hereafter friendly to protect : insomuch that between he and his subject on the one party , and between you and you on the other party , great abundance and perfection of mutual amity may increase . and therefore we offer unto your foresay messenger , after they have particular declare unto we such piracy and wrong , to send the king letter unto they of who complaint be make , firm enjoin they , under grievous penalty , that without delay they restore or cause to be restore unto the party damnify , or unto their procurator , all ship , merchandise , ware , and good , by they take or violent steal from your subject . and that your say messenger may partly attain their desire , we have \ namely the ship of Edgard scoff at Caleis . the ship of Tidman dor-deviant and Tidman War-owen , atorwel and^episwich . [ i - 159 - ] command certain i ship , merchandise , ware , and good , find in certain haven , to be deliver unto they . howbeit , as touch other good , which be perhaps perish or want by infortunate dissipation or destruction , and for the which the say messenger of you demand satisfaction to be make unto they within a certain time by we limit : may it please your honour to understand , that in the absence of our say sovereign lord the king , be as yet far distant from we , we can in no wise limit or set down any such term of time . notwithstanding , at the prosperous return of our sovereign , we be determine to commune with he about this matter . of who answer so soon as we be certify , we purpose to signify his intention unto you by our letter . since also ( right reverend and mighty lord ) your say messenger be content , for the present , to accept of our offer aforesaid , as indeed by all reason they ought thereat to rest content , especial whereas by this mean they shall the more speedy attain unto the effect of their purpose ( to the short and wish execution and performance of which offer , we will , by god help , endeavour , to the utmost of our ability ) may it be your will and pleasure , that as in the kingdom of England , your merchant and subject be courteous entreat : even so the merchant and liege people of our sovereign lord the king and of his kingdom peaceable frequent your part , either in regard of traffic or of any other just occasion , may there in like manner friendly be use , and with your merchant and subject suffer to communicate , and to have intercourse of traffic , enjoy the commodity of the ancient league . by this also the fervent zeal and affection which you bear unto the royal crown of England shall undoubted appear : albeit between the famous house of England and of Prussia , the band of unfeigned love and friendship have be successive confirm and keep inviolable in time note well . past . and thus ( right reverend and mighty lord ) •wishing unto you increase of honour and prosperity , we take our leaf . write at London the five of October , in the year of our lord 1403. by the chancellor , the treasurer , and other lord of the hono : counsel of the king of England and France , be personal present at London . A.D. 1404. 1403. the letter of king Henry the 4. unto Conradus de Jungingen the master general of Prussia , for mutual conversation and intercourse of traffic to continue between the merchant of England and of Prussia , for a certain term of time . Enry by the grace of God , king of England and France , and lord of Ireland , to the noble and mighty personage of sacred religion , frater Conradus de Jungingen master generali of the order of the dutch knight of saint marry etc our most dear and well-beloved friend , greeting , and continual increase of our ancient and sincere amity . by the grievous complaint of our liege subject concern traffic , as it be circularwise too and fro both our dominion , we have often be advertise that in regard of diverse injury and damage , which as well our as your merchant ( who by their deal in merchandise be wont peaceable to use mutual conversation together , whereupon very many commodity be know to have proceed ) have , by occasion of pirate , rove up and down the sea , sometime heretofore sustain : both the say merchant of our and of your dominion do abstain themselves from their wont mutual conversation and traffic , as they have likewise careful abstain at sometime heretofore , and especial from that time , wherein at the instant request of your messenger , be of late before our presence , the free access of our merchant unto your territory and dominion , and of your merchant unto our realm have be forbid . since therefore 41 