GnpeswM . item , they of Gripeswold exhibit 5. article , the sum whereof amount unto 2092. noble and a half . for the which there be promise satisfaction of 153. noble and a half . and the say man of Gripeswold have of the good of english man in possession , to the value of 22015. noble , 18. s , as it be report by they of linne . and the same liberty be reserve unto they that be unto the hamburger . Campen . item , they of Campen propound ten article , the sum whereof extend unto 1405. noble . there be no satisfaction promise unto they : but the same liberty be reserve unto they , which be unto the other above mention . item , the ambassador of England demand of the citizen of rostok and Wismer , for damage and injury by they commit against the subject of the foresay sovereign king 32407. noble , 2 . s . ro . d . and albeit every of the foresay city send one of their burgomaster unto the town of Hage in holland , to treat with the english ambassador , it be in the end find out , that they have not any authority of negotiate or conclude aught at all and therefore they make their faithful promise , that every of the say city shall send unto our sovereign lord the king one or two procurator or procurator sufficient instruct to treat and conclude with our say sovereign lord the king about the damage and injury aforesaid at the feast of the nativity of saint John the baptist . composition and ordinance conclude between the messenger of frater Conradus the jung-ingen master generail of Prussia : and the chancellor and treasurer of the realm of England 1403. in the year of our lord 1403 , upon the feast of saint Michael the Archangel , the right hono : Henry bishop of Lincoln , chancellor of England , and the lord de Roos high treasurer of England , and the ambassador of Prussia , John Godek of Dantzik , and Henry Monek of Elbing , master of the same city have at Westminster treat in manner of composition about the article underwritten : between the most sovereign lord the king of England , and the right reverend and honourable Conradus de Jungingen master general of Prussia , as concern the injury offer unto the people of Prussia and Livonia upon the sea by the english . first , that all ship with their appurtenance , and the commodity of the mariner , accord unto the condition of the thing , and all other good take away by the english , which be actual undivided and whole , be incontinent and with all speed to be restore . and if there be any defect in aught , the value of the say defect be to be account , and with other loss of good to be restore , at the term of the restitution to be make and deliver . item , that all ship , damage , and good ( as they be contain in our bill of accusation ) which be not now immediate restore , be to be restore and pay in the land of Prussia , between this and the term appoint , [ i . 158. ] with full execution and compliment of justice . item , concern the person throw over board or slay in the sea : it shall remain to be determine at the will and pleasure of the most mighty prince the king of England , and of the right reverend the master of Prussia . item , between this and the term appoint for the restore of the good take away , and until there be due payment and restitution of the say good perform , the merchant of England and of Prussia be in no wise to exercise any traffic of merchandise at all in the foresay land . Memorandum , that the three day of the month of 1403. October , in the year of our lord 1403. and in the five year of the reign of the most mighty prince and lord , king Henry the four , by the grace of God king of 37 England and France etc between the reverend father Henry bishop of Lincoln , chancellor , and the right honourable William lord de Roos , high treasurer of England , both of they counsellor unto the say sovereign king on the one party , and the right worshipful John Godeke , and Henry Moneke , send as messenger by the right reverend and religious personage , frater Conradus de Jungingen master generail of the dutch knight of the order of saint marry on the other party : it be , at the request and instancy of the say messenger , appoint , and mutual agree upon , that all the liege people and subject of the say sovereign lord and king shall have free licence and liberty until the feast of easter next ensue , safe to travel unto the land of Prussia aforesaid , there to remain , and thence , with their ship , merchandise , and other their good whatsoever , to return unto their own home : which on the other side , all the subject of the say master general may , within the term prefix , likewise do , in the foresay realm of England . provide always , that after the time above limit , neither the say merchant of the realm of England may in the land of Prussia , nor the merchant of that land , in the realm of England , exercise any traffic at all : unless it be otherwise ordain by some composition , between the foresay king of England , and the say master general in the mean time conclude . in witness whereof , one part of this present indenture be to remain in the custody of the foresay messenger . give in the chapter-house of the church of S. Paul at London , the day and year above write . the letter of the chancellor and treasurer of England , unto frater Conradus de Jungingen , master generail of Prussia 1403. right reverend and mighty lord , your honourable messenger John Godeke , and Henry Moneke , the bearer hereof come of late before the presence of our most sovereign lord the king of England and of 38 