the letter of Conradus de Jungingen , master generali of Prussia , write unto Richard the second , king of England , in the year 1398 , for the renounce of a league and composition conclude between England and Prussia , in regard of manifold injury offer unto the Prussians . our humble commendation , with our earnest prayer unto God for your majesty , premise . most renown prince and mighty lord , it be not ( we hope ) out of your majesty remembrance , how our famous predecessor go immediate before we scent certain letter of he unto your highness , effectual contain sundry complaint of grievance , injury and loss , wherewith the merchant of his land and order be wont in time past to visit your kingdom with their good and merchandise , have be contrary to their liberty and privilege annoy with manifold injury and wrong . especial since they have be molest in your realm , be contrary to the friendly composition make and celebrate by the hono : personage , master Nicholas Stocket , Thomas Graa and Walter Sibil , in the year 1388 , with the assistance of their coarbiter on our part , and contrary to God and all justice , oppress with manifold damage , loss , and grievance : as in certain article exhibit unto our predecessor aforesaid it do moor manifest appear . in consideration whereof be vehement move by the damnify party , he humble beseech your highness by his messenger and letter , for compliment and execution of justice . about the which affair your majesty return your letter of answer unto our say predecessor , signify that the say business of article concern all the communality of your realm , and that your highness purpose , after •consultation have in your parliament , to send a more deliberate answer concern the premise , unto our 25 A.D. I398 - predecessor aforesaid . howbeit he be by death translate out of this present world , and our self by the providence of God succeed in his room , and also long time expect a effectual answer from your highness , be not yet inform as we look for : albeit the complaint of injury and loss offer unto our subject do continual increase . but from henceforth to provide a remedy and a caveat for the time to come , the say complaint do upon great reason move and invite i . since therefore in regard of the say composition , neither you nor your subject may be judge in the empire : and since plain reason require that the one be not enrich by the other loss : as undoubted our subject shall sustain great damage by the composition aforesaid , by virtue whereof your subject do enjoy all commodity in our land , and contrariwise our subject in your realm have suffer , and as yet sundry way do suffer manifold discommodity , loss and injury . wherefore ( most sovereign prince and mighty lord ) be reasonable move upon the cause aforesaid , we do , by the advice of our counsellor , revoke and repeal the say composition conclude as be above write , together with the effect thereof , pure and simple renounce the same by these present : refuse hereafter to have either our self or our subject in any respect to stand bind by the virtue of the say composition : but from henceforth , and for the time heretofore also , be it altogether void and of none effect . provide notwithstanding , that from the time of the notice of this denunciation give unto the hono : mayor of your city of London , for the space of a year next ensue , it shall be lawful for all merchant of your kingdom whatsoever , with their good and merchandise to return home , accord to the form in the foresay composition express : conditionaly that our subject may even so in all respect be permit to depart , with the safety of their good and life out of your dominion : this present renunciation , revocation , and retractation of the 26 order and composition aforesaid , notwithstanding . howbeit in any other affair whatsoever , devout to submit our self unto your highness pleasure and command , both our self , and our whole order be right willing and [ i . 154. ] desirous : and also to benefit and promote your subject we will endeavour to the utmost of our ability . give in our castle of Marienburg in the year of our lord 1398 , and upon the 22. day of February . frater Conradus de Jungingen , master generali of the order of the dutch knight of saint Mary hospital at Jerusalem . a brief relation of William esturmy , and John Kington concern their ambassage into Prussia , and the hans-towne . inprimis , that in the month of July , and in the 1403. year of our lord 1403 , and the five year of the reign of our sovereign lord the king that now be , there come into England the ambassador of the mighty lord fr : Conradus de Jungingen , be then master general of Prussia , with his letter direct unto our foresaid sovereign lord the king , require amends and recompense for certain injury unjust offer by english man unto the subject of the say master generail , write in 20. article , which amount unto the sum of 19120. noble and a half etc item , that the three day of the month of October , in the year of our lord abovewritten , and in the five year of the reign of our sovereign lord the king , between the reverend father in God , Henry then bishop of Lincoln lord chancellor , and William lord de Roos high treasurer of England , on the one party and the say ambassador on the other party , it be ( accord to their petition ) among other thing ordain : namely that the liege people of our sovereign lord the king shall free be permit , until the feast of easter then next after ensue to 27 