Theise be the grievance and offence , whereat the merchant of the Hans of almain , come unto , and reside in the realm of England , do find themselves aggrieve , contrary to the article and privilege of the charter grant unto they by the worthy progenitor of the king of England that now be , and also by the say sovereign lord the king , ratify , and confirm . mprimis , whereas the foresay merchant have a privilege grant unto they by charter , that they may , in city , borough , and in other town and village throughout the whole realm of England , exercise traffic in gross , as well with the natural inhabitant of the kingdom , as with stranger , and private person : of late , those that be free denizen in the city , borough , and village within the foresay kingdom , do hinder and restrain all other that be stranger , foreigner , and alien , that they neither can , nor dare buy and sei with the merchant of the Hans aforesaid , to their great hindrance and loss . item , the foresay merchant by virtue of their charter be wont to have and to hold Innes and mansion , for the repose of themselves and of their good , wheresoever they please in any city , borough , or village , throughout the whole kingdom : howbeit of late the foresay merchant be not suffer to take up their mansion , contrary to the tenor of their charter . item , the foresay merchant be privilege not to undergo any other burden or imposition , but only to pay certain custom , as it do by their charter manifest appear . notwithstanding at you same time when Simon de Moreden be mayor of London , the foresay merchant be constrain , in the ward of dove-gate at London , to pay fifteenth , tallage , and 72 other subsidy contrary to the liberty of their charter . whereupon the say merchant prosecute the matter before the council of our sovereign lord the king , insomuch that they be release from pay afterward any such tallage , fifteenth , and subsidy . which merchant , a while after , of their own accord and free will , give unto the gildhall of London a hundred mark sterling , conditional , that they of the ci tie aforesaid shall not at any time after exact or demand of the say merchant , or of their successor , any tallage , fifteenth , or subsidy , contrary to the tenor of their charter , as by record in the foresay gildhall , it do moor plain appear . howbeit of late the officer of our lord the king , in the foresay ward of dove-gate , constrain the merchant aforesaid to pay tallage , fifteenth , and other subsidy . and because the say merchant murmur and refuse to pay any such contribution , allege their privilege , the foresay officer arrest the good of those say merchant ( which be as yet detain upon the arrest ) notwithstanding that they be release before the council of our sovereign lord the king , and also that they give unto the say gildhall one hundred mark to be release , as it be aforesaid . and also the foresay merchant be constrain to pay I2 . d . in the pound , and of late 6.d . and other subsidy , more than their ancient custom , to the great damage of those merchant . item , the foresay merchant be privilege as touch the ancient custom of wol by they buy within the realm of 1° ™ * England , y£ they be not bind to pay , over and beside w°° ’ their ancient custom , but only forty . d . more than the homeborn merchant of England be wont to pay . but now you foresay merchant be compel to pay for every sack of wool ( beside the ancient custom and the 4o . d . aforesaid ) a certain imposition call penny for the penny for the town of Cales , namely for every sack of wool i9 . d . more than the merchant of England do pay , to their great loss , and against the liberty of their charter . the english voyage item , the foresay merchant be privilege by their charter , that concern the quantity of their merchandise bring into the realm of England ( in regard whereof they be bind to pay 3.d . for the worth of every pound of silver ) credit be to be give unto they for the letter of their master and of their company , if they be able to show they . and if so be they have no letter in this behalf to show , that then credit shall be give unto themselves , and that their oath , or the other of their attorney shall be take , without any other proof , as touch the value of their merchandise so bring in , and that thereupon they shall be bind to pay custom , namely the custom of 3-d . just for that cause to be pay . but now the customer of our sovereign lord the king put their good to a high rate than they ought or be wont to be : and hereupon they compel they to pay custom for their good , at their pleasure , scan about their fraught and expense particular disburse in regard of the say good and merchandise , to the great hindrance of the say merchant , and against the tenor of their charter . item , the foresay merchant by way of pitiful complaint do allege , that whereas the worthy progenitor of our lord the king that now be , by virtue of the say great charter , grant liberty unto they to pay the custom of certain clothes , namely of scarlet , and cloth die in grain , and of other clothes of assize , which be by they to be carry out of the realm of England , even as by their foresay charter it do moor plain appear : and whereas our sovereign lord the king that now be ( ratify and confirm the say charter , and be willing that they shall have more especial favour show unto they ) grant unto they by their charter , that the say merchant shall be exempt and free from all custom and imposition of small clothes , as in piece and in narrow clothes which be not of assize , and in such other clothes of like quality : yet of late the customer of our lord the king that now be , not allow-74 ing their say speciali charter so grant unto the speciali merchant aforesaid , do compel they to pay for straight charter . clothes and for piece of clothes which be not of assize , ( together with other demand particular and several make ) as great custom as if the clothes be full out of assize . Moreover also of late , the customer of the small the customer or petty custom and of the subsidy do demand of they oftheW ) custom for kersey-clothe equal unto the custom of it those clothes , that be of full assize , whereas the foresay merchant be not wont to pay for those kersey by virtue of their charter , but only accord to the worth of each pound of silver , as namely for other good which be of gold weight : to the great hindrance of the foresay party , and against the manifest grant of our sovereign lord the king , as it appear in the say speciali charter . item , the say merchant allege , that they be privileged by their charter , if they pay custom and subsidy for their good in the behalf of our lord the king , at any port of England where those good have arrive , and afterward will transport the say good or any part of they unto any other port within the realm aforesaid : that than they shall be quite release from pay of any other custom for the same good , if they bring a warrant that they have pay the say custom , as be aforesaid . of late it fortune , that a certain man of their society name Nicholas crossehaire , be a 1405. merchant of the land of Prussia , immediate after the concord be conclude between the english and the Prussians , bring unto the town of Sandwich a ship lade with bowstave and other merchandise , and there well and true pay the custom of our lord the king for all his ware : and sell there part of the same good , he afterward transport parcel thereof in a small bark unto London , there to be sell , and carry a warrant also with he , that he have at Sandwich pay the custom due unto our lord the king : and yet ( the say warrant notwithstanding ) the customer of the petty custom and subsidy of London come and demand custom of he at another time contrary to reason , and against the tenor of their charter : and the say Nicholas offer pledge unto they , yea , even ready money down into their hand , until the question be discuss and determine , whether he shall pay new custom or no : but this they will not do . then the say Nicholas bring a brief from our lord the king , to get himself discharge from pay the say custom : and for all that , the foresay customer will not as yet have regard unto he , but keep the say good within shipboard , upon the river of Thames , for the space of 15. day , until he have pay another custom , to the great loss of the say Nicholas , for that which he sell first at Sandwich to be deliver at London for seven noble , he can not afterward have for it above four noble , and yet so be it sell , by reason of the harm which his ware have take by lie so long upon the water , contrary to the tenor of their charter . item , the say merchant do allege , that another of their company call Peter Hertson buy at Bristol certain clothes , and jade they same in a ship , to be transport for Prussia , for the which he true pay at Bristol , the custom and subsidy due unto our sovereign lord the king : which ship with the foresay good arrive at London : the customer of the petty-custom and of the subsidy there will not permit the say ship with the good to pass unto the part aforesaid , until the say Peter have pay another custom for the same good ( the warrant , which he bring with he notwithstanding ) to his great hindrance , and contrary to the tenor of their charter . item , pitiful complain the foresay merchant allege , that whereas every merchant , bring ware into the realm , be wont to have a schedule wherein his name be write , for a specification and certificate of the quantity of his good in the say schedule to be find at the arrival of the ship , without pay therefore ought at all , of late the customer of the petty custom do compel they to pay 76 for each man name write a penny , at the arrival of their good out of every ship wherein the say good be find , what commodity and merchandise soever they be : whenas notwithstanding , if there be a chest or any other small matter , there shall not therefore be any custom due unto our lord the king , nor any receive unto his majesty use . in like manner do the customer of the the customer subsidy deal . whereas also the foresay merchant be not wont to pay for a cocket for the conveyance and transportation of their good out of the realm ( albeit many name be write therein ) more than 4-d . of late the customer of the petty custom do compel they to pay for every name contain in the same cocket , 4-d . and in like sort do the customer of the say subsidy deal . which contribution in a year extend it self unto a great sum , to the unknown prejudice of our lord the king , more than any man can suppose , ( for the [ i - 173 ] customer enjoy their fee and commodity from his majesty that they may do he faithful service ) and likewise to the great damage of the say merchant . item , pitiful complain the say merchant do allege that they be constrain to pay for subsidy , sometime I2 . d . and sometime 6.d . in the pound , contrary to the tenor of their charter : and yet notwithstanding when their merchandise come to the wharf , the customer prolong and delay the time 3. or 4. week before they will take custom for their good , in the which space other merchant sei their good , the customer not regard whether the good aforesaid take wet or no ; to the great damage aswell of our lord the king , as of the say merchant : because , if they have quick dispatch , they may pay custom unto his majesty often than they do . item , the say merchant do far allege , that the customer of the petty custom , and of the subsidy in the port of London have appoint among themselves certain man to seal up the good of the say merchant , so soon as they be arrive at the port of safety , until the 77 say good be custom . by mean of the which seal , the foresay party do compel the merchant abovenamed , ( upon a use and custom whereof themselves have be the author ) to pay a certain sum of money , to the great hindrance of the say merchant , and contrary to justice and to their charter . Moreover , the say customer have ordain between themselves , that the say merchant shall put or make up no cloth into fardel , to transport out of the realm , unless certain man appoint by they for the same purpose be there present , to see what manner of clothes they be , under pain of the forfeiture of the say good . also of late , when the say march ant will have make up such fardel , the foresay party assign to be overseer refuse to come , unless they may have for their come some certain sum of money , delay and procrastinate from day to day , so long as themselves list , to the great loss and undo of the foresay merchant , and contrary to their liberty : because the foresay customer be bind by their office to do this , without any contribution therefore to be pay unto they by the say merchant : for that they do enjoy from our sovereign lord the king their fee and commodity , to the end that they may serve he and every merchant just and faithful , without any contribution by they to be impose anew upon the say merchant , of custom . item , the say merchant do allege , that the customer and bailiff of the town of Southampton do compel they to pay for every last of herring , pitch , and soap ash bring thither by they 2 . s . more than the king custom : and for each hundred of bowstave and board call waghenscot , 2.d . for every hundred of board call Richolt , 4.d . and for all other merchandise bring by the foresay merchant unto the same town : which contribution they never pay at any time heretofore , be great to their hindrance , and contrary to the tenor of their charter . HANSE merchant ’ grievance a.d. . 1407 - item , the foresay merchant do allege , that one of their company , call Albert redewish of Prussia , bring diverse good and merchandize unto Newcastle upon Tine , and there pay the usual custom of 3.d . in the pound for all his ware , the bailiff of the say town , against all reason , exact 7. pound sterling at his hand more than the custom : whereupon the foresay merchant get a brief from the king majesty , for the recovery of the say 7. H. accord to equity and reason : howbeit , that at the come of the say brief the foresay baliff will do nothing on his behalf , but will have slay their foresay associate , contrary to their charter and privilege . William esturmy knight , and John Kington canon of Lincoln , be by you most mighty prince and lord , lord Henry by God grace king of England and France and lord of Ireland , sufficient depute and appoint to parley , treat , and agree wl the common society of the merchant of the Hans of Dutchland or almain , concern and about the redress and reformation of unjust attempt happen between our say sovereign lord the king his liege people and subject on the one part , and between the common society aforesaid , the city , town , and particular person thereof on the other part : do ( for the behalf of our say sovraign lord the king , with a mind and intention to have all and singular you thing underwrite to come to the knowledge of the say common society ) intimate , declare , and make know unto you ( hono . sir ) Henr. Westhoff citizen and deputy of the city of Lubec , Henry Fredelaw , Joh. van Berk citizen of Colen , Mainard buxtehude citizen , 8c deputy of the city of Hamburgh , m. Simon clawsten clerk , sir John de Aa knight deputy of the city of rostok , Herman Meyer deputy of the city of Wismar , be , as the procurator , messenger , 8c commissioner of the foresay city , assemble together at the town of Hage in holland , with the forename will . 8c John in regard of the foresay redress 8c reformation : that , even as our say sovereign lord the king his meaning be not to disturb or hinder such privilege as have be heretofore grant and vouchsafe unto the common society of the merchant aforesaid , by the renown king of England , and the worthy progenitor of our lord the king that now be , and by himself also under a certain form confirm : even [ i . 174. ] so he be determine ( without , you prejudice of foreign law ) upon just , mature and sober deliberation , by his royal authority to withstand such privilege , as by reason of the abuse thereof , have be infinite prejudicial ! unto himself and his subject . inprimis the said ambassador do affirm as afore , that whereas all and every the merchant of the say company , as often as they will , be , both in the realm of England , and in other territory and dominion subject unto our sovereign lord the king , admit and suffer ( accord to the tenor of the forename privilege grant unto they ) free , friendly and secure to traffic and converse with any of his majesty liege people and subject whatsoever , or with other people of whatsoever nation live in the realm of England , or in the dominion aforesaid : the say common society of merchant by their public and deliberate common counsel do appoint and ordain , y* no society in any city , town , or place , neither yet any particular man of any such society ( there be no lawful or reasonable cause why ) shall in any wise admit any merchant of the realm of England resort unto their city or other place for merchandise , to enjoy intercourse of traffic : but that the say english merchant shall be altogether exclude from all traffic and mutual conversation among they , by denounce and inflict grievous penalty of money as well upon city as other place , and upon particular merchant also of the foresay society practise the contrary . item , that immediate after , the foresay party enact and ordain publish their say statute and 80 ordinance , in all kingdom , province , part , city , and town , wherein any merchant of the say society be conversant . item , that after that publication , the statute and ordinance aforesaid by every of the merchant of the forename society be inviolable observe . item , that the say statute and ordinance have be so rigorous put in execution , that whereas immediate after certain english merchant with their ship , mariner , and merchandise be in a certain part of one of the principali city of the foresay society , utter destitute of meat , drink , and money , public offer to sell their woollen clothes of England , only to provide themselves of necessary victual : yet the merchant of the say city , stout persist in their statute and ordinance aforesaid , straight prohibit the buy of such clothes , unchristian deny meat and drink unto the say english merchant . item , the foresay society decree and ordain , that no merchant of the say company shall in any place or country whatsoever , buy any woollen clothes of the realm or dominion of England ( albeit offer by other and not by english man ) or , have buy any , shall , after the term prefix , sei they , impose grievous pecuniary mulct , beside the forfeiture of the clothes so buy or sell , upon they that will attempt the contrary . item , that after the say statute and ordinance , the foresay society decree , that all merchant of the say company , have among their ware and merchandise any woollen clothes make in England , shall either sell the say clothes , or within a short space then limit shall , under penalty of forfeit the say clothes , utter renounce the use and commodi tie thereof : not - the Hans withstand a grievous penalty of money be impose society deter-upon the violater of the same statute . of item , that the statute and ordinance aforesaid might English mar-with moor speed and celerity be put in execution , the chant . n 81 f statute against english merchant in Norway and in Suedland . say author and publisher thereof imagine , accord to their desire , that by this mean a utter extirpation and overthrow of english merchant may , yea and of necessity must ensue : upon their serious and long premeditate deliberation , straite command and enjoin , under pain of lose the benefit of all privilege , wheresoever , or by the prince of what land , or the magistrate of what city or town soever vouchsafe unto the say common society , that not only the aiderman of that society in all place throughout the realm of England , but also all other merchant of the say company , after the manner of merchant converse in the say realm , shall , without exception of person , utter abstain from all intercourse of traffic with the merchant of the realm aforesaid : yea , and that they shall depart out of the say kingdom within a very short space limit . for the dispatch of all which premise without delay , it be accord to their commandment effectual provide . item , that the society aforesaid have approve diverse very unreasonable statute and ordinance , make and publish by the merchant of the same society reside in the kingdom of Norway and Swedland , to the great prejudice of the kingdom of England , and the merchant thereof : and as yet both covert and express do approve the same , unjust put they in daily execution . item , whereas in the privilege and indulgence grant by the renown prince sometime king of England , you worthy progenitor of our sovereign lord the king y1 now be , unto the society aforesaid , it be provide , y‘ the say merchant shall not avow any man which be not of their company , nor shall not colour his good and merchandise under their company : whereas also in the [ i . 175. ] confirmation of the say privilege make by our sovereign lord that now be , it be manifest provide , that the merchant of the Hans town , under the colour of their privilege in England , shall not upon pain of the perpetuali frustration and revocation of the foresaid privilege , receive any stranger of any other town in their liberty , by who the king custom may in any sort be withhold or diminish : and yet the contrary unto all these proviso have be every year , for these 20. year or thereabouts notorious practise and commit , as well joint by the generail counsel , and toleration of the foresay society , as also several by the advice and permission of diverse particular city of the foresay Hans company to the great diminution of his majesty custom , the estimation whereof the foresay ambassador be not able at this present full to declare . but that all occasion of the last above mention diminution may be prevent for the time to come , the say ambassador do demand to have from how many u ’ the foresay society a declaration in write , what and be the i ' r . ■ . • • .. - two Hans town . what manner ot territory , city , town , village or company they be , for which the say society challenge and pretend , that they ought to enjoy the privilege grant unto their merchant , as be above mention . Moreover , it be require by the foresay ambassador , if the society aforesaid have not decree nor ordain the thing above write , that the name of the city and place decree and ordain such statute and ordinance , may by the say common society either now or at some other time and place convenient for the same purpose , be express and set down in writing . a letter of Henry the four king of England etc unto frater Conradus de Jungingen the master generali of Prussia . HEnrie etc to the most noble and mighty personage of sacred religion fr : Conradus de Jungingen master general of the order of the dutch knight of saint marie , our most dear friend , greeting , and continual perfection of amity . when as your messenger and ambassador be of late personal present in holland , and there expect 83 