a brief treatise of the great duke of Moscovia his genealogy , be take out of the moscovite manuscript chronicle write by a polack . t have almost ever be the custom of nation , in search out the infancy and first beginning of their estate , to ascribe the same unto such author as live among man in great honour and endue mankind with some one or other excellent benefit . now , this inbred desire of all nation to blaze and set forth their own pedigree have so much prevail with the great part , that leave the undoubted truth , they have betake themselves unto mere fable and fiction . yea and the chronicle of many nation write in diverse and sundry age do testify the same . Even so the grecian boast that they be either autocthones , that be earthbred , or else lineal descend from the god and the roman affirm that Mars be father unto their first founder Romulus . right well therefore and judicial say Titus Livius : neither mean i to avouch ( quoth he ) ne to disable or confute those thing which before the building and foundation of the city have be report , be more adorn and fraught with poetical fable then with incorrupt and sacred monument of truth : antiquity be it to be pardon in this behalf , namely in join together matter historical and poetical , to make the beginning of city to seem the more honourable . for sith antiquity it self be account such a notable argument of true nobility , even private man in all age have contend thereabouts . wherefore citizen of Rome be desirous to make demonstration of their gentry , use to have their ancestors arm paint along the wall of their house : in which regard they be so puff up , that oftentimes 182 1580. they will arrogant disdain those man , which by their own virtue have attain unto honour . in like sort poet , when the originali of their worthiness and brave champion be either utter unknown or somewhat obscure , will oft refer it unto their god themselves . so in these our day ( to let pass other ) the turkish emperor with great presumption boast himself to be descend of the trojan blood . likewise the great duke of Moscovie , to make himself and his predecessor seem the more sovereign , derive the beginning of his parentage from the roman emperor , yea even from Augustus Caesar . albeit therefore no man be so fond as to accept of this report for truth , yet will we brief set down what the moscovite have write in their chronicle as touch this matter . Augustus ( believe it who list ) have certain brethren or kinsfolk which be appoint governor over diverse province . among the rest one Prussus ( of who Prussia be name ) have his place of government assign unto he upon the shore of the eastern or baltic sea , and upon the famous river of Wixel . this man grand child or nephew of the four generation be Rurek , Sinaus , and truvor , who likewise inhabit in the very same place . whereas therefore at the very same time the russian or the moscovite without any civil regiment possess large and spacious territory towards the north , the foresay three brethren , upon the persuasion of one Gostomislius the chief citizen of Novogrod , in the year since the world creation ( accord to the computation of the greek ) 6370 , which be in the year of our lord 572 > be Russia become send for , to bear rule . and so join their kinsman mw in you Olechus unto they , and divide these huge country among themselves , they labour to reduce the barbarous 57 ' and savage people unto a civil kind of life . Sinaus and Truvor decease without issue , Rurek succeed and leave a son behind he name Igor ; 183 who not being of sufficient year to bear rule , be commit unto the protection of his kinsman Olechus . the say Igor beget of olha daughter unto a citizen of Plesco ( who , after her husband be slay by his enemy , take her journey to Constantinople , be there baptize by the name of Helena ) a son call Stoslaus , who fight many battle with the neighbour country . howbeit at length Stoslaus be slay by his foe , who make a drink cup of his skull , engrave thereupon in golden letter this sentence : seek after other man , he lose his own . he leave [ i . 222. ] behind he three son , namely Teropolchus , Olega , and Vulodimir . the which Vulodimir have slay his two brethren , become sole governor of Russia , or ( as the moscovite call it ) Rosseia , his own self . this man begin at length to loathe and mislike the ethnik religion , and the multitude of false god , apply his mind unto the religion of Christ , and have take to wife Anna sister unto Basilius and Constantinus emperor of Constantinople , be together with his whole nation , in the year of Christ 988. baptise , and embrace the christian religion , with the rite and ceremony of the greek church , and his name be change , he be call Basilius . howbeit Zonaras report that before the time of Vulodimir , Basilius emperor of Constantinople send a bishop unto the russian , by who mean they be convert unto the christian faith . he report moreover that they will not be persuade unless they may see a miracle : whereupon the say bishop have make his prayer unto almighty God , throw the book of the evangelist into the fire , which remain there unconsume . and that by this miracle they be move to give credit unto the doctrine of Christ , and to conform themselves thereunto . the son of Vulodimir be Vuiseslaus , Isoslaus , Jaroslaus , Suatopolcus , Borissus , Glebus , Stoslaus , Vulzevolodus , Stanislaus , Sudislaus , and Podius who 184 die in his childhood . among the residue all Russia be divide by their father , who not be content with their portion , but invade each other , be most of they slay by their mutual contention . Borissus and Glebus in regard of their holy conversation be register for saint , who feast be every year celebrate with great solemnity upon the twelve of November . at length Jaroslaus only get the sovereign authority into his own hand , and leave behind he four son , Vulodimir , isoslauus , weceslauus , and Vuszevolodus . the foresay Vulodimir son of Jaroslaus keep his residence at the ancient city of Kiow stand upon Kioto . the river of Boristhenes , and after diverse conflict with his kinsman , have subdue all the province unto himself , be call Monomachos , that be , the only champoin . this man ( for i think it not amiss to report those thing which their own manuscript chronicle make mention of ) wage war against Constantine the emperor of Constantinople , and when he have waste and overrun Thracia , be return home with great and rich spoil , and make preparation for new war , Constantine send Neophytus the metropolitan of Ephesus and two bishop , with the governor of Antiochia , and Eustaphius the abbot of Jerusalem , to present rich and magnificent gift unto he ; as namely , part of the cross of our saviour Christ , a crown of gold , a drink cup curious make of Sardonyx stone , a cloak set all over with precious stone , and a golden chain ; command they to salute he by the name of Czar ( which name , as it may be prove by many argument , signify a king , and not a emperor ) and conclude a most inviolable league of amity and friendship with he . the foresay Vulodimir beget Vuszevolodus the second . This Vuszevolodus leave eight son behind he , Miscislaus , Isoslaus , Stoslaus , Teropolcus , Weceslaus , Romanus , Georgius , and Andrew . the son of George be Roseslaus , Andrew , Basilius , and Demetrius . 185 Demetrius beget George , who in the year 1237. be slay by one bathy , a tartarian duke , which bathy waste Moscovia , and subdue the same unto himself . since which time the russian be tributary to the Tartar , and be govern by such duke as they please to set over they . howbeit the Tartar so great abuse that authority , that when they send their ambassador unto the prince of Moscovie , he be constrain to go forth and meet with they , and ( as Herbortus Fulstinius in his polonian history report ) to offer they a basin full of mare milk , and if they have spill any whit thereof upon their horse maines , to lick it off with his tongue , and have conduct they into his princely court , to stand bareheaded before they while they sit down , and with all reverence to give ear and attendance unto they . but by what mean they shake off at the length this yoke of servitude , i will forthwith declare . about the same time almost all Polonia , and the dukedom of Silesia be overrun by the Tartar with fire and sword . who have burn Presla the chief city of Silesia , and be come before the city of Legnitz , they fight there a most cruel and bloody field , wherein be slay duke Henry himself be son unto the most holy and devout lady hedvice , with many other , who monument and grave be as yet extant in sundry place , and with a infinite multitude of common soldier , insomuch that the Tartar fill nine great sack with the ear of they which they have slay . the Tartar to the end they may obtain the victory , present unto the view of our soldier the portraiture of a man head place by art magic upon a banner , wherein the letter x. be paint , which be shake and move up and down breathe forth a most loathsome stench , and strike such a terror into the heart of our man , that be as it be astonish with the snaky visage of Medusa , they be utter daunt and dismay . 186 from thence bathy and his company with the same bloodthirsty intent march into Hungary , and have almost slay king Bela the four , who together with his son escape by flight do scarce rid themselves out of the enemy hand . and when the whole world almost be exceed terrify at the cruel invasion of this most barbarous nation , at length pope Innocentius the four send ambassador unto bathy obtain peace for five year : but to forsake his heathenish superstition and to become a christian , he will by no mean be persuade . for he be by the instigation of the Saracen infect with devilish opinion of Mahomet , as be more agreeable unto his barbarous rudeness , which even unto this day the Tartar do maintain , like as the profane Turk also . this bathy have a son call Tamerlan , who the moscovite call Temirkutla , who likewise , as it be record in history , attain unto great renown . for he carry about with he in a cage Bajazet the turkish emperor be fetter in golden chain , and make he a laugh stock unto all man . let we now return unto the russian . George be slay , Jaroslaus his brother succeed in his room , and leave behind he three son , Theodorus , Alexander and Andreas . Daniel the son of Alexander first establish his royal seat in the city of Moscow , and magnificent build the castle which before time have be obscure , he take upon he the title of the great duke of Russia . he have five son , namely , George , Alexander , Borissus , Ophonias , and John. This John succeed his father , and because he continual carry a scrip about with he to bestow alm , he be surname Kaleta , which word signify a scrip . his son be , Simeon , John , and Andrew . he give unto his son Simeon the province of Vulodimiria and Moscovia : which Simeon decease without issue his brother John succeed , who beget a son call Demetrius . This Demetrius have seven son , namely 187 A.D. 1580. [ I. 223. ] Theise ambassador be Johan , de Plano Carpini y Frier Benedict a polonian . the city of Moscow first make the seat of the great duke . the name of the moscovite first advance . the english voyage Daniel , Basilius , George , Andrew , Peter , John , and Constantine . Basilius reign after his father death . this man dishinherit his son which be call after his own name , because he suspect his mother of adultery , at his death surrender his dukedom unto his brother George , who keep his nephew a long time in prison . howbeit at his death , though himself have two son namely Andrew and Demetrius , yet be strike perhaps with remorse of conscience , he bestow the dukedom upon his nephew Basilius . against who his two cousin bear a grudge wage war , and at length have take he by a wily stratagem they put out his eye . notwithstanding the boiarens ( for so the moscovite call their noble ) continue their dutiful allegiance unto this their blind duke , who for his blindness they call cziem-nox , that be to say , dark or darken . he leave a son behind he call Ivan Vasilowich who bring the russian common wealth , be before his time but obscure , unto great excellende and renown . who that he may the better get all the superiority into his own hand put to death so many son and nephew of the former duke as he can lay hold on , and begin to take upon he the title of the great duke of Vulodimiria , Moscovia , and Novogardia , and to call himself the monarch or Czar of all Russia . he bring under his subjection two principali city , namely Plesco be the only wall city in all moscovy , and Novogrod , both of they be in regard of traffic most rich and flourish city , and have be subject unto the lithuanians for the space of 50. year before . the treasure of Novogrod be so exceed , that the great duke be report to have carry home from thence 300. cart lade with gold and silver . he also be the first man that wage war against the polonians and the livonians : against Polonia he pretend a quarrel , allege that his daughter Helena ( who he have marry unto Alexander the great 188 duke of Lithuania , which be afterward king of Polonia ) be evil entreat , and be withdraw from the greekish religion unto the ceremony of the church of Rome . but against the livonians for none other cause , but only for a incredible desire of enlarge his dominion . howbeit what impulsive cause of little or no moment happen in the mean season , we will in another place more plain declare . notwithstanding he be very often and in diverse battle vanquish by Plettebergius the great master of the dutch knight : but it be not to the purpose to stand any long upon this discourse . he be marry first unto marry the duke of Tyversky his daughter , and of she he beget John , unto who in his life time he surrender his dukedom , and marry he unto the daughter of Stephan the palatine of Moldavia : which John , after he have beget his son Demetrius , decease before his father . afterwards Ivan Vasilowich aforesaid marry a wife call Sophia be daughter unto Thomas Palaelogus , which be report to have have her dowry out of the pope treasury , because the Moscovite have promise to conform himself unto the romish church . This Sophia be a woman of a princely and aspire mind , and often complain that she be marry unto the Tartar vassal , at length by her instant intreaty and [ i - 224 - ] continual persuasion , and by a notable stratagem she cast off that slavish yoke very much unbeseem so mighty a prince . for whereas the tartarian duke have his procurator and agent in the moscovite court , who dwell in their own house build within the very castle of Moscow , and be eye witness of all affair which be there perform : Sophia say she be admonish from heaven to build a temple in the self same place where the Tartar house stand , and to consecrate it unto saint Nicholas . be therefore deliver of a son she invite the tartarian duke unto the solemn baptize of he , and be come , she request he to give she his house , and obtain it at 189 the yoke of the Tartar shake of . Basilius . Ivan Vasilowich . the english voyage his hand . which house be raze and those tartarian espial be exclude , the Tartar at length be quite bereave and utter dispossess of their authority which they have exercise over the russian for many year , and can never yet recover it ; albeit they have give sundry attempt . of his wife Sophia he beget six child , namely , a daughter call Helena , and five son , that be to say , Gabriel , Demetrius , George , Simeon , and Andrew . the dukedom of right appertain unto Demetrius the son of John , which be the son of Vasilowich by his first marriage . howbeit Sophia prevail so with her husband , that neglect his grandchild Demetrius , he bestow his dukedom upon Gabriel his son . Andrew the young have a son call Vulodimir , of who Mary be bear , which in the year of Christ 1573. be marry unto Magnus the duke of Holst . Gabriel have obtain the great dukedom of Russia , change his name call himself Basilius , and apply his mind to the achieve of high and great enterprise . for he reduce a great part of the dukedom of moscovy , which Vitoldus the great duke of Lithuania hold in possession , under his own jurisdiction , and win upon the river of Boristhenes ( which the russian call Neiper ) many city and especial Smolensco , in the year of our lord 1514. have divorce his first wife , he beget of Helena daughter unto duke Glinskie , Ivan Vasilowich , which now this present 1580. reign as great duke . he be bear in the year of our lord 1528. the 25. of August , six hour after the rise of the son . the great dukedom of Russia fall unto the say Ivan Vasilowich in the five year of his age , have his uncle George for his great protector : be 25. year of age , and be of a strong body and of a courageous mind he subdue the Tartar of Cazan and astracan upon the river of Volgha , carry their duke and chieftains into captivity . 190 but by what way and mean ( after the league which by the intercession of the most sacred Roman emperor , continue from the year 1503. for the space of fifty year , be expire ) have renew war against Livonia , he bring that most flourish province into extreme misery , use for the same purpose a new pretense , and allege that it belong unto he by right of inheritance , i tremble to recount : and it require a large history , which perhaps in time and place convenient some more learned than my self will take upon they to address . he be exceed addict unto piety and devotion , and do oftentimes observe very strict fast and abstinence with his monk : and whereas the russes in do reverence and adoration unto God do beat their forehead against the ground , this Ivan Vasilowich with perform of the same ceremony cause his forehead to be full of boine and swell , and sometime to be black and blue , and very often to bleed . he be much delight with building of church and spare no cost for that purpose . whether therefore by nature , or ( which he pretend to be the cause ) by reason of his subject malice and treachery , he be so addict unto all rigour and cruelty , i dare not determine , especial since he have not a illiberal or misshape countenance , as Attila be report to have have . of his first wife which be sister unto Mikita Romanowich , be now great steward of his household , he beget two son , namely Ivan and Theodore . and albeit he be five time marry , yet have Theodore . he not one child more . whereas this Ivan Vasilowich upon certain frivolous reason call himself the naturali lord of Livonia , i think it not amiss to add a epistle hereunto , which be write by a certain honourable man concern the same matter . S. all we which inhabit this province with all seemly reverence and submission of mind , do offer most humble thank unto the emperor most sacred and peer - 191 less majesty our most gracious lord , in that accord to his fatherly affection which he bear towards all christendom , and for the good 8c commodity of this our distress and afflict country , which these many year have be in stead of a bulwark against the invasion of barbarous nation , he have send his ambassador unto the great duke of Moscovia . in regard of which his fatherly love and great benefit vouchsafe on we , we be ready when occasion shall serve , to adventure our life and good : pray in the mean season unto almighty God , [ i . 225. ] who be the only establisher and confounder of common wealth , to bring this excellent work , the foundation whereof be already lay unto a prosperous conclusion . but as touch the title which the Moscovite make to this province , to say the very truth , we great wonder and be astonish at the declaration thereof . for it be most apparent , not only out of all ancient and credible history , but even from the experience and state of these region , that the say title and allegation be fabulous and feign . for out of all ancient monument , by what name soever they be call ( whereof there be diverse extant among we ) it can be prove by any mention , nor yet by any likelihood or conjecture , that those thing which the Moscovite affirm concern the people which be governor of these region in time past , and concern the right and title of his ancestor unto this province , be ground upon truth . the commodi - for it be not unknown by what mean this province , tie of traffic partiy through the industry of merchant , and partly by cion . the benente or navigation , be first discover : neither be it unknown how the inhabitant thereof be whole addict unto heathenish superstition and idolatry , be by the croise knight ( who draw other knight profess the same order in Prussia to aid and accompany they in this their enterprise ) and that with great labour and difficulty , convert unto the christian faith : when as at the same time the livonians have no knowledge at all of the jurisdiction , religion , manner , or language of Moscovie : 192 Ivan VASILOWICH , emperor of Russia who have not only no conversation nor deal with the moscovite , but be estrange also from all other nation whatsoever : for lead a miserable , poor , barbarous , and heathenish life , in savage manner among wild beast , and in the desert and solitary wood , they be utter ignorant of God and destitute of civil magistrate . howbeit this kind of government be peculiar unto they , namely that all of one family and society use a kind of reverence unto their elder more than to any other , who also , that their authority may be the great , they call by the name of king , and ( albeit one of their family consist of a 100 person ) they obey they in all respect , and after their rude and barbarous manner do they loyal service . at the very same time the moscovite have receive the religion , and the ecclesiastical ceremony of the greek and eastern church , which religion they publish and disperse throughout all province subject to their dominion , use their own proper letter and character for the same purpose . of all which thing the livonians which very barbarous inhabit a land be environ with Russia , Lithuania , Samogitia , Prussia , and the balthic sea , never hear any report at all . it be moreover to be note that never at any time heretofore either within the earth , or in other place of Livonia , there have be find any monument at all of the antiquity or letter of the russes : which very must needs have come to pass , if the moscovite , russes , or any other nation which use the foresay particular , have bear rule and authority over the livonians : yea there have be leave some remainder and token , either of their religion and divine worship , or of their law and custom , or at the least of their manner , language , and letter . This indeed we can in no wise deny , that even in Livonia it self , there have be in time past and at this present be many and diverse language speak by the people . howbeit no one language of they all have any affinity either with the moscovian tongue , or with the tongue of any other nation . but whereas the Moscow - two 193 n vite pretend that there have be usual pay a pension or tribute unto himself and his predecessor out of the whole province , it be as incredible as the former .. about the begin of this tragical war , the Moscovite , to cloak his tyranny and ambition under some fair pretense , among other of his demand , make mention also of a tribute which shall be due unto he out of the bishop of dorpat his jurisdiction , whereof notwithstanding he can neither bring any just account , nor affirm any certainty : howbeit there be no man live to be find which either can tell of his own remembrance , or from the relation of other , that any such tribute be ever pay unto the Moscovite . what time therefore he refer all this negotiation unto the master of the livonian order , and command he to get what knowledge he can thereof from the man of dorpat , and urge the tribute , say if it be worth but one hair , that he will not remit it : at length it be find record in the ancient chronicle of dorpat , that beyond the memory of man , when the territory of Plesco contain nothing but wood and forest for wild beast , that the peasant of the liberty of dorpat call neuhus , by the consent of the russian borderer , enjoy beehive in the say wood , and pay every year in lieu thereof unto the russian governor , six shilling of livonian coin . but so soon as the russian have fell the wood and have build town and village in their place , the say pension cease together with the tree which be cut down . wherefore the say six shilling be never since that time either demand by the russes or pay by the livonians . Theise thing which i know concern the cause of the livonian war i think good to signify unto you . give the 22. of may , in the year of our lord 1576. 194 