a note touch the mighty ship of king Henry the five , mention hereafter in the treaty of keep the sea , take out of a chronicle in the Trinity church of Winchester . Odem anno quo victoria potitus est videlicet anno domini 1415. and regni svi anno tertio , post bellum de Agincourt , conducti a Francis venerunt cum multis navibus recuperaturi Harfletum . say rex angliae misit fratrem suum johannem ducem bedfordiae and Andegaviae , qui pugnavit cum eis and vicit , and nave cepit , and quasdam submersit : caeteri fugerunt cum Hispanis navibus qui venerant cum eis anno gratiae 1416. sequenti vero anno redierunt potentiores , and iterum devicti perpetuam pacem cum rege composuerunt , and propter eorum nave fecit rex fieri nave quales non erant in mundo . de his sic conductis a Francis ita metrice scribitur . regum belligero trito celeberrimus arvo gallos , Hispanos , Janos , devicit , and urget , vastat ; turbantur castera regna metu . Navali bello bis devicti quoque Jani . a branch of a statute make in the eight year of Henry the sixth , for the trade to Norwey , Sweveland , Denmark , and Fynmarke . i tern because that the king most dear uncle , the king of Denmark , Norway and Sweveland , as the same our sovereign lord the king of his intimation have understand , consider the manifold and great loss , peril , hurt and damage which have late happen aswell to he and he , as to other foraine and stranger , and also friend and speciali subject of our say sovereign lord the king of his realm of England , by you go in , enter and passage of such foreign and strange person into his realm of Norwey and other in [ i . 186. ] nave maxima henrici quinti. dominion , streit , territory , jurisdiction and place subdue and subject to he , special into his isle of Fynmarke , and elsewhere , aswell in their person as their thing and good : for eschew of such loss , peril , hurt and damage , and that such like ( which God forbid ) shall not hereafter happen : our say sovereign lord the king have ordain and statute , that all and singular stranger , aswell Englishman and other will to apply by ship and come into his realm of Norwey and other dominion , streit , territory , jurisdiction , isle and place aforesaid with their ship , to the intent to get or have fish or any other merchandise , or good , shall apply and come to his town of northberne , where the say king of Denmark have special ordain and establish his staple for the concourse of stranger and special of Englishmen , to the exercise of such merchandise : grant to the say Englishmen that they shall there enjoy in and by all thing the same favour , privilege and prerogative which they off the Hans do enjoy . therefore our say sovereign lord the king will the love , affinity and amity to be firm observe , which betwixt his say uncle and his noble progenitor of good memory , their realm , land , dominion , streite , territory , jurisdiction and their say place , and the same our sovereign lord the king and his noble progenitor of famous memory , his great man , subject , realm , land and dominion have be of old time hitherto continue , nor nothing by our say sovereign lord the king or his people to be attempt or do whereby such amity by reason of any dissension , enmity or discord may be break : by the advice of the lord spirituali and temporali and of the commons of his say realm of England , assemble in this present parliament , have ordain , prohibit that none of his liege people nor subject of his realm of England by audacity of their folly presume to enter the realm , land , dominion , strait , territory , jurisdiction and place of the say king of 112 Denmark against the ordinance , prohibition and interdiction of you same his uncle above remember , and in contempt of the same , upon pain of forfeiture of all their movable good and imprisonment of their person at the king will . another branch of a statute make in the ten year of the reign of Henry the sixth concern the state of the english merchant in the dominion of the king of Denmark . item because that our sovereign lord the king at the grievous complaint to he make in this parliament by the commons of his realm of England be in this parliament be inform , that many of his faithful liege people be great impoverish , undo , and in point to be destroy by the king of Denmark and his liege , which be of the amity of the king our sovereign lord , because that they do daily take of his say faithful subject their good , so that they have take of merchant of York and Kingston upon hui good and merchandise to the valour of v. m.li . within a year , and of other liege and merchant of the realm of England good and cattal to the valour of sheet . m.li . whereof they have no remedy of the say king of Denmark , nor of none other , forasmuch as none of they come within the realm of England , nor nothing have in the same realm of England , and that the good be take out of the same realm : the king willing to provide remedy for his say liege people , have ordain and establish , that if the good of any of you say his liege be or shall|be take by the say king of Denmark or any of his say liege , the keeper of the privy seal for you time be , shall have power to make to you party grieve letter of request under the privy seal , w‘out any other pursuit to be make to any for restitution to be have of the good so take and to be take . and if restitution be not make by [ i . 187. ] n 113 h 