the coin , weight and measure use in Russia , f1 - 256 - ] write by John Hasse , in the year , 1554. orasmuch as it be most necessary for all merchant which seek to have traffic in any strange region , first to acquaint themselves with the coin of those land with which they do intend to join in traffic , and how they be call from the valuation of the high piece to the low , and in what sort they make their payment , as also what their common weight and measure be : for these cause i have think good to write some thing thereof accord to my own knowledge and experience , to the end that the merchant of that new adventure , may the better understand how the wealth of that new frequent trade will arise . first , it be to be note that the emperor of Russia have no other coin then silver in all his land , which go for payment among merchant , yet notwithstanding there be a coin of copper , which serve for the relief of the poor in Moscow , and no where else , and that be but only for quasse , water and fruit , as nut , apple , and such other like . the name of which money be call pole or pole , of which pole there go to the least of the silver coin , 18. but i will not stand upon this , because it be no currant money among merchant . of silver coin there be three sort of piece : the least be a Poledenga , the second a Denga , the three , nowgrote , which be as much to say in english as halfpenny , penny , and twopence , and for other value money then this , there be none : there be oftentimes there coin of gold , but they come out of foreign country , whereof there be no ordinary valuation , but they pass accord to the agreement of merchant . their order in sum of money be this : as we say n no coin of gold in Russia , but all of silver . 273 in England , halfpenny , penny , shilling and pound , so say they Poledenga , Denga , Altine and Rubble : there go two Poledengas to a Denga , six denga to a Altine , and 23 altines , and two denga to a Rubble . concern the weight of Russia they be these : there be two sort of pound in use among they , the one great , you other small : the great pound be just two small pound : they call the great weight by the name of Beasemar , and the small they call the Skalla weight : with this small weight they weigh their silver coin , of the which the emperor have command to put to every small pound three rubble of silver , and with the same weight they weigh all grocery ware , and almost all other ware which come into the land , except those which they weigh by the Pode , as hop , salt , iron , lead , tin and batrie with diverse other , notwithstanding they use to weigh batrie more often by the small weight then by the great . whensoever you find the price of your ware rate by the Pode , consider that to be the great weight , and the pound to be the small . also they divide the small pound into 48 part , and they call the eight and forty part a slotnike , by the which Slotnike the retailer sell their ware out of their shop , as goldsmith , grocer , silkeseller and such other like as we do use to retail by the ounce : and as for their great weight which they call the Beasemar , they sei by pode , or shippond . the pode do contain of the great weight , 40 pound , and of the small 80 : there go 10. podes to a shippond . yet you must consider that their great weight be not full with we : for i take not their great pound to be full 13 ounce , but above 12 i think it be . but for your just proof , weigh 6 rubble of Russia money with our pound weight , and then shall you see what it lack : for 6 rubble of Russia be by the emperor standard , the great pound : so that i think it the next way to know the just weight , as well of the great pound as of the small . 274 there be another weight needful to be know , which the weight of be the weight of Wardhouse , for so much as they weigh Wardhouse . all their dry fish by weight , which weight be the Beasemar , as they of Russia do use , notwithstanding there be another sort in it : the name of those weight be these : the mark pound , the great pound , the weigh , and the shippond . the mark pound be to be understand as our pound , and their great pound be 24 of their mark pound : the weigh be 3 great pound , and 8 weigh be a shippound . now concern their measure . as they have two than Russia sort of weight , so they have also two sort of mea - mm ™ ™ - sure : wherewith they measure cloth both linen and woollen : they call the one a areshine , and the other a locut : the areshine i take to be as much as the Flanders ell , and their locut half a english yard : with their areshine they may mete all such sort of clothes as come into the land , and with the Locut all such cloth both linen and woollen , as they make themselves . and whereas we use to give yard and inch , or yard and handful , they do give nothing but bare measure . they have also a measure wherewith they do mete [ i . 257. ] their corn , which they call a setforth , and the half of that a osmine : this setforth i take to be three bushel of London measure . and as for their drink measure , they call it a span , which be much like a bucket , and of that i never see any true rate , but that some be great than other some . and as for the measure of measure Wardhouse wherewith they meet their cloth , there be no difference between that and the measure of dansk , measu , . e which be half a english ell . dansk . concern the toil and custom of Russia , it be report to i in Moscovia , that the Turk and the Turk Armenians pay the ten penny custom of all the ware rme they bring into the emperor land , and above that they ususme^ pay for all such good as they weigh at the emperor the emperor beam , two penny of the Rubble , which you buyer or beam . « 75 the dutch nation lose their privileges , you renew they with a great sum . the commodity of Russia . the english voyage seller must make report to of the master of the beam : they also pay a certain horse toll , which be in diverse place of his realm four penny of a horse . the dutch nation be free of this : notwithstanding for certain offence , they have lose their privilege which they have recover this summer to their great charge . it be report to i by a justice of that country , that they pay for it thirty thousand rubble , and also that rye , Dorpte and revel have yield themselves under the government of the emperor of Russia : whether this be a brag of the russes or not , i know not , but thus he say , and in deed while we be there , there come a great ambassador out of Liefland , for the assurance of their privilege . to speak somewhat of the commodity of this country , it be to be understand , that there be a certain place four score mile from the sea call Colmogro : to which place there resort all the sort of ware that be in the north part , as oil , salt , stockfish , salmon , feather and fur : their salt they make of saltwater by the sea side : their oil they make of seal , whereof they have great store which be bring out of the bay where our ship come in : they make it in the spring of the year , and bring it to colmogro to sell , and the merchant there carry it to novogrode , and so sell it to the dutch nation . their stockfish and salmon come from a place call mallum , not far from Wardhouse : their salmon and their salt they carry to Moscow , and their dry fish they carry to novogrode , and sell it there to the lieflander . the fur and feather which come to Colmogro , as sable , beaver , minx , Armine , lettuce , Graies , wool-verings , and white fox , with dear skin , they be bring thither , by the man of pen , Lampas , and Powstezer , which fetch they from the samoede that be count savage people : and the merchant that bring these fur do use to truck with the merchant 276 i55+-of colmogro for cloth , tin , batrie , and such other like , and the merchant of Colmogro carry they to novogrode , Vologda , or Moscow , and sell they there . the feather which come from pen they do little esteem . if our merchant do desire to know the meet place of Russia for the stand house , in my opinion i take it to be Vologda , which be a great town stand in the heart of Russia , with many great and good town about it . there be great plenty of corn , victual , and of all such ware as be raise in Rusland , but special , flax , hemp , tallow and bacon : there be also great store of wax , but it come from the Mosko . the town of Vologda be meet for our merchant , Vologda and because it lie amongst all the best town of Russia , sta^ and there be no town in Russia but trade with it : also the water be a great commodity to it . if they plant themselves in Moscow or Novogrode , their charge will be great and wonderful , but not so in Vologda : for all thing will there be have better cheap by the one half . and for their vent , i know no place so meet . it be likely that some will think you Mosko to be the meet by the reason of the court , but by that reason i take it to be worse : for the charge there will be so great by craver and expense , that the moiety of the profit will be whole consume , which in the other place will be save . and yet notwithstanding our merchant may be there in the winter to serve the emperor and his court . The the emperor emperor be a great merchant himself of wax and l sable , which with good foresight may be procure to mseife n their hand : as for other commodity there be little or none in Moscovia , beside those above rehearse : if there be other , it be bring thither by the Turk , who will be dainty to buy our clothes consider the charge of carriage over land . our merchant may do well to provide for the russes such ware as the dutch nation do serve they of , as Flanders and Holland clothes , which i believe , they shall 277 serve better and with less charge than they of rye or dorpt , or revel : for it be no small adventure to bring their clothes out of Flanders to either of these place , and their charge not little to carry they over land to novogrode , which be from rye nine hundred russian mile . [ I. 258. ] This novogrode be a place well furnish with flax , wax , hide , tallow and many other thing : the best flax in Russia be bring thither and there sell by the hundred bundle , which be do also at Vologda , and they that bring the flax to novogrode , dwell as near Vologda , as novogrode , and when they hear of the utterance which they may have with our nation , they will as willing come to they as go to other . two sort of they have in Russia two sort of flax , the one be axe - call great flax , and the other small : that which they call great flax be better by four rubble in 100 bundle then the small : it be much long than the other , and clean without wood : and whereas of the small flax there go 27. or 28 bundle to a shippound , there go not of the great sort above 22. or 24 at the most . there be many other trifle in Russia , as soap , mat , etc but i think there will be no great account make of they . the letter of king Philip and queen marry to Ivan Vasilivich the emperor of Russia write the first of April 1555 and in the second voyage . Hilip and marry by the grace of God , king and queen of England , France , Naples , Jerusalem , and Ireland , defender of the faith , prince of Spain and Sicily , archduke of ostrich , duke of Burgundy , Milan , and Brabant , county of haspurge , Flanders , and tiroll : to the right high , right mighty , and right excellent prince , garnish with all gift of nature , by god grace John Vasilivich 278 