the letter of m. George Killingworth the come - [ i . 263. ] pany first agent in Moscovie , touch their entertainment in their second voyage . anno 1555. the 27. of November in Moscow . ight worshipful , my duty consider , etc it may please your worship to understand , September we our ware up , that at the make hereof we all be in good health , thank be to God , save only William our cook as we come from colmogro fall into the river out of the boat , and be drown . and the 11. day of come to Vologda , and there we lay all and sell very little : but one merchant will have give we 12. roble for a broad cloth , and he say he will have have they all , and 4. altines for a pound of sugar , but we do refuse it because he be the first , and the merchant be not come thither , nor will not come before winter , trust to have more : but i fear it will not be much better . yet notwithstanding we do for the best . and the house that our ware lie in cost from that day until Easter ten roble . and the 28. day of September we do determine with our self that it be good for m. grey , Arthur Edwards , Thomas hautory , Christopher Hudson , John Segewicke , Richard Johnson , and Richard Judde , to tarry at Vologda , and m. chancellor , Henry lane , Edward prize , Robert Best and i shall go to Moscow . and we do lade the emperor sugar , with part of all sort of ware to have have to the Moscow with we , but the way be so deep , that we be fain to turn back , and leave it still at Vologda till the frost . and we go forth with post horse , and the charge of every horse be still ten in number , come to 10. S. y.d. half penny , beside the guide . and we come to the Moscow the 4. day of October , and be lodge that night in a simple house : but the next day 291 queen Mary letter to the emperor of Russia . the english voyage we be send for to the emperor his secretary , and he bid we welcome with a cheerful countenance and cheerful word , and we show he that we have a letter from our queen grace to the emperor his grace , and then he desire to see they all , and that they may remain with he , to have they perfect , that the true meaning may be declare to the emperor , and so we do : and then we be appoint to a better house : and the seven day the secretary send for we again , and then he show we that we shall have a better house , for it be the emperor his will , that we shall have all thing that we do lack , and do send we mead of two sort , and two hen , our house free , and every two day to receive eight hen , seven altines , and two penny in money , and mead a certain , and a poor fellow to make clean our house , and to do that whereunto we will set he . and we have give many reward before , which you shall perceive by other , and so we give the messenger a reward with thank : and the nine day we be send to make we ready to speak with the emperor on the morrow . and the letter be send we , that we may deliver they our self , and we come before he the ten day : and before we come to his presence we go through a great chamber , where stand many small ton , pail , bowl and pot of silver , i mean , like wash bowl , all parsel gilt : and within that another chamber , wherein fate ( i think ) near a hundred in cloth of gold , and then into the chamber where his grace sit , and there i think be more than in the other chamber also in cloth of gold , and we do our duty , and show his grace our queen grace letter , with a note of your present which be leave in Vologda : and then his grace do ask how our queen grace do , call her cousin , say that he be glad that we be come in health into his realm , and we go one by one unto he , and take he by the hand , and then his grace do bid we go in health , and come to dinner again , and 292 we dine in his presence , and be set with our face towards his grace , and none in the chamber sit with their back towards he , be i think near a hundred at dinner then , and all serve with gold , as platter , charger , pot , cup , and all not slender but very-massy , and yet a great number of platter of gold , stand still on the cupboard , not move : and diverse time in the dinner time his grace send we meat and drink from his own table , and when we have dine we go up to his grace , and receive a cup with drink at his own hand , and the same night his grace send certain gentleman to we with diverse sort of wine and meed , to who we give a reward . and afterward we be by diverse italian counsel to take heed who we do trust to make the copy of the privilege that we will desire to have , for fear it shall not be write in the Russie tongue , as we do mean . So first a russian do write for we a breviate to the emperor , the tenor whereof be , that we do desire a strong privilege : and when the secretary see it , he do deliver it to his grace , and when we come again , his grace will we to write our mind , and he will see it , and so we do . and his grace be so trouble with preparation to war , that as yet we have no answer : but we have be require of his secretary , and of they under chancellor , to know what ware we have bring into the realm , and what ware [ i . 264. ] we do intend to have , that be , or may be have in this realm : and we show they , and they show the emperor thereof . and then they say his grace pleasure be , that his best merchant of the Moscow shall be speak to , to meet and talk with we . and so a day be appoint , and we meet in the secretary his office , and there be then under chancellor , who be not pass two year since the emperor merchant , and not his chancellor : and then the conclusion of our talk be , that the chancellor will we to bethink we , where we will desire to have a house or house , 293 the italian counsel to our people . the diversity of weight E5 measure in Russia . that we may come to they as to our own house , and for merchandise to be make preparation for we , and they will know our prize of our ware and frise : and we answer , that for our price they must see the ware before we can make any price thereof , for the like in goodness have not be bring into the realm , and we do look for a example of all sort of our ware to come from Vologda , with the first sledway , and then they shall see they , and then we will show they the price of they : and likewise we can not tell they what we will give they just , till we do know as well their just weight as their measure : for in all place where we do come , all weight and measure do vary . then the secretary ( who have make promise unto we before ) say , that we shall have all the just measure under seal , and he that be find faulty in the contrary , to buy or sei with any other measure then that , the law be , that he shall be punish : he say moreover , that if it so happen that any of our merchant do promise by covenant at any time to deliver you any certain sum of ware in such a place , and of such like goodness , at such a day , for such a certain price , that then because of variance , we shall cause it to be write , accord as the bargain be , before a justice or the next ruler to the place : if he do not keep covenant and promise in all point , accord to his covenant , that then look what loss or hindrance we can just prove that we have thereby , he shall make it good if he be worth so much : and in like case we must do to they : and to that we do agree , save only if it be to come over the sea , then if any such fortune shall be ( as God forbid ) that the ship shall mischance or be rob , and the proof to be make that such kind of ware be lade , the english merchant to bear no loss to the other merchant . than you chancellor say , i think you shall do best to have your house at Colmogro , which be but 100 mile from 294 the right discharge of the ship , and yet i trust the ship shall come near hereafter , because the ship may not tarry long for their lade , which be rooo . mile from Vologda by water , and all our merchant shall bring all our merchandise to Colmogro to you , and so colmogro . shall our merchant neither go empty nor come empty : for if they lack lade homeward , there be salt , which be good ware here , that they may come load again . so we be very glad to hear that , and do agree to his say : for we shall nevertheless , if we lust , have a house at Vologda , and at the Moscow , yea , and at novogrode , or where we will in Rusland : but the three and twenty of this present we be with the secretary , and then among other talk , we move , that if we shall tarry at colmogro with our ware , and shall not come to Vologda , or further to seek our market , but tarry still at Colmogro , and then the merchant of the Moscow and other shall not come and bring their ware , and so the ship shall come , and not have their lade ready , that than it be a great loss and hindrance for we : then say he again to we , that the merchant have be again together with he , and have put the like doubt , that if they shall come and bring their ware to Colmogro , and that they shall not find ware there sufficient to serve they , that than they shall be at great loss and hindrance , they leave their other trade to fall to that : and to that we do answer , that after the time that we do appoint with they to bring their ware to Colmogro , God will , they shall never come thither , but at the begin of the year , they shall find that our merchant will have at the least for a thousand roble , although the ship be not come : so that he say , that than we must talk further with the merchant : so that as yet i know not , but that we shall have need of one house at Colmogro , and another at Vologda , and if that they bring not their ware to Col - Vologda . mogro , than we shall|be sure to buy some at Vologda , and to be out of bondage . 295 the russian secretary his name . the english voyage and thus may we continue three or four year , and in this space we shall know the country and the merchant , and which way to save our self best , and where to plant our house , and where to seek for ware : for the Moscow be not best for any kind of ware for we to buy , save only wax , which we can have under seven penny the ruff pound , and it lack two ounce of our pound , neither will it be much better cheap , for i have bid 6. penny for a pound . and i have buy more , five hundred weight of yarn , which stand i in eight penny farthing the ruff pound one with another . and if we have receive any store of money , and be dispatch here of that we tarry for , as i doubt not but we shall short ( you know what i mean ) then as soon as we have make sale , i do intend to go to novogrode , and to Plesco , whence all the great number of the best tow flax come , and such ware as be there i trust to buy part . and fear you not but we will do that may be do , if God send we health , desire you to prepare full for one ship to be ready in the begin of April to depart off the coast of England . concern all those thing which we have do in the ware , you shall receive a perfect note by the next bearer ( God will ) for he that carry these from we be a merchant of Terwill and he be cause to carry these by the commandment of the emperor his secretary , who name be Ivan Mecallawich weskawate , who we take to be our very friend . and if it please you to send any letter to dantiske to Robert Elson , or to William Watsons servant Dunstan Walton to be convey to we , it may please you to enclose we in a letter send from you to he , write in polish , dutch , latin or italian : so enclose , come to the Moscow to his hand , he will convey our letter to we wheresoever we be . and i have write to dantiske already to they for the conveyance of letter from thence . and to certify you of the weather here , man say that 296 these hundred year be never so warm weather in this country at this time of the year . but as yesternight we receive a letter from Christopher Hudson from a city call yeraslave , who be come hither with certain of our ware , but the winter do deceive he , so that he be fain to tarry by the way : and he write that the emperor present be deliver to a gentleman at Vologda , and the sled do overthrow , and the butt of hollock be lose , which make we all very sorry . i pray you be not offend with these my rude letter for lack of time : but assoon as sale be make , i will find the mean to convey you a letter with speed : for the way be make so doubtful , that the right messenger be so much in doubt , that he will not have any letter of any effect send by any man , if he may , for he know not of these : and to say the truth , the way be not for he to travel in . but i will make another shift beside , which i trust shall serve the turn till he come , if sale be make before he be ready , which be and shall be as please God : who ever preserve your worship , and send we good sale . write in haste . by you to command George Killingworth draper . a copy of the first privilege grant by the emperor of Russia to the english merchant in the year 1555. Ohn Vasilivich , by the grace of God emperor of Russia , great duke of Novogrode , Moscovia , etc to all people that shall see , read , hear or understand these present , greeting . forasmuch as God have plant all realm and dominion in the whole world with sundry commodity , so as the one have need of the amity and commodity of the other , and 297 