the voyage of the foresay m. Stephen Burrough , An. 1557. from colmogro to Wardhouse , which be send to seek the bona Esperanza , the bona Confidentia , and the fillip and marry , which be not hear of the year before . May . Pon Sunday the 23. of may , i depart 23 with the searchthrift from Colmogro , the latitude whereof be 64. degree , 25. minute , and the variation of the compass , 5. degree , 10 minute from the north to the east . Wednesday we come to the island 26 call pozanka , which island be within four league of the bar Berozova . it flow here at a east and by south moon full sea . Saturday in the morning we depart from pozanka , 29 and ply to the bar of Berdzova Gooba , whereupon we come to anchor , at a low water , and sound the say bar with our two skiff , and find in the best upon the shoald of the bar 13. foot water by the rule . it high upon this bar , in spring stream 3. foot water : and a east moon make a full sea upon this bar . Sunday in the morning we depart from the bar 3° of Berozova , and ply along by the shoald in five fathom , until i have sight of saint Nicholas ride , and then we cast about to the northward , and go with a hommocke , which be half a mile to the eastwards of Coya Reca , which hommocke and saint Nicholas abbey Coia Reca . lie southsouthwest , and northnortheast , and between [ i . 291 , ] they be 11. league . Coia Reca be half a mile to the eastwards of coscaynos . coscaynos and the mid of coscaynos . the island call Mondeustova ostrove , which be thwart of the bar of Berozova lie south and by 363 east , north and by west , and between they be 4. league , or as you may say from the seaboord part of the bar to coscaynos be 3. league and a half . 31 Monday at a north-east and by east sun we be thwart of coscaynos . dog nose lie from coscaynos northnorthwest , and between they be eight league : and dog nose show like a Gurnerds head , if you be inward on both side of it : on the low point of dog nose there stand a cross alone . 2 dog nose . the variation of the compass 4. degree . 3 4 June . from dog nose to Foxenose be three league , north and by west . the 2. day of June i go on shore 2. mile to the northward of dog nose , and have the latitude of that place in 65. degree , 47. minute . it flow a shore at this place , at a east moon full sea , and the ship lay thwart to wend a flood , in the off , at a southsoutheast moon . so that it be to be understand , that when it be a full sea on the shore , it be two point to ebb , before it be a low water in the off . the variation of the compass at this place be 4. degree from the north to the east . this day the northnorthwest wind put we back again with dog nose , where a ship may ride thwart of a salt house , in 4. fathom , or 4. fathom and a half of water , and have landfange for a north and by west wind : which salt house be half a mile to the southward of dog nose . Friday at a Southsouth west sun , we depart from this salt house . it be to be note that four mile to the northward of dog nose there grow no tree on the bank by the water side : and the bank consist of fuller earth . over the cliff there grow some tree : so that dog nose be the better to be know because it be fuller earth , and the like i have not see in all that country . 364 a head of fox nose a league from the shore there fox nose . be 15. fathom : betwixt fox nose and Zolatitsa there be 6 league , i mean the southerly part of fox nose . Sunday i sound the bar of Zolatitsa , which the 6 russes tell i be a good harbour , but in the best of it i find but 4. foot water . Monday , i have the latitude in 66. degree , and then 7 be point Pentecost six league south of we . point pente - Wednesday i go on land at cross island , and c^‘ take the latitude , which be 66. degree 24 minute . cross island . we be one league north-east of cross island , i see the land on the Eastside , which i judge to be cape good fortune , and it be then eastsoutheast of cape good they 9 league . fortune . cape grace be 7. league and a half north-east from cape grace . cross island . there be 2. Islands 5. league northnortheast from cape grace , the southermost of they be a little long island almost a mile long , and the northermost a little round island , and they be both hard aboard the shore . cape race be from the southermost island north cape race . and by west , and between they be two league , and from that and half a league northnorthwest , there be another point . between which point and cape race , the russes have a stanavish or harbour for their Lodias : and to the westwards of the say point , there be a shoal bay . three league and a half to northward of cape 10 race , we have the latitude on the 10. day of this month in 67. degree 10. minute . ride within half a league of the shore in this latitude i find it to be a full sea at a north and by east moon . i have where we ride two and twenty fadoome , and the tallow which be take up be full of great break shell , and some stone withal like unto small sand congeal together . from a south sun that we weigh , the wind 365 being at north and by east , we drive to the windward half the ebb , with the ship head to the eastwards . and then when we cast her head to the westwards , we sound , and have 22. fathom break shell , and grey sand ; this present day be very misty , frost in June , with frost on the shrowd as the mist fall . Friday in the morning at a east sun , the mist break up a little , the wind be at north and by west a stiff gale , our shrowd and rope over head be cover with frost , and likely to be a storm : i think it good to seek a harbour , and so ply room with the island which be two league to the southward of cape race , and within these island ( thanks be to God ) we find harbour for we . it high at these island two fathom water : [ i . 292. ] it flow in the harbour at this place at a southsoutheast moon full sea : and a sea board it flow at a southsouthwest moon a full sea . the russes call Tri ostrove . this island , Tri ostrove . you may come in between the little island and the great island , and keep you in the mid of the sound , and if you borrow on any side , let it be on the great island , and you shall have at a low water , four fathom , and three fathom and a half , and three fathom , until that you be shoot so far in as the narrow , which be between the northermost point of the great island , and the southern point of the main which be right against it , and then hale to the northward with the cross which stand in the main , and you shall have at a low water 10. foot water , and fair sand . and if you be dispose to go through the sound to the southward , keep they northwest shore aboard , for on the island side after you be shot so far in as the cross , it be a shoal of rock half the sound over : which rock do last unto the southerly part of the great island , and rather to the southward . and if you be constrain to seek a harbour for northerly wind , when you come out of 366 the sea , hale in with the southerly part of the great island , give the island a fair birth , and as you shoot towards the main , you shall find road for all northerly wind , in four fathom , five , six and seven fathom , at a low water . also within this great island ( if need be ) you may have a good place to ground a ship in : the great island be almost a ' mile long and a quarter of a mile over . this storm of northerly wind last until the 16. 16 of this month , and then the wind come southerly , but we can not get out for ice . i go on shore ice . at the cross , and take the latitude , which be 66. degree , 58. minute , 30. second : the variation of the the variation . compass 3. degree and a half from the north to the east . Thursday be fair weather , and the wind at 17 north we ply to the windward with sail and oar : we stop the flood this day three league to the northward of cape race , two mile from the shore , and have twenty fathom water , fair grey and black sand , and break shell . and when the slake come we 18 weigh and make aboard to the shoreward , and have within two cable length of the shore , eighteen fathom fair grey and black sand : a man may find road there for a north wind , and so to the westwards . two league to the southward of Corpus Christi point , you may have landfang for a north and by east wind , and from that to the westwards in 23. fathom almost a mile from shore , and fair sand , and among the sand little young small limpet , or such like as grow upon muscle : and within two cable length and less of the shore be eighteen fathom , and the sound aforesaid , but the young limpet more plentiful . it be a full sea where we ride , almost a mile from shore , at a south and by west moon : two league to the southward of corpus christi point be the uttermost land , which land and 367 cape race lie south and half a point to westwards , and north and half a point to the eastwards , 19 and between they be six league . ride this day six league to the northward of cape race , the wind at northnorthwest , with mist and frost , at noon the sun appear through the mist , so that i have the latitude in 67. degree , 29. minute . 21 Monday we be thwart of corpus christi point , gorpuschrlsti fWO league and a half from shore , or rather more , ^nt ' where we sound , and have 36. fathom and break code shell , with branny sand , but the break shell very thick . 22 Tuesday in the morning we be shoot a head of cape gallant . Cape gallant , which the russes call Sotinoz . and as we be shoot almost half a league betwixt it , and cape comfort , the wind come up at the northwest , and after to the northward , so that we be fain to bear room to seek a harbour , where we find good harbour for all wind , and the least 7. fathom water between saint Johns island , and the main . after that we come to a anchor , we take the latitude , which be 68 degree 1. minute , after noon , the wind at north with plenty of snow . at a west sun there come aboard we certain lappians in a boat , to the number of sixteen person , and among they there be two wench , and some of they can speak the ruff tongue : i ask they where their abide be , and they tell i that there be a company or hear of they , to the number of 100 man , beside woman and child , but a little from we in the river lekonga . they tell i that they have be to seek meat among the rock , say , if we get no meat , we eat none . i see they eat rock weed as hungerly , as a cow do grass when she be hungry . i see they also eat fowl egg raw , and the young bird also that be in the egg . 368 i observe certain word of their language , [ 1 . 293J which i think good to set down for their use , that hereafter shall have occasion to continue this voyage . cowghtie coteat , what call you this . poddythecke , come hither . avanchythocke , get the hence . Anna , farewell . Teyrve , good morrow . lomme lemaufe , i thank you . Passevellie , a friend . Olmvelke , a man . Captella , a woman . alke , a son . neit , a daughter , or young wench . Oyvie , a head . Cyelme , a eye . Nenna , a nose . Nealma , a mouth . Pannea , tooth . Neughtema , a tongue . Seaman , a beard . Peallee , a ear . teappat , the neck . voapt , the hair . Keat , a hand . soarme , finger , lowlkie , a leg . Peelkie , the thumb , or great toe . Sarke , woollen cloth . Lein , linen cloth . payte , a shirt . Tol , fire . Keatse , water . murr , wood . vannace , a boat . Arica , a oar . Nurr , a rope . Peyve , a day . her , a night . Peyvezea , the sun . manna , the moon . last , star . Cozam volka , whither go you . Ottapp , sleep . Tallye , that . Keiedde pieve , a week . Isckie , a year . Kesse , summer . talve , winter , lowksam , cold . Parox , warm . Abrye , rain . youghang , ice . keatykye , a stone . sellowpe , silver . soldan , gold . Tennae , tin . veskue , copper . Rowadt , iron . Neybx , a knife . Axshe , a hatchet . 369 2 A Leabee , bread , laevegoat , meal . Pencka , the wind . lout , a platter . kemnie , a kettle . Keestes , glove . sapege , shoe . Conde , a wild deer . Poatsa , the labour deer . their word of number be these as foliow . fafte , wonderful noumpte , 1. 2. colme , 3 - Nelly e , 4 - vitte , 5 - cowte , 6. keydeem , 7 - Kaffts , 8. Owghchte , lock , ostretumbelocke , cowghtnumbelocke , colmenonbelocke , in ellynombelocke , vittie nombelocke , cowtenombelocke , keydemnombelocke , kafts nombelocke , ought nombelocke , coffteylocke , colmelocke , Nelly lock , Vitte lock , cowtelocke , keydemlocke , kaffstelocke , oughcheteloke , tewet . 9-io . two . 12. j3-14 . 16. u-18 . 1920. 30. 40. 50. 60. 70. 80. 90. 100 Juana Creos . [ i - 294 - ] s. George island . cape comfort . 25 Friday in the morning we depart from saint Johns island : to the westwards thereof , a mile from the shore , we sound , and have 36. fathom , and oazy sand . Juana Creos be from cape gallant westnorthwest , and half a point to the northward , and between they be 7. league . the point of the island , which be cape comfort , lie from Juana Creos , northwest and by north , and almost the 3. part of a point to the westwards , and between they be 3. league . the eastermost of saint George island , or the 7. Islands , lie from Juana Creos northwest , and half a point to the northward , and between they be 14. league and a half . the uttermost of the 7. Islands , and cape comfort lie northwest , and by north , southeast , and by south . under the southermost island you shall find good road for all northerly wind from the northwest to the 37° j557-northeast . from the southeast part of the 7. Islands , unto the northwest part of they , be 3. league and a half . from the northwest part of the island aforesaid , unto saint Peter saint Peter island , be n . league northwest . Islands . 26 saint Peter island rise a indifferent low point , not seem to be a island , and as if it have a castle upon it . S. Paul island lie from saint Peter island north - s. Paul west and to the westwards , and between they be wand . , 6. league . within these island there be a fair sandy bay , and there may be find a good road for northerly wind . cape sour beer lie from saint Paul island north - cape sower west and by west , and between they be 5. league . beere‘ cape comfort , which be the island of Kildina , lie from Kildina . cape sour beer , 6. league west northwest , and it be altogether a bay between they seem many island in it . from cape Bonaventure , to Chebe Navoloche be 10. cape bona-\ league northwest , and a little to the westwards . Chebe venture-navoloche be a fair point , whereon stand a certain black , like a empty butt stand a head . from Chebe Navoloch to Kegor , be 9 league and a Kegor . half northwest , and half a point to the westwards . Kegor rise as you come from the eastwards like 2. round hammock stand together , and a fair saddle between they . 27 it flow where we ride this Sunday to the eastwards of Kegor , at a southeast and by east moon , a full sea : we ride in 15. fathom water within half a mile of the shore : at a northwest sun the mist come down so thick , that we be fain to come to a anchor within less than a mile of the point that turn to Dorns domshaff . have , where we have 33. fathom , and the sound like to the skurfe of a skalde head . 28 Monday at afternoon , we come into the sound of Wardhouse . Wardhouse , although it be very misty . than i send a 371 | | which be the bona Esperanza , the bona confidentia and the fillip and marry . whereof the two first be lose . | | or , Trondon . the fillip and marry . the bona Confidentia cast away . the english voyage man a shore to know some news , and to see whether they can hear any thing of our two ship . 29 Tuesday i go on shore , and dine with the captain deputy , who make i great cheer : the captain himself be not as yet come from Bergen : they look for he every hour , and they say that he will bring news with he . at a northwest and by north sun we depart from Wardhouse , towards Colmogro . 30 Wednesday we come to Kegor , where we meet with the wind at east southeast , so that we be fain to go in to a bay to the westwards of the point Kegor , where a man may moare 2. or 3. small ship , that shall not draw past 11. or 12. foot water , for all wind , a east Northeast wind be the worst . it be a ledge of rock , that defend the northerly wind from the place where they moare . when we come into the bay we see there a bark which be of two Dronton , and three or four Norway yeaghe , belong to Northberne : so when i come a shore , i meet first with the Dutchman , among who be the borrowmaster son of Dronton , who tell i that the fillip and marry winter at Dronton , and depart from thence for England in march : and withal he show i that the confidence be lose , and that he have buy her sail for his ship . then the Dutchman carry i to their Boothe , and make i good cheer , where i see the lappians chepen of the say Dutchman , both silver platter and dish , spoon , gild ring , ornament for girdle of silver and gilt , and certain thing make to hang about the neck , with silver chain belong to they . the Dutchman bring hither mighty strong beer , i be certain that our english double beer will not be like of the keril and lappians , as long as that will last . here i see the Dutchman also have course cloth , both blow , green and red , and sad horseflesh colour : and hither they bring also ottar case and fox case , both 372 1557-blacke and red : our english fox case be but counterfeit unto they . they will not let i understand any of their prize , but as i otherwise understand they barter 2. load of silver for 100 of stockfish , and 2. load be a doller . and the Dutchman tell i , that they have make a notable [ i . 295. ] good year this present year 1557. they tell i that they shall be fain to go to Wardhouse with one lade , and lie it on land there , and so come again and fetch another . the borrowmasters son tell i , that he will go to Amsterdam with his lade of stockfish , who give i a barrel of strong beer , and bring it in aboard our ship himself . after this i go among the russes and keril , who offer i fish to sell , and likewise the lappians desire i to look upon their fish . i make they answer , that i have now no ware nor money to barter with they , and say that i come only to see if i may meet with our english ship . than they desire i that i will come thither the next year : i say to they , if i shall come the next year , i think here will a gainefidl not be fish enough to serve the Dutchman and we trade of fish also . they answer i , that if moor ship do at es°r ' resort thither , there will more people labour to kill and make fish : and further they say , that some of they come thither a fish 8. week journey with deer , which deer will travail more speedy than horse will . as i be thus in talk with the keril and lappians , the emperor of Russia his deputy ( who be there to gather the tribute of the lappians ) send for i to come to his tent , who after familiar salutation , make i good cheer . he demand of i , why none of our ship come thither . i answer he , because we know not the place before now , neither yet hear of any fair that be keep there . then say he , if you will come hither , here will moor people resort to kill fish , i think it good ( say he ) that you make a beginning . i tell he , that 373 by the grace of God the next year , one english ship shall come thither . because i see the servant of the king of Denmark there also gather the tribute , i ask vasilie pheodor-vich the Russie deputy , whether the denmark will not be a let to we , if we shall come to this Kegor . and he say , no , they shall not : for this land be my king , and therefore be bold to come hither . the keril and the lappians sell not fish , until the say deputy have look upon it , and have give they leave to sell . i ask he what ware be best for we to bring thither , and he say , silver , pearl , cloth , blow , red , and green , meal , strong beer , wine , pewter , fox case , and gold . the lappians pay tribute to the emperor of Russia , to the king of Denmark , and to the king of Sweden . he tell i that the river Cola be little more than 20. league to the southward of Kegor , where we shall have great plenty of salmon , if corn be any thing cheap in Russia : for then poor man will resort thither to kill salmon . the Dutchman tell i that they have make a good year of this , but the keril complain of it , because they can not sell all their fish , and that which they sell be as please the Dutchman , and at their own price . i ask the keril at what price they sell their fish to the russes , and they say good cheap : we sell 24. fish for 4. altines . i think they sell little above 20. penny , the 25. fish this year . the Dutchman tell i that the best stockfish be make at Kegor . i see at vasilies tent 7. or 8. javelin , and half a dozen of bow bend , with their budget of arrow , and likewise sword with . other weapon : otherwise i see no weapon there . i be also convey to their lodging , which gather tribute for the king of Denmark , where i see a pair of bilboe : and i ask whether they be for the lappians ( if need be , ) and they say no , but only 374 1557-for their own company if they shall chance to be unruly . the keril and the lappians be not to be trust , for they will steal as well as the russes , if they may convenient come by any thing . concern my voyage , because the wind be scant to go back again to Colmogro , i tarry to the eastwards of the point Kegor , and send to land , and bake two batch of bread in the oven that the keril have for their provision . Instructions give to the master and mariner to be observe in and about this fleet , pass this year 1557. towards the bay of S. Nicolas in Russia , for this present race to be make and return of the same by god grace to the port of London , the place of their right discharge , as in the article ensue be deduce . irst , it be accord and agree between the several proprietary and owner , master and company of the four ship , surname the primrose , the John Evangelist , the anne and the Trinity , and the lieutenant , consul , assistant and company of the merchant advent turer , that the above name four ship shall in good order and conduct , sail , pass , and travail together in one float , ging , and conserve of society , to be keep indissoluble and not to be sever , but unite within continual sight , so far forth as ( by wind and weather ) by possibility shall or may be without any separation [ i . 296. ] or departure of one from the other . 2 item , it be agree that the good ship name the primerose , shall admiral of this float , and that Anthony Jenkinson gentleman , shall captain thereof : and that all other the 3. ship shall ensue and follow she in all course , and that no course nor weigh ( in 375 