white hawk in white bear prohibit without licence . master Gray journey to Lampas . 1558. [ I. 304. ] the english voyage Vologda . also if you shall so think meet , your wax and tallow shall be lade in two dosnicke , for they be meet to go aboard the ship : i do intend to set up a house at Boroseva over against the place whereas the ship shall ride , your advice therein i expect , it shall not cost above three roble , and yet if we will , there shall be two warm room in it . as for other matter at this present i have not to trouble you withal , and if it will please you i will be glad to hear some good news of master Jenkinson . thus Jesus be with you and be his guide . Postscriptum . as for these our hawk they be not white , but white and mail , but indeed be jarfawkon . Theise day past our Olen die . so this year our master of the company be like to have none , nor any white bear . neither may any pass out of the realm without a special licence from the emperor . i intend God willing to go to Lampas , if i do i will take four or five kersey with i , but as for money there be small store here to carry . you , Richard grey . a letter of Thomas Alcocke to the worshipful Richard grey , and Henry lane agent in Moscovia from Tirwill in Polonia , write in Tirwill the 26. of April 1558. my duty premise unto your worship , with commendation etc it may please you to be advertise , ill my last i send from Smolensco , which i trust you have receive wl other letter to diverse of our english man , wherein i certify you of my long retain there , as also of my departure from thence , and how that i have hire a totar to bring i to dansk . we come to a certain village on Saturday the six and twenty of February , and there remain that night and Sunday to refresh our horse , intend to have go away on 396 Monday early . but on Saturday at night one of his neighbour depart to Tirwill , and there declare to the captain how that at such a place there be a dutch man that be come from the Moscow , and will ride to dansk , say , for the one , i can tell what he be . the captain incontinent rid to the king to show he thereof , so that without any delay there be send out for i one of the gentleman of the king house , and one of the mesnicke of the town with six officer to take i . they come thither in the night about midnight , and there apprehend i and take all that i have from i : they leave i nothing but my clothes to put on my back , and so bring i to Tirwill to the captain house , where before i dine , i have a pair of fetter clap on my leg , wherewithal ! i sit until it be Monday in the easterweeke . on which day , after long and earnest call to the captain as he rid by the window , he command the martial that my iron shall be take off , but no word i can hear when 1 shall be deliver out of captivity till it be saint George his day : on which day i be have before the martial , who declare unto i that the king majesty have show his mercy and goodness towards i : for his pleasure be that i shall be deliver out of prison to depart into England , but no way else . so after i have give thanks for the king majesty goodness show unto i , i desire he that he will be a mean that i may have the remainder of such thing as be take from i restore unto i again . he make i answer , that i may thank God that i escape with my head , and that if ever there come any more of we through the land , they shall not so do . the week before easter they deliver i my corobia again with all thing that be therein . they take from i in money nine hunger|have gylderns in gold , five shilling four penny in lettoe money , fourty altines in Russe money , whereof twenty and moor be for token , half a angel and a quarter of master doctor standish , 397 doctor standish theemper-ours Phisitlon . with his gold ring . your two piece of money ( master Gray ) that you send to your wife and daughter , with my two piece of boghary money . of all this i have eight hunger|have gilderns deliver i the third week of my imprisonment to pay for my charge , which stand i in a doller a week . so that at the day of my delivery encage have but three gyldernes leave i . for the rest i make a supplication , to the captain and have the like answer give i as the marshal give i . so that all the rest of the thing before write be lose , and no recovery to be have , which grieve i more for the token sake then do my eight week imprisonment . they have also my sword , my boot , my bow and arrow that i buy at Smolensco , which cost i four mark , my sled , my felt , the comhold , a book of the flower of godly prayer , and my book wherein my charge be write . of all these i can get nothing again , not so much as my two book . after i have remain there five and thirty day , i be have before the captain up into a great chamber to be examine for letter and of the cause of my come through the country . in the captain company be one of the lord of dansk . they demand of i where my letter be , i declare unto they that i have none : your officer ( say i ) take i when i be in my bed , they search i and take all that i have from i , if there be any they shall find they among my stuff which they have . they ask i then , for what cause i go home over land ? i declare unto they , that the winter be a warm season , and have intelligence that the freeze sea be not much freeze , and suppose this summer it will be navigable , i be only send to provide a ship to be send to pass the say sea to discover Cataia : which if God grant we may do , it will not only be a commodity to the realm of England , but unto all christian land , by the riches that may be bring from thence , if the history be true that be write thereof . much other 398 communication i have with they concern the same voyage . than he demand of i what ware we bring into Russia , and what we carry from thence . i declare the same unto they . than they burden i , that we bring thither thousand of ordinance , as also of harness , sword , with other munition of war , artificer , copper , with many other thing : i make they answer , that we have bring thither about one hundred shirt of mail , such old thing new scour as no man in England will wear . other talk they have with i concern the trade of mos-covia too long to commit to writing . at my come hither here be ambassador from the town of dansk , Lubeck , and Hamburgh , as also [ i . 305. ] out of Liefland to desire this king to be their captain and head in their intend voyage , which be to stop - an attempt to all such ship as shall go out of England for Mos - t^mos covia . whereunto the king grant , and immediate cwia they they depart to prepare their ship . so that i be Hans town afraid that either these our enemy , or the great war wonderful easterthat we have with France and Scotland will be a occasion i ™ ®-that you shall have no ship at Colmogro this year . to conclude , although i have no token to deliver they , that the token take from i be send unto , yet i will declare unto they that i have token for they , with the mischance . and thus i commit you to almighty God with the rest of the company , who keep you in health to his holy will and pleasure . by you to command Thomas Alcocke . [ A letter 399 