Edward be mar and tear , so that we can make no reckon by they : and likewise to write we a perfect note of all the good which you receive the last voyage out of the Edward , and herein not to fail . it Andrew judde . George bairn . Anthony Huse . William Garrard . William Chester . < 557 - John Sedgewick at Novogrode . a letter of master Thomas Hawtrey to the worshipful master Henry lane agent at Colmogro , write in Vologda the 31. of Januarie 1557. worshipful sir , hearty commendation premise . Theise may be to advertise you , that yesterday the thirty of this present come hither Robert Best , and bring with he two hundred roble , that be , one hundred for this place , and one hundred for you at Colmogro . as for hemp which be here at two roble and a half the bercovite , master Gray have write to buy no more at that price : for John Sedgewicke have buy for six or seven hundred roble worth at novogrode for one roble and a half the bercovite , and better cheap : and white novogrode flax be there at three roble the bercovite . i trust he will do much good by his go thither . as i do understand , Richard Johnson be go to novogrode with money to he , i doubt not but master grey have advertise you of all their do , both at the Moscow and at Novogrod . And touch our do here , you shall perceive that we have sell ware of this four voyage for one hundred and fourty roble , beside fifty roble of the second and three voyage since the give up of my last account , and for ware of the country , you shall understand 392 that i have buy try and untried for 77. roble four hundred podes of try tallow , beside four hundred podes that i have give out money for , whereof God grant good receipt when the time come , which be in Lent. and in brown flax and hemp i have buy seventeen bercovite , six podes and sixteen pound , which cost 28. roble , eleven altines two penny . and as for other kind of ware i have buy none as yet . and for mast mast of 30. to be provide , you shall understand that i write a jarci!-letter to Totma the 28. of this present for fifty mast , to wit , for 25. of fifteen fathom , and 25. of fourteen fathom , to be a arshine and a half at the small end . and more , i have write for 30. great tree to be two arshine and a half at the small end , an arshine be and for the other that be provide the last year , 3 - quarter off i trust they shall be send down in the spring : of the a^ard , ir year . and as concern the ropemaker , you shall understand that their abide place shall be with you at a rope house Colmogro , as i do think master grey have advertise erect at you . for , as Roger Bon tinge master of the work c°lmogro . do say , there be no place more meet for their purpose then with you : and there it will be make with lesser cost , consider that the pale be the one half of it : which be to set one pale moor to that , and so for to cover it over , which as they say , will be but little cost . they do pray that it may be make sixteen foot broad , and one hundred and eighty fathom long : and that in the mid way twenty foot from the pale toward the water side there may be a house make to tarre in , stand alone by it self a tar house . for danger of fire . the tar house that they will have make , be to be fifteen fathom long , and ten fathom broad , and they will that house shall be make first : for i think they will not tarre before they come there . and far they desire that you will provide for as much tar as you may , for here we have small store , but when the time come that it 393 shall be make , i will provide as much as i can here , that it may be send down when the nasade come . the stuff that they have ready spin be about five thousand weight , and they say that they trust to have by that time they come down yarn enough to make 20. cable . as concern a copy of the alphabet in Robert cipher master grey have write hither that Robert Austen . Austen have one , which he will that he shall deliver to you . thus i surcease , beseech God to preserve you in health , and to send you your heart desire . by you to command to his power , Thomas Hawtrey . [ I. 303. ] a letter of master Richard Gray one of the first agent of the Moscovie company to master Henry lane at Moscow , write in i558 - colmogro the 19 of February 1558. worshipful sir , after hearty commendation etc you shall understand that this Lent come Lampas a to Lampas such a number of man of diverse nation great mart fir w£th ware } as have not be see these ten year . tk^North thither come many out of Ugori : therefore i will have be there my self , and also have receive such money as be owe we in ware by Kerill his brother and Osep boscovo . for as you well know , thence they will go with their ware to the Moscow , and make we payment with delay , as they have do these other year pass . Colobone and his partner be depart towards Lampas with seven sled lade with victual . other also be go to that Mart. as touch the bring of money with you , it will be good , for i assure you since our come to this country have not so many person go to the sea , as will do this year . trust that God will send good store of train oil , i will cause as much cask to be in a readiness as i can , if you shall think it meet to send some money before . all 394 