the five mead be make of honey and water , with other mixture . there be also a delicate drink draw from the root of the birch tree , call in the ruff tongue Berozevites , which drink the noble man and other use in April , may , and June , which be the three month of the spring time : for after those month , the sap of the tree dry , and then they can have it . the voyage of master Anthony Jenkinson , make from the city of Moscow in Russia , to the city of Boghar in Bactria , in the year 1558 : write by himself to the merchant of London of the Moscovie company . [ i - 3^-1 he 23. day of April , in the year 1558. ( have obtain the emperor of Russia his letter , direct unto sundry king and prince , by who dominion i shall pass ) i depart from Moscow by water , have with i two of your servant , namely , Richard Johnson , and Robert Johnson , and a tartar tolmach , with diverse parcel of ware , as by the inventory appear : and the 28. day we come to a town call Collom , distant from the Moscow 20. league , and pass one league beyond the say Collom , we come unto a river call Occa , into the which the river Moscow fall , and lose his name : and pass down the say river Occa 8. league , we come unto a castle call Terrevettisko , which we leave upon our right hand , and proceed forward , the second day of May , we come unto another castle call peroslave , distant 8. league , leave it also on our right hand . the three day we come unto the place where old rezan be situate , be now most of it ruin and overgrow , and distant from the say peroslave , 6. league : the 4. day we pass by a castle call Terrecovia , from rezan 12. league , and the 6. 11 449 2 f day we come to another castle call Cassim , under the government of a tartar prince name Utzar Zegoline , sometime emperor of the worthy city of Cazan , and now subject unto the emperor of Russia . but leave Cassim on our left hand , the 8. day we come unto a fair town call Morom , from Cassim 20. league , where we take the son , and find the latitude 56. degree : and proceed forward the 11. day , we come unto another fair town and castle call nice Novogrod , situate at the fall of the foresay river Occa into the worthy river of Volga , distant from the say Moron 25. league , in the latitude of 56. degree 18. minute . from rezan to this nice Novogrod , on both side the say river of Occa , be raise the great store of wax and honey in all the land of Russia . we tarry at the foresay nice Novogrod until the 19 day , for the come of a captain which be send by the emperor to rule at astracan , who be arrive , and have the number of 500 great boat under his conduct , some lade with victual , soldier , and munition : and other some with merchandise , depart altogether the say 19 day from the say nice Novogrod , and the 22. we come unto a castle call Vasiliagorod , distant 25. league , which we leave upon our right hand . this town or castle have his name of this emperor father , who be call Vasilius , and gorod in the ruff tongue be as much to say as a castle , so that Vasiliagorod be to say , Vasilius castle : and it be the further place that the say emperor conquer from the Tartar . but this present emperor his son , call Ivan Vasiliwich , have have great good success in his war , both against the Christians and also the mahometist and gentile , but especial against the Tartar , enlarge his empire even to the caspian sea , have conquer the famous river of Volga , with all the country thereabouts adjacent . thus proceed on our journey the 25. day of May aforesaid , we come to another castle call Sabowshare , which we 45° leave on our right hand , distant from Vasiliagorod 16. league . the country hereabout be call mordovit , and the habitant do profess the law of the gentile : but now be conquer by this emperor of Russia , most of they be christen , but lie in the wood and wilderness , without town or habitation . the 27. day we pass by another castle call Swyasko , distant from shabowshare aforesaid 25. league : we leave it on our right hand , and the 29. come unto a island one league from the city of Cazan , from Cazan . which fall down a river call cazanka reca , and enter into the foresay Volga . Cazan be a fair town after the ruff or Tartar fashion , with a strong castle , situate upon a high hill , and be wall round about with timber and earth , but now the emperor of Russia have give order to pluck down the old wall , and to build they again of free stone . it have be a city of great wealth and riches , and be in the hand of the Tartar it be a kingdom of it self , and do more vex the russes in their war , than any other nation : but 9 year past , this emperor of Russia conquer it , and take the king captive , who be but young be now baptise , and bring up in his court with two other prince , which be also king of the say Cazan , and be each of they in time of their reign in danger of their subject through civil discord , come and render themselves at several time unto the say emperor , so that at this present there be three prince in the court of Russia , which have be emperor of the say Cazan , who the emperor use with great honour . we remain at Cazan till the 13. day of June , and then depart from thence : and the same day pass [ i . 325. ] by a island call the island of merchant , because it be the island of wont to be a place where all merchant , as well russes merchant . and Cazanites , as nagayan and crimme , and diverse other nation do resort to keep mart for buy and sell , but now it be forsake , and stand without 451 horde . the english voyage any such resort thither , or at Cazan , or at any place about it , from Moscow unto mare Caspium . thus proceed forward the 14. day , we pass by a goodly river call Cama , which we leave on our left hand . this river fall out of the country of Permia into the river of Volga , and be from Cazan 15. league : and the country lie betwixt the say Cazan and the say river Cama on the left hand of Volga be call Vachen , and the inhabitant be Gentiles , and live in the wilderness without house or habitation : and the country on the other side of Volga over against the say river Cama be call the land of cheremize , half Gentiles , half Tartars , and all the land on the left hand of the say Volga from the say river unto astracan , and so follow the north and Northeast side of the caspian sea , to a land of the Tartar call turkeman , be call the country of Mangat or Nagay , who inhabitant be of the law of Mahomet , and be all destroy in the year 1558 , at my be at astracan , through civil war among they , accompany with famine , pestilence , and such plague , in such sort that in the say year there be consume of the people , in one sort and another , above one hundred thousand : the like plague be never see in those part , so that the say country of Nagay be a country of great pasture , remain now unreplenish to the great contentation of the russes , who have have cruel war a long time together . the nagayans when they flourish , live in this manner : they be divide into diverse company call horde , and every Hord have a ruler , who they obey as their king , and be call a murse . town or house they have none , but live in the open field , every murse or king have his horde or people about he , with their wife , child and cattle , who have consume the pasture in one place , remove unto another : and when they remove they have house like tent set upon wagon or cart , which be draw 45 2 from place to place with camel , and therein their wife , child , and all their riches , which be very little , be carry about , and every man have at the least four or five wife beside concubine . use of money they have none , but doe barter their cattle for apparel and other necessary . they delight in no art nor science , except the war , wherein they be expert , but for the most part they be pasture people , and have great store of cattle , which be all their riches . they eat much flesh , and especial the horse , and they drink mare milk , wherewith they be oftentimes drink : they be seditious and incline to theft and murder . corn they sow not , neither do eat any bread , mock the christian for the same , and disable our strength , say we live by eat the top of a weed , and drink a drink make of the same , allow their great devour of flesh , and drink of milk to be the increase of their strength . but now to proceed forward to my journey . all the country upon our right hand the river Volga , from over against the river Cama unto the town of astracan , be the land of Crimme , who inhabitant be the Crimme also of the law of Mahomet , and live for the most part Tartar . accord to the fashion of the nagaye , have continual war with the emperor of Russia , and be valiant in the field , have countenance , and support from the great Turk . the 16. day of June we pass by certain fishermen house call Petowse twenty league from the river Cama , where be great fish for sturgeon , so continue our way until the 22. day , and pass by another great river call Samar , which fall out of the afore - the river of say country , and run through Nagay , and enter samar-into the say river of Volga . the 28. day we come unto a great hill , where be in time past a castle make by the crimme , but now it be ruin , be the just midway between the say Cazan and Astrachan , which be 200. league or thereabouts , in the latitude of 51. 453 astracan . the english voyage degree 47. minute . upon all this shore grow abundance of Licoris , who root run within the ground like a vine . thus go forward the sixth day of July we come to a place call Perovolog , so name because in time past the Tartar carry their boat from Volga unto the river Tanais , otherwise call don , by land , when they will rob such as pass down the say Volga to astracan , and also such as pass down by the river Tanais , to asou , Caffa , or any other town situate upon mare Euxinum , into which sea Tanais fall , who have his spring in the country of rezan , out of a plain ground . it be at this strait of perovolog from the one river to the other two league by land , and be a dangerous place for thief and robber , but now it be not so evil ! as it have be , by reason of the emperor of Russia his conquest . depart from perovolog , have the wilderness on both side , we see a great hear of Nagayans , pasture , as be abovesaid , by estimation above a thousand camel draw of cart with house upon they like tent , of a strange fashion , seem to be a far off a town : that Hord be belong to a great murse call Smille , the great prince in all nagay , who have slay and drive away all the rest , not spare his own brethren and child , and have peace with this emperor of Russia he have what he need , and rule alone : so that now the russes live in peace with the nagayans , who be wont to have mortali war together . the 14. day of July pass by a old castle , which be old astracan , and leave it upon our right hand , we arrive at new astracan , which this emperor of Russia conquer six year past , in the year 1552. it be from the Moscow unto astracan six hundred league , or thereabouts . the town of astracan be situate in a island upon a hill side , have a castle within the same , wall about with earth and timber , 454 neither fair nor strong : the town be also wall about with earth : the building and house ( except it be the captain lodging , and certain other gentleman ) most base and simple . the island be most destitute and barren of wood and pasture , and the ' ground will bear no corn : the air be there most infect , by reason ( as i suppose ) of much fish , and special sturgeon , by store of stur-which only the inhabitant live , have great scarcity and ms ' of flesh and bread . they hang up their fish in their street and house to dry for their provision , which cause such abundance of fly to increase there , as the like be never see in any land , to their great plague . and at my be at the say astracan , there be a great famine and plague among the people , and special among the Tartar call Nagayans , who the same time come thither in great number to render themselves to the russes their enemy , and to seek succour at their hand , their country be destroy , as i say before : but they be but ill entertain or relieve , for there die a great number of they for hunger , which lie all the island through in heap dead , and like to beast unbury , very pitiful to behold : many of they be also sell by the russes , and the rest be banish from the island . at that time it have be a easy thing to have convert that wicked nation to the christian faith , if the russes themselves have be good Christians : but how shall they show compassion unto other nation , when they be not merciful ! unto their own ? at my be there i can have buy many goodly Tartar child , if i will have have a thousand , of their own father and mother , to say , a boy or a wench for a loaf of bread worth six penny in England , but we have more need of victual at that time then of any such merchandise . this astracan be the further hold that this emperor of Russia have conquer of the Tartar towards the caspian sea , which he keep very strong , send thither every year provision of man , and victual , and timber to build the castle . 455 the length of the island of astracan . they enter into the caspian sea . the english voyage there be a certain trade of merchandise there use , but as yet so small and beggarly , that it be not worth the make mention , and yet there come merchant thither from diverse place . the chief commodity that the russes bring thither be red hide , red sheep skin , wooden vessel , bridle , and saddle , knife , and other trifle , with corn , bacon , and other victual . the Tartar bring thither diverse kind of ware make of cotton wool , with diverse kind of wrought silk : and they that come out of Persia , namely from Shamacki do bring sow silk , which be the course that they use in Russeland , Crasko , diverse kind of pied silk for girdle , shirt of male , bow , sword , and such like thing : and some year corn , and walnut , but all such thing in such small quantity , the merchant be so beggarly and poor that bring the same , that it be not worth the writing , neither be there any hope of trade in all those part worth the follow . this foresay island of astracan be in length twelve league , and in breadth three , and lie east and west in the latitude of forty seven degree , nine minute : we tarry there until the sixth day of August , and have buy and provide a boat in company with certain Tartar and persian , we jade our good and embark our self , and the same day depart i , with the say two Johnsons have the whole charge of the navigation down the say river Volga , be very crooked , and full of flat towards the mouth thereof . we enter into the caspian sea the ten day of August at the easterly side of the say river , be twenty league from astracan aforesaid , in the latitude of forty six degree , twenty seven minute . Volga have seventie mouth or fall into the sea : and we have a large wind , keep the north-east shore , and the eleven day we sail seven league eastnortheast , and come unto a island have a high hill therein , call Accurgar , a good mark in the sea . 456 from thence east ten league , we fall with another island call Bawhiata , much high than the other . within these two island to the northward , be a great bay call the blue sea . from thence we sail east the blue sea . and by north ten league , and have a contrary wind , we come to a anchor in a fathom water , and so rid until the fifteen day , have a great storm at southeast , be a most contrary wind , which we rid out . then the wind come to the north , and we weigh , and set our course southeast , and that day sail eight league . thus proceed forward , the 17. day we lose sight [ i . 327. ] of land , and the same day sail thirty league , and the 18. day twenty league wind east , and fall with a land call Baughleata , be 74. league from the taughkata mouth of the say Volga , in the latitude of 46. degree 7+54 . minute , the coast lie near east and by south , i and west and by north . at the point of this land lie bury a holy prophet , as the Tartar call he , of their law , where great devotion be use of all such maho-metists as doe pass that way . the nineteenth day the wind be west , and we wind eastsoutheast , we sail ten league , and pass by a great river call laic , which have his spring laic river . in the land of Siberia , nigh unto the foresay river Cama , and run through the land of Nagay , fall into this mare Caspium . and up this river one day journey be a town call Serachick , subject to the serachick . aforesaid tartar prince call murse Smille , which be now in friendship with the emperor of Russia . here be no trade of merchandise use , for that the people have no use of money , and be all man of war , and pasturer of cattle , and give much to theft and murder . thus be at a anchor against this river laic , and all our man be on land , save i , who lie sore sick , and five Tartar , whereof one be repute a holy man , because he come from Mecka , there come unto we a boat with thirty man well arm and appoint , who board we , and begin to enter into our bark , and our holy 457 tartar call azy , perceive that , ask they what they will have , and withal make a prayer : with that these rover stay , declare that they be gentleman , banish from their country , and out of live , and come to see if there be any russes or other Christians ( which they call Caphars ) in our bark ? to who this Azi most stout answer , that there be none , avow the same by great oath of their law , ( which light they will not break ) who the rover believe , and upon his word depart . and so through the fidelity of that tartar , i with all my company and good be save , and our man be come on board , and the wind fair , we depart from that place , and wind east and southeast , that day be the 20. of August sail 16. league . the 21. day we pass over a bay of 6. league broad , and fall with a cape of land , have two island at the southeast part thereof , be a good mark in the sea : and double that Cape the land trend Northeast , and make another bay , into which fall the great river the country Yem , spring out of the land of Colmack . of Colmack . the 22. 23. and 24. day , we be at a anchor . the 25. the wind come fair , and we sail that day 20. league , and pass by a island of low land , and there about be many flat and sand : and to the northward of this island there go in a great bay , but we set off from this island , and wind south to come into deep water , be much trouble with shoald and flat , and run that course 10. league , than east southeast 20. league , and fall with the main land , be full of cop hill , and pass along the coast 20. league , the further we sail , the high be the land . the 27. day we cross over a bay , the south shore be the high land , and fall with a high point of land : and be overthwart the cape , there rise such a storm at the east , that we think very we shall have perish : this storm continue 3. day . from 458 1558. this cape we pass to a port call manguslave . The the port of place where we shall have arrive at the southermost manguslave . part of the caspian sea , be 12. league within a bay : but we be sore torment and toss with this foresay storm , be drive unto another land on you other side the bay , overthwart the say manguslave be very low land , and a place as well for the ill commodity of the haven , as of those brute field people , where never bark nor boat have before arrive , not like of we . but yet here we send certain of our man to land to talk with the governor and people , as well for our good usage at their hand , as also for provision of camel to carry our good from the say sea side to a place call sellyzure , be from the place of our land five and twenty day journey . our messenger return with comfortable word and fair promise of all thing . wherefore the 3. day of September 1558. we this - they go on charge our bark , and i with my company be gentle entertain of the prince and of his people . but before our departure from thence , we find they to be very bad and brutish people , for they cease not daily to molest we , either by fight , steal or beg , raise the prize of horse and camel , and victual , double that it be wont there to be , and force we to buy the water that we do drink : which cause we to hasten away , and to conclude with they as well for the hire of camel , as for the prize of such as we buy , with other provision , accord to their own demand : so that for every camel lade , be but 400. weight of we , we agree to give three hide of Russia , and four wooden dish , and to the prince or governor of the say people , one nine , and two seventh : namely , nine several ! thing , and twice seven several thing : for money they use none . and thus be ready , the fourteen of September [ i . 328. ] we depart from that place , be a Caravan of a 459 thousand camel . and have travail five day journey , we come to another prince dominion , and upon the way there come unto we certain Tartars on horseback , be well arm , and servant unto the say prince call timor sultan , governor of the say country of manguslave , where we mean to have arrive and discharge our bark , if the great storm aforesaid have not disappoint . Theise aforesaid Tartar stay our Caravan in the name of their prince , and open our ware , and take such thing as they think best for their say prince without money , but for such thing as they take from i , which be a nine ( after much dissension ) i rid unto the same prince , and present my self before he , request his favour , and passport to travail through his country , and not to be rob nor spoil of his people : which request he grant i , and entertain i very gentle , commanding i to be well feast with flesh and mare milk : for bread they use none , nor other drink except water : but money he have none to give i for such thing as he take of i , which may be of value in Russe money , fifteen rubble , but he give i his letter , and a horse worth seven rubble . and so i depart from he be glad that i be go : for he be report to be a very tyrant , and if i have not go unto he , i understand his commandment be , that i shall have be rob and destroy . this sultan live in the field without castle or town , and sit , at my be with he , in a little round house make of reed cover without with felt , and within with carpet . there be with he the great metropolitan of that wild country , esteem of the people , as the bishop of Rome be in most part of Europe , with diverse other of his chief man . the sultan with this metropolitan demand of i many question , as well touch our kingdom , law , and religion , as also the cause of my come into those part , with my further pretence . to who i answer 460 concern all thing , as unto i seem best , which they take in good part . So have leave i depart and overtake our Caravan , and proceed on our journey , and travail 20. day in the wilderness from the sea side without see town or habitation , carry provision of victual with we for the same time , and be drive by necessity to eat one of my camel and a horse for our part , as othei* do the like : and during the say 20. day we find no water , but such as we draw out of old deep well , be very brackish and salt , and yet sometime pass two or three day without the same . and the 5. day of October ensue , we come unto a gulf of the caspian sea again , where we find the water very fresh and sweet : at this gulf the customer of the king of turkeman meet we , who take custom of every 25. one , and 7. ninth for the say king and his brethren , which be receive they depart , and we remain there a day after to refresh our self . 20 day travail in the wilderness , with scarcity of water . another gulf of the caspian sea . note that in time pass there do fall into this gulf the great river Oxus , which have his spring in the mountain of Paraponisus in India , and now come not so far , but fall into another river call Ardock , ill-de which run towards the north , and consume himself , cribeththis in the ground pass under ground above 500 mile , river of and then issue out again and fall into the lake ardok , cap . 4. of Kithay . we have refresh our self at the foresay gulf , depart thence the 4. day of October , and the seven day arrive at a castle call sellizure , where you king selrzure , or call Azim can , remain with 3. other of his brethren , ha^ure-and the 9 day i be command to come before his presence , to who i deliver the emperor letter of Russia : and i also give he a present of a nine , who entertain i very well , and cause i to eat in his presence as his brethren do , feast i with flesh of a wild horse , and mare milk without bread . and the next day he send for i again , and ask of i diverse 461 urgence . the english voyage question , as well touch the affair of the emperor of Russia , as of our country and law , to which i answer as i think good : so that at my departure he give i his letter of safe conduct . this castle of sellizure be situate upon a high hill , where the king call the can lie , who palace be build of earth very base , and not strong : the people be but poor , and have little trade of merchandise among they . the south part of this castle be low land , but very fruitful , where grow many good fruit , among which there be one call a dynie , of a great bigness and full of moisture , which the people do eat after meat in stead of drink . also there grow another fruit call a carbuse of the bigness of a great cucumber , yellow and sweet as sugar : also a certain corn call legur , who stalk be much like a sugar cane , and as high , and the grain like rice , which grow at the top of the cane like a cluster of grape ; the water that serve all that country be draw by ditch out of the river Oxus , unto the great destruction of the say river , for which cause it fall not into the caspian sea as it have do in time past , and in short time all that land be like to be destroy , and to become a wilderness for want of water , when the river of Oxus shall fail . the 14. day of the month we depart from this castle of sellizure , and the 16. of the same we arrive at a city call urgence , where we pay custom as well for our own head , as for our camel and horse . and have there sojourn one month , attend the time of our further travail , the king of that country call aly sultan , brother to the forename azym can , return from a town call Corasan , within the border of Persia , which he late have conquer from the persian , with who he and the rest of the king of Tartary have continual war . before this king also i be command to come , to who i likewise present the emperor letter of Russia , and he entertain 462 i well , and demand of i diverse question , and at my departure give i his letter of safeconduct . this city or town of urgence stand in a plain ground , with wall of the earth , by estimation 4. mile about it . the building within it be also of earth , but ruin and out of good order : it have one long street that be cover above , which be the place of their market . it have be win and lose 4. time within 7. year by civil war , by mean whereof there be but few merchant in it , and they very poor , and in all that town i can not sell above 4. kersei . the chief commodity there sell be such ware as come from Boghar , and out of Persia , but in most small quantity not worth the write . all the land from the caspian sea to this city of urgence be call the land of turkeman , and be subject to the say Azim can , and his brethren which be five in number , and one of they have the name of the chief king call can , but he be little obey save in his own dominion , and where he dwell : for every one will be king of his own portion , and one brother seek always to destroy another , have no natural love among they , by reason that they be beget of diverse woman , and common they be the child of slave , either Christians or Gentiles , which the father do keep as concubine , and every can or sultan have at the least 4. or 5. wife , beside young maiden and boy , live most vicious : and when there be war betwixt these brethren , ( as they be seidome without ) he that be overcome if he be not slay , fly to the field with such company of man as will follow he , and there live in the wilderness resort to water place , and so rob and spoil as many Caravans of merchant and other as they be able to overcome , continue in this sort his wicked life , until such time as he may get power and aid to invade some of his brethren again . from the caspian sea unto the castle of sellizure aforesaid , and all the country about the say sea , the people live without 463 the country of turkoman . town or habitation in the wild field , remove from one place to another in great company with their cattle , whereof they have great store , as camel , horse , and sheep both tame and wild . their sheep be of great stature with great buttock , weigh 60. or 80. pound in weight . there be many wild horse which the Tartar do many time kill with their hawk , and that in this order . the hawk be lure to seize upon the beast neck or head , which with chafe of themselves and sore beat of the hawk be tire : then the hunter follow his game do slay the horse with his arrow or sword . in all this land there grow no grass , but a certain brush or heath , whereon the cattle feed become very fat . the Tartar never ride without their bow , arrow , and sword , although it be on hawk , or at any other pleasure , and they be good archer both on horseback , and on foot also . Theise people have not the use of gold , silver , or any other coin , but when they lack apparel or other necessary , they barter their cattle for the same . bread they have none , for they neither till nor sow : they be great devourer of flesh , which they cut in small piece , and eat it by handful most greedy , and especial the horseflesh . their chief drink be mare milk sour , as i have say before of the nagayans , and they will|be drink with the same . they have no river nor place of water in this country , until you come to the foresay gulf , distant from the place of our land 20. day journey , except it be in well , the water whereof be saltish , and yet distant the one from the other two day journey and more . they eat their meat upon the ground , sit with their leg double under they , and so also when they pray . art or science they have none , but live most idle , sit round in great company in the field , devise , and talk most vain . the 26. day of November , we depart from the 464 town of urgence , and have travail by the river Oxus , too . mile , we pass over another great river call Ardock , where we pay a certain petty custom . this river Ardock be great , and very swift , fall out off nuum of the foresay Oxus , and pass about 1000 mile to the rtirjckfal northward , it then consume it self in the ground , a ‘ and pass under the same about 500 mile , issue out again , and fall into the lake of kitay , as i have before declare . the 7. of December follow , we arrive at a castle the castle of call kait , subject to a sultan call Saramet sultan , ka , tl who mean to have rob all the christian in the Caravan , have it not be for fear of his brother the king of urgence , as we be inform by one of his chief counsellor , who will we to make he a present , [ i . 330. ] which he take , and deliver : beside , we pay at the say castle for custom , of every camel one red hide of Russia , beside petty gift to his officer . thus proceed in our journey , the ten day at night be at rest , and our watch set , there come unto we four horseman , which we take as spy , from who we take their weapon and bind they , and have well examine they , they confess that they have see the tract of many horseman , and no footing of camel , and give we to understand , that there be rover and thief abroad : for there travail few people that be true and peaceable in that country , but in company of Caravan , where there be many camel : and horse-feeting new without camel be to be doubt . whereupon we consult and determine among our self , and send a post to the say sultan of kayte , who immediate come himself with 300. man , and meet these four suspect man which we send unto he , and examine they so straight , and threaten they in such sort , that they confess , there be a banish prince with 40. man 3. day journey forward , who lie in wait to destroy we , if he can , and that they themselves be of his company . n 465 2 g the sultan therefore understand , that the thief be not many , appoint we 80. man well arm with a captain to go with we , and conduct we in our way . and the sultan himself return back again , take the four thief with he . Theise soldier travail with we two day , consume much of our victual . and the 3. day in the morning very early they set out before our Caravan , and have range the wilderness for the space of four hour , they meet we , come towards we as fast as their horse can run , and declare that they have find the tract of horse not far from we , perceive well that we shall meet with enemy , and therefore will we to appoint our self for they , and ask we what we will give they to conduct we further , or else they will return . to who we offer as we think good , but they refuse our offer , and will have more , and so we not agree they depart from we , and go back to their sultan , who ( as we conjecture ) be privy to the conspiracy . divination by but they be go , certain Tartar of our company sorcene . call holy man , ( because they have be at Mecha ) cause the whole Caravan to stay , and will make their prayer , and divine how we shall prosper in our journey and whether we shall meet with any ill company or no ? to which , our whole Caravan do agree . and they take certain sheep and kill they , and take the blade bone of the same , and first sod they , and then burn they , and take of the blood of the say sheep , and mingle it with the powder of the say bone , and write certain character with the say blood , use many other ceremony and word , and by the same divine and find , that we shall meet with enemy and thief ( to our great trouble ) but shall overcome they , to which sorcery , i and my company give no credit , but we find it true : for within 3. hour after that the soldier depart from we , which be the 15. day of December , in the morning , we escry far off diverse horseman which make towards we , and we ( per-466 ceiving they to be rover ) gather our self together , be 40. of we well appoint , and able to fight , and we make our prayer together every one after his law , profess to live and die one with another , and so prepare our self . when the thief be nigh unto we , we perceive they to be in number 37. man well arm , and appoint with bow , arrow and sword , and the captain a prince banish from his country . they will we to yield our self , or else to be slay , but we defy they , wherewith they shoot at we all at once , and we at they very hot , and so continue our fight from morning until two hour within night , diverse man , horse and camel be wound and slay on both part : and have it not be for 4. handgunne which i and my company have and use , we have be overcome and destroy : for the thief be better arm , and be also better archer than we ; but after we have slay diverse of their man and horse with our gun , they dare not approach so nigh , which cause they to come to a truce with we until the next morning , which we accept , and encamp our self upon a hill , and make the fashion of a castle , wall it about with pack of ware , and lay our horse and camel within the same to save they from the shot of arrow : and the thief also encamp within a arrow shot of we , but they be betwixt we and the water , which be to our great discomfort , because neither we nor our camel have drink in 2. day before . thus keep good watch , when half the night be spend , the prince of the thief send a messenger half way unto we , require to talk with our captain , in their tongue , the Caravan bassa , who answer the messenger , i will not depart from my company to go into the half way to talk with thou : but if that thy prince with all his company will swear by our law to keep the truce , then will i send a man to talk with thou , or else not . which the prince understand as well himself as his company , swear so loud that 467 handgun very profitable . we may all hear . and then we send one of our company ( repute a holy man ) to talk with the same messenger . the message be pronounce aloud in this order , our prince demand of the Caravan bassa , Bussarmans . and of all you that be bussarmans , ( that be to say cir - [ i - 331. ] cumcise ) not desire your blood , that you deliver Caphar . into his hand as many Caphars , that be , unbeliever ( mean we the Christians ) as be among you with their good , and in so do , he will suffer you to depart with your good in quietness , and on the contrary , you shall be handle with no less cruelty than the Caphars , if he overcome you , as he doubt not . to the which our Caravan bassa answer , that he have not Christians in his company , nor other stranger , but two turk which be of their law , and although he have , he will rather die than deliver they , and that we be not afraid of his threaten , and that shall he know when day appear . and so pass in talk , the thief ( contrary to their oath ) carry our holy man away to their prince , cry with a loud voice in token of victory , olio , olio . wherewith we be much discomfort , fear that that holy man will betray we : but he be cruel handle and much examine , will not to death confess any thing which be to we prejudicial ! , neither touch we , nor yet what man they have slay and wound of we the day before . when the night be spend , in the morning we prepare our self to battle again : which the thief perceive , require to fall to agreement 8c ask much of we : and to be brief , the most part of our company be loath to go to battle again , and have little to loose , 8c safeconduct to pass , we be compel to agree , and to give the thief 20 ninth ( that be to say ) 20 time 9 several thing , and a camel to carry away the same , which be receive , the thief depart into the wilderness to their old habitation , and we go on our way forward . and the river of that night come to the river Oxus , where we refresh Qxus . our seivesj have be 3. day without water and 468 drink , and tarry there all the next day , make merry with our slay horse and camel , and then depart from that place , and for fear of meeting with the say thief again or such like , we leave the high way which go along the say river , and pass through a wilderness wilderness of sand , and travel 4 day in the same before we °fsande-came to water : and then come to a well , the water be very brackish , and we then as before be in need of water , and of other victual , be force to kill our horse and camel to eat . in this wilderness also we have almost fall into the hand of thief : for one night be at rest , there come certain scout , and carry away certain of our man which lie a little separate from the Caravan , wherewith there be a great shout and cry , and we immediate jade our camel , and depart be about midnight and very dark , and drive sore till we come to the river Oxus again , and then we fear nothing be wall with the say river : and whether it be for that we have get the water , or for that the same thief be far from we when the scout discover we , we know not , but we escape that danger . so upon the 23 day of December we arrive at Bokhara i the city of Boghar in the land of Bactria . This Boghar be situate in the low part of all the land , wall about with a high wall of earth , with diverse gate into the same : it be divide into 3 partition , whereof two part be the king , and the 3 part be for merchant and market , and every science have their dwelling and market by themselves . the city be very great , and the house for the most part of earth , but there be also many house , temple and monument of stone sumptuous build , and gilt , and special bathstove so artificial build , that the like thereof be not in the world : the manner whereof be too long to rehearse . there be a little river run through the midst of the say city , but the water there of be most unwholesome , for it breed sometime in man that drink thereof , and 469 a strange especial in they that be not there bear , a worm of a wormemmens ep long5 which lie common in the leg betwixt the god's flesh and the skin , and be pluck out about the ankle with great art and cunning , the surgeon be much practise therein , and if she break in pluck out , the party die , and every day she come out about a inch , which be roll up , and so work till she be all out . and yet it be there forbid to drink any other thing than water , and mare milk , and whosoever be find to break that law be whip and beat most cruel through the open market , and there be officer appoint for the same , who have authority to go into any man house , to search if he have either aquavitae , wine , or brag , and find the same , do break the vessel , spoil the drink , and punish the master of the house most cruel , yea , and many time if they perceive but by the breath of a man that he have drink , without further examination he shall not escape their hand . there be a metropolitan in this Boghar , who cause this law to be so straight keep : and he be more obey than the king , and will depose the king , and place another at his will and pleasure , as he do by this king that reign at our being there , and his predecessor , by the mean of the say metropolitan : for he betray he , and in the night slay he in his chamber , who be a prince that love all Christians well . this country of Boghar be sometime subject to the persian , and do now speak the persian tongue , but yet now it be a kingdom of it self , and have most cruel war continual with the say persian about their [ I* 332 - ] religion , although they be all mahometist . one occasion of their war be , for that the persian will not cut the hair of their upper lip , as the bogharians and all other Tartars do , which they account great sin , and call they Caphars , that be , unbeliever , as they do the Christians . the king of Boghar have no great power or riches , his revenue be but small , and he be most maintain 47° by the city : for he take the ten penny of all thing that be there sell , as well by the craftsman as by the merchant , to the great impoverishment of the people , who he keep in great subjection , and when he lack money , he send his officer to the shop of the say merchant to take their ware to pay his debt , and will have credit of force , as the like he do to pay i certain money that he owe i for 19 piece of kersey . their T& °f money be silver and copper , for gold there be none bosl , ar-currant : they have but one piece of silver , and that be worth 12 penny English , and the copper money be call pool , and 120 of they go the value of the say 12. penny , and be more common payment than the silver , which the king cause to rise and fall to his most advantage every other month , and sometime twice a month , not care to oppress his people , for that he look not to reign above 2 or 3 year before he be either slay or drive away , to the great destruction of the country and merchant . the 26 day of the month i be command to come before the say king , to who i present the emperor of Russia his letter , who entertain we most gentle , and cause we to eat in his presence , and diverse time he send for i , and devise with i familiar in his secret chamber , as well of the power of the emperor , and the great Turk , as also of our country , law , and religion , and cause we to shoot in handgun before he , and do himself practise the use thereof . but after all this great entertainment before my departure he show himself a very tartar : for he go to the war owe i money , and see i not pay before his departure . and although indeed he give order for the same , yet be i very ill satisfy , and force to rebate part , and to take ware as payment for the rest contrary to my expectation : but of a beggar better payment i can not have , and glad i be so to be pay and dispatch . but yet i must needs praise and commend this barbarous king , who immediate after my arrival at Boghar , 471 have understand our trouble with the thief , send 100 man well arm , and give they great charge not to return before they have either slay or take the say thief . who accord to their commission range the wilderness in such sort , that they meet with the say company of thief , and slay part , and part flee , and four they take and bring unto the king , and two of they be sore wound in our skirmish with our gun : and after the king have send for i to come to see they , he cause they all 4 to be hang at his palace gate , because they be gentleman , to the example of other . and of such good as be get again , i have part restore i , and this good justice i find at his hand . there be yearly great resort of merchant to this city of Boghar , which travail in great Caravans from the country thereabouts adjoin , as India , Persia , Balgh , Russia , with diverse other , and in time pass from Cathay , when there be passage : but these merchant be so beggarly and poor , and bring so little quantity of ware , lie two or 3 year to sell the same , that there be no hope of any good trade there to be have worthy the follow . the chief commodity that be bring thither out of these foresay country , be these follow . the Indians do bring fine white , which the Tartar do all roll about their head , and all other kind of white , which serve for apparel make of coton wool and crasko , but gold , silver , precious stone , and spice they bring none . i inquire and perceive that all such trade pass to the ocean sea , and the vein where all such thing be get be in the subjection of the Portugal . the indian carry from Boghar again wrought silk , red hide , slave , and horse , with such like , but of kersei and other cloth , they make little account . i offer to barter with merchant of those country , which come from the further part of India , even from the country of Bengala , and the river Ganges , to give 472 1558. they kersey for their commodity , but they will not barter for such commodity as cloth . the persian do bring thither Craska , woollen cloth , merchandise linen cloth , diverse kind of wrought pied silk , argo-macks , with such like , and do carry from thence red hide with other ruff ware , and slave , which be of diverse country , but cloth they will by none , for that they bring thither themselves , and be bring unto they as i have inquire from Aleppo in Syria , and the part of turquoise . the russes do carry unto Boghar , red Marchaudiu hide , sheepskin , woollen cloth of diverse sort , °fRussia ' wooden vessel , bridle , saddle , with such like , and do carry away from thence diverse kind of ware make of cotton wool , diverse kind of silk , Crasca , with other thing , but there be but small utterance . [ I. 333. ] from the country of Cathay be bring thither in merchandise time of peace , and when the way be open , musk , rhubarb , of Cathay . satin , damask , with diverse other thing . at my be at Boghar , there come Caravans out of all these foresay country , except from Cathay : and the cause why there come none from thence be the great war that have dure 3 year before my come thither , and yet dure betwixt 2 great country and city of Tartar , that be direct in the way betwixt the say Boghar and the say Cathay , and certain barbarous field people , as well Gentiles as Mahometists border to the say city . the city be call Taskent and Caskar , and the people that war against Taskent and Taskent be call cassak of the law of Mahomet : cascar-and they which war with the say country of Caskar be call king , gentile and idolater . Theise 2 barbarous nation be of great force live in the field without house or town , and have almost subdue the foresay city , and so stop up the way , that it be impossible for any Caravan to pass unspoiled : so that 3 year before our being there , no Caravan have go , or use trade betwixt the country of Cathay and Boghar , and when the way be clear , it be 9 month journey . 473 he return the eight of march 1559. the english voyage to speak of the say country of Cathay , and of such news as i have hear thereof , i have think it best to reserve it to our meeting . i have make my solace at Boghar in the winter time , and have learn by much inquisition , the trade thereof , as also of all the other country thereto adjoin , and the time of the year be come , for all Caravans to depart , and also the king be go to the war , and news come that he be flee , and i advertise by the metropolitan himself , that i shall depart , because the town be like to be besiege : i think it good and meet , to take my journey some way , and determine to have go from thence into Persia , and to have see the trade of that country , although i have inform my self sufficient thereof , as well at astracan , as at Boghar : and perceive well the trade not to be much unlike the trade of Tartary : but when i shall have take my journey that way , it be let by diverse occasion : the one be , the great war that do new begin betwixt the sophy , and the king of Tartary , whereby the way be destroy : and there be a Caravan destroy with rover and thief , which come out of India and Persia , by safe conduct : and about ten day journey from Boghar , they be rob , and a great part slay . also the metropolitan of Boghar , who be great than the king , take the emperor letter of Russia from i , without which i shall have be take slave in every place : also all such ware as i have receive in barter for cloth , and as i take perforce of the king , and other his noble , in payment of money due unto i , be not vendible in Persia : for which cause , and diverse other , i be constrain to come back again to mare Caspium , the same way i go : so that the eight of march 1559 , we depart out of the say city of Boghar , be a Caravan of 600 camel : and if we have not depart when we do , i and my company have be in danger to have lose life and good . for ten day after our departure , the king of Samarcand come 474 with a army , and besiege the say city of Boghar , the king be absent , and go to the war against another prince , his kinsman , as the like chance in those country once in two or three year . for it be marvel , if a king reign there above three or four year , to the great destruction of the country , and merchant . the 25 of march , we come to the foresay town of urgence , and escape the danger of 400 rover , which urgence . lay in wait for we back again , be the most of they of kindred to that company of thief , which we meet with go forth , as we perceive by four spy , which be take . there be in my company , and commit to my charge , two ambassador , the one from the king of Boghar , the other from the king of balk , king of and be send unto the emperor of Russia . and after °r have tarry at urgence , and the castle of sellysure , ag it eight day for the assemble , and make ready of our Caravan , the second of April we depart from thence , have four more ambassador in our company , send from the king of urgence , and other Sol tan , his brethren , unto the emperor of Russia , with answer of such letter as i bring they : and the same ambassador be also commit unto my charge by the say king and prince : to who i promise most faithful , and swear by our law , that they shall be well use in Rusland , and suffer to depart from thence again in safety , accord as the emperor have write also in his letter : for they somewhat doubt , because there have none go out of Tartary into Russia , of long time before . the 23 of April , we arrive at the mare Caspium again , where we find our bark which we come in , but neither anchor , cable , cock , nor sail : nevertheless we bring hemp with we , and spin a cable our self , with the rest of our tackle , and make we a sail of cloth of cotton wool , and rig our bark as well as we can , but boat or anchor we have none . in the mean time be devise to make a anchor of wood 475 of a cart wheel , there arrive a bark , which come from astracan , with Tartar and russes , which have 2 anchor , with who i agree for the one : and thus be in a readiness , we set sail and depart , i , and the two Johnsons be master and mariner our self , have in our bark the say six ambassador , and 25 russes , [ i . 334. i which have be slave a long time in Tartary , nor ever have before my come , liberty , or mean to get home , and these slave serve to row when need be . thus sail sometime along the coast , and sometime out of sight of land , the 13. day of May , have a contrary wind , we come to a anchor , be three league from the shore , and there rise a sore storm , which continue 44. hour , and our cable be of our own spin , break , and lose our anchor , and be off a lee shore , and have no boat to help we , we hoist our sail , and bare roomer with the say shore , look for present death : but as God provide for we , we run into a creek full of oz , and so save our self with our bark , and live in great discomfort for a time . for although we shall have escape with our life the danger of the sea , yet if our bark have perish , we know we shall have be , either destroy , or take slave by the people of that country , who live wild in the field , like beast , without house or habitation . thus when the storm be seize , we go out of the creek again : and have set the land with our compass , and take certain mark of the same , during the time of the tempest , while we rid at our anchor , we go direct to the place where we rid , with our bark again , and find our anchor which we lose : whereat the Tartar much marveil , how we do it . while we be in the creek , we make a anchor of wood of cart wheel , which we have in our bark , which we throw away , when we have find our iron anchor again . within two day after , there arise another great storm , at the north-east , and we lay a try , be drive far into the sea , and have much ado to keep 476 1559-our bark from sink , the billow be so great : but at the last , have fair weather , we take the sun , and know how the land lie from we , we fall with the river Yaik , accord to our desire , whereof the Tartar be very glad , fear that we shall have be drive to the coast of Persia , who people be unto they great enemy . note , that during the time of our navigation , we the english set up the red cross of saint George in our flag , for it 5 honour of the christian , which i suppose be never p ' see in the caspian sea before . we pass in this voyage diverse fortune : notwithstanding the 28. of may we arrive in safety at astracan , and there remain till the ten of June follow , as well to prepare we small boat , to go up against the stream of Volga , with our good , as also for the company of the ambassador of Tartary , commit unto i , to be bring to the presence of the emperor of Russia . this caspian sea ( to say some thing of it ) be in length about two hundred league , and in breadth 150. without any issue to other sea : to the east part whereof , join the great desert country of the Tartar , call turkeman : to the west , the country of the chyr-casses , the mountain of Caucasus , and the mare Euxinum , which be from the say caspian sea a hundred league . to the north be the river Volga , and the land of Nagay , and to the south part join the country of Media and Persia . this sea be fresh water in many notable deplace , and in other place as salt as our great ocean , tcription of they it have many goodly river fall into it , and it avoid casfian sea-not it self except it be under ground . the notable river that fall into it , be first the great river of Volga , call in the tartar tongue Edell , which spring out of a lake in a marsh or plain ground , not far from the city of Novogrode in Russia , and it be from the spring to the sea , above two thousand english mile . it have diverse other goodly river fall into it , as out of Siberia , Yaic , and Yem : also out of the moun-477 taine of Caucasus , the river of Cyrus and Arash , and diverse other . as touch the trade of shamaky in Media and tebris , with other town in Persia , i have inquire , and do well understand , that it be even like to the trade of Tartary , that be little utterance , and small profit : and i have be advertise that the chief trade of Persia be into Syria , and so transport into the Levant sea . the few ship upon the caspian sea , the want of mart and port town , the poverty of the people , and the ice , make that trade nought . at astracan there be merchant of Shamaky , with who i offer to barter , and to give they kersy for their ware , but they will not , say , they have they as good cheap in their country , as i offer they , which be six rubble for a kersie , that i ask : and while i be at Boghar , there be bring thither out of Persia , cloth , and diverse commodity of our country , which be sell as good cheap , as i may sell we . the ten day of June , we depart from astracan towards the Moscow , have a hundred gunner in our company at the emperor charge , for the safe conduct of the tartar ambassador and i . and the eight and twenty day of July follow , we arrive at the city of Cazan , have be upon the way from astracan thither , six week and more , without any refresh of victual : for in all that way there be no habitation . the seven of August follow , we depart from Cazan , and transport our good by water , as far as the city of morum , and then by land : so that the [ i . 335. ] second of September , we arrive at the ci tie of Moscow , his arrival at and the four day i come before the emperor September majesty , kiss his hand , and present he a white cow tail of Cathay , and a drum of Tartary , which he well accept . also i bring before he all the ambassador that be commit to my charge , with all the ruff slave : and that day i dine in his 478 majesty presence , and at dinner , his grace send i meat by a duke , and ask i diverse question touch the land and country where i have be . and thus i remain at the Moscow about your affair , until the 17. day of February that your ware be send down : and then have licence of the emperor majesty to depart , the 21. day i come to your house at Vologhda , and there remain until the break up of the year : and then have see all your good laden into your boat , i depart with the same , and arrive withal in safety at Colmogro the 9 of May 1560. and here i cease for this time , entreat you to bear with this my large discourse , which by reason of the variety of matter , i can make no short , and i beseech God to prosper all your attempt . the latitude of certain principali place in Russia , and other region . Deg. Min. ' Moscow in 55 ' io novgorod the great 58 26 Novogrod the less 33 Colmogro 64 10 Vologhda 59 11 Cazan 55 33 oweke 51 40 astracan 47 9 at the entrance into the caspian sea . > 46 ► 72 manguslave beyond the caspian sea . ► 45 00 urgence in Tartary 20. day journey from the caspian sea . > 42 18 Boghar a city in Tartary 20. day journey ^39 io from urgence . i i i 479 