his arrival at Casbin the 25. of May . conference and demand of they shaugh . the english voyage a letter of m. Arthur Edward , write the 8. of August 1566. from the town of Shamaki in Media , to the right worshipful the governors , consul , assistant , and generality of the company of Russia , etc show his access unto the emperor of Persia , his conference with he , his obtain of a privilege , with diverse other good observation . right worshipful sir , my bind duty remember , with most humble commendation and like request to God for the preservation of your good health , with the rest of the company , etc it may please you to understand , that the last letter which i send you from hence be of the 26. of April of this present year by Richard Johnson at my departure towards Casbin : to which ci tie i come the 25. of May follow , not slack any day , hour , nor moment , to procure and make friend for the speedy bring i before the presence of they shaugh , be the 29. day of the same month bring before he , with who majesty i be in talk ( as i think ) two hour . he will i twice to come near he , demand what be my request : and have hear they , he promise i his gracious letter . afterwards he call i twice again to come near he , and talk with i of our queen majesty and country , and what commodity we have , and what other commodity we desire : and then of other country adjoin to we and their commodity , as also of king Philip , what overthrow he give the turk at the siege of Malta . and how long we have trade into Russeland and Moscovia , and in what space we may sail out of England into Russeland , and how many week travel it be from colmogro to astracan : and then come to discourse of Russeland , and what town the emperor have win , declare unto i himself most of our commodity . in the end he will that your worship 54 1566. shall send he of all sort of clothes , but of one all sort of especial which maiden do make ( as he say : ) he do to be send , name it Karengi , i think it be western dozen die specta^ be into scarlet . lime will not permit i to write at die into large the conference which i have with his majesty . it scarlet . be strange to his people ( know our religion ) to see i so long in talk with he , will his secretary before i to write what he be desirous of : to wit , of London clothes , three or four of all sort for example , be well shear and dress . violet in grain and fine red be most wear , but other good colour will away , when they shall see they . i wear a garment of London russet , be much esteem . you shall do well to send such sort as be lively to the sight , and some black for woman garment , with some orange colour and tawnei . here be much broad cloth wear . they talk much of London London c^s clothes , and they that know the wear , be desirous of they before the cloth of the woman make , for they much Venice find it nothing durable . for when it come to wear cloth wear in on the thread , it rent like paper . here be much Persia . Venice cloth wear , be cromplist a yard and a half broad , and sell here from 24. to 30. shaughes their arshine , be long by two inch then the ruff arshine be . i wish also that you send some good chamlet and velvet die in grain , with purple colour and fine red : because these be most wear . also some black with other colour : some cloth of gold , tissue and bocky , some velvet wrought with gold , with satin and damask , most purple , and red of all sort . you may not forget to send some western karsei , to wit , dozen , which be thick well , and close shut in the weave , be die into fine red , and some scarlet : for i think there be no such cloth for their cap . your worship shall understand , that after my first departure from the presence of the prince , i neglect no time in daily attendance on they , who have my privilege in write , that i may have it in readiness at such time as i shall again be call before they the second admission to the shaugh presence , the 29. of June 1566. at which Arne he receive the privilege . the shaugh promise to increase the privilege . [ i - 359 - ] the english voyage presence of they shaugh , which be the 29. of June last . i be in apparel that he give unto i , with other garment to my interpreter , and one of your servant , and then i receive your letter or privilege , accord to my desire , seal and firm with the shaugh own hand . praise be God who have wrought with i , and for i , in all my do . the 29. of June be one of their chief festi vail day , so that all his nobility be there present , with two ambassador in company with his majesty , who say unto i that if my letter be not to my mind , in time to come they shall be mend . whereupon i make my reverence , and give his highness most humble and hearty thank , say , that with as much speed as may be , our queen majesty shall understand of his goodness towards her merchant , which i think will write their letter of request unto his highness , in such form and order as by they shall be think meet and requisite for their good assurance in the trade of merchandize : who reply with these word : when we shall see their reasonable request , we will show they our far good will , and so i depart . since the receive of the shaugh letter , i have eat in company of good duke and other , who before will not come near i . and every day some will come to my shop , and eat and drink with i out of my own dish . likewise in ride from Casbin hither , on the way when i sit down to dinner , they will come and eat with i unbidden , when i wish they further off : for i spare they that , which glad i will have eat my self . i doubt not but we shall live here from henceforth in quietness : for now in all place where i come , i be friendly use with the best . i be ask by the shaugh if you be able to bring he year one hundred thousand piece of kersy , and clothes . and i answer he , say , your worship be able to furnish his country with two hundred thousand . whereat his highness rejoice : for the 56 armenian barterwiththe Venetians . the distance Arthur Edward a.d. 1566. Turk ambassador the last year , as diverse have tell i , do put the shaugh in despair , say , that the Turk will not permit any cloth to be bring into his country . there be a city in Syria name Aleppo , wherein con - Aleppo a city tinual be many venetian dwell , beside other that greattwde-come yearly and there buy wool , gal , tallow , saffron , skin , cotton wool , and other ware , and great store of spice . also the armenian year receive at the venetian hand , karsy in barter for raw silk , give sometime 60. piece of karsy for 70. batman of silk of this country , and 40. piece for grosin silk . and karsy sell common for ready money in Aleppo , at 11. and 12. ducat the piece , ( the ducat be here worth 12. shilling ) may cost the first penny 132. and 144. Shaughs a kerchief . by report it be one month travel from this town of shamaky to Aleppo , and from thence to Tripoli , six day journey : and from Tripoli r ' to Venice by water , a month or five week sail . as i learn , from hence to Venice may easy be travel in less than three month . therefore i wish your worship to procure some trusty and assure friend there , to who from hence letter may be send . for i can have they here to put in surety to deliver my letter , and to bring answer . if i have any other here with i , i will nothing have doubt to have bring you the shaugh letter that way . the armenian and other be desirous to barter with Armenians we , give silk for karsy , and also will serve we of all ot^er ’ kind of spice , we give they sufficient warn to an / spice fetch it in the Indies , and will deliver it we in shamaky for karsy . at these prize . Pepper this town batman for 18. Shaughs , every shaugh be sixpence . mace large for 40. Shaughs , and 45. the batman . Cloves for 40. Shaughs the batman . nutmeg for 16. and 18. Shaughs the batman . cinnamon for 40. Shaughs the batman . i doubt not the shaugh desirous tobar-gaine fir our commodity . [ I. 360. ] 2000 piece of karsy to be send into Persia . the english voyage but there will be profit and good do in spice , with drug and other like in time . from Casbin to ormus be six week travel , and from hence to Casbin be 16. day with camel lade : but if one travel with a good mule unlade , it may be go in seven or eight day . and i think to ormus and other place , may be travel in like order and proportion , with cattle unlade . but here in all place as man travel , they must carry their own provision on horse , which they be to buy , and thus they travel but a footepase . the shaugh himself be desirous to bargain with you who will give money , silk , and other ware as we will , and take our ware as we may afford they , will i himself to bring such ware as we may gain by he . the armenian by report , and as i perceive , bring from Aleppo yearly , four , five , and six thousand piece of karsy , and clothes , beside those which other man bring . if your worship may procure and find vent or sale for raw silk , and silk die in grain , beside other silk wrought and make here , by which , profit may be make : than you may send a great substance of ware hither . but i fear you shall be hinder by the venetian if they may : for i know it will grieve they that you do trade into these part : for in short time it shall clean alter their trade , and hinder the sale of their clothes in Aleppo and other place adjoin . you shall understand that 60. batman of silk be a mule lade : and as it be report , one village of the armenian yearly carry 400. and 500 mule lade of silk to Aleppo , and bring thence 800. or a thousand mule lade with karsy 8c Venice clothes . and 18. piece of karsy be a mule lade . but i wish you not to send above 2000 piece of karsy , although i have be will to write for more . if i may have have any understanding what your worship have write for in your letter send this year , i shall 58 in this my letter have be better able to have answer you . they which be now in astracan , may have write some thing unto i hither , if it have please they , or else have send i such letter of i , as i hope some of my friend have write to i : for here be arrive eight week past , two boat with ware and russes , by who they may have write , have it be but 3. or 4. line . they promise the russes to write , but promise be not keep . i will be sorry that any boat shall depart out of these part , and not write unto they , weigh how all thing stand . i hear they have buy a boat , which cost 40. rubble , and ship certain ware to come hither . God send they in safety . i do tarry their come , or else i have think to have come to astracan in those boat which depart hence late . the fifteen of July last , i depart from Casbin , he depart and come to this town the 29. of you same . and fr°m as^n the four of August i find mean to arrest the false knave in this country , to for 22. tumen , and too . shaugh , tumen . ) i have cause he to put forthcoming at all time , what with he , God know , the debt wit , the customer ( 200. shaugh be a in surety for his end i shall have will be recover , but not yet , for he must pay the shaugh 1000 rubble . Theise part as yet be in no stay for lack of a governor or head to rule , which i think shall be the mursey . within 5. or 6. day we shall know , for it be time , because man be in fear to travel for be rob . if there be a prince place , i shall soon get in your debt , for they dare not disobey the shaugh letter or privilege : wherein he have not only write that our debt shall be pay , but also that we shall be take heed to , so as we need not to doubt ( God will ) in time to come , to be here as well use as we be in Russeland . the bill of debt that Richard Richard Johnsons Johnson leave with i , have neither the party name and eat ne^1 ' nor sum of money in two of they , and in other bill sence‘ Cozomomet be Arthur Edward friend to the shaugh . the english voyage but his own name . if i have not use discretion in cause to be write in our privilege , that such debt as be owe , shall be pay any or we in the absence of the other , some man will not have pay one penny , but only to Richard Johnson , who have write but his own name only in the bill . i receive in Casbin of Forackan in part of 29. tumen , 300. shaugh in money : the rest he will deliver i here in silk , and this be all that i have receive to this day . and as for hawrambeck twelve tumen , i make account , that if i can ride to speak with he , i shall be pay in money and ware . touch ackon money , by mean of duke Ameddinbeck , who first owe the debt , because they mean not to pay a penny , he do rather seek to hinder my suit then to further i , but i find out a present remedy : for God send i friend that be always about the shaugh , and daily put on his apparel , who open all my suit , and bring i to the presence of they shaugh before that Cozomomet see the shaugh eye . but Cozomomet in the end be my friend : for he be send for , and declare unto the shaugh what good merchant we be , use truth in all our do , and how we be in great favour with the emperor of Russia , and what good commodity we may bring into his country , with other talk . and daily he be send for to the shaugh about the affair in those part , for no man be able to advise the shaugh of the state and affair of those country so much as he be . he owe your worship seven tumens and 48. shaugh , which be not all this time to be get at his hand : for he be at great charge in ride to Casbin , and give great gift since his come , which he twice declare unto i . i feel his grief become physician to ease his pain , and forgive he his debt abovesaid , in recompense of ten piece of karsy , that be promise he by Richard Johnson and i , to give he at the cam of our good , in consideration that he shall with speed do what lie in he , to dispatch i away : for i perceive he procure other that do help i in my suit to delay i of , till time he have his purpose . i never be in quiet , till i have the prince privilege , and have get i out of Casbin : for victual , and all other thing victual and be very dear there , because they be bring thither dl thing dear from far off . as for all other small debt ( which may at as my be about 7. tumen ) when our merchant be come hither , we shall seek to get they in as we may . i wish your worship to send some bullion to be coin here , it will please the prince there , and be profitable to you . silk be better cheap by two or three shaugh the batman , than it be the last year . you shall understand that i have write two letter of all my proceed , which i send from Casbin long since : to wit , the 24. and 29. of June last , by one of your servant to Gilan , there to take ship and to go to astracan , and to deliver the same unto your factor , which may have be to their quietness and i , long ago . but i be right sorry to hear since my come hither , that he have play the loiter merchant in Gilan , not go in those boat that go first , but tarry for the last boat . but 1 will teach he , to the example of other , how he shall make haste hereafter in such affair . the karsy which you send last , be buy of m. Quarles , be [ i . 361 ] good and full length and well sort . the prince theambatsa-ambassador of Gilan be in Casbin , at my be there . i hope in God , if i remain here , and may go to Gilan , quan 0 to obtain for your worship the like privilege at the king hand there also . for i have something move the matter , be put in such comfort , that i doubt not the get thereof with small charge , which i have do at this time if i have have other here with i to put in trust : for from Casbin to Gilan be but 5. Gilan but five day ride , which country may be profitable to your worship . there be in that province good store of silk , ' better cheap , and better in goodness than this country silk be . also great store of Alom , be there sell this town batman , for one bist and a half . i have make reckon , all charge bear from hence to Colmogro , and from thence fraught into England at three pound the ton , all charge account , will not stand you in above 18. and 20. shilling the hundred . you have year by report two or three hundred ton lade . other commodity there for England i hear not of . as for Gals . gal here to be buy , there be no profit to be do by they . they be bring from Aleppo , and sell here not under 3. or 4. shaugh their batman , be grain , six pound English weight . grain that you die scarlet withal be worth the batman ready money , 200. shaugh , reckon the shaugh for 6. penny Russe , it may be 6. rubble their batman . your worship may send some portion of money , if you may buy , as i think you may , for 12. and 13. S. a pound the berry , so you shall gain both in the price and weight . if one Englishman moor have be here with i , to who i may have deliver our bill of debt and other thing , whatsoever shall have chance of i , i will then have become servant ormus . to my interpreter , and so have go to ormus and Aleppo . Aleppo , which both join on the border of this country , be the chief mart town , whereunto from all place merchant resort . and thus will i have spend 4. or 5. month in travel for further knowledge of thing for to have certify your worship of . i hope in God to use thing in such order , that year you shall have return of your good from hence , as you have forth of Russeland , and in those ship . for if we may , as i doubt not with diligence , provide to make sale in time , and with speed receive silk at the shaugh hand , and other man , that it may be send from hence to be in astracan at the begin of April , from whence it may be send to Colmogro in three month and less , and there to be ready with the rest of your good by the end of June for your ship to receive , that will be time enough . this i doubt not to bring to pass within a year or two , when we be thorough settle in these 62 part , and better know . Moreover you shall stand , that at my last be in the presence of they it be say to i that m. Anthony Jenkin . , ^ proffer to take all the raw silk in those party , de - pefsian ‘ liver cloth and other commodity for the same . i assure you there be in those part to be have three or four thousand horse lade , every horse load be 50. or 60. batman , beside silk of grosin . great abundance of silk at time be send out of these part , to wit , 4. or 5. hundred horse load at a time by the Turk , who bring great store of silver to be coin , to wit , dollar at ten shaugh the piece . the Hungary Ducket be at 12. shaugh . and have money in readiness at the time of the year , they buy silk the better cheap , when the country man bring it first to be sell . if your worship may bargain with the venetian to take silk at your hand , or otherwise deal with they , i do not mistrust but to have at the shaugh hand six batman of silk for two piece and a half of karsy . your good advice herein , and in other matter , i trust you will write with convenient speed . master Anthony m. Anthony Jenkinson have deserve great commendation at all your Jenkinson worship hand : for the good report of his well and come e • wise do in those part , be oftentimes a comfort to i to hear thereof , and some good help to i in my proceed . to this day i never hear from any of our merchant . God grant i in health to see your worship , for i have have a careful travel , with many a sorrowful day and unquiet sleep . neither have i the company of one english person , to who sometime i may have ease my pensive heart , as God well know , who have deliver i from my enemy . thus almighty God grant you in health and wealth long to live . your humble servant at commandment during life , Arthur Edwards . 63 under - shaugh , m. Anthony / 4 « / 4 Jenkinsons the shaugh letter to the Moscovy company . [ I. 362. ] the english voyage another letter of Arthur Edwards write in astracan the 16. of June , 1567. at his return in his first voyage out of Persia , to the right worshipful company trade into Russia , Persia , and other the north and Northeast part . it may please your worship that herein i have write not only certain article of your privilege , but also the governor name , with the consul , assistant and generality . also such commodity as the prince or emperor of the country have write in one of his letter direct to your worship to be send he , with other note which i think good to be remember , as may appear hereafter follow . your privilege be write , grant , and give in the name of these six person follow : to wit , sir William Garrard , sir William Chester , governor , sir Thomas lodge , master Anthony Jenkinson , master Thomas Nicols and Arthur Edward . 1 first , it be grant that you shall pay no manner of custom or tol , any kind of way , now , nor in time come , unto his heir after he . and that all english merchant , such as you shall appoint now and hereafter , shall and may pass and repass into all place of his dominion and other country adjoin in the trade of merchandise , to buy and sell all manner of commodity , with all manner of person . 2 item , that in all place where any of our merchant shall have their resort , or abide , his chief governor , ruler and justice shall take heed unto we , be our aid and defence against all evil person , punish those that shall do we any wrong . 3 item , that for all such debt as shall be owe by any manner of person , justice shall be do on the party , and we pay at the day . 4 item , that no manner of person of whatsoever estate 64 or degree they be of , shall be so hardy as to take any kind of ware , or any gift , without any leave and good will . 5 item , if by chance medley any of our merchant or servant , as God forbid , shall kill any of his subject , that no part of your good shall be touch or meddle withal , neither any party but the offendor , and true justice to be minister , and be any of we , not to suffer without the prince knowledge and advise . 6 item , that all such debt as be now owe , or hereafter shall be , be to be pay unto any of we , in the absence of the other , be the party dead or alive . 7 item , that no person return any kind of ware back again , be once buy or sell . 8 item , that when God shall send your good to shore , present his people shall help we on land with they . Theise article before write , i trust in God will content your mind , until your far letter be hitherto write unto the prince , who i be assure will grant your far reasonable request , which his majesty have promise . for i move the question , declare unto he that i think your worship will write your letter of request , to crave his far good will , as shall be think meet for your better assurance in the trade of merchandise : you will hardly believe what long and gracious talk he have with i , which i assure you continue two hour , which be strange unto the people and other merchant stranger . for betwixt every question that his majesty move , when i have answer he , he will talk with his noble and other his servant , have some knowledge of our western part and commodity , and then again will demand other question . he cause his secretary to write the article before name , in all of his four letter give i ( whereof two as i require , be in the turkish tongue to be send you . ) on the back side of the one , hi 65 e * by the word Karanff . es , i think they meanekarsy . the english voyage he have write what ware his majesty will have you to send he . he hold i one hour within night before i depart from he . Theise be the name of the ware or commodity , which on the back side of one of his letter the shaugh have write to you to be send he . first , some cloth of gold , with cloth of tissue , and cloth of Botky , as velvet wrought with gold . item , good velvet , to wit , crimosin , purple , red , green and black . Theise colour his majesty requires , for they be most wear . and though there be some of these ware make in his city of Cassan , yet nothing like in goodness , to those that you may procure for he . small profit i think will be in these ware : yet for diverse consideration , as also to satisfy the prince mind , i wish you to send some , and those that be especial good . item , good damask and satin of all sort , with a hundred piece of good chamlet , which be worth here 80. shaugh the piece , at six penny the shaugh , and those silk to be of those colour above write , to wit , crimosin , purple , red , green , black , with some light watchet colour . item , three or four complete harness that will abide the shot of a handgun with 10. or 12. target of steel , be good . item , ten or twelve good shirt of mail be very good or else none , that may abide the shot of a arrow , and two buff jerkin . item , ten or twelve piece of western karsy , be thick well and close shut in the weave , and die into scarlet and fine red . i think there will be no such cloth for noblemen cap . the prince name they * karangy , say , that maiden do make they , and be desirous of they . item , six piece of fine holland cloth for the prince , with some other for nobleman , of a low price . item , twenty handgun be good , some of they with fire lock , and also six good dag , with lock to travel withal . item ioo . brush for garment ( none make of swine hair , ) for gift , and otherwise to be sell . item , six stone bow that shoot lead pellet . item , a mill to grind corn in the field as they go , fine devise : for Cozomomet will i to write for one to be send , to give the prince . item , the prince require of all sort and colour of London clothes . i wish you to send no less than 40. or 50. for i know they will be sell to profit , especial such cloth as may be affbord for 20. shaugh the arshine , which be long by two of my inch then Russia arshine be . let there be fine scarlet , violet in grain , fine red , black , brown blow , four or five of every sort , for the prince and other lord : the rest of other colour lively to the sight , as London russet , tawny , lion colour , good lively green , with other , as you shall think good : for the prince desire to see of all sort , which will be a occasion that the venetian and Turk shall be in less estimation than they be : for they themselves do fear , and secret say the same . and true the prince subject intend to enter into trade with we for spice and other commodity that they be wont to sell unto the venetian and Turk . thus i commit you all to God , who send you health with increase of worship . write in astracan the 16. of June , 1567. by your servant during life to command , Arthur Edwards . 67 [ distance 