the queen majesty letter to the great sophy of Persia , send by m. Anthony Jenkinson , 1561. Lizabetha dei gratia , angliae , Francias , and hiberniae regina , etc potentissimo and invictissimo principi , magno Sophi Persarum , Medorum , parthorum , hir-canorum , Carmanorum , Margianorum , populorum cis and ultra tygrim fluvium , and omnium intra mare Caspium , and per - sicum sinum nationum atque gentium imperatori salutem , and rerum prosperarum felicissimum incrementum . summi dei benignitate factum est , ut quas gentes , non solum immensa terrarum spacia , and insuperabiles marium vastitate , sed and ipsi etiam coelorum cardines longissime disjunxerunt , ipsae tamen literarum bono and mentis certa cogitata , and humanitatis grata officia , and intelligentiae mutuae multa commoda facile inter se and opportune possint communicare . itaque cum perdi-lectus , and fidelis noster famulus antonius Jenkinson , qui have litera nostras perfert , cum bona venia , favore , and gratia nostra hoc angliae nostrae regnum excedere , and in Persiam usque , vestrisque alias ditiones dei benignitate penetrare constituerit , hoc illius institutum perlaudabile quidem grato nostro favore prosequi , and promovere studuimus : id quod eo nos libentiis facimus , quoniam hoc ejus propositum ex honesto study commercii constituendi potissimum chm vestris subditis , aliisque peregrinis hominibus , ad vestra regna confluentibus , omnino exortum sit . Propterei nobis and scribendum ad vestram majestatem , ab eaque petendum esse duximus , ut nostro rogatu dignetur concedere huic famulo nostro Antonio Jenkinson litera publicae fidei , and salvi conductus , quarum authoritate atque praesidio , licitum , liberdmque sit illi , una cum suis familiaribus , servis , sarcinis , mercibus and bonis universis , per vestra regna , domicilia , 1561. ditione , atque provincias liberi , and sine impedimento proficisci , ire , transire , redire , abire , and istic morari , quamdiu placuerit , and inde recedere , quandocunque illi vel suis lubitum fuerit . si haec sancta hospitalitatis jura and dulcia communis humanitatis officia , inter nos , nostra regna , nostrosque subdito libenter constitui , sincere coli , and constant conservari queant , speramus nos , deum optimum maximum effecturum , ut ab hiis parvis initiis , grandiora rerum momenta , nobis ad magna ornamenta atque decus , nostris ad summa commoda atque usus , aliquando sint oritura : siquidem , ut non terra , non mare , non coelum , ad nos longissime seperandos , quam divina ratio communis humanitatis , and mutuae benevolentiae ad nos firmissime conjungendos plus virium habuisse videatur . Deus salutem omnem , and foelicem in terris , and [ i . 341 - ] perpetuam in coelis , vestrae concedat majestati . Datum in Anglia , in celebri nostra urbe Londino , 25 die mensis Aprilis , anno mundi , 5523 , domini ac dei nostri Jesus christi , 1561 , regnorum vero nostrorum tertio . the same in english . ELizabeth , by the grace of God , queen of England , this letter etc to the right mighty , and right victorious prince , the great sophy , emperor of the persian , Medes , parthian , hircans , carmanians , Margians , of the people on this side , and beyond the river of Tigris , and of all man , and nation , between the caspian sea , and the gulf of Persia , greeting , and most happy increase in all prosperity . by the goodness of the almighty god it be ordain , that those people , which not only the huge distance of the land , and the invincible wideness of the sea , but also the very quarter of the heaven do most far separate , and set asunder , may nevertheless through good commendation by write , both ease , and also communicate between they , not only the conceive thought , or deliberation , and grateful office of humanity , but also many commodity of mutual intelligence . therefore whereas our faithful , 7 and right well-beloved servant Anthony Jenkinson , bearer of these our letter , be determine with our licence , favour , and grace , to pass out of this our realm , and by God sufferance to travel even into Persia , and other your jurisdiction : we mind true with our good favour , to set forward , and advance that his right laudable purpose : and that the more willing , for that this his enterprise be only ground upon a honest intent , to establish trade of merchandise with your subject , and with other stranger traffic in your realm es . wherefore we have think good , both to write to your majesty , and also to desire the same , to vouchsafe at our request , to grant to our say servant , Anthony Jenkinson , good passport , and safe conduct , by mean , and authority whereof , it may be free and lawful for he , together with his familiar , servant , carriage , merchandise , and good whatsoever , through your realm , dominion , jurisdiction , and province , free , and without impeachment , to journey , go , pass , repass , and tarry so long as he shall please , and from thence to return whensoever he or they shall think good . if these holy duty of entertainment , and sweet office of naturali humanity may be willing conclude , sincere embrace , and firm observe between we , and our realm , and subject , than we do hope that the almighty god will bring it to pass , that of these small beginning , great moment of thing shall hereafter spring , both to our furniture and honour , and also to the great commodity , and use of our people : so it will be know that neither the earth , the sea , nor t^e heaven , have so much force to separate we , as the godly disposition of naturali humanity , and mutual benevolence have to join we strong together . God grant unto your majesty long and happy felicity in earth , and perpetuali in heaven . Dated in England , in our famous city of London , the 25 day of the month of April , in the year of the creation of the world , 5523 , and of our lord and God Jesus Christ , 1561 , and of our reign the three . 8 