a copy of the privilege give by obdolowcan king of Hyrcania , to the company of english merchant adventurer for Russia , Persia , and mare Caspium , with all the land and country adjoin to the same , obtain by m. Anthony Jenkinson at his be there about the affair of the say company , April 14. anno 1563. we obdolowcan by the mighty power of God maker of heaven and of earth , appoint and now reign king of Shirvan and hircan , of our mere motion and great goodness , at the earnest suit and request of our favour and well-beloved Anthony Jenkinson ambassador , have give and grant unto the right worshipful sir William garret , sir William Chester , sir Thomas lodge , m. Richard mallarie , and m. Richard Chamberlaine , with all their company of merchant adventurer of the city of London in England , free liberty , safe conduct , and licence to come or send their factor in trade of merchandise into our country , and to buy and sell with our merchant and other , either for ready money or barter , and to tarry and abide in our country , so long as they will , and to go away when they listen , without impediment , let , or hindrance , either of body or good . and further our commandment and pleasure be , that the say english merchant with their company , shall pay no manner of custom for ware , which they or their factor shall buy or sei within our dominion . and if at any time our customer or other officer , or any of they , do disturb , misuse , force or constrain the say english merchant or any of they , or their factor , to pay any manner of custom or duty for any ware they bring in or carry out of our dominion contrary to this our commandment , and the same be know unto we , than we will that the say customer and officer shall loose and be 39 A.D. I563 - put out of their say office , with our further displeasure , and the say english merchant to have restore all such money and ware as our customer have take of they for our say custom . and whensoever the say english merchant or their factor shall bring any manner of ware meet for our treasury , than our treasurer shall take the say ware into our treasury , and shall give unto the say english merchant , either ready money or raw silk , to the value of their say ware . and wheresoever this our letter of privilege shall be see and read within our dominion , we straight will and command that it take effect , and be obey in all point . Dated at our place of Javat , the day and year above write , and seal with our princely seal , and firm by our secretary in the 12. year of our reign . [ l 353. i the second voyage into Persia make by Tho. Alcock , who be slay there , and by George wren , and Ric. cheinie servant to the worshipful company of Moscovie merchant in anno 1563. write by the say Richard cheinie . a rubble be a mark English . t may please your worship to understand , that in the year 1563. i be appoint by m. Antho. Jenkinson , and m. Thomas Glover your agent in Russia , to go for Persia in your worship affair , one Thomas Alcock have the charge of the voyage commit to he , and i one of your worship servant be join with he in your business , have with we , as they say 1500. rubble . and if it shall please you i can tell certain what sum of money we have then of the emperor : for i receive none , nor disburse any of it in ware for the voyage . also , God i take to record , i can not tell what stock your worship have there , for the book be keep so privy that a man can never see they . the 10. of 40 