a grant unto the company that at what time soever they send to the discovery of Cataya , they shall|be licence to repair unto this country , and have such conduct and guide , mariner , vessel , man and victual as they shall stand in need of . it be also promise by knez Alfanas , and Peter Gregoriwich in the emperor name , that if Benet butler or any english man complain , deface , hinder in way of traffic or otherwise go about to discredit the worshipful company , and their do , that therein they shall not be hear , and the doer to be punish , as in such case they shall|be judge to have deserve . certain person grant to be send home into England that serve the company , and be practiser against they in that country . a commission give by we Thomas Randolfe ambassador for the queen majestic in Russia , and Thomas Bannister , etc unto James Bassendine , James woodcock and Richard brown , the which Bassendine , woodcock , and brown we appoint joint together , and aider , the one of they to the other , in a voyage of discovery to be make ( by the grace of God ) by they , for search of the sea , and border of the coast , from the river Pechora , to the eastwards , as hereafter follow anno 1588. the first of August . qprimis , when your bark with all furniture be ready , you shall at the begin of the year ( assoon as you possible may ) make your repair to the eastern part of the river Pechora , where be a island call dolgoieve , and from thence you shall pass to the eastwards alongst by the sea coast of Hugorie , or the main land of 119 the english voyage Pechora , and sail alongst by the same coast , you shall pass within seven league of the island vaigat , which be in the straight , almost half way from the coast of Hugorie , unto the coast of Nova Zembla , which island vaigat and nova Zembla you shall find note in your plat , therefore you shall not need to discover it : but proceed on alongst the coast of Hugory , towards the river Obba . there be a bay between the say vaigat , and the river Obba , that do bite to the southward , into the land of Hugory , in which bay be two small river , the one call cara Reca , the other Naramsy , as in the paper of note which be give to you herewith may appear : in the which bay you shall not need to spend any time for search of it , but to direct your course to the river ob ( if otherwise you be not constrain to keep alongst the shore ) and when you come to the river ob you shall not enter into it , but pass over unto the eastern part of the mouth of the say river . and when you be at the eastern part of the mouth of Obba Reca , you shall from thence pass to the eastwards , alongst by the border of the say coast , describe the same in such perfect order as you can best do it . you shall not leave the say coast or border of the land , but pass alongst by it , at least in sight of the same , until you have sail by it so far to the eastwards , and the time of the year so far spend , that you do think it time for you to return with your bark to winter , which travel may well be 300 or 400 league to the eastwards of the ob , if the sea do reach so far as our hope be it do : but and if you find not the say coast and sea to trend so far to the eastwards , yet you shall not leave the coast at any time , but proceed alongst by it , as it do lie , leave no part of it unsearched , or see , unless it be some bay , or river , that you do certain know by the report of the people , that you shall find in those border , or else some certain 120 commission to BASSENDINE token whereby you of your self may judge it to be so . for our hope be that the say border of land and sea do in short space after you pass the ob , incline east , and so to the southward . and therefore we will have no part of the land of your starreboord side , as you proceed in your discovery , to be leave undiscovered . but and if the say border of land do not incline so to the eastwards as we presuppose it , but that it do prove to incline and trend to the northward , and so join with Nova Zembla , make the sea from vaigat to the eastwards but a bay : yet we will that you do keep alongst by the say coast , and so bring we certain report of that form and manner of the same bay . and if it do so prove to be a bay , and that you have pass round about the same , and so by the trending of the land come back unto that part of Nova Zembla that be against vaigat , whereas you may from that see the say island vaigat , if the time of the year will permit you , you shall from thence pass alongst by the say border and coast of Nova Zembla to the westwards , and so to search whether that part of Nova Zembla do join with the land that sir Hugh willoughby discover in anno 53 , and be in 72 degree , and from that part of Nova Zembla 120 league to the westwards , as your plat do show it unto you : and if you do find that land to join with Nova Zembla , when you come to it , you shall proceed further along the same coast , if the time of the year will permit it , and that you do think there will be sufficient time for you to return back with your bark to winter either at Pechora or in Russia , at your discretion : for we refer the same to your good judgement , trust that you will lose no time , that may further your knowledge in this voyage . note you , it be the 20 of August , 56 year the serchthrift begin to return back from her discovery , to winter in Russia , and then she come from the island 121 vaigat , be forcible drive from thence with a easterly wind and ice , and so she come into the river Dwina , and arrive at Colmogro the 11 of September , 56. if the ice have not be so much that year as it be in the strait , on both side of the island vaigat , they in the say pinnace will that year have discover the part that you be now send to seek : which thing ( if it have please God ) may have be do then : but God have reserve it for some other . which discovery , if it may be make by you , it shall not only prove profitable unto you , but it will also purchase perpetuali fame and renown both to you and our country . and thus not doubt of your willing desire , and forwardness towards the same , we pray God to bless you with a lucky beginning , fortunate success , and happy to end the same . amen . necessary note to be observe , and follow in discovery , as hereafter follow . your bark with all furniture and necessary be in readiness for you to depart to the sea : be that you take your bark at saint Nicholas , or any part of Dwina Reca ) you shall from thence , even as timely in the spring as the ice will permit you , sail , [ i . 384. . ] and make all expedition that may be , unto the mouth of the river Pechora ( as your commission do lead you ) and as you pass by the coast all along ( notwithstanding the plat that show you the description of the say coast , from Dwina unto vaigat ) yet you shall seek by all the mean that you can , to amend the same plat , use as many observation , as you possible can do : and these note follow be to be observe by you principal . 1 first , that you do observe the latitude as often , and in as many place as you may possible do it , note diligent the place where you do so observe the same . 2 also that you do diligent set with your compass , how the land do lie from point to point , all alongst 122 