the way from Colmogro to mizemske Sloboda , where the samoed keep their mart to ust pinnego to Palango to Levnona to Vescom to Soyava to co via to Nendega to Lampas to Sloboda all be 230. verst the way to Uromo from mezemske Sloboda , where the Losh hide be get . to Lampas to pogorel to zapolle to uromo all be 115. verst ► north-east and Southwest . the way and distance from saint Nicholas , to the caspian sea if you go straight from saint Nicholas to the caspian sea , you must go to Vologhda by water , as by the easy passage , and that be accomplish , pass day and night , in fourteen day and fourteen night , in boat cut out of a tree : ( the boat be call stroog ) 1100. verst it be . by horse and sled in 8. day you may pass it in winter . in summer the way be dangerous by mean of marsh and bog , and not safe then to be pass . then from Vologhda to yeraslave , 180. verst over land . this yeraslave stand upon the river of Volga , 180. verst i say distant from Vologhda . to the caspian sea be 2700. verst from yeraslave . so from saint Nicholas to the caspian sea , be } 3 800.80 . verst . the journey from saint Nicholas to yeraslave be accom-70 plish in fourteen day by water , and two day by land . } i6 . day . from thence to astracan man travel by water in 30. day and 30. night . so between saint Nicholas and the caspian sea , be [ 46. day journey . there pass down Volga every summer , 500 boat great 8c small , from all the upper part of the river , whereof some be of 500 ton . they go for Minerali salt and for sturgeon . the salt lie in rock ( and be whitish red , and in fine sand ) as it be 30. mile from astracan towards the caspian sea . they dig it themselves and pay nothing for it , but to the prince a penny a pood , viz. 40. pound weight . the sturgeon which they call ocetera be take fifty fishingfir mile on this side astracan . along the river the space of 20. mile , they make their booty in plain ground , ' 8c fish for the space of three month , viz. from the end of may till the end of August , and have salt they use to salt they . the river be there 5. or 6. mile broad , but with some island . the river below yeraslave , where it be most narrow , be a mile broad from side to side . the river run upon red clay , all wood of birch and oak on the river side , save about the town of the fish place . Dwina from S. Nicholas to ustiug run all on chalk and sand : the fish be sweet 8c fat . the mean a fish with a great head a foot long breed about Vologda , and be fat and delicate . between Vobsko and Novogrod , the space of a 180. mile , grow flax : the whole soil in length be so employed , and as much in breadth : this be upon a flat soil . the hemp grow about Smolensk© upon the polish border , 300. mile in compass : much of the soil be so employ . of this hemp they bring in winter to Vologda and Colmogro , and we set in work in make of cable above 100 man . the english - the russian do spin and hachell it , and the english man in make tar it in thread and lay the cable . and one cable onworheaioo those be worth two of Danzick , because the dan-man in Russia , zicker put in old cable and rot stuff , which in foul weather be find of no strength . Sosnova tree , Sosnova , a tree that cure the wolf with the shave excellent for of ^g wooj ? grow in these part , and of the bark \he ‘ wolf . they make rope as big as a man arm for their boat . the samoed lack linen make handkerchief and [ ! • 365. ] towel of the very wood of this tree . the wood of this tree be as heavy as holly , and the shave tough . the descrip - rose island in S. Nicholas bay be full of rose ‘ hland^^ damask and red , of violet and wild rosemary : this island be near 7. or 8. mile about , and good pasture , and have the name of the rose . the snow here about the midst of may be clear , have be two month in melt , than the ground be make dry within 14. day after , and then the grass be knee high within a month . then after September the frost come in , the snow be a yard deep upon plain ground . the island have fir and birch , and a fair fresh spring near the house build there by the english . 72 