a letter of m. Henry lane to m. Richard Hakluit , concern the first ambassage to our most gracious queen Elizabeth from the russian emperor anno 1567 , and other notable matter incident to those place and time . orshipfull sir , because i find you have the success and proceed of Osep Napea the first ambassador of the russian emperor to the majesty of king Philip and queen marry , at what time and at his return i be remain in Russia , and do not find that the perfect knowledge of the first ambassage from thence to this our sovereign lady queen Elizabeth be come to your hand , between who highness and the ambassador i be interpretor , i think good to express it . in August anno 1567 arrive at London with their retinue two especial authorise messenger , name Stephen Twerdico , and Theodore Pogorella , with letter and present to her majesty , at that time be at otelands , where diverse of the chief merchant of the russian company do associate they , and i there do my duty and office of interpretor , her majesty give they audience . first they rehearse the long stile and majesty of their master , with his most friendly and hearty commendation to her highness , and then they testify the singular great joy and pleasure that he conceive to hear of her most princely estate , dignity and health : and last , they deliver their letter and present . the present send unto her majesty be sable , both in pair for tippet , and two timbar , to wit , two time forty , with lusern and other rich fur . for at that time that princely ancient ornament of fur be yet in use . and great pity but that it may be renew , especial in court , and among magistrate , not 98 only for the restore of a old worshipful art and company , but also because they be for our climate 7% use of wholesome , delicate , grave and comely : express dig - f^e* micate nitie , comfort age , and of long continuance , and ’ ’ better with small cost to be preserve , than these new silk , shagge , and rag , wherein a great part of the wealth of the land be hasty consume . grave and comely . Theise ambassador be appoint lodging and enterteinement by the Moscovie company at their house then in seethe lane , and be sundry time after permit to be in presence . and in may 1568 take their leave [ i . 375. i at Greenwich , where they understand and have the queen majesty mind , letter and reward . at the latter part of her talk , her highness consider that our trade to saint Nicholas since the beginning have be ? he trade t0 offensive to diverse prince , state , and merchant eastward , use these speech or the like : who be or shall ^vers pr-inces be more touch by detractor , with fly tale and state east - true report , than prince and ruler , to the breach of ward . love and unity ? your master and i in thing that pass by word and writing , i doubt not will keep and perform promise . if he hear the contrary of i , let he suspend his judgement , and not be light of credit , and so will i . these word they term her majesty golden speech : and kneel down , kiss her hand , and depart . the letter that these two messenger bring , be deliver to i by my lord treasurer , be then secretary , to be translate , the copy whereof i have , but now can find . the copy of the queen majesty letter i send enclose herewith unto your worship . i also have send you a copy of a letter write from the king of Polonia to the queen majesty , with other letter from some of our nation and factor , declare the displeasure for our traffic to the russes from anno 1558 to the year 1566 , especial by the way of the narve : in which year of 1566 , have generali procuration and commission from the company , i be in the low country at Antwerp and Amsterdam , and sometime in company with polack , Dansker , and Easterling : and by reason i have be a lidger in Russia , i can the better reply and prove , that their own nation and the italian be most guilty of the accusation write by the king of Poland . this king Sigismundus ( who ambassador very sumptuous i have see at Moscow ) be report to be too mild in suffer the moscovite . before our traffic they overrun his great dukedom of Lituania , Smolensk win and take Smolensco , carry the people captive to by the ruff . Moscow . and in the year 1563 , as appear by Thomas alcocks letter , they suffer the ruff likewise in that Polotzko duchy to take a principali city call Polotzko , with take . the iorj a ( j people thereof . likewise the say sigis - mundus and the king of Sweden do not look to the protection of Livonia , but lose all , except rye and revel , and the ruff make the narve his port to traffic , not only to we , but to Lubec and other , generali . and still from those part the moscovite be furnish out of Dutchland by enterloper with all art and artificer , and have few or none by we . the italian also furnish they with engine of war , and teach they warlike stratagems , and the art of fortification . in the day of Sigismond , the ruff will tant the polack , that they love their ease at home with their wife , and to drink , and be not at commandment of their king . This Sigismond have to wife the daughter of Ferdinando , Charles the fifth brother , and he die without issue . Polotzko re - since which time their late elect king Stephanus Batore tier by t ruff jn better order , and recover Polotzko batore . again in the year 1579. thus with my hearty farewell i take my leave of your worship . your assure friend Henry lane . 100 