and my self depart , and embark at saint Nicholas about the end of July , and arrive safe at London in the month of September follow . a copy of the privilege grant by the right high and mighty prince , the emperor of Russia , etc unto the right worshipful fellowship of english merchant , for the discovery of new trade : and hither send by Thomas Randolfe esquire , her majesty ambassador to the say emperor , and by Andrew Savin his ambassador in the year of our lord God 1569. ne God everlasting , and without and before the beginning , the father , the son , and the holy ghost , the bless Trinity , our only God , maker , and preserver of all thing , and replenisher of all thing every where , who by thy goodness do cause all man to love the giver of wisdom our only mediator , and leader of we all unto bless knowledge by the only son his word , our lord Jesus Christ , holy and everlasting spirit , and now in these our day teach we to keep Christianity , and suffer we to enjoy our kingdom to the happy commodity of our land , and wealth of our people , in despite of our enemy , and to our fame with our friend . we John vasiliwich by the grace of God , great lord , emperor , and great duke of all Russia , volodemer , Moscovia , Novogrod , emperor of Cazan , Tversky , Vgorsky , Permisky , Vadsky , Bulgaria , and many other , lord and great duke of the low country of Novogrod , Chernigosky , Resansky , Polotsky , Rastow , yeraslave , Bealosera , Owdorsky , Condinsky , and all Siberland , great commander of all the north part , lord of Leifland , and many other northward , southward and westward . 108 whereas our sister Elizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , have write unto we her letter for her merchant , who have make suit that we shall grant our goodness to the merchant which be of one company , and give they free leave to come to traffic in our kingdom to Colmogro , and to the country of Dwina , and to our great city of Moscovia , and to all the city in our dominion , and through our country to Boghar , to Persia , Casbin , and charday , and to all other country . i we John vasiliwich emperor and great duke of all Russia ( for our sister Elizabeth sake , queen of England ) have give and grant to the english merchant , the governor , consul , assistant and fellowship , sir Wil. Garrard knight , Rowland haiward Aiderman , Joh. Thamworth esquire , John river Aiderman , Henry Beecher Aiderman , consul : sir Wil. Chester knight , Edward Jackman Aiderman , Lionel Ducket Aiderman , Edward Gilbert , Laurence Huse , Francis Walsingham , clement Throgmorton , John Quarles , Nicholas Wheeler , Thomas Banister , John Harrison , Francis Burnham , Anthony Gamage , John Somers , Richard Wilkinson , Joh. spark , Richard bairn , Robert Woolman , Thomas brown , Thomas smith , Thomas Allen , Thomas more , William bully , Richard young , Thomas Atkinson , assistant : John Mersh esquire , Geoffrey Ducket , Francis Robinson , Matthew field , and all the rest of their company and fellowship , and to their successor and deputy , to come with ship and other vessel into our country , at Colmogorod , and [ i . 379. ] Dwina , and to all the north part now be we , or that hereafter shall at any time be in our possession , by sea , river or land , even to our great city of Moscow , in all the town of our country , to Cazan and astracan , to Novogorod the great , to Plesko and Leifland , Vriagorod , to narve , and all other town of Leifland . 2 and to pass through our land to Boghar , Persia , 109 Casbin , charday , and other country : and wheresoever they come there to be and abide free , and to barter and bargain free all ware of sale , without custom of all people , and merchant stranger whatsoever . and if so be they bring any fine ware out of England , or any other country from Boghar , Persia , Casbin , or from any other place , and those their ware that come by the way of Narve , or any other part into our dominion , to bring the same ware into our treasure , and our treasurer to view the same ware , and to take into our treasury of the same such as shall|be needful for we . and all such ware as we shall not need , our chancellor to redeliver you same : and after the view of our chancellor , to barter it free to who they will , not sell any of their ware needful for we , before our chancellor have see the same . and all other gross and heavy ware that shall be needful to our use , not be bring to Moscow , to declare and tell our chancellor of the same ware : and to give a note thereof by name , and how much they leave there , not bring to Moscow : and then if we need not the say ware , the english merchant , their servant and factor , to convey their ware the near way to ustiug the great , and so to Colmogorod , or elsewhere at their pleasure , there to barter and sell the same . but those ware that shall needful for our treasury , they shall not hide from we in any case . and when our chancellors shall send our adventure , with the say merchant or their factor , they to take our adventure with they , and to sell , and to barter for such ware as shall meet for our treasury , and to return it into our treasury . and when we shall send any adventure into England then our chancellor to give they a year warn , that their ship may be provide thereafter , that by take in of our ware , they leave not their own behind they . iio and to take our adventure yearly when they go into Persia . neither shall the english merchant receive or colour any of our people good , nor barter nor sell it in any wise : likewise our people not to barter for the say english merchant or occupy for they . 3 and when they shall come into our empire of Casan and astracan , and other place of our dominion , than our captain of Casan and astracan , and our authorise people , quiet to let they pass , not take any toll or custom of their ware , nor once to make search thereof . and when we shall send no adventure with they , yet to suffer they free to pass , not view their ware , nor take any kind of custom . and whatsoever english merchant will bargain with our merchant or factor wear for ware to barter the same at their pleasure . and whatsoever their merchant or factor will sell their ware at their house at Moscow , which house i grant they at saint maxim at the Moscow , they to sei the ware to our people , either stranger as they may best utter it , keep within their house , arshine , measure , and weight under seal . 4 we have grant they the say house at saint maxim in the half free , and without stand rent , as heretofore we do grant it the say english merchant , sir Wil. Garrard , and the company , maintain in the say house one housekeeper a ruff , and two Russe servant , or some of their own country man , and none other russes beside the aforesaid . and the say housekeeper that shall live at their house with the english merchant , neither to buy nor sei any ware for they , but that the say merchant themselves or their factor , shall buy , sell , and barter their own ware : and our Moscovie merchant not to take the say Englishman ware to sell they in our town , nor to buy any ware for they , neither the english merchant to colour any russes ware at any town . 5 and whatsoever english merchant will sell his ware at Colmogorod , Dwyna , Vologda , yeraslave , Castran , Novogorod the low , Casan , astracan , novgorod the great , vopsko , the narve , Vriagorod , or at any other town , they to sei their ware there at their pleasure : and of all ware aswell of other country as of Russia , no officer or other to take any custom , neither in any place to stay they in any wise , neither take any kind of toll of they for their ware whatsoever . 6 and whatsoever merchant shall bargain or buy any ware of english merchant : the say ruff not to return those ware upon the merchant hand again , but to give ready money for the say ware , otherwise they to crave the justice to give right , and to execute the law upon the same with all expedition . and when [ i . 380. ] the english merchant or factor shall travail from Moscovie after the dispatch of their ware and business , than to show themselves unto our chancellor , whatsoever ware of they shall go from Moscow , they not to show the same ware to any our officer , nor pay no custom nor toll in any place . 7 if it so happen the english merchant have any wrack , and the ship be bring to any port of our dominion , we to command the say good to be inquire and seek out , and to be give to the english merchant , be here abide at that time in our country , the factor , servant , or deputy , of the company aforesaid , to who we have grant this our gracious letter . and if there happen none of the english merchant , factor , servant , or deputy to be in our country at such time , than we will all the say good to be seek out and bestow in some convenient place , and when any of the company aforewritten , bring these our letter , shall come for their good , we to command their good to be restore unto they . 8 likewise we have grant leave to the english merchant , their governor , consul , and assistant , 112 namely , sir William Garrard knight , Rowland Hayward , and to the company , to build house at Vologda , Colmogro , and the seaside , at Ivangorod , at Cherell , and in all other place of our dominion , as shall be needful for their trade . and they to keep at the say house one housekeeper , a ruff , and two or three man to keep their ware at the say house , make sale thereof to who they will , they , their factor or deputy : the say housekeeper not to buy or sell for they . 9 also we have give and grant to the english merchant , their house which they have by our goodness at saint maxim in the zenopski , and other their house in the town of Zenopski , make for the better assurance of their good , and all such as they shall set up hereafter shall be of the two Opressini , and will make they know to all they of Opressini . io and whereas by our goodness we have grant they a Ropehouse at Vologda , be far from the english merchant house , now we have give they to build a house for that use by the say english house , and have give and grant they ( of our goodness ) ground , one hundred and fourscore fathom long , and fifty fathom in breadth , accord to their own request . 11 also , we have of our goodness give and grant to the english merchant , leave to buy they a house at Wichida , and there to search out mine of iron . and where they shall happy find it , there to set up house for the make of the same iron : and to make the same , of our goodness have grant they wood , five or six mile compass about the say house , to the make of the say iron , and not to exceed these bound and limit : and where they shall cut the say wood , not to set up any village or farm there , bring the artificer for make of their iron , out of their own country , and to learn our people that art , and so free occupy the say iron in these our dominion , transport also of the same home into England , allow for every pound one dingo , or half penny . hi 113 h | | or , choose side . 12 and if any of the say iron shall|be needful for our work , than we to take of the say iron to our work , upon agreement of price , pay money out of our treasury for the same : and when the say english merchant or factor shall send their own people out of our realm into their country , over land through any country whatsoever , free to send the same with our word . 13 also , we of our goodness have grant , that if any man misuse the say english , the factor or servant , or the say english merchant , their factor or servant abuse any other at Moscovie , or any other out town whatsoever within our dominion in trade of merchandise or otherwise , than they to have upright justice in all such matter of our counsel the Opressini without all let or delay : but if our justice may not agree the party , than lot to be make , and to who lot it shall fall , to he the right to be give , and that only our counsel at Moscovie , and none of our captain , or authorise people , or officer in any other our town , give judgement upon the say english merchant for any thing . 14 also , if any stranger shall have matter of controversy with any english merchant , factor or servant , abide within these our realm , or contrariwise any english merchant , factor or servant , against any other stranger , in all those cause our counsel of the Opressini , to give they justice , and to make a agreement and end between the party , without all delay : and none to deal therein , save our counsel of the Opressini . 15 and if any man have action against any english merchant be absent , that then in his absence it shall|be lawful for any other Englishman at his assignation to answer his cause . 16 if any Englishman happen to be wound or beat to death , or any ruff or stranger slay or beat , 17 or any steal good to be find in the say english house , than our counselor to cause the 114 1569. guilty person to be seek out , and to do right and justice in the cause , and the party that be guilty , if he deserve punishment , to be correct accord after his offence : that the say english merchant , factor and servant , sustain thereby no hindrance or damage . 18 and whatsoever english merchant , factor , servant , [ i . 381. ] or deputy , shall|be guilty of any fault , deserve our displeasure , than our counseller to cause the guilty party to go under surety , and their good to be seal and keep , until our pleasure be further know , and our counsel to examine their offence , and so to report it unto we , that we may command what shall be do therein , and none other to be arrest or have their good seal , which be not guilty of that offence , nor to stay or apprehend they in any of our dominion for the same . 19 if any english merchant , factor or servant shall offend , it shall|be lawful for their agent to do justice upon the say party , or to send he home into England at his pleasure . 20 if any english merchant , factor or servant , have lend or hereafter shall lend money to any of our people , or credit they with ware , and so depart into any foreign country , or die before the debt be due to be pay , than our people and merchant to pay the say debt , to who soever shall be appoint to the say room or charge , and the say english merchant , factor , or servant , to bring his bill of debt to our counsel , to show they what be due , and what money be owe they for any ware : and thus to do true , not add any whit to the debt , and our counsel to command the debt to be discharge unto the english merchant , factor , or servant , without delay . 21 and whatsoever english merchant shall be arrest for debt , than our counsel to command the party under arrest to be deliver to the agent : and if he have no surety , to bind the agent with he , for the better force of the bond . and if any Englishman be indebt , we will the creditor not to cast he in prison , or to deliver he to the sergeant , lest the officer lose - he , but to take ware in pawn of the debt . 22 also of our goodness , we have grant the english merchant to send our commission to all our town , captain , and authorise man , to defend and guard the say merchant from all thief , robber , and evil dispose person . 23 if in come or go to and from our dominion , the merchant , the factor , or servant be spoil on the sea , our counsel shall send our letter , and will they to be seek out , and where they shall find the good , cause it to be restore again , and the offender to be punish , accord to our commandment . 24 also of our goodness , we have grant the say merchant to take up broker , packer , wayer , and such like labourer , as shall be needful for they , pay for their hire as the labourer and they shall agree . 25 we likewise of our goodness , have license the english merchant in our town of Moscow , Novogorod the great , and Plesko , that the coiner of the say town shall melt dollar , and coin money for they , without custom , allow for coal , and other necessary , with the workmanship . 26 also of our goodness , we have grant to the say english merchant , to take post horse at needful time , leave with our officer a note how many they take , and not else , in no case hinder or diminish our treasury . 27 also for our sister queen Elizabeth sake , we of our goodness have grant to the merchant within write , this our letter , and to their successor , that no Englishman , nor any other stranger , come without the queen leave to colmogorode , the river of Vob , Vasiagy , Pechora , Cola , Mezena , Pechingo , zelevetskye island , the river of shame , nor to no other haven of Dwina , nor to any part of the northside of Dwina 116 by hitherward of Wardhouse , to any haven , with ship , buss , or any other vessel ! , nor to occupy in any kind of way , but only the say english company , and their successor , to who we of our goodness have grant this privilege . 28 also that no english merchant , without the queen leave , shall come with any ware , to the narve , or Uriogorod . 29 and whatsoever english merchant , stranger , or other , of whatsoever country he be , shall come with any ship , buss , or any other vessel , to any of the say haven , of the north side , to any part of Dwina , by north the narve , or Uriogorod , without the queen leave or knowledge , not be of the company above write , we to apprehend and take the same vessel from those stranger and merchant , the one half to we the emperor , and great duke , and the other half to the company of english merchant . 30 also of our goodness we have grant the say company of english merchant , that no english mere chant or stranger shall pass through our dominion , to Boghar , Persia , Casbin , charday , or other country , save only the company of english merchant , and our own messenger . 31 also whatsoever Englishman , come out of England or any other country , into our dominion , without the queen leave , and knowledge , not be of the say company , write within those our letter , [ 1. 382. ] mind , and purpose , to abide in our realm , contrary to the queen will and pleasure , or any way abuse himself , the agent shall free send he home , to the queen his sovereign : which if the agent of himself be unable to do , let he pray for aid of the captain and officer of our town there be , and so send he to prison , and will the say captain not to hinder the say agent from send home such evil person into England . 32 and if any man within our country run away to any other town or place , the english merchant and 117 factor , to have free liberty to apprehend he , and take their good from he again . 33 and as for our privilege give to Thomas Glover , Ralph Rutter , Christopher Bennet , John chapel , and their adherent , we have command the same privilege to be take from they . 34 also we of our goodness have grant the say company of english merchant , their successor , servant and deputy , that do or shall remain at Moscow , or elsewhere within our dominion free to keep their own law : and in any wise none of we to force they to our law or faith against their will . Moreover , beside and with the company of english merchant , we permit all stranger , to trade to our town of Narve , Ivanogorod , and other our town of Liefland , as they have do beforetime . give from the begin of the world 7077 , in the month of June 20 , indiction 12 , the year of our lordship and reign 35 , and of our empire of Rusland 23 , Cazan 17 , astracan 15. other speciali grant by his majesty private letter at the suit of m. Randolfe ambassador . releasement out of prison of Fitzherbert , that be accuse for write of letter against the emperor . liberty give to Thomas Greene that be accuse and trouble upon suspicion of his deal with the ambassador , and licence give to he to traffic as he be accustom . Andrew Atherton and his surety release at the narve and his servant at the Moscow , that be in trouble for send the merchant letter into England . a letter grant to Thomas Southam to the council , for justice against they that steal the pearl . his majesty favour promise to the artificer , and live to be appoint they as they can best deserve . a letter to the merchant that go into Persia , to pass free without impeachment in his dominion , as also letter of favour to the great shaugh of Persia . 118 a grant unto the company that at what time soever they send to the discovery of Cataya , they shall|be licence to repair unto this country , and have such conduct and guide , mariner , vessel , man and victual as they shall stand in need of . it be also promise by knez Alfanas , and Peter Gregoriwich in the emperor name , that if Benet butler or any english man complain , deface , hinder in way of traffic or otherwise go about to discredit the worshipful company , and their do , that therein they shall not be hear , and the doer to be punish , as in such case they shall|be judge to have deserve . certain person grant to be send home into England that serve the company , and be practiser against they in that country . a commission give by we Thomas Randolfe ambassador for the queen majestic in Russia , and Thomas Bannister , etc unto James Bassendine , James woodcock and Richard brown , the which Bassendine , woodcock , and brown we appoint joint together , and aider , the one of they to the other , in a voyage of discovery to be make ( by the grace of God ) by they , for search of the sea , and border of the coast , from the river Pechora , to the eastwards , as hereafter follow anno 1588. the first of August . qprimis , when your bark with all furniture be ready , you shall at the begin of the year ( assoon as you possible may ) make your repair to the eastern part of the river Pechora , where be a island call dolgoieve , and from thence you shall pass to the eastwards alongst by the sea coast of Hugorie , or the main land of 119 A.D. 1588. 