the english bark assault near astracan by the Nagaian Tartars . [ I. 395-j astracan besiege by 70000. Turks and Tartar . the five voyage into Persia make by m. Thomas Banister , and master Geoffrey Ducket , agent for the Moscovie company , begin from England in the year 1568. and continue to the year 1574. follow . write by P. i . from the mouth of m. Lionel Plumtree . Pon the 3. day of July 1568. they embark themselves at yeraslave , be accompany with Lionel Plumtree , and some 12. English man moor , in a bark call the Thomas Bonaventure of the burden of 70. ton , take also along with they of russes to the number of 40. for their use and employment . it fall out in the way , before they come to astracan by 40. mile , that the Nagaian Tartars , be a kind of thievish and cruel people , make a assault upon they with 18. boat of they , each of they be arm , some with sword , some with spear , and some other with bow and arrow , and the whole number of they they discover to be about 300. man . they for their part , although they can have wish a quiet voyage and journey without blow and violence , yet not willing to be spoil with such barbarian as they be , begin to defend themselves against their assault , by mean whereof a very terrible and fierce fight follow and continue hot and sharp for two hour , wherein our man so well play their part with their caliver , that they force the Tartar to flee with the loss of 120. of they , as they be afterward inform by a ruff prisoner , which escape from the nagaians , and come to they to astracan , at which town they arrive the 20. of August . in this town of astracan they be somewhat hinder of their journey , and stay the space of six week 150 by reason of a great army of 70000. Turk and Tartar which come thither upon the instigation of the great Turk , hope either to have surprise it sudden or by continuance of siege to win the same . but in the end by reason that the winter approach , as also , because they have receive news of a great expedition , which the emperor of Russia be in provide for the defence of the say place , they be constrain to raise their siege , 8c to leave the town as they find it . upon their departure our man have opportunity to proceed on their voyage , and use the occasion , they leave astracan , and come to Bilbil towards the end of October : from whence they go to Shavaran , where ( as they lodge in their tent ) they be great molest with strange troop of sholcave or fox , which be so busy with they that they take their meat and victual out of their lodging , and devour to the bare bone in one night a mighty wild boar that be send unto they for a present from the governor of the country . Having stay here some three or four day in provide of carriage and other necessary for their journey , they depart thence and come to shamaky , which be four day journey from the aforesaid Shavaran . in this town of shamaky their whole company spend out the winter , and from thence in April follow they take their journey towards Ardouil a place of great account and much esteem , by reason of the sepulchre of the emperor of Persia , which for the most part lie there bury , and so be grow to be a place of their superstitious devotion . in this town of Ardouil they sojourn the space of 5. or 6. month , find some traffic and sale , but to no purpose , the town be more inhabit and frequent with gentleman and nobleman than merchant . the difference of religion breed great broil in this town while they remain there : for the brother seek the destruction of the brother , and the near kinsman 151 A.D. I569 . rose up one against another , insomuch that one of their company Lionel Plumtree have see in one day sometime 14. slay in a garboil . and he be further desirous to see their manner of fight , or rather somewhat more curious to behold , then mistrustful of their blow , be like to have bear a share in their bloody tragedy , be twice wound with their shot and arrow , although not to the death . at this town the shaw Thamas send a messenger for our man to come to his presence at Casbin , to who Thomas Banister fail not to go , although master Ducket lie very sick at Ardouil , and in such case that they almost despair of his recovery . he be come to the shaugh be receive and entertain of he with great favour and speciali countenance , and have the most part of all his request grant he , this only except , that whereas he entreat a privilege or sufferance to transport and carry through his dominion certain horse into India , the shaugh seem loath to yield thereunto , and yet do not altogether deny it , but refer it to some further time . as for the point of traffic , he can not make that motion or request that be not so soon grant as it be prefer : and the shaugh himself buy there of he many karsy , and make he as good payment as any man can wish , and oftentimes will send his money for the ware before the ware be deliver , that he may be the sure of this honourable intend deal . one thing somewhat strange i think good in this place to remember , that whereas he purpose to send a great sum of money to Mecca in Arabia , for a offering to Mahomet their prophet , he will not send any money or coin of his own , but send to the english merchant to exchange his coin for they , accord to the value of it , yield this reason for the same , that the money of the merchant be get by good mean , and with good conscience , and be therefore worthy to be make for a oblation to their holy prophet , 152 but his own money be rather get by fraud , oppression and unhonest mean , and therefore be not fit to serve for so holy a use . after six month spend in Casbin the say Thomas Banister depart towards the great city of Tauris , where be arrive , he find m. Ducket well recover of his sickness , who he have leave ill at Ardouil . at this city the foresay master Ducket make sale of the english commodity , remain there to that purpose the space of two year and a half . and beside other kind of merchandise of that country , he buy great store of gal which grow in great abundance at a place within one day journey of the aforesaid Tauris . after this Thomas Banister depart from Tauris , and go to shamaky to give order for the transport of those commodity which be buy for England . and have dispatch they away , he go there hence to arrash , a town four day journey with camel from shamaky for the buy of raw silk . but there by reason of the unwholesomeness of the air , and corruption of the water in the hot time of the year , he with Laurence chapman and some other english man unhappy die : which be know of m. Ducket , he immediate come from Tauris to arrash , to take possession of the good , for otherwise by the custom of the country , if there have be no merchant or other friend of he to enter upon that which he leave , all have fall into the shaugh hand , which good notwithstanding can not be recover from the officer which have seize and seal up the same , until m. Ducket have be in person with the shaugh , and have procure his order for the delivery thereof . Lionel Plumtree , in the mean time that m. Ducket be at Casbin in suit for good , upon the persuasion of certain bogharians , make provision for a journey to Cathaia , with carriage and commodity , and have all thing ready , depart secret with a Caravan : but be go forward on his way six day journey , some fifty r53 A.D. 1572. [ i - 39^-1 the death of Thomas Banister and Laurence chapman . 1572. Humphrey Greensell burn at ormus . the english voyage horseman by the procurement of Humphrey Greensell ( who afterward be at ormus in the east Indies , be there cruel burn in the inquisition by the Portugal ) be send after he in post from sultan Erasbec , the shaugh lieutenant , to fetch he back again , not suffer he to pass on so perilous and dangerous a journey for fear of diverse inconvenience that may follow . after this m. Ducket return from Casbin to shamaky again , and immediate make preparation for a journey to Cassan , be about four day journey from shamaky , and carry with he four mule lade with money . in the way of his travel he pass through Persepolis , sometime the royal seat of the emperor of Persia , but now altogether ruin and deface , whereof remain to be see at this day two gate only that be distant one from the other the space of 12. mile , and some few pinnacle in the mountain and conveyance for fresh water . the foresay Cassan be a town that consist altogether of merchandise , and the best trade of all the land be there , be great frequent by the merchant of India . here our man buy great store of all manner of wrought silk , and some spice , and good store of turquoise stone . the town be much to be commend for the civil and good government that be there use . a idle person be not suffired to live among they . the child that be but five year old be set to some labour . no ill rule , disorder or riot by game or otherwise , be there permit . play at dice or card be by the law present death . at this Cashan they remain about the space of ten week , and then come down again to shamaky , and after some time spend in diverse place of the country for buy of raw silk and other commodity , they come at last to Shavaran again , where their ship be in harbour , and then they ship all their good and 154 .. I573‘ embark themselves also , set sail the eight day of May , in the year 1573. intend to fetch astracan . by reason of the variety of the wind and dangerous flat of the caspian sea , they beat it up and down some 20. day . and the 28. day ride at anchor upon the flat , certain Russe cassak , which be outlaw or banish man , have intelligence of their be there , and of the great wealth that they have with they , come to they with diverse boat under the colour of friendship , and enter their ship , but immediate they take their hatchet and slay diverse of the russes that be of the ship upon the hatch : whereupon master Ducket , Lionel Plumtree , William smith , the master , a man of singular valour , and Amos Riall be under the spar-deck , do so well behave themselves , that they scour the hatch , and slay 14. of the cassaks gunner , and hurt and wound about 30. more , be of they all in number 150. at the least , arm with caliver and other weapon fit for so villainous a purpose . m. Ducket notwithstanding and the rest aforesaid english receive diverse wound from the enemy , and be so take by hurt , and withal so oppress with the multitude and Cassa shall force of they , that they be at last constrain to make a agreement with the cassak by render the ship into their hand , have receive first their oath swear by their crucifix , not to do any further harm to their person . thus the ship be take , and all the english grievous hurt , the cassak immediate discharge the ship of they , put they all into the ship boat with two or three persian target full of horse flesh and swine flesh , without further victual or relief : they be in that case , make the best haste they can to get to astracan : and be come to the town , master Ducket make great suit to the captain to have man [ i . 397. ] and boat set out for the rescue and recover of the ship if it be possible : who immediate send out his son with forty boat and five hundred man to 155 pursue the pirate , and by good hap come to the place where they ride at anchor with the ship , but by reason of their foolishness in strike up their drum before they be come near they , the cassaks discover the boat , cut their gable and put out to sea , whereupon the boat not be able to follow they , return again to astracan . after which , 60. boat more be send out to pursue they again the second time : and that second army come to a place where they find many of those cassak and slay they , and find out the place where they have hide certain parcel of their good in the earth in the chest of the ship : all which they recover again for the english merchant , to the value of 5000. livre . of 30. or 40. thousand pound , but all the rest the cassak in the ship have carry away . in the same place they find further diverse of the cassak which the Englishman have slay , bury in the earth , and wrap some in forty or fifty yard of satin and taffeta , and some in turquoise carpet cut and spoil by those villainous pirate , of who afterward as many as can be take by the persian who entire love the english merchant , be put to most cruel torment in all place accord to their desert . but our man be thus spoil of their good , and wound in their body , remain about two month at astracan for their better recovery : and have get some reasonable strength , they then provide boat and go up the river of Volga to Cazan , with such good as they have recover from the cassaks . from Cazan they go towards yeraslave , but in the way the ice intercept they about the begin of October , ' where sudden in the night they be take with a cruel and vehement frost , and therewithal ! the water so congeal , that their boat be crush and cut in sunder with the ice , whereby they sustain both a further danger of life and loss of good : but as much as they can preserve with much ado , they convey over land in sled to Vologda , and from thence send much I56 of it to saint Nicholas to be lade in the ship for England . but master Ducket , Lionel Plumtree and Amos Riall go with some parcel to the Mosko , and there sell certain quantity of it to the emperor , who pity the mighty loss that they have sustain by his own rebellious people and subject , buy himself as much as he like , and pay present money for the same . so that winter be spend out in Mosko , and such ware provide by they as serve for England , they depart to saint Nicholas , and there embark in the month of August : and have endure a very terrible passage in nine week and three day , with some hardness of victual , contrary and furious wind , and other sea accident , they arrive at London in the month of October , one thousand five hundred seventie and four , and so make a end of a unfortunate voyage : which if it have please God to prosper , that all thing have come home as safe as they be careful provide , and painful labour for , it have prove the rich voyage and most profitable return of commodity , that have ever be undertake by english merchant , who , notwithstanding all misfortune , lose nothing of their principali adventure , but only the interest and gain that may have rise by the use of their stock in the mean time . A.D. 1574 - 1574 - T57 [ further 