8 these order if you shall diligent observe , it will be easy for you to make a plat and perfect description of your discovery , and so shall your note be sufficient to answer that which be look for at your hand . but withal you may not forget to note as many thing as you can learn and understand by the report of any people whatsoever they be , so that it appertain any way to our desire . and thus the lord God prosper your voyage . amen . certain letter in verse , write by master George turbervile out of Moscovia , which go as secretary thither with master Tho. Randolph , her majesty ambassador to the emperor 1568 , to certain friend of he in London , describe the manner of the country and people . to his especial friend master Edward Dancie . my Dancie dear , when i recount within my breast , my London friend , and wont mate , and thou above the rest : i feel a thousand fit of deep and deadly woe , to think that i from land to sea , from bliss to bale do go . i leave my native soil , full like a reckless man , and unacquainted of the coast , among the russes run : a people pass rude , to vice vile incline , folk fit to be of Bacchus train , so quaff be their kind . drink be their whole desire , the pot be all their pride , the sober head do once a day stand needful of a guide . if he to banquet bid his friend , he will not shrink on they at dinner to bestow a dozen kind of drink : 124 such liquour as they have , and as the country give , but chief two , one call kva , whereby the mousike live . small ware and waterlike , but somewhat tart in taste , the rest be mead of honey make , wherewith their lip they baste . and if he go unto his neighbour as a guest , he care for title meat , if so his drink be of the best . no wonder though they use such vile and beastly trade , sith with the hatchet and the hand , their chief god be make . their idol have their heart , on God they never call , unless it be ( Nichola bough ) that hang against the wall . the house that have no god , or paint saint within , be not to be resort to , that roof be full of sin . beside their private god , in open place stand their cross unto which they crooche , and bless themselves with hand . devout down they duck , with forehead to the ground , be never more deceit in rag , and greasy garment find . almost the mean man in all the country ride , the woman eke , against our use , her trot horse bestride . ' in sundry colour they both man and woman go , in buskin all , that money have on buskin to bestoe . each woman hanging have a ring within her ear , which all of ancient use , and some of very pride do [ i - 385J wear . their gate be very brave , their countenance wise and sad , and yet they follow fleshly lust , their trade of live bid . it be no shame at all account to defile another bed , they make no care their folly to concile , i25 be not the mean man in all the land but he , to buy her paint colour do allow his wife a fee , wherewith she deck her self , and die her tawny skin , she prank and paint her smoky face , both brow , lip , cheek , and chin . yea those that honest be , if any such there be within the land , do use the like : a man may plain see upon some woman cheek the paint how it lie , in plaster sort , for that too thick her face the harlot die . but such as skilful be , and cunning dame indeed , by daily practice do it well , yea sure they do exceed . they lie their colour so , as he that be full wise , may easy be deceiv’d therein , if he do trust his eye . i not a little muse , what madness make they paint their face , weigh how they keep the stoove by mere constraint . for seidome when , unless on church or marriage day a man shall see the dame abroad , that be of best array . the Russie mean to reap the profit of her pride , and so he mew she to be sure , she lie by no man side . thus much , friend Dancie , i do mean to write to thou , to let thou weet in Russia land , what man and woman be . hereafter i perhaps of other thing will write to thou , and other of my friend , which i shall see with sight : and other stuff beside , which true report shall tell , mean while i end my love line , and bid thou now farewell . 126 if i shall now forget , or not remember thou , thou Spencer might’st a foul rebuke , and shame impute to i . for i to open show do love thou pass well , and thou be he at parture , who i loathe to bid farewell . and as i go thy friend , so i continue still , no better proof thou can then this desire of true good will . i do remember well when needs i shall away , and that the post will licence we , no long time to stay : thou wrong i by the fist , and hold fast my hand , do crave of i to send thou news , and how i like the land . it be a sandy soil , no very fruitful vain , [ i . 38& ] more waste and woody ground there be , then close fit for grain . yet grain there grow be , which they untimely take , and cut or ear the corn be ripe , they mow it on a stack . And lay sheaf by sheaf , their harvest so they dry , they make the great haste , for fear the frost the corn destroy . for in the winter time , so glary be the ground , as neither grass , nor other grain , in pasture may be find . in come the cattle then , the sheep , the colt , the cow , fast by his bed the mowsike then a lodging do allow , who he with fodder feed , and hold as dear as life : and thus they wear the winter with the mowsike and his wife . 127 seven month the winter dure , the glare it be so great , as it be May before ' he turn , his ground to sow his wheat . the body eke that die unburied lie they then , lay up in coffin make of fir , as well the poor man , as those of great state : the cause be light find , for that in winter time , they can come to break the ground . and wood so plenteous be , quite throughout all the land , as rich , and poor , at time of death assure of coffin stand . perhaps thou muse much , how this may stand with reason , that body dead can uncorrupt abide so long a season . take this for certain troth , as soon as heat be go , the force of cold the body bind as hard as any stone , without offence at all to any live thing : and so they lie in perfect state , till next return of spring . their beast be like to we , as far as i can see for shape , and show , but somewhat less of bulk , and bone they be . of waterish taste , the flesh not firm , like english beef , and yet it serv’s they very well , and be a good relief : their sheep be very small , sharp single , handful long , great store of foul on sea and land , the moorish reed among . the greatness of the store do make the price less , beside in all the land they know not how good meat to dress . they use neither broach nor spit , but when the stove they heat , 128 George TURBERVILE’S letter a.d. .. i 5^8 . they put their victual in a pan , and so they bake their meat . no pewter to be have , no dish but of wood , no use of trencher , cup cut out of birche be very good . they use but wooden spoon , which hang in a case each mowsike at his girdle tie , and think it no disgrace . with whitle two or three , the better man the more , the chief russy in the land , with spoon and knife do go . their house be not huge of building , but they say , they plant they in the lofty ground , to shift the snow away , which in the winter time , each where full thick do lie : which make they have the more desire , to set their house hie . no stone work be in use , their roof of rafter be , one link in another fast , their wall be all of tree . of mast both long , and large , with moss put in between , to keep the force of weather out , i never erst have see a gross devise so good , and on the roof they lie the burden bark , to rid the rain , and sudden shower away . in every room a stove , to serve the winter turn , of wood they have sufficient store , as much as they can burn . they have no english glass , of slice of a rock hight Sluda they their window make , that english glass do mock . they cut it very thin , and sow it with a thread in pretty order like to pane , to serve their present need . no other glass , good faith do give a better light : and sure the rock be nothing rich , the cost be very [ i . 3 8 7. i slight , in 129 i the chief place be that , where hang the god by it , the owner of the house himself do never sit , unless his better come , to who he yeald the seat : the stranger bend to the god , the ground with brow must beat . and in that very place which they most sacred deem , the stranger lie : a token that his guest he do esteem . where he be wont to have a bear skin for his bed , and must , in stead of pillow , clap his saddle to his head . in Russia other shift there be not to be have , for where the bed be not good , the boalster be but bad . i muse very much , what make they so to lie , sith in their country down be rife , and feather out of cry : unless it be because the country be so hard , they fear by niceness of a bed their body will be mar , i wish thou oft with we , save that i stand in fear thou will have loathe to have lay thy limb upon a bear , as i and Stafford do , that be my mate in bed : and yet ( we thank the god of heaven ) we both right well have speed . Loe thus i make a end : none other news to thou , but that the country be too cold , the people beastly be . i write not all i know , i touch but here and there , for if i shall , my pen will pinch , and eke offend i fear . who so shall read this verse , conjecture of the rest , and think by reason of our trade , that i do think the best . but if no traffic be , then can i bold pen the hardness of the soil , and eke the manner of the man . 130 they say the lion paw give judgement of the beast : and so may you deem of the great , by read of the least . to Parker . my Parker , paper , pen , and ink be make to write , and idle head , that little do , have leisure to indite : wherefore , respect these , and thy assure love , if i will write no news to thou , thou might’st my pen reprove . and sithence fortune thus have shov’d my ship on shore : and make i seek another realm unseen of i before : the manner of the man i purpose to declare , and other private point beside , which strange and geazon be . the Russie man be round of body , full fac’d , the great part with belly big that overhang the waste , flat head for the most , with face nothing fair , but brown , by reason of the stove , and closeness of the air : it be their common use to shave or else to shear their head , for none in all the land long loll lock do wear , unless perhaps he have his sovereign prince displeas’d , for than he never cut his hair , until he be appeas’d . a certain sign to know who in displeasure be , for every man that view his head , will say , lo this be he . and during all the time he let his lock to grow , dare no man for his life to he a face of friendship show . their garment be not gay , nor handsome to the eye , 131 a cap aloft their head they have , that stand very high , which Colpack they do term . they wear no ruff at all : the best have collar set with pearl , which they Rubasca call . their shirt in Russie long , they work they down before , and on the sleeve with colour silk , two inch good and more . aloft their shirt they wear a garment jacket wise height Onoriadka , and about his burly waste he tie [ i . 388. i his portky , which in stead of better breech be : of linen cloth that garment be , no codpiece be to see . a pair of yarnen stock to keep the cold away , within his boot the Russie wear , the heal they underlie with clout clamp of steel , sharp point at the toe , and over all a Shuba fur , and thus the Russie go . well butn be the shube , accord to his state , some silk , of silver other some : but those of poor rate do wear no shubs at all , but gross gown to sight , that reach down beneath the calf , and that Armacha hight : these be the russy robe . the rich use to ride from place to place , his servant run , and follow by his side . the cassacke bear his felt , to force away the rain : their bridle be not very brave , their saddle be but plain . no bit but snaffle all , of birch their saddle be , much fashion like the scottish seat , broad flake to keep the knee from sweat of the horse , the pannei large far and broad be then we , they use short stirrup for the war : for when the Russie be pursue by cruel foe , he ride away , and sudden betake he to his boe , 132 and bend i but about in saddle as he sit , and therewithal ! amid his race his follow foe he hit . their bow be very short , like turquoise bow outright , of sinew make with birchen bark , in cunning manner dight . small arrow , cruel head , that fall and fork be , which be shoot from out those bow , a cruel way will flee . they seidome use to shoe their horse , unless they ride in post upon the freeze flood , then cause they shall not slide , he set a slender calk , and so he ride his way . the horse of the country go good fourscore verst a day , and all without the spur , once prick they and they skip , but go not forward on their way , the Russie have his whip to rap he on the rib , for though all boot bee , yet shall you not a pair of spur in all the country see . the common game be chess , almost the simple will both give a check and eke a mate , by practice come their skill . again they dice as fast , the poor rogue of all will sit they down in open field , and there to game fall . their dice be very small , in fashion like to those which we do use , he take they up , and over thumb he throw not shake they a whit , they cast suspicious , and yet i deem they void of art that dice most apply . at play when silver lack , go saddle , horse and all , and each thing else worth silver walk , although the price be small . because thou love to play friend Parker other while , 133 i wish thou there the weary day with dice to beguile . but thou be better far at home , i wit it well , and will be loath among such lowt so long a time to dwell . then judge of we thy friend , what kind of life we have , that near the freeze pole to waste our weary day be glad . in such a savage soil , where law do bear no sway , but all be at the king his will , to save or else to slay . and that sans cause , God wot , if so his mind be such . but what mean i with king to deal ? we ought no saint to touch . conceive the rest your self , and deem what life they lead , where lust be law , and subject live continual in dread . and where the best estate have none assurance good of land , of life , nor nothing fall unto the next of blood . but all of custom do unto the prince redound , [ i . 389. ] and all the whole revenue come unto the king his crown . good faith i see thou muse at what i tell thou now , but true it be , no choice , but all at prince pleasure bow . so Tarquin rule Rome as thou remember well , and what his fortune be at last , i know thy self can tell . where will in common weal do bear the only sway , and lust be law , the prince and realm must needs in time decay . the strangeness of the place be such for sundry thing 1 see , as if i will i can write each private point to thou . the cold be rare , the people rude , the prince so full of pride , the realm so store with monk and nun , and priest on every side : t34 the manner be so turquoise like , the man so full of guile , the woman wanton , temple stuff with idol that defile the seat that sacred aught to be , the custom be so quaint , as if i will describe the whole , i fear my pen will feint . in sum , i say i never see a prince that so do reign , nor people so beset with saint , yet all but vile and vain . wild Irish be as civil as the russy in their kind , hard choice which be the best of both , each bloody , rude and blind . if thou be wise , as wise thou be , and will be rule by i , live still at home , and covet not those barbarous coast to see . no good befall a man that seek , and find no better place , no civil custom to be learn , where God bestow no grace . and true ill they do deserve to be belov’d of God , that neither love nor stand in awe of his assure rod : which though be long , yet plague at last the vile and beastly sort of sinful wight , that all in vice do place their chief sport . a dieu friend Parker , if thou listen , to know the russes well , to Sigismundus book repair , who all the truth can tell : for he long erst in message go unto that savage king , send by the pole , and true report in each respect do bring , to he i recommend my self , to ease my pen of pain , and now at last do wish thou well , and bid farewell again . 135 