their arrival at Bilbil the 14 - of August 1568. prince Erasbec . the four voyage into Persia , make by m. Arthur Edward agent , John spark , Laurence chapman , Christopher faucet , and Richard pingle , in the year 1568. declare in this letter write from Casbin in Persia by the foresay Laurence chapman to a worshipful merchant of the company of Russia in London . anno domini 1569. April 28. orshipfull sir , my duty always remembered , and your prosperous health , and good success in all your affair wish , to the glory of God , and your own heart desire , etc may it please you to understand that your agent m. Arthur Edward and we depart from yera - slave in July 1568. and the 14. of August arrive at our port call Bilbil , with your ship the grace of God , and the good in she in good safety , God be thank for it , find there neither the people so ready to aid we for the bring of she in , and unlade of the good , nor yet so obedient to the shaugh privilege , as the worshipful company have be inform . our good bring upon land , we be compel to open and sei as they will set the price , or otherwise it will have be worse for we . be so satisfy to their contentment , we be speedy aid with camel by the prince Erasbec sultan his appointment , to carry our good to Shamaki , to which place we attain the first of September , find it so thorough furnish with all manner of commodity by occasion of our late come , and by such as come before we , that no man will ask to buy any one piece of kerchief of we , and lie then the space of one whole month before your agent Arthur Edwards will disperse we abroad with the good , such as come out of Russia afterwards , have 136 bring their good to that and other place , and spoil those sale we may have make , be send abroad in time convenient , be no little hindrance to the worshipful , as also great grief unto we to see . to conclude , through our daily call upon he , he bend himself for Casbin , take with he the great sum of the good , and two of the worshipful servant , to wit , John spark and my self , to help and procure the better sale for the same : and leave at Shamaki Christopher faucet and Richard pingle with [ i - 39° - ] three hundred and fifty piece of karsy in their hand , suppose to be sell there or in arrash before he shall be able to make his return from Casbin , pingle . which , so far forth as i can understand , lie for the great part unsold . And be upon our way , at a certain town call Ardouil , we chance to barter nine piece of karsy with those merchant for fourscore and four bateman of cinnamon , sell the karsy at one hundred and fifty shawgh the piece . And be at that present not far from Teveris , call the principal place in this country for utter of cloth or karsy , by much intreaty i persuade your agent to send thither to prove what may be do , and receive from he four and fifty piece of karsy , as also his commission for the sale of the same , i proceed on that voyage my self , and one tolmach in company with i , find in that place great store of broad cloth and karsy bring thither , some part by the Turk who be resident there , some by the armenian , who fetch they at Aleppo , and some by the townsman , who travel unto Venice and there buy they , so that no man offer i one penny more than a hundred and fourty shawgh for a kerchief : and have speciali commission and charge from your agent not to stay there above the space of seven day after my arrival there , but to repair to Casbin with all speed , and furthermore , have regard to keep up the price of the worshipful commodity , accord to 137 war against the Portugal at Ormuz . the gpvemour of grozin his merchant . the english voyage their desire , i find mean to barter they away for spice , such as be there to be have , neither in goodness nor yet in price to my content : nevertheless , consider the cold sale which be there , as well for your karsy , as also the hot news , that Ormuz way be shut up by occasion that the Indians do war against they , which be true in deed : and again the desire that the worshipful have to have such commodity buy , i think it necessary to buy they , the price and weight whereof appear at large by my account send to the worshipful , and be , as i think , the whole sum of spice buy at this time . it chance i in that place to meet with the governors merchant of grozin , who be not a little desirous to barge with i for a hundred piece of karsy for his master call Levontie , and offer i so good band for the payment of the money or silk to the merchant contentment upon the delivery of they , as in any place within all this country be to be have : and offer i beside his own letter in the behalf of his master , that no custom shall be demand for the same , and the obtain also at his master hand as large a privilege for the worshipful to travel into all part of his dominion , as the shaugh have give they , and hear good report make of he by the armenian also , and that he be a christian , i be much more the willing to barge with he , and sell he a hundred piece for a hundred and threescore shawgh a piece , to be pay to the merchant in grozin either in money or silk to his contentment , within three day after the delivery of the karsy there , have a band of he make by the metropolitanes own hand , for the performance of the same , which be as sure as any here be to be devise : and upon the same i send my tolmach from i back to Shamaki , with such good as i buy at Teveris , and to the end he may cause the worshipful servant there to see this barge accomplish . at who arrival there , as i do 138 1568. perceive , the captain will not accomplish his barge to take they , but say , he have no need of they : such be the constancy of all man in this country , with whosoever you shall barge . if the ware be buy , and they do mislike it afterward , they will bring it again , and compel you to deliver the money for it the generail again , regard the shawgh letter , which manifest inconstancy tn the contrary , as a straw in the wxnde : by mean and aier of whereof , the worshipful may know whether all be true these part . that have be write of this country people or not . i be inform by all the broker in Teveris , that the way once open to ormuz , from whence come no such store of spice as the worshipful do look for , that here will be put a way in Teveris , some for money , and other some for barter , to the number of three hundred or four hundred piece of karsy , be in color and goodness to the example here send you , the rest of the karsy to make they up a thousand , and broad clothes to the sum of a hundred , be as many as will be put away yearly in this country , so far as yet i can perceive . to break the trade betwixt the venetian and the whole company of the armenian it be not possible , unless the worshipful will find some mean to receive of they yearly to the number of 100 catter or mule lade , and deliver they for the same one three part money , the rest cloth and karsy fit in color meet for this country : the example , as abovesaid , be send unto you . at Amadia six day journey from Teveris , grow abundance of gall , which be bring up yearly by the venetian , and be sell there for two biste the teveris bateman , which as your agent here say , make six pound english weight , but i doubt it will not so be prove . nevertheless it be suppose much good will be do by buy of they : which may at this present have partly be prove , if so be that some can do but half that which have be write . 139 the trade between the venetian and the armenian not easy to be break . A.D. 1568. [ i - 391 • ] Babylon 15. day journey from Casbin . the english voyage touch drug , i find many as well at Teveris , as also in Casbin , but the goodness nothing like to such as be bring into England out of other place : and the price be so high that small gain will be have in buy of they : albeit , if i have be furnish with money , as i may have be , if some will , i will have buy some , to the end the goodness of they may have be see in England . at my come to Casbin i find no manner of sale of any commodity make , but all lie there whole , and news give out ( as your agent say ) that you shaugh will buy all such commodity as he have , and give he silk and spice for the same : but by report the shaugh never take cloth into his treasury all the day of his life , and will not now begin : he whole trade be in raw silk , which he sell always for money to the armenian and Turk , and such other as use to buy it : thus hope of that which be not like to be have , he have drive off the time , not send to any other place : by mean whereof the worshipful good lie unsold to this day to their great hindrance , which i for my part be not a little sorry to see . Babylon be from hence fifteen day journey , whereas by true report be great store of date , and sell for a bisse the batman , the commodity fit for England , and the place so near unto we might easy have be know , if he , who deed and say differ much , have be willing to the same . Cassan also be but seven day journey from hence , and a place by report where most store of spice be at all time to be have , over and above any place in this country : it can not be grant by he to be see and prove at this time : if this be loss to the worshipful , refer it to the want of one which can do that which he speak in word . to travel in this country be not only miserable and uncomfortable for lack of town and village to harbour in when night come , and to refresh man with wholesome victual in time of need , but also such scarcity 140 Edwards , spark and chapman a. d 1568. of water , that sometime in three day journey together , be not to be find any drop fit for man or beast to drink , beside the great danger we stand in for rob by these infidel , who do account it remission of sin to wash their hand in the blood of one of we . better it be therefore in my opinion to continue a beggar in England during life , than to remain a rich merchant seven year in this country , as some shall well find at their come hither . by commandment of the agent also i go to Gilan , his voyage to as well to see what harbour be there for your ship , as gilan-also to understand what commodity be there best sell , and for what quantity . i find the way from hence so dangerous and troublesome , that with my pen i be not able to note it unto you : no man travel from hence thither , but such poor people as need constrain to buy rice for their relief to live upon , and they lie not above twenty batman upon a catter , and it lie no low than the skirt of the saddle , and he escape very hardly that come there with the same . the town of Laighon , which be the chief place in all that land , have i see , and Langro and Rosar also , which be now overrun by the shaugh and his power , and be so spoil , and the people so rob , that not one of they be able to buy one kerchief . the best commodity there to be buy , be raw silk , and be sell in the summer time for 38. shaugh the Laighon batman , which be little above 40. livre . weight , and for ready money : also there be to be have what store of Alom you will , and sell there for one bisse the teveris batman . in these part be many turquoise merchant resident , the malice of which give a outward show , as though they be glad of our come hither , but secret they be our mortali enemy , search by all mean to hinder our sale , because we shall the soon give over our trade thither , which in process of time i hope will grow to better perfection . they wish we to go to Hallape with the 141 rest of our commodity unsold , where they say we shall have good entertainment in spite of the great number of Venetians which be there resident , and the custom but two in the hundred , and our karsy to be sell present , have we never so many , for twelve ducat , which make of this money 165. shaugh : but by such as know the place , market and custom , it be report to we credible to the contrary , and that such karsy as we be , be not sell for above 8. ducat there : the custom thirty in the hundred and moor , that no place in the world be so well furnish with good cloth and karsy , and of so brave colour as that place be , suppose it to be crafty purpose of they , to bring we into trouble , which God defend we from . the price of spice be these , at this present enhance by reason you way be shut to ormus , which when God shall send open , i purpose ( God will ) to see , and at my return to advertise the worshipful what benefit be there to be have in all point , so near as i can learn : Pepper 25. shaugh the teveris batman : clove 50. shaugh , long pepper 25. shaugh , mace large 50. shaugh , ginger 24. shaugh , ready money all , or else look not upon they . and the best sort of raw silk be sell for 60. shaugh the teveris batman . thus for want of further matter to enlarge , i end for this time , beseech God to preserve you in continual ! health . by your obedient servant , Laurence chapman . 142 