vaigat , be forcible drive from thence with a easterly wind and ice , and so she come into the river Dwina , and arrive at Colmogro the 11 of September , 56. if the ice have not be so much that year as it be in the strait , on both side of the island vaigat , they in the say pinnace will that year have discover the part that you be now send to seek : which thing ( if it have please God ) may have be do then : but God have reserve it for some other . which discovery , if it may be make by you , it shall not only prove profitable unto you , but it will also purchase perpetuali fame and renown both to you and our country . and thus not doubt of your willing desire , and forwardness towards the same , we pray God to bless you with a lucky beginning , fortunate success , and happy to end the same . amen . necessary note to be observe , and follow in discovery , as hereafter follow . your bark with all furniture and necessary be in readiness for you to depart to the sea : be that you take your bark at saint Nicholas , or any part of Dwina Reca ) you shall from thence , even as timely in the spring as the ice will permit you , sail , [ i . 384. . ] and make all expedition that may be , unto the mouth of the river Pechora ( as your commission do lead you ) and as you pass by the coast all along ( notwithstanding the plat that show you the description of the say coast , from Dwina unto vaigat ) yet you shall seek by all the mean that you can , to amend the same plat , use as many observation , as you possible can do : and these note follow be to be observe by you principal . 1 first , that you do observe the latitude as often , and in as many place as you may possible do it , note diligent the place where you do so observe the same . 2 also that you do diligent set with your compass , how the land do lie from point to point , all alongst 122 as you go , and to use your judgement how far there may be between each of they . 3 item , that you do always use to draw the proportion and bite of the land , aswell the lie out of the point , and headland , unto the which you shall give some apt name ( at your discretion ) as also the form of the bay , and to make some mark in draw the form , and border of the same , where the high cliff be , and where low land be , whether sandy hill , or whatsoever : omit not to note any thing that may be sensible and apparent to you , which may serve to any purpose . 4 in pass along by any coast , that you keep your lead go often time , and sound at the least once every glass , and often if you think good as occasion do serve , and note diligent the depth with the manner of the ground , and at every time , how far the same sound may be from the next shore to it : and how the next point or headland do bear from you . and in the sea after you set off from your port , you shall orderly at the end of every four glass sound , and if you find ground , note the depth and what ground , but if you can find no ground , you shall also note in what depth you can find no ground . 5 also that you do diligent observe the flow , and ebb in every place , and how the tide do set , which way the flood do come , and how much water it do high in every place , and what force the same tide have to drive a ship in a hour , as near as you can judge it . 6 also that you do seek to observe with the instrument which i deliver you herewith , accord as i teach you at rose island , the true platform , and distance , in as many place as convenient you may , for it serve very apt your purpose . 7 also that you take with you paper and ink , and keep a continual jour nail or remembrance day by day , of all such thing as shall fall out worth the knowledge , not forget or omit to write it , and note it , that it may be show and read at your return . 123 8 these order if you shall diligent observe , it will be easy for you to make a plat and perfect description of your discovery , and so shall your note be sufficient to answer that which be look for at your hand . but withal you may not forget to note as many thing as you can learn and understand by the report of any people whatsoever they be , so that it appertain any way to our desire . and thus the lord God prosper your voyage . amen . certain letter in verse , write by master George turbervile out of Moscovia , which go as secretary thither with master Tho. Randolph , her majesty ambassador to the emperor 1568 , to certain friend of he in London , describe the manner of the country and people . to his especial friend master Edward Dancie . my Dancie dear , when i recount within my breast , my London friend , and wont mate , and thou above the rest : i feel a thousand fit of deep and deadly woe , to think that i from land to sea , from bliss to bale do go . i leave my native soil , full like a reckless man , and unacquainted of the coast , among the russes run : a people pass rude , to vice vile incline , folk fit to be of Bacchus train , so quaff be their kind . drink be their whole desire , the pot be all their pride , the sober head do once a day stand needful of a guide . if he to banquet bid his friend , he will not shrink on they at dinner to bestow a dozen kind of drink : 124 