BURROUGH’S epistle dedicatory oh . c 1598. furthermore when it shall please God that the ship shall return to come to discharge at Hull , which will be have the best the most for your profit for the sale of all such like commodity as come from that place , as for fish , oil , saieoffish . and Salmon chief , he that will seek a better market for the sale then at Hull , he must seek it out of England , for the like be not in England . this be the best way that i can devise , and most for your profit , [ i . 417. ] and if you will , i will also set you down all the commodity that be necessary for such a voyage , and which way also that the Hollander may within two or three year be force to leave off the trade of Cola which may easy be do . for if my ability be to my will , i will use the matter so that they shall either leave off the trade , or else carry light ship with they home again . a dedicatory epistle unto the queen most excellent majestic , write by master William Burrough late comptroller of her highness navy , and annex unto his exact and notable map of Russia , brief contain ( among other matter ) his great travail , observation , and experiment both by sea and land , especial in those northeastern part . to the most high and renown princess Elizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , France and Ireland , etc y mind earnest bend to the knowledge of navigation and hydrography from my youth ( most excellent my dread sovereign ) have eftsoon be move by diligent study to search out the chief point to they belong : and not therewith suffice have also seek by experience in diverse discovery and other voyage and travail to practise the same . i be in the first in 209 oh voyage for discovery of the part of Russia , which begin in anno 1553. ( be then sixteen year of age ) also in the year 1556. in the voyage when the coast of Samoed and Nova Zembla , with the straight of Vaigatz be find out : and in the year 1557 , when the coast of Lappia , and the bay of saint Nicholas be more perfect discover . since which time , by my continual practice in the voyage make yearly to saint Nicholas in Russia , or to the narve , and to some other country also by sea : as likewise in pass from saint Nicholas to Moscow , and from Moscow to narve , and from thence back again to saint Nicholas by land , in the year 1574. and 1575. ( be then agent in those country for the company of english merchant for discovery of new trade ) set down always with great care and diligence , true observation and note of all those country , island , coast of the sea , and other thing requisite to the art of navigation and hydrography : and with like diligence gather exact note and description of the way , river , city , town , etc as i pass by land : i find my self sufficient furnish to give report unto your majesty , and to make description of those north part of the world in form and manner of every league distance that i have pass and see in all those my travel . the place herein describe , which i have not see and try my self , i have set down by the best authority that i can find , and therein may err with the learned Gerardus Mercator , Abraham Ortelius , and the rest : but for the main part which be from rochel in France hither to London , and from hence eastward to narve by sea , and from thence to Moscow and to saint Nicholas by land : also from hence northwards and northeastwards by sea to saint Nicholas , and to the strait of Vaigatz ( first crave humble your highness pardon ) i dare bold affirm ( and that i trust without suspect of arrogancy , since true i may say it ) i have here set it open to the view , with such exactness and truth , and so place every thing aright in 210 burrough’s epistle dedicatory a.d. .... c - I598 ' true latitude and longitude , ( account the longitude from the meridian of London , which i place in 21. degree ) as till this time no man have do the like : neither be any man able by learning only , except he travail , as i have do . for as it may be true say of navigation and hydrography , that no man can be cunning in the one which want convenient knowledge in the other : and as neither of they can be have without the help of astronomic and cosmography , much less without these two ground of all art , arithmetic and geometric : so none of the best learned in those science mathematical ! , without convenient practice at the sea can make just proof of the profit in they : so necessary depend art and reason upon practice and experience . albeit there be diverse both learned and unlearned , little or nothing experience , which in talk of navigation will enter deep and speak much of and against error use therein , when they can reform they . such also have write thereof , pretend singular great knowledge therein , and will so be account of , though in very deed not worthy the name of good and sufficient pilot . to who i think it shall not be amiss in defence of rule bud upon reason , and in practice allow , thus much to say for answer . it be so , that there be rule use in navigation which be not perfect true : among which the strait line in sea-cardes , represent the 32. point of the compass or wind , be not hold to be the least , but note of such talker for principali , to condemn the occupier thereof for ignorant : yet have the famous and learned Gerardus Mercator use they in his universal map . but such as condemn they for false , and speak most [ i . 418. ] against their use can give other that shall serve for navigation to better purpose and effect . experience ( one of the key of knowledge ) have teach i to say it . wherein with my ability , together with some part of my study , i be the rather move ( in this my plot ) to make some trial unto your majesty : for that 211 i perceive that such attempt of new discovery ( whereunto this noble island be most apt situate ) be by your royal maintenance so willing further : beseech your highness so to accept of these my travail , as a pledge of my well willing to my country , and of my loyal service to your majesty , who healthful happy life and reign God continue which be almighty . amen . your majesty most humble subject William Burrough . the queen majesty letter to shaugh Thamas the great Sophi of Persia , send by Arthur Edward , William Turnbull , Matthew Tailbois , and - Peter Gerard appoint agent for the Moscovie company , in their sixth voyage to Persia , begin in the year 1579. to the most noble and invincible emperor of Persia , king of Shirvan , Gilan , grosin , Corassan , and great governor of the Indies . Lizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc to the most noble and invincible emperor of Persia , king of Shirvan , Gilan , grosin , Corassan , and great governor even unto the Indies , send greeting . most noble and in - il 1568 vincible prince , it be now two ten year since , or 394 - thereabouts , wherein ( after the honourable ambassade of the noble man Anthony Jenkinson our well-beloved subject , to your most noble and invincible father perform ) we labour to bring to pass by Thomas Bannister and Geoffrey Ducket merchant , our subject , that throughout all the kingdom subject to his empire , free power may be give to will . Garrard , Thomas Ofley , William Chester knight , Rowland haiward , Lionel Ducket , 212 