governor of all thing dispose of our affair on earth , that each one shall need other . and as for our people and subject of the english nation , in very deed your majesty shall find they make and fashion so pliant to the performance of all duty of humanity , that it can never repent you to have grant they this frank traffic , nor shame we to have obtain it for they at your hand . that therefore it may please your majesty to yield unto they this at our request , most earnest we beseech you . and we ( as it well beseem a prince ) if ever hereafter we may , will show our self not to be unmindful of so great a benefit . we wish your majesty well and prosperous to fare . give at our palace of Westminster the io . day of June , in the year of our lord 1579. and of our reign the 21. [ I. 419. ] advertisement and report of the 6. voyage into the part of Persia and Media , for the company of english merchant for the discovery of new trade , in the year 1579. 1580. and 1581. gather out of sundry letter write by Christopher Burrough , servant to the say company , and send to his uncle master William Burrough . first it be to be understand , that the ship for the voyage to saint Nicholas in Russia , in which the factor and merchandise for the persian voyage be transport , depart from Gravesend the 19 of June , 1579. which arrive at saint Nicholas in Russia the 22. of July , where the factor and merchant land , and the merchandise be discharge and lade into doshnike , that be , bark of the country , to be carry from thence up by river unto Vologda . and the 25. day of you say Julie , the doshnike depart from rose island by S. Nicholas up the river Dwina , Peremene , that be to say , in post , by continual sail , row , set with pole , or draw of man , which come to 214 colmogro the 27. day , and depart thence the 29. of Julie up the say river Dwyna , and come to Ustyoug ( which be at the head of the river Dwina , and mouth of Sughano ) the 9 of August , where they stay but a small time , provide some victual , and shift certain of their cassock or barkman , and so depart thence the same day up the river Sughano , and come to Totma ( which be count somewhat more than half the way from Ustioug ) the 15. day , where they shift some of their cassak , and depart thence the same day , and come to the city Vologda the 19 of August , where they land their good , and stay at that place till the 30. of the same . have provide at Vologda , Telegas , or wagon , whereupon they jade their good , they depart thence with the same by land towards yeraslave the say 30. of August at eight of the clock yeraslave . in the morning , and come to the east side of the river Volga over against yeraslave , with 25. Telegas lade with the say good the seven of September at five of the clock afternoon . then the three stroog or bark provide to transport the say good to astracan ( where they shall meet the ship that shall carry the same from thence into Persia ) come over from yeraslave unto the same side of the river Volga , and there take in the say good . and have prepare the say bark ready with all necessary furniture they depart with they from yeraslave down the river of Volga on the 14 day of September at nine of the clock in the morning , and they arrive at Niznovogrod the 17 day at three of the clock afternoon , where they show the emperor letter to pass free without pay any custom , and tarry there about three hour to provide necessary , and then depart , arrive at Cazan ( or near the same town ) on the 22. of September at five of the clock afternoon , where ( through contrary wind , and for provide new cassak in the place of some that there go from they ) they remain till the 26. day , at what time they depart thence about two of the clock after 215 noon , and arrive at Tetushagorod , which be on the Crim side of Volga , and in latitude 55. degree 22. minute , the 28. day at ten in the forenoon , where they anchor , and remain about 3. hour , and depart thence come to oveak , which be on the crims side ( on the western side of Volga ) the five of October about five of the clock in the morning . this place be account half the way between Cazan and astracan : great store of and here there grow great store of Licoris : the soil Licoris . js very fru . itfu.ll : they find there apple tree , and cherry tree . the latitude of oveak be 51. degree 30. minute . at this place have be a very fair stone castle call by the name oveak , and adjoin to the same be a town call by you russes , Sodom : this town and part of the castle ( by report of the russes ) be swallow into the earth by the justice of God , for the wickedness of the people that inhabit the same . there remain at this day to be see a part of the ruin of the castle , and certain tomb , wherein as it seem have be lay noble personage : for upon a tomb stone may be perceive the form of a horse and a man sit on it with a bow in his hand , and arrow gird to his side : there be a piece of a scutcheon also upon one of the stone , which have character grave on it , whereof some part have be consume with the weather , and the rest leave unperfect : but by the form of they that remain , we judge they to be character of Armenia : and other character be grave also upon another tomb stone . now they depart from oveak the say five of October at five of the clock after noon , Peravolok . and come to Peravolok the 10. day about eleven or twelve of the clock that night , make no abode at that place , but pass alongst by it . this word Peravolok in the ruff tongue do signify a narrow straight or neck of land between two water , and it be so call by they , because from the river Volga , at that place , to the river don or Tanais , be count thirty verst , or as much as a man may well travel on foot 216 in one day . and seven verst beneath , upon a island call Tsaritsna the emperor of Russia have fifty gunner all the summer time to keep watch , call by the tartar name Carawool . between this place and astracan be five other carawool or watch . i the first be name Kameni Carawool , and be distant [ i . 420. ] from Peravolok 120 , verst . 2 the second name Stupino Carowool , distant from the first 50. verst . 3 the three call Polooy Carowool , be 120. verst distant from the second . 4 the four name keezeyur Carawool , be 50. verst distant from the three . 5 the five name Ichkebre , be 30. verse distant from the four , and Ichkebre to astracan be 30. verst . the 16. of October they arrive at astracan , with astracan . their three stroog in safety about nine of the clock in the morning , where they find the ship provide for the Persia voyage in good order and readiness . the 17. day the four principal factor of the company , Arthur Edwards , William Turnbull , Matthew Talbois , and Peter Pete^ gar Garrard , be invite to dine with the chief diake or rar ' secretary of astracan ( Vasili Pheodorovich Shelepin ) who declare then unto they the trouble that be in Media and Persia : and how the Turk with help of the crim have conquer , and do possess the great part of Media : also he lay before they that winter be at hand , and if they shall put out with their ship to the sea , they shall be constrain to take what hazard may happen they by winter in the part of Media , or else where , for back again to that place there be no hope for they to return : whereupon the say factor determine to stay there all winter to learn further of the state of those country . the 19 of November the wind be northerly , at a stra - there be a great frost , and much ice in the river : the next day be the 20. of November the ice stand in ' the river , and so continue until Easter day . 217 the 22. of December depart this life John Moore the gunner of the ship . Thursday the 7. of January between 8. and 9 of the clock at night there appear a cross proceed from the moon , with two gall at the south and north end thereof . the 6. of January be twelve day ( which they call Chreshenia ) the russes of astracan brake a hole in the ice upon the river Volga , and hallow the water with great solemnity accord to the manner of their country , at which time all the soldier of the town shoot off their small piece upon the ice , and likewise to gratify the captain of the castle be a duke , who name be Pheodor Michalovich Troiocouria , who stand hard by the ship , behold they as they be on the river , be shoot off all the ordinance of our ship be 15 piece , viz. 2. falcon , 2. falconet , 4. fowler , 4. fowler chamber , and 3. other small piece make for the stroog to shoot hailstone , and afterward the great ordinance of the castle be shoot off . on the 31. of January there happen a great eclipse of the moon , which begin about 12. of the clock at night , and continue before she be clear a hour and a half by estimation , which end the first of February about half a hour past one in the morning : she be whole darken by the space of half a hour . the 26. of February the town of nagay Tartar , call the yourt , which be within 3. quarter of a mile of the castle of astracan , by casualty be set on fire about 10. of the clock at night , and continue burn till midnight , whereby one half of it be burn , and much cattle destroy . the nagaye that inhabit that town , be the emperor of Russia his vassal : it be suppose there be of they inhabit that place of man , woman , and child , the number of seven thousand . that night the alarm be make in the castle and town of astracan . the captain thereof have all his soldier in very good order and readiness , be 218 1580. of they in number two thousand gunner and cassak , that be to say , a thousand gunner , which be account mere soldier , and be not put to any other service then the use of their piece , watch , etc as soldier which always keep the castle , and the cassak also use their piece , do keep the town , and be common set to all kind of labour . the 7. of march 1580. the nagaye and crim come before astracan to the number of one thousand four hundred horseman , which encamp round about , but the near of they be two ruff verst and a half off from the castle and town : some of they lie on the crims side of Volga , and some on the nagay side , but none of they come upon the island that astracan astracan situ-standeth on . it be say that two of the prince of u ? m an the crim his son be among they . they send a ' a messenger on the eight day to the captain of astracan , to signify that they will come and visit he : who answer , he be ready to receive they : and take a great shot or bullet in his hand , will the messenger to tell they that they shall not want of that gear , so long as it will last . the nine day news be bring that the crim determine to assault the town or castle , and be make of faggot of reed , to bring with they for that purpose . the ten day two russes that be captive , and two of the Tartar bondman run away from the nagaye , and come into astracan . the same day word be bring to the duke of two nagaye which be see at gostine house , suppose to be spy , but be go again from thence before they be suspect . this gostine house be a place a [ i . 421. ] little without the town where the tisik ( or persian merchant ) do usual remain with their merchandise . the 11. day the say nagaye , and one more with they , come again to that house early in the morning , where they be take by the russes , and bring to the captain of the castle , and be examine , confess that their come be only to seek two of their 219 the variation of the comp as in astracan be 13. deg . 40 , minute . May . the english voyage bondman that be run from they : whereupon their bondman be deliver to they : which favour the say captain common show if they be not russy , and they be set at liberty . the 13. day they break up their camp , and march to the northward into the country of Nagay . the 17. of April the variation ot the compass observe in astracan be 13. deg . 40. min. from north to west . this spring there come news to astracan hat the queen of Persia ( the king be blind ) have be with a great army against the turk that be leave to possess Media , and have give they a great overthrow : yet notwithstanding derbent , and the great part of Media be still possess and keep by the turk . the factor of the company consult upon their affair , determine to leave at astracan the one half of their good with Arthur Edward , and with the other half the other three factor will proceed in the ship on their purpose voyage to the coast of Media , to see what may be do there : where , if they can not find safe traffic , they determine to proceed to the coast of Gilan , which be a province near the caspian sea border upon Persia : and thereupon appoint the say good to be lade aboard the ship , and take into she also some merchandise of tisik or persian merchant . the 29. of April Amos Riall , and Anthony marsh , the company servant be send from astracan by the say factor , up the river Volga to yeraslave , with letter of advice to be send for England , and have order for stay the good in Russia that shall come that year out of England for maintain the trade purpose for Persia , until further trial be make what may be do in those part . the first day of may in the morning , have the ship in readiness to depart , the factor invite the duke Pheodor Micalovich proiocoorow , and the principali secretary Vasili Pheodorovich Shelepin , with other of 220 the chief about the duke to a banquet aboard the ship , where they be entertain to their good like , and at their departure be shoot off all the ordinance of the ship , and about nine of the clock at night the same day they weigh anchor , and depart with their ship from astracan , and be but little wind , tow she with the boat about three verst , and then anchor , have with they a pavo or light to help they at the flat . the second day at four of the clock in you morning they weigh and ply down the river Volga towards the caspian sea . the seven of May in the morning they pass by a tree that stand on the left hand of the river as they go down , which be call Mahomet agatch , or Mahomet tree , and about three verst further , that be to say , to the southward of the say tree be a place call Uchoog , that be to say , the ruff wear : uchwg . ( but Ochoog be the name of a wear in the tartar tongue ) where be certain cottage , and the emperor have lie at that place certain gunner to guard his fisherman that keep the wear . This Uchoog be count from astracan 60. verst : they proceed down the say river without stay at the Uchoog . the nine shall water . and ten day they meet with shall water , and be force to lighten their ship by the pavo : the 11. day they send back to the Uchoog for a other pavo : this day by mischance the ship be bilge on the grapnell of the pavo , whereby the company have sustain great loss , if the chief part of their good have not be lay into the pavo : for notwithstanding their pump with 3. pump , heave out water with bucket , and all the best shift they can make , the ship be half full of water ere the leak can be find and stop . the 12. day the pavo come to they from the Uchoog , whereby they light the ship of all the good . the 13. day in the morning there come to they a small boat , send by the captain of astracan , to learn whether the ship be at sea clear of the flat . the 15. Flats . day by great industry and travel they get their ship 221 45 degree 20. minute . the first observation in the caspian sea . [ I. 422. ] brackish water far re within the sea . the english voyage clear off the shoal and flat , wherewith they have be trouble from the nine day until then : they be force to pass their ship in three foot water or less . the 16. day they come to the chetera Bougori , or island of four hillock , which be count forty verst from Uchoog , and be the further land towards the sea . the 17. day they bear off into the sea , and be about twelve verst from the four hillock , ride in five foot and a half water about eleven of the clock in the forenoon , they take their good out of the pavose into the ship , and fill their ship with all thing necessary . the 18. day in the morning about seven of the clock , the pavose be discharge depart away towards astracan , the wind then at southeast , they ride still with the ship , and observe the elevation of the pole at that place , find it to be 45. degree 20. minute . the 19 day , the wind southeast , they ride still . the 20. day the wind at northwest they set sail about one of the clock in the morning , and steere thence south by west , and southsouthwest about 3. league , and then anchor in 6. foot and a half water , about nine of you clock before noon , at which time it fall calm : the elevation of the pole at that place 45. degree 13. minute . the 21. have the wind at northwest , they set sail , and steere thence south by west , and south until eleven of the clock , and have then nine foot water : and at noon they observe the latitude , and find it to be 44. degree 47 minute : then have they three fathom and a half water , be clear of the flat . it be count from the four hillock to the sea about fifty verst . from the say noontide until four of the clock they sail south by east five league and a half : then have they five fathom and a half and brackish water : from that till twelve at night they sail south by east half a league , east ten league : then have they eleven fathom , and the water salt . from that till the 22. day three of the clock in the morning they sail three and fifty league , then have they sixteen 222 fathom water : from thence they sail until noon south and by west seven league and a half , the latitude then observe 43. degree 15. minute , the depth then 43 - degree eight and twenty fathom , and shallow ground : from ’5-that until eight of the clock at night , they sail south by east five league and a half , then have they three and forty fathom shallow ground . from thence till the 23. four a clock in the morning , they sail Southsouthwest three league and a half : then can they get no ground in two and fifty fathom deep . from thence until noon they sail south nine league , than the latitude observe be 42. degree 20. minute . from that till the 24. day at noon they sail south by west seventeen league and a half , than the latitude observe be 41. degree 32. minute . from noon till seven of 41 - degree the clock at night , they sail Southsouth west four 32 - minuts-league , then have they perfect sight of high land or hill , which be almost cover with snow , and the mid of they be west from the ship , be then about twelve league from the near land : they sound but can find no ground in two hundred fathom . from thence they sail Southwest until midnight : about three league from thence till the 25. day four of the clock in the morning , they sail west three league , be then little wind , and near the land , they take in their sail , and lay hull : at noon the latitude observe , be 40. degree 54. minute : they sound but can get 4° degree no ground in two hundred fathom . at four of the 54 - minute . clock in the afternoon , the wind northwest , they set their sail , and from thence till the 26. day at noon they sail east southeast four league . from thence they sail till eight of the clock at night Southwest three league , the wind then at north . from thence they sail until the 27. day two of the clock in the morning , Westsouthwest eight league , the wind blow at north very much . from the say two till four of the clock they sail south by west one league : then be day light , they see the land plain , which be 223 not past three league from they , be very high ragged land . there be certain rock that lie far off into the sea , about five league from the same land , ( which be call barmake Tash ) they sail between those rock and the land , and about five of the clock they pass bilbili . by the port Bilbili , where they shall have put in but can not : and bear long the shore about two of the clock afternoon , they come to Bildih in the country of Media or Shervan , against which place they anchor in 9 foot water . present after they be at anchor , there come aboard of they a boat , wherein be seven or eight person , two turk , the rest Persians , the Turk vassal , which bid they welcome , and seem to be glad of their arrival , who tell the factor that the Turk have conquer all Media , or the country Shervan , and how that the turk bassa remain in Derbent with a garrison of Turk , and that Shamaky be whole spoil , and have few or no inhabitant leave in it . the factor then be desirous to come to the speech of the bassa , send one of the tisike ( or merchant that go over with they from astracan , passenger ) and one of the company servant Robert Bachu port . Golding , with those soldier , to the captain of Bachu , which place stand hard by the sea , to certify he of their arrival , and what commodity they have bring , and to desire friendship to have quiet and safe traffic for the same . Bachu be from Bildih , the place where they ride , about a day journey , on foot easy to be travel , which may be six league the next way over land : it be a wall town , and strong fortify . when the say messenger come to the captain of Bachu , the say captain give he very friendly entertainment , and after he understand what they be that be come in the ship , and what they have bring , he seem to rejoice much thereat : who give the say Golding licence to depart back the next day , be the eight and twenty day : and promise that he will himself come to the ship the next day follow : with which 224 answer the say Golding return and come to the ship the say eight and twenty day about nine of the clock at night . the nine and twenty day in the morning the factor cause a tent to be set up at shore near the ship , against the come of the say captain : who come thither about three of the clock after noon , and bring about thirty soldier , that attend on he , in shirt of male , and some of they have gauntlet of silver , other of steel , and very fair . the factor meet he at their tent , and after very friendly salutation pass between they , they give he for a present a garment of cloth [ i . 423. ] of velvet , and another of scarlet , who accept the same grateful . after they have talk together by their interpreter , as well of the state of the voyage and cause of their come thither , as also learned of the say captain the state of that country , the factor make request unto he , that he will help they to the speech of the bassa , who answer that their demand be reasonable , and that he will willing show they therein what pleasure he can , and say , because the way to Derbent , where the bassa remain , be dangerous , he will send thither , and certify he of their arrival , and what commodity they have bring , and such commodity as they will desire to exchange or barter the same for he will procure the say bassa to provide for they : and therefore will the factor to consult together , and certify he what they most desire , and what quantity they will have provide : so while the factor be consult together thereupon , the captain talk with a tisike merchant that come over in the ship with they from astracan , which tisike , among other matter in talk , certify the captain , that the night before , the factor and their company be determine to have return back again to astracan , and that they be about to weigh their anchor , which Thomas hud-in deed be true , but the master of the bark Thomas son tfLlme-Hudson of Limehouse persuade they that the wind English be not good for they to depart , etc when the factor bark . in 225 p come again to talk with the captain , they desire to go to the bassa , and that he will safe conduct they thither : he grant their request willing , desire they to go with he to a village hard by , and there to abide with he that night , and the next day they shall go to Bachu , and from thence proceed on their journey to Derbent . they be unwilling to go that night with he , because their provision for the way be not in readiness , but request that they may stay till the morning . thereupon the captain say it be report unto he , that they mean the night before to have go away : and if it shall so happen , he be in great danger of loose his head : for which cause he request to have some one for a pledge : wherefore m. Garrard one of the factor offer himself to go , who , because he can not speak the ruff tongue , take with he Christopher Burrough , and a ruff interpretor : that night they ride from the seaside , to a village about ten mile off , where at supper time the captain have much talk with m. Garrard of our country , demand where about it do lie , what country be near unto it , and with who we have traffic , for by the ruff name of our country he can not conjecture who we shall be : but when by the situation he perceive we be Englishman , he demand if our prince be a maiden queen : which when he be certify of , then ( quoth he ) your land be call enghilterra , be it not ? answer be make , it be so : whereof he be very glad when he know the certainty . he make very much of they , place m. Garrard next to himself , and Christopher Burrough , with the Russie interpretor for the turquoise tongue hard by . there be a Gillan merchant with he at that present , of who he seem to make great account : he he place next to himself on the other side , and his gentleman sit round about he talk together . their sit be upon the heal , or cross legged . supper be bring in , he request they to eat . 226 after their pottage ( which be make of rice ) be do , and likewise their boil meat , there come in platter of rice sodden thick , and honey mingle withal : after all which , come a sheep rest whole , which be bring in a trey , and set before the captain : he call one of his servitor , who cut it in piece , and lay thereof upon diverse platter , set the same before the captain : then the captain give to m. Garrard and his company one platter , and to his gentleman another , and to they which can not well reach he cast meat from the platter which be before he . diverse question he have with m. Garrard and Christopher Burrough at supper time , about their diet , inquire whether they eat fish or flesh voluntary , or by order . their drink in those part be nothing but water . after supper ( walk in the garden ) the captain demand of m. Garrard , whether the use be in England to lie in the house or in the garden , and which he have best like of : he answer , where it please he , but their use be to lie in house : whereupon the captain cause bed to be send into the house for they , and cause his kinsman to attend on they in the night , if they chance to want any thing : he himself with his gentleman and soldier lie in the garden . in the morning very early he send horse for the rest of the company which shall go to Derbent , send by they that go ten sheep for the ship . in that village there be a stove , into which the captain go in the morning , request m. Garrard to go also to the same to wash himself , which he do . Shortly after their come out of the stove , while they be at breakfast , m. Turnbull , m. tailboye , and Thomas Hudson the m. of the ship , come thither , and when they have all break their fast , they go to Bachu : but Christopher Burrough return to the ship , for that he have hurt his leg , and can not well endure that travel . and from Bachu they proceed towards Derbent , as it be by the captain 227 then receive of the english into Derbent . the english voyage promise , be accompany on their way for their safe conduct , with a gentleman , and certain soldier , which have the captain of Bachu his letter to the bassa of Derbent , very friendly write in their behalf . in their journey to Derbent they forsake the ordinary way , be very dangerous , and travel through wood till they come almost to the town of Derbent : and then the gentleman ride before with the captain letter to the bassa , to certify he of the english merchant come , who receive the letter , and understand the matter , be very glad of the news , and send forth to receive they certain soldier gunner , who meet they about two mile out of the town , salute they with great reverence , and afterwards ride before they : then again meet they other soldier , somewhat near the castle , which likewise have do their salutation ride before they , and then come forth noble man , captain , and gentleman , to receive they into the castle and town . as they enter the castle , there be a shot of twenty piece of great ordinance , and the bassa send m. Turnbull a very fair horse with furniture to mount on , esteem to be worth a hundred mark , and so they be convey to his presence : who after he have talk with they , send for a coat of cloth of gold , and cause it to be put on m. turnbulles back , and then will they all to depart , and take their ease , for that they be weary of their journey , and on the morrow he will talk further with they . the next day when you factor come again to the presence of the bassa , accord to his appointment , they request he that he will grant they his privilege , whereby they may traffic safe in any part and place of his country , offer he , that if it please his majesty to have any of the commodity that they have bring , and to write his mind thereof to the captain of Bachu , it shall be deliver he accord . the bashaes answer be , that he will willing give they his privilege : yet for that he regard their safety , have 228 come so far , and know the state of his country to be troublesome , he will have they to bring their commodity thither , and there to make sale of it , promise he will provide such commodity as they need , and that he will be a defence unto they , so that they shall not be injure by any : whereupon the factor send Thomas Hudson back for you ship to bring she to Derbent , and the bassa send a gentleman with he to the captain of Bachu , to certify he what be determine , which message be do , the captain of Bachu , and the Bashaes messenger , accompany with a dozen soldier , go from Bachu with Thomas Hudson , 8c come to the ship at Bildih the 11 day of June . after the captain and his man have be aboard and see the ship , they all depart present , but the gentleman , messenger from you bassa , with three other turk , remain aboard , and continue in the ship till she come to Derbent : the latitude of Bildih by diverse the latitude observation be 40. degree 2 5. minute : the variation of^'^h 40. of the compass 10. degree 40. minute from north to rfe variation west . after the return of Thomas Hudson back the compass to Bildih , they be constrain to remain there 10. deg . 40. with the ship through contrary wind until the 16. mtnday of June four of the clock in the morning , at which time they weigh anchor , set sail and depart thence towards Derbent , and arrive at anchor against derbent east and by south from the say castle in four fathom and a half water , the 22. day of June at ten of the clock in the morning : than they take up their ordinance , which before they have stow in hold for ease the ship in her roll . in the afternoon the bassa come down to the waterside against the ship , and have the say ordinance place , and charge , it be all shot off to gratify he : and present after his departure back , he permit the factor to come aboard the ship . the 29. day their good be unlade and carry to the bashaes garden , where he make choice of such thing as he like , take 229 for custom of every five and twenty karsy , or whatsoever , one , or after the rate of four for the hundred . the factor after his choice make , determine to send a part of the rest of the good to Bachu , for the speedy make sale thereof , for which cause they obtain the bashaes letter to the captain of Bachu , write very favourable in their behoof : and thereupon be lade and send in a small boat of that country in merchandise , to the value ( very near ) of one thousand pound sterling : videlicet , one hundred piece of karsy , seven broad clothes , two barrel of cochenelio , two barrel of tin , four barrel of shaffe . there go with the same of the company servant William winckle , Robert Golding , and Richard relfe , with two russy , whereof one be a interpretor , beside four barkman . they depart from Derbent with the say bark the 19 of July , and arrive at Bildih the 2 5. day : their passage and carriage of their good to Bachu be chargeable , although their sale when they come thither be small : they have great friendship show they of the captain of Bachu , as well for the bashaes letter , as also for the factor sake , who have deal friendly with he , as before be declare . Robert Golding desirous to understand what may be do at shamaky , which be a day journey from Bachu , go thither , from whence return , he be set on by thief , and be shoot into the knee with a arrow , who have very hardly escape with his life and good , but that by good hap he kill one of the thief horse with his caliver , and shoot a Turk through both cheek with a dag . on the sixth day of August the factor be advertise at Derbent that their ship be [ i . 425. ] so rot and weak , that it be doubtful she will not carry they back to astracan , do thereupon agree and barge at that place with a armenian , who name be Jacob , for a bark call a buss , be of burden about 35. ton , which come that year from astracan , Zere island , and be at that instant ride at a island call Zere , about three or four league beyond or to the eastwardes 230 of Bildih , which bark for their moor safety , they mean to have with they in their return to astracan , and thereupon write unto Wincoll and the rest at Bachu , that they shall receive the same buss , and lade in she their good at Bildih to be return to Derbent , and to discharge their first boat , which be observe by they accord . when all their good be lade aboard the say buss at Bildih , and be ready to have depart thence for Derbent , there arise a great storm with the wind out of the sea , by force whereof the cable and halser be break , and their vessel put a shore , and break to piece against the rock : every of they that be in she save their life , and part of the good . but there be a carobia or chest , wherein be dollar , and gold , which they have receive for the commodity of the company , which they sell at Bachu , which at the take out of the buss , fall by the bark side into the water among the rock , and so iwa' lose . the pack of cloth which they can not well take out of the buss be also lose , other thihg that be more profitable they save . the 18. of August , the factor receive from the bassa 500 batmans of raw silk , parcel of the bargain make with he , who bid they come the next day for the rest of the bargain . the 19 day the factor go to the bassa accord to his appointment , but that day they can not speak with he , but it be deliver they as from he , that they shall look and consider whether any thing be due unto he or not , which grieve the factor : and thereupon m. Turnbull answer , that their head and all that they have be at the bashaes pleasure : but than it be answer there be no such matter in it : but that they shall cast up their reckon , to see how it stand between they . the 20. day they cast up their reckon . the 21. they go to have speak with the bassa , but be deny audience . the 22. day they hear news by a buss that come 231 the english suffer shipwreck . Arthur Edwards die at astracan . from astracan , that Arthur Edwards ( who the factor leave at astracan with the moiety of the good ) be dead , who depart this life then of the 23. day the factor receive more from the bassa 500 batmans of silk . the 4. of September news be bring to Derbent , that Golding come from Shamaky be set on by thief ( turk ) and have hurt one of they . the 5. Tobias Atkins the gunner boy die of the flux , who be bury the 6. day 2. mile to the southward of the castle of Derbent , where the armenian Christians do usual bury their dead . about the 20. of September news come to Derbent , that the buss which they have buy of Jacob the armenian as before , be cast away at Bildih , but they receive no certain news in write from any of our people . the 26. of September be lade aboard the ship 40. bale of silk . from the 26. till the 2. of October , they take into the ship , bread , water , and other necessary provision for their sea store : the say 2. day of October , the factor be command upon the sudden to avoid their house , and get they with their provision out of the town : whereupon they be constrain to remove and carry their thing to the sea side against the ship , and remain there all the night . the cause of this sudden avoid they out of the town ( as afterward they perceive ) be for that the bassa have receive news of a supply with treasure that the Turk have send , which be then near at hand come towards he . the 3. day of October all thing be bring from the shore aboard the ship : and that day the factor go to the bassa to take their leave of he , unto who they recommend those the company servant , etc which they have send to Bachu , make account to leave they behind in the country : who cause their name to be write , and promise they shall want nothing , nor be injury of any . after this leave take , 232 the factor go aboard purpose present to have set sail and depart towards astracan , the wind serve well for that purpose at south southeast : and as they be ready to set sail , there come against the ship a man , who weve : whereupon the boat be send a shore to he , who be a armenian send from William wincoil , with his write table , wherein the say wincoil have write brief , the mishap of the loss of the buss , and that they be come from Bildih towards Derbent , they , and such thing as they save with a small boat , force to put a shore in a place by the sea side call the armenian village : whereupon the drmen-factor cause the ship to stay , hope that with the tan southerly wind that then blow , they will come from the place they be at to the ship , but if they can not come with that wind , they mean to sail with the ship , with the next wind that will serve they , against the place where they be , and take they in , if they can : which stay and loss of those southerly [ i . 426. ] wind , be a cause of great trouble , that they afterward sustain through ice , etc enter the Volga as shall declare . the 4. day the wind south southeast , the ship ride still : this day Christopher Burrow be send to shore to derbent to provide some necessary for the voyage , and with he a tisike or two , which shall go in the ship passenger to astracan . And be on shore he see there the come in of the Turk treasure , be accompany with 200. soldier , and one hundred pioner , beside captain and gentleman : the bassa with his captain and soldier very gallant apparel and furnish go out from Derbent about three or four mile , to meet the say treasure , and receive the same with great joy and triumph . treasure the Turk his be the chief thing they need , for not long before the soldier be ready to break into the court against ’ the bassa for their pay : there be a great mutiny among they , because he have long differ and not 233 pay they their due . the treasure come in seven wagon , and with it be bring ten piece of brass . in the part of Media where they be , there be no commodity to be buy of any value , but raw silk , neither be that to be have but at the bashaes hand : who short after their come thither tax the country for that commodity . his deal with our merchant as it be not with equity in all point accord to his bargain , so it be not extreme ill . of the commodity they carry he take the chief part , for which he give but a small price in respect of the value it be there worth , and because he have provide such quantity of commodity for they , which otherwise they can not have have , the country be so troublesome , and travail by land so dangerous , he use they at his pleasure . the news that be report unto they at astracan touch the war between the Turk and persian differ little from the truth : for the Turk army with aid of the crim , ( be in number by you information of two Spaniard that serve in those war , about 200000 ) invade and conquer the country of Media in anno 1577. when the great Turk underOsman bassa , stand of the conquest , he appoint Osman bassa ( the say bassa , and now captain of Derbent ) governor of the whole country , who settle himself in shamaky the chief city of Media , and principali place of traffic , unto who be send from the great Turk , in signification of the grateful acceptation of his service and the great conquest , a sword of great value . after the say bassa have bring the country in order to his like , and place garrison where he think convenient , the army be dissolve and send back : when the persian understand that the Turk army be dissolve and return , they gather a power together , and with the queen of their country as chief , they enter the country of Media , and overrun the same with fire and sword , destroy 234 whatsoever they find , as well people , cattle , as whatsoever else , that may be commodious to the Turk . and after they have so overrun the country , they come to shamaky , where the say bassa lieutenant generail of the great Turk be settle , and besiege it : whereupon the bassa see he can not long endure to withstand they , flee thence to Derbent where he now remain . Derbent be a strong castle which be build by Alexander the great , the situation whereof be such , that the persian be without ordinance , be not able to win it but by famine . when the Turk be flee from Shamaky , the persian enter the same and spoil it , leave therein neither live creature nor any commodity , and so return back into Persia , and settle themselves about Teveris , where there grow some question among they for the kingdom . afterwards the persian have intelligence of a army from the Turk come into Media , gather themselves together in a great army and encounter the say Turk , set upon they on the sudden , and vanquish they , put they all to the sword . this overthrow of the Turk grieve the bassa of Derbent , and make he to have the more care for his own safety . Moreover , news be bring unto he that the kisel Bashaes , ( that be to say the noble and gentleman of Persia ) be mind to set upon he , and that near unto Bachu there lay a army ready to besiege it . whereupon the bassa oftentimes will ride about the castle of Derbent view the same , and the spring that do come to it , and where he see any cause of reformation , it be amend . the latitude of Derbent ( by diverse observation exact there make ) be 41. deg 52. min. the variation of the compass at that place about 11. degree from north to west . from Derbent to Bildih by land 46. league . from Derbent to shamaky by land 45. league . from shamaky to Bachu about 10. league , which may be 30. 235 Derbent build by Alexander the great . the latitude of Derbent 41 , deg . 52. min. the variation of the compass . mile . from Bachu to Bildih five or six league by land , but by water about 12. league . from the castle derbent eastwards , there reach two stone wall to the border of the caspian sea , which be distant one English mile . those wall be 9 foot thick , and 28. or 30. foot high , and the space between they be 160. Geometricali pace , that be 800. foot . there be yet to be perceive of the ruin of those wall , which do now extend into the sea about half a mile : also from the case westward into the land , they do perceive the ruin of a stone wall to extend , which wall , as it be report , do pass from thence to Pontus Euxinus , and be build by Alexander the great when the case Derbent be make . the 5 of October about noon the wind Northnortheast they weigh anchor , and set sail from Derbent , be alongst the coast to the southward to seek their man : but as they have sail about four league the wind scant Easterly , so that they be force to anchor in three fathom water . the 6 day they weigh anchor , and bear further off into the sea , where they anchor in seven fathom water , the ship be very leak , and so rot abaft the main mast , that a man with his nail may scrape through her side . the 7 day about 7 of the clock in the morning , they set sail , the wind Southwest . they consider the time of the year be far spend , the ship weak , leak and rot , and therefore determine not to tarry any long for Wincoll and his fellow , but to leave they behind , bend themselves direcdy towards astracan : and sail northnortheast until midnight about 16 league , the wind then come to the northnorthwest , and blow much , a very storm , which cause they to take in all their sail , save the fore corpse , with which they be force to steer before the sea , south by west , and southsouthwest . and on the 8 day about two of the clock in the morning their great boat sink at the ship stern , which 236 they be force to cut from the ship to their great grief and discomfort : for in she they hope to save their life if the ship shall have miscarry . about 10 of the clock before noon they have sight of the land about 5 league to the south of Derbent , and bare long the coast to the southeastwards unto Nezavoo , where they Nezavoo . come at anchor in three fathom , and black oz , good anchor hold , whereof they be glad , as also that the wind be shift to the northwest , and but a mean gale . Wincoll and the rest of his fellow be in the armenian village , which be about 18 verst to the westwards of Nezavoo , the place whereagainst they ride at anchor , see the ship as she pass by that place , and send a man in the night follow alongst the coast after she , who come against the ship where she ride , and with a firebrand in the top of a tree make sign , which be perceive by they in the ship , whereupon they hoist out their skiff , and send she ashore to learn what be mean by the fire : which return a letter from Wincoll , wherein he write that they be with such good as they have at the armenian village , and pray that there they may with the same good be take into the ship . the 9 day it be little wind , they weigh and bear a little further off " into the sea towards the say village , and anchor . the 10 day they send their skiff to the armenian village to fetch those man and the good they have , with order that if the wind serve , that they can not return to fetch the ship , they of the ship promise to come for they , against the say village . this day it be calm . the 11 day the wind northwest they ride still . the 12 day the wind southeast they weigh anchor , and bear against and near to the armenian village where they anchor , and then the skiff come aboard and tell they that our people at shore be like to be spoil of the Tartar , be it not that the gunner defend they : then be the skiff send back again to charge they at any hand they shall hasten aboard the ship whatsoever it cost they . whereupon , all the company come aboard the 237 two Spaniard deliver by our english man . [ I. 428. ] the english voyage same day save Richard relfe and two russes , but assoon as the skiff be return aboard the ship , the wind blow at southeast , and the sea be grow , so as they be force to take in their skiff into the ship , and ride still till the 13 day , and then be fair weather , early in the morning the skiff be hoist out of the ship , and send to shore to fetch the say relfe and the two russes , which be ready at the shore side , and with they two Spaniards that be take captive at the Goletta in Barbary , which serve the Turk as soldier . those Spaniard ( of christian charity ) they bring also aboard the ship to redeem they from their captivity , which be bring over into England , and set free and at liberty here in London , in September 1381. the wind this day at Northnortheast , fair weather . the 14 day they send the skiff to shore , and fill fresh water . the 15 day they ride still , be little wind and fog . the 16 day the wind eastsoutheast , they weigh anchor and set sail , bear northwards towards astracan , and the same night they anchor in ten fathom water , about five mile from the shore of the shalkaule country , which place be eight league northnorthwest from Derbent . the 17 day the wind at north very stormy , they ride still all that day and night . the 18 the wind all southeast about one of the clock afternoon , they weigh anchor , and sail thence till four of the clock Northnortheast six league , than they may see the land northwest about ten league from the wind southeast : from thence they sail till midnight Northnortheast twelve league . from thence till the 19 day seven of clock in the morning they sail Northnortheast eight league : the wind then eastsoutheast , a fair gale , they sound and have 17 fathom , and sand , be ( as the master judge ) about the head of Shetly : from thence till 12 of the clock at noon they sail north 5 league , the wind then at east a fair gale , they sound and have 5 fathom . from thence till 8 of the clock at night , they sail north 7 league , the wind then at Northeast with small 238 rain , they take in their sail , and anchor in 3 fathom water and soft oz , where they ride still all night , and the 20 day and night the wind Northeast , as before with small rain . the 21 day the wind northwest , they likewise ride still . the 22 day about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , they weigh anchor , the wind westnorthwest , and sail from thence till six of the clock at night north 4 league , than they anchor in 2 fathom and a half soft oz , the wind at west a small breath . the 23 day about 7 of the clock in the morning , they weigh anchor , and set sail , be little wind Easterly , and sail till 2 of the clock after noon northwest in with the shore about six league , and then anchor in 6 foot water , have perfect sight of the low land ( sand hill ) be about 3 mile from the near land . this place of the land that they be against , they perceive to be to the westwards of the 4 island ( call in the ruff tongue chetera Bougori ) and they find it afterward by due proof , to be about 50 verst , or 30 english mile to the southwest , or southwest by south , from the say Chetera Bougori . the 24 day the wind at east , and by south , a sea wind call Gillavar , cause they to ride still . the 2 5 day they think good to send in their skiff Robert Golding , and certain russes , to row he alongst northwards by the shore , to seek the four island , and so to pass unto the uchooge , and there to land the say Robert Golding to proceed to astracan , to deliver Amos Riall a letter , wherein he be require to provide pavose to meet the ship at the say island , and the skiff with the russes be appoint to return from the uchooge with victual to the ship , which skiff depart from the ship about nine of the clock in the forenoon . the 26 , 27 , 28 , and 29 day , the wind easterly and Northeast , they ride still with their ship . the 30 day the wind southeast , they weigh , and set sail to the northeastwards : but the ship fall so on the side to the 239 a strange accident of provision for their relief . November . the english voyage shoreward , that they be force eftsoon to take in their sail , and anchor again , from whence they never remove she . that day they share their bread : but in their want God send they two covy of partridge , that come from the shore , and light in and about their ship , whereby they be comfort , and one that lie sick , of who life be small hope , recover his health . the 4 of November the skiff return to the ship with some victual , and certify that the four island be about 60 verst from they to the northeastwards . when Robert Golding come to astracan , and deliver there the factor letter to Amos rial , the duke , captain of that place , be do to understand of the ship arrival , and of the state they be in , and their request for pavose , who be very glad to hear of their safe return , and appoint to be send with all speed two pavose and a stroog , with gunner to guard and to defend they . with the which Stroog and pavose , Amos Riall go down to the chetera Bougori , or 4. Islands aforesaid , where he stay with those bark , accord to the factor appointment . the 5 day they purpose to send from the ship their skiff with the carpenter , and 4 russes to row he to the 4 bougory , to request Amos Riall to come from thence with the pavose to the ship with all possible speed . the skiff with those man depart from the ship in the morning , and within one hour they meet with a small boat with russes , row towards the ship , which come from the ouchooge with a wild swine and other victual to sell : with the same boat the skiff return back to the ship after the russes have receive and be satisfy for the victual they bring : the same day they return with their boat back towards the ouchooge , and with they in the same boat be send the carpenter of the ship to the chetera Bougori , which be in their way , to declare unto Amos Riall the message before appoint he . from the 5 until the 9 day the ship ride still with contrary wind easterly . the same 9 day come to the ship certain russes in a small boat , which bring 240 with they some victual send by Amos Riall , and declare that he with the pavose and Stroog have remain at the chetera Bougori five day , expect the come thither of the ship . the 10 day be doubtful of the pavose come , they send Thomas Hudson master of the ship in the skiff ( and with she go the foresay skiff boat ) towards the chetera Bougori to the pavose to bring word whether they will come to the ship or not , the wind then at Northeast with fog . the 11 day the wind northerly with fog , the ship ride still . the 12 day Amos Riall , Christopher faucet , and a new gunner come to the ship , and with they the m. Thomas Hudson return ; but the Stroog with the gunner remain at the chetera Bougori ; and from thence ( when it begin to freeze ) return to astracan . Amos Riall declare that he send the carpenter back from [ i . 429. ] the chetera Boogori in a small boat on the 10 day , and marveil that he be not come to the ship ( but in the fog the day before as afterward they learn ) miss the ship , and overshoot she , and afterward return back , he find the ship at anchor , and nothing in she but the russes that be leave to keep she , and then he depart thence , and go to the uchooge , and there stay . present upon the come of the pavose to the ship they use as much speed as may be , to get the good out of the ship into they , and after the good be lade in , they take in also of the ship ordinance , furniture and provision , as much as they can . the 13 day in the morning Amos Riall be send away ice the 13 of in a small boat towards astracan , to provide victual and carriage to relieve and help they , who can pass no further than the four island , but be there over - Volga . take with ice , and force to leave his boat , and from thence pass post to astracan , find at the uchooge the carpenter return from his ill journey , very ill handle with the extremity of the cold . the same day they depart also in those lighter with the good in 241 q towards the chetera Bougori , leave the ship at anchor , and in her two russes , which with three more that go in the pavose , to provide victual for themselves and the rest , and therewith promise to return back to the ship with all speed , have offer to undertake for twenty rubble in money to carry the ship into some harbour , where she may safe winter , or else to keep she where she ride all winter , which be promise to be give they if they do it : and the same day when with those lighter they have get sight of the four island be about eight verst southwest from they , the wind then at Northeast , do freeze the sea so as they can not row , guide , stir or remove the say lighter , but as the wind and ice do force they . and so they continue drive with the ice , southeast into the sea by the 16 day . the space of forty hour , and then be the sixteenth day the ice stand . while they drive with the ice , the danger which they incur be great : for oftentimes when the ice with the force of wind and sea do break , piece of it be toss and drive one upon another with great force , terrible to behold , and the same happen at sometime so near unto the lighter , that they expect it will have overwhelm they to their utter destruction : but God who have preserve they from many peril before , do also save and deliver they then . within three or four day after the first stand of the ice , when it be firm and strong , they take out all their good , be forty and eight bale or pack of raw silk , etc lay it on the ice , and cover the same with such provision as they have . then for want of victual , etc they agree to leave all the good there upon the ice , and to go to the shore : and thereupon break up their chest and Corobias , wherewith , and with travail upon such other thing as they can get , they make sled the ice . for every of they to draw upon the ice , whereon they lay their clothes to keep they warm , and such victual as they have , and such other thing as they may convenient carry , and so they depart from the say 242 1580. good and pavose very early about one of the clock in the morning , and travail on the ice , direct their way north , as near as they can judge , and the same day about two of the clock in the afternoon , they have sight of the chetera Babbas ( fourp hillock of island chetera bab-so call ) unto the same they direct themselves , and as ' it|be remain that night . the good and pavose which they leave on the ice they judge to be from those chetera Babbas about 20 verst . and the next morning depart thence eastwards , and come to the chetera bougory ( or four island before speak of ) before noon ( the distance between those place be about 15 verst ) where they remain all that night , depart thence towards astracan : the next morning very early they lose their way through the persuasion of the russes which be with they , take too much towards the left hand ( contrary to the opinion of m. Hudson ) whereby wander upon the ice four or five day , not know whether they be enter into the Crimme Tartar land or not , at length it fortune they meet with a way that have be travail , which cross backward towards the sea : that way they take , and follow the same , within two day travail it bring they to a place call the Crasnoyare ( that be to say in the english tongue ) red cliff , which diverse of the company know . there they remain that night , have nothing to eat but one loaf of bread , which they happen to find with the two russes that be leave in the ship to keep she all the winter ( as be aforesaid ) who they chance to meet go towards astracan , about five mile before they come to the say Crasnoyare , who certify they that the ship be cut in piece with the english ice , and that they have hard escape with their life . ship cut in in the morning they depart early from Crasnoyare sm ce‘ towards the ouchooge , and about 9 of the clock before noon , be within 10 verst of the uchooge , they meet 243 the english voyage Amos Riall , with the carpenter , which he find at Ouchooge , and a gunner new come out of England , and also 65 horse with so many cassock to guide they , and 50 gunner for guard , which bring provision of victual , etc and be send by the duke to fetch the good to astracan . the meeting of that company be much joy unto they . the factor send back with Amos Riall and the say company to fetch the good , Thomas Hudson the master , Tobias Paris his mate , and so they the say factor and their company march on to the uchooge , where they refresh themselves that day , and the night follow . and from thence proceed on towards astracan , where they arrive the last day of November . Theise that go for the good after their departure from the factor travail the same day until they come within 10 verst of the chetera Babbas , where they rest that night . the next morning by the break of the day they depart thence , and before noon be at the chetera Babas , where they stay all night ; but present depart thence Thomas Hudson with the carpenter and gunner to seek where the good lay : who find the same , and the next day they return back to their company at the chetera Babbas , and declare unto they in what sort they have find the say good . the 3 day early in the morning they depart all from the 4 Babbas towards the say good , and the same day do lade all the good they can find upon the say sled , and with all convenient speed return back towards astracan . and when they come to the chetera Bougori , where they rest the night , in the morning very early before the break of day , they be assault by a great company of the nagay Tartar horseman , which come shout and hallow with a great noise , but our people be so environ with the sled , that they dare not enter upon they , but run by , and shoot their arrow among they , and hurt but one man in the head , who be a ruff , and so depart present . yet 244 1581. when it be day , they show themselves a good distance off from our man , be a very great troop of they , but do not assault they any more . the same day our their return man with those carriage , depart from thence towards t0 astracan-astracan , where they arrive in safety the 4 of December , about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , where our people great rejoice of their great good hap to have escape so many hard event , trouble and misery , as they do in that voyage , and have great cause therefore to praise the almighty , who have so merciful preserve and deliver they . they remain the winter at astracan , where they find great favour and friendship of the duke , captain , and other chief officer of that place : but that winter there happen no great matter worth the note . in the spring of the year 1581 , about the mid of the break march , the ice be break up , and clear go before astracan , and the nine of April , have all the good that be return from the part of Media , lade into a Stroog , the factor , William Turnbull , Matthew taile-boye , Giles crow , Christopher Burrough , Michael lane , Laurence Prouse gunner , Randolfe fox , Tho. Hudson , Tobias Paris , Morgan Hubblethorne the dier , Richard Morgan hub-the surgeon , Rob. Golding , Joh. smith , Edw. Reding carpenter , and William Perrin gunner , have also 40 persia . russes , whereof 36 be cassock to row , the rest merchant passenger , depart from astracan with the say Stroog and good up the Volga towards yeraslave . they leave behind they at astracan , with the english good and merchandise there remain , Amos Riall , W. Wincoll , and Richard relfe , and appoint they to sell and barter the same , or so much thereof as they can to the tisik , if there come any thither that spring , and to other as they may , and the rest with such as they shall take in exchange to return up to yeraslave that summer , when the emperor carriage shall pass up the Volga . the 21 day they come with their stroog to the Peravolok , but make no stay at that place : for they have be much 245 the english voyage trouble with ice in their come from astracan . the 3 of may about noon they come to oveak , and from thence proceed up the river , on the 17 day William Turnbull depart from the Stroog in a small boat , and go before towards Tetusha to provide victual , and send down to the Stroog , from which place they be then about 230 verst . the 23 day they meet a boat with victual , which William Turnbull send from Tetusha , and the same day they arrive with their stroog at Tetusha , where they stay all night , and the next morning betimes depart thence , but W. Turnbull be go in the small boat before to Cazan , to provide necessary from thence , and to make way for their dispatch . the 26 day they arrive with their stroog at Cazan , where they remain till the four of June : the factor send Giles crow from Cazan to the Moscow , with their letter the 30 of May . the 4 day of June they depart from Cazan with their stroog , and arrive at yeraslave the 22 day about 5 of the clock in the morning . the 23 day they provide Telegos , to carry the good to Vologda . the 24 day have the good lade upon Telegos , they depart with the same towards Vologda , and remain there five verst from yeraslave . the 29 day they come to Vologda , with all their good in safety , and good order . the same 29 , William Turnbull and Peter Garrard depart from Vologda post by water towards Colmogro , the three of July , have their good lade in a small doshnik , they depart with the same from Vologda towards rose island by S. Nicholas , where they arrive in safety the 16 of July , and find there the agent of Russia , and in the ride the ship send out of England , almost lade ready to depart . the 25 day depart for England ( out of the road of saint Nicholas ) the ship Elizabeth . the 26 day depart thence the Thomas Allen and Mary Susan , and in the Thomas Allen go William turnbul , Matthew Tailboys , Thomas Hudson , and 246 other . the good return of the Persia voyage be lade into the ship , William and John , whereof be master , William bigat , and in she with the same good come Peter Garrard and Tobias Paris . the two of August , the same ship be lade and dispatch depart from the road of saint Nicholas , and with she in company another of the company freight ship , call the Tomasin , whereof be m. Christopher hall . in their return homeward they have some foul weather , and be separate at the sea , the William and John put into Newcastle the 24 of September : from whence the say Peter Garrard and Tobias Paris come to London by land , and bring news of the arrival of the ship . the 25 of September both the say ship arrive at the port of London in safety , and anchor before limehouse and Wapping , where they be discharge , 1581. observation of the latitude and meridian altitude of diverse place in Russia , from the north to the south : anno 1581. Michael Archangel . Meridian altitude observe at Michael the Archangel , 42. degree , 30. minute . the true latitude , 64. degree , 54. minute . the english house in Colmogro . the english house in Colmogro , in latitude , 64. d . 25. m . the meridian altitude there observe , the 29 of July , 42. d . 15. m . Recola . Meridian altitude the 30 of July , 41. d . 40. m . declination , 16. d . 6. m . 64. d . 20. m . Yeegris . Meridian , 4 of August , 41. d . 50. m . declination northerly , 14. d . 49. m . 62. d . 59 m . 247 A.D. 1581. 