certain reason to dissuade the use of a trade to the narve aforesaid , by way through Sweden . the merchandise of the narve be gross ware , viz. flax , hemp , wax , tallow and hide . the traffic at that place stand upon the agreement and like of the emperor of Russia , with the king of Sweden : for all these merchandise that be bring thither come from Plescove , Novogrod , and other part of the emperor dominion . for transport those merchandise from narve to Stockholm , or what other place shall be think convenient in Sweden , it must be in vessel of those country , which will of small force to resist freebooter , or any other that shall make quarrel or offer violence against they . when the good be bring into Sweden , they must be discharge , and new lade into small vessel , to carry the same by river or lake a part of the way , and again to be unlade and transport by land to newle . so as the ordinary charge for transport of good from narve to newle by way as aforesaid , beside the spoil by so often lade and unlade , carriage by land , and the danger of the sea , pirate , etc will be such as when it shall|be so bring to newle it will be as dear to the merchant in that place as it shall be worth to be sell in London , wherefore the trade that way can be profitable to our nation . Moreover , when the good shall be in newle , it may note . be think doubtful to bring it thence quiet without dislike or forcible resistance of the king of Denmark , forasmuch as he make quarrel , and allege damage unto he in his toil of the sound by our trade to saint Nicholas , how much more will he now do by this way , and with how much great advantage may he 207 perform it ? the danger that may grow in our trade to Russia by way of saint Nicholas , through the displeasure that the emperor may conceive by our trade with the Sweden to narve be also to be consider . a remembrance of advice give to the merchant , touch a voyage for Cola abovesaid . 1578. whereas you require my counsel after what order the voyage for Cola be to be set forth , i answer that i know no better way then have be heretofore use , which be after this manner . first of all we have hire the ship by the great , give so much for the wear of the tackle and the hull of the ship , as the ship may be in bigness : as if she be about the burden of a hundred ton , we pay fourscore pound , and so after that rate : and thereunto we do victual the ship our self , and do ship all our man our self , ship no more man , nor give they more wage than we shall do if they go of a merchant voyage , for it have be a great help to our voyage hitherto , to have our man to fish with one boat , and cost we no more charge than it shall do , if our man shall lie and do nothing save the charge of salt , and of line , which be treble pay for again . for this last year past our man kill with one boat betwixt 9 or 10. thousand fish , which yield to we in money with the oil that come of it , about 15. or 16. score pound , which be a great help to a voyage . and beside all this , our ship do take in so much oil and other commodity as we bestow 100 whole clothes in . but because , as i do suppose , it be not the use of London to take ship to fraught after that order before prescribe , neither i think that the mariner will take such pain as our man will : therefore my counsel be , if you think good , to freight some ship of hui or Newcastle , for i be sure that you may have they there better cheap to freight , then here at London . beside all this , one may have such man as will take pain for their merchant . and 208 