the great danger unto you in that place will be while you shall shift your ship : therefore you be to consider of it , but the fit time for you to do the same , will be when the wind be southerly off the shore , or calm , and at such time you may the better do it without danger . you must take such order among you , that your company may be always willing and ready to help one the other , and appoint among your self such ship to shift first , and such after , in such sort and form as you shall think best and most convenient . and while they shall be in discharge , shift , and lade , let the rest of your company which have not then to do in lade or discharge , help those ship that shall have labour to do , as well for carry the bark from ship to the shore , or from shore to the ship with your boat , as also for any other help that they shall have need of . [ I. 455. ] 12 remember what have be say unto you touch the more of your ship , etc for use advantage against the enemy , if you shall be assault in that place . 13 see that you serve God , abolish swear and game , be careful of fire and candle , etc 14 you be to consult and agree among your self upon sign , token , and good order for the better keep of company together , and also the manner how and by what mean , rescue , aid , or help may be give by one to the other in fight , if you happen to come to it . thus we pray God to send you a prosperous voyage and safe return . the opinion of master William Burrough send to a friend , require his judgement for the fit time of the departure of our ship towards saint Nicholas in Russia . whereas you request i to persuade the company not to send their ship from hence before the fine of may , i do not think the same so good a course for they to observe : for you know that the soon we 306 send they hence , the soon we may look for their return . if we send they in the begin of May , the russian then may they be at saint Nicholas by the fine of the same month : and by that time the great part or beam of your lade of necessity must be come down , especial may . the flax : but if it shall fall out so lateward a break up of the river of Duyna , that by the end of may the good can be bring to saint Nicholas , yet this be always to be account for certain , that before our ship can come thither , the good may be bring down to that place : and if through ice the ship be keep back any time , the loss and charge of that time touch not the company at all , but the owner of the ship , and yet will the owner put that in adventure , rather than tarry long time before their go hence . now see by send our ship hence in the begin of May , their arrival at saint Nicholas may be at the end of the same month , and remain thirty day there , they may be lade and come thence by the last of June , and return home hither by the 10 of August with commodity to serve the market then , it can be deny but we shall reap thereby great commodi tie . but it may be object , that if all our ship be send then to return as aforesaid , you shall not be able to send we in so much cordage , wax and oil , as otherwise you shall do if they remain a month long , neither can you by that time perfect your account to be send in they as you will do . for answer thereunto this be my meaning : though i wish the great part of our ship to go as aforesaid , yet will i have one good ship or two at the most well furnish in all point that shall depart always from hence , between the beginning and the 10 day of June : and the same to be condition withal to remain at saint Nicholas from the first arrival there until the midst of August , or to be dispatch thence soon , 3°7 at the will and like of our factor for the same : by this order these commodity follow may ensue baptize you may have our commodity there timely to send up the river before it wax shallow , to be disperse in the country at your pleasure . 2 the great part of our good may be return hither timely to serve the first market . 3 Oure late ship remain so long here may serve to good purpose , for return answer of such letter as may be send over land , and receive here before their departure . 4 their remain so late with you shall satisfy your desire for perfect your account , and may bring such cordage , wax , oil , and other commodity , as you can provide before that time : and chief may serve we in stead to bring home our good that may be send we from Persia . now see it may be so many way commodious to the company to observe this order , without any charge unto they , i wish that you put to your help hand to further the same . a copy of the commission give to sir Jerome bow , authorize he her majesty ambassador unto the emperor of Russia , anno 1583 - ELIZABETHA dei gratia , angliae , francia , and hyberniae regina , fidei defensatrix , etc universis and singulis praesente litera visuris and inspecturis , salutem . cum serenissimus princeps , Joannes Basilius , rex , and magnus Dux Russiae , Volodimerae , Moscoviae , and novo-grodiae , rex Cazani , and Astracani , dominus Plescoae , and magnus Dux Smolenscoae , tueri , Ugori , Permiae , Valeae , Bolharae , and aliarum ditionum : dominus and magnus [ i . 456. ] Dux Novogrodiae in inferiori region Chernigae , Rezanae , Polotscoae , Ratsaviae , Yeraslavae , Bealozeri , Liflandiae , Oudori , and condensae , and gubernator in tota provincia 308 