i suppose the sea between Nova Zembla and Tabin to be fresh . you whole to my power to be command , Gerardus Mercator . May . June . keen a island , of Norway . the discovery make by m. Arthur Pet , and m. Charles Jackman , of the north-east part , beyond the island of Vaigatz , with two bark : the one call the George , the other the William , in the year 1580. write by huge smith . Pon Monday the 30. of may , we depart from Harwich in the afternoon , the wind be at south , and to the eastward . the ebb be spend we can not double the pole , and therefore be constrain to put in again until the next day in the morning , be the last of May : which day we weigh our anchor about 3. a clock in the morning , the wind be west southwest . the same day we pass orfordnesse at a east sun , and Stamford at a west sun , and Yarmouth at a west northwest sun , and so to Winterton , where we do anchor all night : it be then calm , and the flood be come . the next day be the first of June , we set sail at 3. a clock in the morning , and set our course north , the wind at the southwest , and at southsouthwest . the 10. day about one of the clock in the afternoon , we put into Norway to a place where one of the headland of the sound be call bottle : the other headland be call moil . there be also a island call keen . here i do find the pole to be elevate 62. deg . it do flow there south , and it hi 7. or 8. foot , not above . the 11. day in the morning the wind come to the south and to the southeast : the same day at six in 282 Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman a.d. 1580. the afternoon we set sail , and bear along the coast : it be very foul weather with rain and fog . the 22. day the wind be at west , we do hall the the north coast east north-east , and east . the same day at 6. in double . the morning we do double the north cape . about 3. in the afternoon we pass skite bear ness , and hold along the coast east , and east southeast , and all the same night we hail southeast , and southeast by east . the 23. day about 3. in the morning we come to Wardhouse . Wardhouse , the wind at the northwest . the cause of our come in be to seek the William , who company we lose the 6. day of this month , and to send [ i . 446. ] letter into England . about one of the clock in the after noon the William also come into Wardhouse to we in good safety , and all her company in good health . the 24. the wind come to the east Northeast . this day the William be hold a ground , because she be somewhat leak , and to mend her steerage . this night about 12. of the clock she do hale a float again . the 25. day the wind be at east north-east . the 26. day the Toby of Harwich depart from Wardhouse for London , Thomas Greene be master , to who we deliver our letter . the 27. day the wind be at south southeast , and the 28. also . the 29. day about 6. in the afternoon , the wind come to the west northwest for the space of one hour , and present to the east again , and so be variable all the same night . the 30. about six in the morning , the wind come to east southeast , and continue so all the same day . the first of July about 5. in the afternoon , the wind July . be at northnorthwest : and about 7. of the clock we set sail from Wardhouse east and by south . the second day about 5. in the morning , the wind be east , and east southeast , and we do lie to the shoreward . and about 10. in morning the wind come to south southeast , and we lay it to the eastward : some-283 time we lay east by south , sometime east southeast , and sometime east by north . about 5. in the afternoon we bear with the William , who be willing to go with Kegor , because we think she to be out of try , and sail very ill , where we may mend her steerage : whereupon master Pet not willing to go into harbour say to master Jackman , that if he think himself not able to keep the sea , he shall do as he think best , and that he in the mean time will bear with willoughbies willoughbies land , for that it be a parcel of our land . direction , and will meet he at verove ostrove , or vaigat , and so we set our course east north-east , the wind be at southeast . the 3. day the wind at southeast we find the pole to be elevate 70. degree , 46. minute . the same night at 12. of the clock we sound , but have no ground , 50. league in i2o . fathom , be fifty league from the one side from Kegor . our reckon east north-east from Kegor . the 4. day all the morning be calm . this day we find the pole to be elevate 71. degree 38. minute . this day at 9 in the afternoon the wind at Northeast with a gentle gale , we hold along southeast by east . the 5. day the wind at northwest , we hold east and east by south : this day we see land , but we can not make it , the wind be northerly , so that we can not come near to it . the 6. day about 2. in the afternoon , the wind at north northwest , we halde east southeast with a fair and gentle gale : this day we meet with ice . about 6. in the afternoon it become calm : we with sail and oar lay it to the north-east part , hope that way to clear we of it : for that way we do see the head part of it , as we think . which do , about 12. of the clock at night we gate clear of it . we do think it to be ice of the bay of saint Nicholas , but it be not i sight of as we f°und afterward . perfect land . the seven day we meet with more ice , at the east 284 Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman a.d. 1580. part of the other ice : we halde along a weather the ice to find some end thereof by east north-east . this day there appear more land north from we be perfect land : the ice be between we and it , so that we can not come near to it . the same morning at six of the clock we put into the ice to find some way through it , we continue in it all the same day and all the night follow , the wind by the north northwest . we be constrain to go many point of our compass , but we go most a easterly course . the eight day the wind at north northwest , we continue our course , and at five in the morning we sound , and have 90. fathom red oz . this day at four in the afternoon we sound again , and have .84 . fathom oz , as before . at six in the after noon we clear our self of the ice , and hold along southeast by south : we sound again at 10. a clock at night , and have 43. fathom sandy oz . the 9 day at 2. in the morning , we sound again , and have 45. fathom , then there appear a shadow of land to we east Northeast , and so we run with it the space of 2. hour , and then perceive that it be but fog , we hold along southeast . this day at 2. in the afternoon we sound and 7^ - 3 - have fifty fathom black oz . our latitude be 70. mtn ' degree three minute . at ten a clock at night we sound again , and have fifty fathom black oz . the ten day the wind be at north northwest , we hale east and by north , which course we set , because [ i . +4.7 . ] at ten of the clock afore noon we do see land , and then we sound have 35. fathom black oz . all this day there be a great fog , so that we dare not bear with the land to make it , and so we keep a outward course . this day at 6. in the afternoon we espy land , wherewith we hail , and then it grow calm : we sound and have 120. fathom black oz : and then we send our boat a land to sound and prove the land . 285 than same night we come with our ship within a a island . island , where we ride all the same night . the same night we go into a bay to ride near the land for wood and water . the malne the 11. day the wind come to the east southeast : land - this day about a league from we to the eastwards , we see a very fair sound or river that pass very far into the country with 2. or 3. branch with a island in the midst . the 12. of July the wind be east southeast . this day about 11. a clock in the morning , there come a great white bear down to the water side , and take the water of his own accord , we chase he with our boat , but for all that we can do , he goat to land Bearebay . and escape from we , where we name the bay Bearebay . this day at 7. in the after noon we set sail , for we have good hope that the wind will come Westerly , and with sail and oar we gate the sea . all the night it be calm with fog . the 13. day in the morning the wind be very variable with fog , and as it clear up we meet with great store of ice , which at the first show like land . this ice do we much trouble , and the more because of the fog , which continue until the 14. day , 12. of the clock . the 14. day in the morning we be so imbay with ice , y* we be constrain to come out as we go in , which be by great good fortune , or rather by the goodness of God , otherwise it have be impossible , and at 12. of the clock we be clear of it , the wind be at south and south by west . the same day 70. deg . 26. we found the pole to be elevate 70. degree , 26. mtn - minute : we lay along the coast northwest , think it to be a island , but find no end in row so long , the suppose we suppose it to be the main of Nova Zembla . about embia^0 ™ 2‘ * n afternoon we lay it to the southward to ' double the ice , which we can not do upon that board , so that we cast about again and lay west along under the ice . about seven in the afternoon 286 Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman a.d. 1580. we goat about the great part thereof . about 11. a clock at night we bring the ice southeast of we , and thus we be rid of this trouble at this time . the 15. day about 3. in the morning , the wind be at south southwest : we cast about and lay to the eastwards : the wind do Wester , so that we lay south southwest with a flawne sheet , and so we run all the same day . about 8. in the after noon we sound , and have 23. fathom small grey sand . this night at twelve of the clock we sound again , and have 29. fathom sand , as afore . the 16. day unto 3. in the morning we hold along east southeast , where we find 18. fathom red sand , than we hold along Northeast . in these sounding we have many overfal . this day at 10. of the clock we many overmet with more ice , which be very great , so that we fab . can not tell which way to get clear of it . then the wind come to the south southeast , so that we lay to the northward . we think that way to clear our self of it , but that way we have more ice . about 6. in the afternoon , the wind come to the east . than we lay to the southward that we have 30. fathom black oz . this day we find the pole to be elevate 69. deg . 40. minute , and this night at 12. a clock we have 41. fathom red sand . the 17. day at 3. in the morning , we have 12. fathom . at 9 we have 8. and 7. all this day we run south and south by west , at the depth aforesaid , red sand , be but shallow water . at eight in the afternoon , the wind with a shower and thunder come to the southwest , and then we run east Northeast . at 12. at night it come to the south and by east , and all this be in the bay of Pechora . the bay of the 18. day at 7. in the morning we bear with the w*0 ™ - headland of the bay , where we find two island . there be also overfal of water or tide . we go between the main and the island , next to the head , where we have about 2. fathom and a half . we find 287 they have sight the pole elevate 69. deg . 13 minute . this day we of Vaygatz . sight of Vaigatz : the land of the main of Pechora do trend southeast , we hold east southeast , and have 10. fathom oz all the same day until 4. in the after noon , then be calm , we anchor in 10. fathom all the same night . the 19 day at two in the morning we set sail , and run south and south southwest all the same day at 8. 7. and 6. fathom , this be off the south part of Vaigatz , this part of the land lie north and south . this day at 4. in the afternoon we find shallow water sometime 4. fathom , sometime 3. and 2. and a half , and one fathom and a half : there we anchor and send our boat away to sound , and all to leeward we have 4. foot and 3. foot , and 2. foot , there be not water for the boat between Vaigatz and the other side : find no more water , there be no other way [ i . 448. ] but to go back as we come in , have the wind northwest , so at twelve at night we set sail . the 20. day we ply to the northward , and get deep water again 6. and 7. fathom . the 21. day the wind by the northwest , we hold along the coast north and north northwest , we have 8. and 9 and 10. fathom . the 22. day the wind come to the southwest , we bear along the coast of Vaygatz , as we find it to lie north and by west , and north northwest , and north . the wind blow very much with great fog , we lack a island water and wood bear within a island where we find have store of great store of wood and water , there be three or wood t water . 9 j tt 1 • 1 roure goodly sound . under two point there be a cross set up , and a man bury at the foot of it . upon the say cross master Pet do grave his name with the date of our lord , and likewise upon a stone at the foot of the cross , and so do i also , to the end that if the William do chance to come thither , they may have knowledge that we have be there . at eight in the afternoon the wind come to the north north - 288 Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman a.d. 1580. west , we set sail and turn out of the bay the same night the wind come to the west , so that we lay north along the land . the 23. day at five in the morning , the wind come to the southwest , a sea board we see a great number of fair island , to the number of six : a sea board fair of these island , there be many great overfal , as great islands-streame or tide : we halde north-east and east north-east as the land do trend . at eight aforenoon the wind come to the southeast with very much wind , rain and fog , and very great store of ice a sea board : so we lay to the southwest to attain to one of the island to harbour we if the weather do so extreme continue , and to take in our boat , think it meet so to do , and not to tow she in such weather . about twelve of the clock it become very calm upon the sudden , and come up to the west northwest , and northwest by west , and then we take in our boat , and this do , there come down so much wind , as we be not able to steer afore it , with corpse and bonnet of each , we hold south with the land , for so the land do trend . this day all the afternoon we sail under a great land of ice , we sail between the land and it , be not able to cross it . about twelve at night we find the ice to stretch into the land , that we can not get clear to the eastward , so we lay it to the shore , and there we find it clear hard aboard the shore , and we find also a very fair island which make a very good harbour , and within be 12. fathom . this island be to you eastwards of Vaigatz , 4 or 5. - a island to league . this land of the main do trend southeast , gr and southeast by east . it be a very fair coast , and °r even and plain , and not full of mountain nor rock : you have but shallow water of 6. or 7. fathom , about a league from the shore , all this morning we hail east southeast . this day we find the pole to be elevate 69. degree 14. minute . about 12. a clock we be constrain to put into the ice to seek some in 289 t then William and the George meet again . the english voyage way to get to the northward of it , hope to have some clear passage that way , but there be nothing but whole ice . about nine in the afternoon we have sight of the William , and when we see she , there be a great land of ice between she and we , so that we can not come one to the other , but as we come near to she , we sound our trumpet and shot off two musket , and she put out her flag upon her foretopmaste in token that she do see we : all this time we do shorten our sail , and go with our foresail and mainetopsaile , seek the best way through the break ice , she make away the best that she can to follow we , we put out our flag to answer she again with the like : thus we continue all the afternoon till about 12. a clock at night , and then we moar our ship to a piece of ice to tarry for the William . the 25. day about five in the morning , the William come to we , be both glad of our meeting . the William have her stern post break , that the rudder do hang clean beside the stern , so that she can in no wise port her helm , with all hand she do lighten her stern , and trim her head , and when we have bring she forward all that we can , we bring a cable under her stern , and with our capstaine do wind up her stern , and so we make it as well as the place will give we leave , and in the end we bring she to steer again . we acknowledge this our meeting to be a great benefit of God for our mutual comfort , and so give his majesty thank for it . all the night after we take our rest be make fast upon a piece of ice : the wind be at west northwest , but we be so enclose with ice that we can not tell which way to pass . wind we have have at will , but ice and fog too much against our will , if it have please the lord God otherwise . the 26. day the wind be at west northwest : we set sail to the northward , to seek if we can find any way clear to pass to the eastward , but the further 290 Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman a.d. 1580. we go that way , the more and thick be the ice , so that we can go no further . so about four in the afternoon we be constrain to moare upon another piece of ice . i think we sail in all a league this day , here we have 15. fathom oz , and this oz be all the channel over . all the same day after four of the clock , [ i . 449. ] and all the night we tarry there , be without all good hope , but rather in despair . this day master jugman do see land east Northeast from we , as he do think , whether it be land or no , i can tell well , but it be very like land , but the fog have many time deceive we . the 27. day the wind be at northwest . this day at nine in the morning we set sail to seek the shore . further into the ice we can not go , and at seven in the afternoon we moar to a piece of ice , and the William with we , here we have 14. fathom oz . at three in the afternoon our warp from one ice to another . at nine in the afternoon we moar again to a piece of ice until the next day . all this night it do snow with much wind , be at west northwest , and at northwest , and by west . the 28. day the wind come to the southwest , and southsouthwest : this day be a very fair day . at one in the afternoon master Pet and master Jackman do confer together what be best to be do consider that the wind be good for we , and we not able to pass for ice , they do agree to seek to the land again , and so to Vaygatz , and there to confer further . at their return . 3. in the afternoon we do warp from one piece of ice to another to get from they if it be possible : here be piece of ice so great , that we can not see beyond they out of the top . thus we warp until 9 in the afternoon , and then we moar both our ship to a great and high piece of ice , until the next morning . the nine and twenty day the wind come to the southwest , we set sail at five in the morning to ply 291 the currant run with the wind . the english voyage into the shore if it be possible , we make many turn among the ice to small purpose , for with the wind do the currant run . this day by misfortune a piece of ice stroke of our greepe afore at two afternoon , yet for all this we turn to do our best . the William be encumber with ice , and perceive that she do little good , take in all her sail , and make her self fast to a piece of ice , and about four in the afternoon she set sail to follow we . we be afraid that she have take some hurt , but she be well . at seven afore noon we take in all our sail to tarry for the William , and make our ship fast to a piece of ice : the William before she come to we take in all her sail , and moar to another piece of ice , and thus we continue until the next morning . the 30. day the wind at southeast , and by south , and at 9 in the morning we set sail , and soon will have do if you William have be by we , but we do tarry for she to know whether all be well with she : but as soon as we make sail , she do the like . all this day we do our best to seek our way as the ice will give we leave , sometime we lay south , sometime west , and sometime east , and thus we continue until eight at night , and then be calm , we make our ship fast to a piece of ice , and go to supper . in the mean time the wind with a fair gentle gale come up to the east , and east and by south , but there come down a shower of rain with it , which continue the space of one hour : which be do , it become calm again , so that we can do no good all that night , but take our rest until the next day . the 31. the wind be at Southwest , we set sail to turn to windward at three a clock in the morning . in this turn we do little good , for the currant will not give we leave . for as the wind be , so be the currant . we do our best until ten of the clock , and then perceive that we do no good , and be enclose with ice , we make our ship fast to a piece of ice : 292 Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman a.d. 1580. all this day the William lie still , and do as much good as we that do labour all the fbrenoone . thus we take our rest all the same day . in the afternoon we set sail , the wind be at south and by east , we lay to the westwards , as Southwest and Southwest and by south , and sometime to the westward as we may . thus we continue until 9 at night , and then we can go no further for ice : so we with the William be constrain to make our ship fast to a piece of ice all the same night . this day we find the pole elevate 69. degree 20. minute , and here we have 17. fathom oz . the first day of August be very calm in the August . morning , the wind be at west northwest . about twelve the wind come to the west , and continue so all the same night with great fog . the second day the wind be at Southwest all day with rain and fog . all this day we be enclose with ice , so that we be force to lie still . here we have one and twenty fathom oz . at six in the afternoon the wind be at west with very much foul weather , and so continue all the same night . the three day the wind be at west , and west by north , and west northwest , this day we lie still enclose with ice , the weather be dark with fog : thus abide the lord leisure , we continue with patience . And sound we find 21. fathom . the four day we lie still enclose with ice , the wind be at west northwest , this ice do every day [ 1. 450. ] increase upon we , yet put our trust in God , we hope to be deliver out of it in good time . the five day all the morning it rain with very much wind , be at south southeast : about 3. in the after noon we set sail , and present it become calm for the space of one hour , than the wind come to the north Northeast , and here we have 33. fathom : thus we make way among the ice Southwest , and southsouthwest , and west , as we may find our way for 293 a whole land the space of 3. hour : than we meet with a whole °fyce - land of ice , so that we can go no further : here we moar our ship to tarry for a further open . here we find 45. fathom oz , and all the night be very dark with fog . the sixth day have no open of the ice we lie still , the wind be at west , and west by south : here we have sixty three fathom oz : all the same night the wind be at the west northwest . the 7. day the wind be at west , and west and by north all day . and all this day we lie still be enclose with ice , that we can not stir , labour only to defend the ice as it come upon we . here we have 68 fathom oz . the 8. day be very fair and calm but foggy . this day towards night there be little wind by the south Southwest : then the ice begin a little to open , and here we have 70. fathom oz : all the night be foggy . the 9 day the wind be at northwest , and by west , all the afternoon we lie still because of the ice , which do still enclose we . this day we find 70. degr . 4. the pole elevate seventy degree , 4. minute , we have mtn - 63. fathom oz : this night be a very fair night , frost . but it freeze : in the morning we have much ado to go through the same : and we be in doubt that if it shall have freeze so much the night follow , the appear we shall hardly have pass out of it . this night j be one star that appear to we . the ten day the wind be at east Northeast with a very small gale . we with sail and oar make way through the ice : about five in the morning we set sail : sometime we lie Southwest , and sometime south , and sometime west , as we may best find the way . about three in the afternoon the gale begin to fresh : about six in the afternoon the wind be at Northeast with fog . here we have eighty eight much snow , fathom : we bear sail all the same night , and it snow very much . 294 the eleven day we be much trouble with ice , and by great force we make our way through it , which we think a thing impossible : but extremity do cause man to do much , and in the weakness of man God strength most appear . this day we have 95. fathom . at three in the afternoon the wind come to the southwest , we be force to make our ship fast to a piece of ice , for we be enclose with it , and tarry the lord leisure . this night we have 97. fathom . the 12. day the wind be at the southeast not very much but in a manner calm : at a 11. of the clock the wind come to the west Southwest : all the day be very dark with snow and fog . at 6. in the afternoon we set sail the wind be at the north Northeast : all this night we bear away southwest , and southsouthwest , as well and as near as the ice will give we leave : all this night we find the ice somewhat favourable to we , more than it be before , whereupon we stand in good hope to get out of it . the 13. day at 7. in the morning , the wind be at the north-east , and Northeast and by east : all this day we be much trouble with the ice , for with a blow against a piece of ice we break the stock of our anchor , and many other great blow we have against the ice , that it be marvelous that the ship be able to abide they : the side of our boat be break with our ship which do recoil back , the boat be betwixt a great piece of ice , and the ship , and it perish the head of our rudder . this day be a very hard day with we : at night we find much break ice , and all this night it blow very much wind , so that we lay in drift with the ice , and our drift be south , for the wind be at north all this night , and we have great store of snow . the 14. day in the morning we make our ship fist to a piece of ice , and let she drive with it . in the mean time we mend our boat and our steerage : all this day the wind continue northerly , and here 295 great store of snow . they be thwart against vaigat . Sands . the english voyage we have threescore and two fathom . thus we lay a drift all the same night . the 15. day we set sail at 6. in the morning , the wind be at Northeast . at 9 aforenoon we enter into a clear sea without ice , whereof we be most glad , and not without great cause , and give God the praise . we have 19 fathom water , and run in Southwest all the morning until we come to 14. fathom , and thence we hail west , till we come to 10. fathom , and then we go northwest , for so the land do trend . at 12. of the clock we have sight of the land , which we may have have soon , but it be dark and foggy all the same day : for when we have sight of the land , we be not pass three league from it . this day we have the pole elevate 69 degree 49 minute . all day we run along the coast in ten and nine fathom , peper sand . it be a very goodly coast and a bold , and fair sounding off it , without sand or rock . the 16 day the wind be at east : this day we be trouble again with ice , but we make great shift with it : for we get between the shore and it . this day at twelve of the clock we be thwart of the southeast part of vaigat , all along which part there be great store of ice , so that we stand in doubt of passage , yet by much ado we get betwixt the shore and it : about 6 in the afternoon be find a great white bear upon a piece of ice : all this day in the afternoon it be dark with fog . and all the night we hale north and north by west , and sometime north and by east , for so do the land trend . the 17 day in the morning we hale west , for so do the land lie . the wind be at southeast , and it be very dark with fog , and in run along the shore we fall a ground , but God be praise without hurt , for we come presendy off again . the William come to a anchor to stay for we , and send some of their man to help we , but before they come we be 296 Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman a.d. 1580. under sail , and as we come to the William we do stowe our boat , and make sail , we go within some of the island , and hale Westsouthwest . the island . about two of the clock in the afternoon , we set our course Southwest and by south : so we run Southwest until twelve at night , the wind come to the northnortheast , and then we hale west . the 18 day at 6 in the morning we have 16 fathom red sand : at 6 in the morning 13 fathom . at 10 , 14 fathom , and we hale westnorthwest . at 12 a clock the wind come to the east , and east by south , we hale west and by north all the same day and night . at 6 in the afternoon we have 17 fathom red sand . the 19 day the wind be at Eastnortheast : at 6 in the morning we have 19 fathom red sand : at 12 of the clock the wind blue north and north by east , we have 17 fathom of water , at 3 in the afternoon 15. the 20 day the wind be at Northeast , and northnortheast : at 7 in the morning we have 30 fathom black oz : at twelve of the clock we be upon the sudden in shoal water , among great sand , and can find no way out . by sound and seek about , we come aground , and so do the William , but we have no hurt , for the wind be off the shore , and the same night it be calm : all night we do our best , but we can not have her aflote . Theise shoal do lie off shoal off colgoyeve : it be very flat a great way off , and it do not high above 2 or 3 foot water : it flow north-east , and Southwest . the 21 day the wind be at Southwest , and be very fair weather we do lighten our ship as much as be possible for we to do , by reason of the place . the same high water , by the help of God , we get both a float , and the wind be at the southwest do help we , for it cause it to flow the more water . this day we find the pole to be elevate 68 degree 40 min. in the afternoon we both set sail to seek way to get out of these sand , our boat a 297 the bay of morzovet . [ I. 452. ] the english voyage head sound , have 6 , 7 , and 8 fathom all within the sand which be without we . we bear to the southward , and the William bear more to the eastwards , and night be at hand the wind come to the southeast , whereupon we lay it to the southward , lie Southwest , and south and by west , and run to 19 , and 12 and 14 fathom , and present we have but six fathom , which be off the sand head , which we be a ground upon the day before . than we cast about to the eastwards for deep water , which we present have , as 10 , 15 , and 20 and so to 23 fathom . the 22 day at 8 in the morning , we cast about to the southward , and this day in the morning we see the William under our lee as far as we can see she , and with a great fog we lose the sight of she , and since we have not see she . thus we run till we come to thirty fathom black oz , which we have at twelve of the clock , and at three in the afternoon we have twenty and three fathom , and then we run westnorthwest , and west by north , all the same night follow . the 23 day we have at 6 in the morning 27 fathom , at 8 a clock 28 fathom : at 9 the wind be at eastsoutheast , we hale westnorthwest : this day we have sight of the land of Hugri side . at twelve of the clock we have thirty two fathom sand . this day we run west and by north , and come to five fathom off the bay of morzovet . than we lay it to the northward , so that we lay northnortheast off . the wind after come to the north , and north by east , and we lay east and east by north , than we lay it to the westward again : and thus we lie till we come to forty fathom , and then we go northwest till we come to fourteen fathom , and so to ten fathom . than we cast about to the eastwards and lay east , and east by north all the same night . the 24 day at 8 in the morning we have 32 fathom . we run northwest till we come to 11 fathom , than we lay to the northward till 12 at night , and then we 298 Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman a.d. 1580. come to forty fathom , than the wind at north-east we lie to the westwards , and hale northwest along . the 25 at 4 in the morning we have 37 fathom , we run northwest , the wind at Northnortheast very much . the 26 day we run with the same wind , and find the pole to be elevate 70 deg . 40 min. the 27 at 7 in the morning we see land , which we make to be Kegor , than we hale northwest , and north by west to double the north cape . the 28 day at 3 in the morning we run northwest , and so all day . at night the wind come to the southwest , and we run northwest all that night . the 29 day we put into a sound call take , and then the town of town be call Hungon : we come to a anchor at 5 in Hungon . the afternoon , at 25 fathom very fair sand . this sound be very large and good , and the same night we get water aboard . the 30 day in the morning the wind at Northeast , and but little , we set sail , and with our boat on head we get the sea about 12 of the clock : the wind with a fair gale come to the east southeast , and all this day and night we run westnorthwest . the 31 day at 12 of the clock we double the north they double cape , the wind be at eastsoutheast , we hale west north all the same day , and at night we run westsouthwest . m the 1 day of September the wind be at Northeast with very much fog : all this day we run westsouthwest : at 2 in the afternoon the wind come north . the second day at 3 in the morning we double fowlnesse , and the wind be this day variable at all part of the compass . in the afternoon we make but little way : at 6 a clock the wind come to the southwest , and we go northwest . at 9 in the night there come down so much wind by the Westsouth west , that we be fain to lay it a hull , we hale it to northwards for the space of 2 hour , and then we lay her head to the southward , and at the break of day we see land , which be very high , and be call by the man of the 299 the sound of romesal . the english voyage country foulness . it be within full of small island , and without full of rock very far out , and within the rock you have fair sand at 20 fathom . the 3 day in the morning we bear with the sound aforesaid : within it be but shoal water , 4 5 and 3 fathom , sandy ground , the land be very high , and the church that be see be call Helike Kirke . it do high here not above 8 or 9 foot . the 12 day at 3 in the afternoon , we put into a sound by Lowfoote , where it do flow Southwest , and by south , and do high 7 or 8 foot water . the 13 day much wind at west : we have a ledge of rock in the wind of we , but the road be reasonable good for all southerly and westerly wind . we have the main land in the wind of we : this day be stormy with rain . the 23 day at four of the clock in the afternoon we put into Norway , into a sound call romesal , where it flow southsoutheast , and do high 8 foot water : this place be full of low island , and many good sound without the high mountain land . here be great store of wood grow , as fir , birch , oak , and hasell : all this night the wind be at the south , very much wind , with rain and fog . the 28 day in the morning the wind be at eastnortheast we set sail at 8 of the clock , and hale out of the bay Westsouthwest , and Southwest , have a goodly gale until one of the clock , and then the wind come to southeast , and to the south with rain and fog , and very much wind : at six of the clock we come into a very good road , where we do ride all the same night in good safety . the 29 day we put into a good sound , the wind by the southwest : at three in the afternoon there come down very much wind by the south , and all night with vehement waste , and rain . the 30 day all day the wind be at Westsouth west . and in this sound the pole be elevate 63 deg . 10 min. 300 Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman ad . 1580. the first day of October the wind be at south with October . very much wind , and vehement blast . the 7 day we set sail : for from the first of this month until this 7 day , we have very foul weather , but special the four day when the wind be so great , that our cable break with the very storm , and i do not think that it be possible that any more wind than that be shall blow : for after the break of our [ i . 453. ] cable , we do drive a league , before our anchor will take any hold : but God be thank the storm begin to slack , otherwise we have be in ill case . the 7. day at night we come to a anchor until the next day , which be the 8 day of the month , when as the wind grow great again , with rain , whereupon we set sail and return into the sound again : and at our first come to a anchor , present there blow so much wind , that although our best anchor be out , yet the extremity of the storm drive we upon a ledge of rock , and do bruise our ship in such sort , that we be constrain to lighten she to save she , and by this mean ( by the help of God ) we get off our ship and stop our leak , and moar she in good safety abide for a wind . we rid from this day by reason of contrary wind , with fog and rain until the 24 day , which day in the morning the wind come to the north-east , and at 8 of the clock we set sail . this sound be call moor Moore sound . sound , where it high about 5 foot water , and flow southsoutheast . the next day be the 2 5 day we put into a sound which be call ultar sound , where be a ship of the king of Denmark put into another sound there by , be 2 league to the southward of we , that come out of island : you wind be contrary for we at southsouthwest . the 12 day of November we set sail the wind be at the east southeast , and pass through the sound where the king ship do lie : which sound be call sloure sound . but as we do open the sound , we find the wind at the southwest , so that we can do no good , so 301 that we moar our ship between 2. Islands until the 18 day , and then the weather be fair and calm , we set sail , 8c go to sea hope to find a fair wind , but in the sea we find the wind at the southwest , and southsouthwest , so that we be constrain to return into the same sound . the next day be the 19 the king ship come out also , because she see we put to sea , 8c come as far out as we , and moar where we do moare afore : and at our return back again , we moar our ship in a utter sound call Scorpe sound , because the king ship be without victual , and we do not great desire her company , although they desire we . in this sound the pole be elevate 62 deg . 47 min. thus we lay still for a wind until the 1 of December , which day we set sail at 6 a clock in the morning , 8c at 4 in the afternoon we lay it to the inward . the 9 day we have sight of the coast of Scotland which be buquhamnesse . the 10 day we be open off the Frith . the 11 day at 4 in the morning we be thwart of Barwike : at 6 we be thwart of bamburch : the same day at 10 at night we be shoot as far as Hollyfoote . then the wind come to the south and southeast , so that we lay still until the next day in the morning , and then we be constrain to put with Tinmouth . the same day at night we hale aground to stop a leak , which we find to be in the scarf afore . the wind continue by the southeast 8c southsoutheast until the 20 day , and then we set sail about 12 at night , bear along the coast . the 22 day by reason of a southeast wind , we think we shall have be put into Humber , but the wind come to the west , so that we hale southeast : and at 3 in the afternoon we hale a sea board the sand , and have shoal water off Lymery and owry , and be in 4 fathom off they . the next day we hale as we may to seize orfordnesse . 302 instruction for russian fleet a.d. 1582. the 24 day we come thwart of the Nase , about 8 in the morning . the 25 day be the nativity of Christ , we come to a anchor between Oldhaven , and tilberie hope . the same day we turn as high as Porshet . the 26 day we turn as high as Ratcliff , and praise God for our safe return . and thus i end , 1580. the William with Charles Jackman arrive at a port in Norway between Tronden and Rostock in October 1580. and there do winter : and from thence depart again in February follow , and go in company of a ship of the king of Denmark towards island : and since that time he be never hear of . Instructions make by the company of english merchant for discovery of new trade , unto Richard Gibs , William Biggat , John Backhouse , William freeman , John Haly , and James woodcock , etc master of the 9 ship , and one bark that we have freight for a voyage with they to be make ( by the grace of God ) from hence to saint Nicholas in Russia , and back again : which ship be now in the river of Thames be present ready to depart upon the say voyage , with the next apt wind that may serve thereunto : and with this fleet afterward be join m. Christopher Carlisle with the tiger . the 1 of June 1582. orasmuch as the number of ship which we purpose to send in this fleet together for saint Nicholas in Russia be great than at any time heretofore we have send thither , as also for that some speech be give out that you shall be meet withal by such as with force and violence will assault you as enemy , to the end that good 3°3 