covet and desire of the commodity you carry with you . it behoove you to give trifle thing unto such people as you shall happen to see , and to offer they all courtesy and friendship you may or can , to win their love and favour towards you , not do or offer they any wrong or hurt . and though you shall be offer wrong at their hand , yet not to revenge the same light , but by all mean possible seek to win they , yet always deal wise and with such circumspection that you keep your self out of their danger . thus i beseech God almighty to bless you , and prosper your voyage with good and happy success , and send you safe to return home again , to the great joy and rejoice of the adventurer with you , and all your friend , and our whole country , amen . certain brief advise give by master thou , to Arthur Pet , and Charles Jackman , to be observe in their northeastern discovery , and oh 1580. if we reckon from Wardhouse to colgoieve island 400. mile for almost 20. degree difference only of longitude very near east and west , and about the latitude of 70. degree and two third part : from colgoieve to vaigat 200. mile for 10. degree difference only in longitude , at 70. degree of latitude also : from vaigat to the promontory Tabin 60. degree difference of longitude ( the whole course , or short distance be east and west ) in the latitude likewise of 70. degree , make 1200. mile : then be summa totalis from Wardhouse to Tabin 600. league , or 1800. English mile . therefore allow in a discovery voyage for one day with another but 50. English mile , it be evident that from Wardhouse to Tabin , the course may be sail easy in six and thirty day : but by god help it may be finish in much short time , both by help 262 of wind prosperous , and light continual for the time requisite thereunto . when you be past Tabin , or come to the longitude of 142. degree , as your chart show , or two , three , four , or five degree further easterly , it be probable you shall find the land on your right hand run much southerly and eastward , in which course you be like either to fall into the mouth of the famous river Oechardes , or some other , which yet i conjecture to pass by the renown city of Cambalu , and the mouth to be in latitude about 50. or 52. degree , and within 300. or 400. mile of Cambalu it self , be in the latitude of 45. degree southerly of the say river mouth , or else that you shall trend about the very northern and most easterly point of all Asia , pass by the province Ania , and then to the latitude of 46. degree , keep still the land in view on your right hand ( as near as you may with safety ) you may enter into quinsay haven , be the chief city in the northern china , as i term it for distinction sake , from the other better know . and in or about either or both of these two warm place , you may to great good purpose be occupy the whole winter , after your arrival in those quarter , as sometime by sea , sometime in notable fresh river , sometime in discreet view and note down the situation of the city within land , etc and ever assay to come by some charts or map of the country , make and print in Cathay or China , and by some of their book likewise for language , etc you may also have opportunity to sail over to Japan island , where you shall find Christian man , Jesuit of many country of Christendom some , and perhaps some Englishman , at who hand you may have great instruction and advise for you affair in hand . [ note 263 A.D. 1580. m. Dee give they a chart of his own make , which here he refer they unto . 