a letter send from her highness to the say great duke of Russia , by sir Hierome bow aforesaid , her majesty ambassador . serenissimo principi ac domino , Joanni Basilio , dei gratia regi and magno duci totius Russiae , volo-domerae , etc regi Cazani , etc domino Plescoae , etc domino and magno duci novogrodiae , etc and gubernatori in tota Provincia siberiae , etc fratri and amico nostro charissimo . Lizabetha , dei gratia angliae , francia , and hiberniae regina , fidei defensatrix , etc serenissimo principi ac domino , Joanni Basilio , eadem dei gratia regi and magno duci totius Russiae , volo-domerae , Moscoviae , and Novogrodiae , regi Cazani and Astracani , domino Plescoae , and magno duci Smolenscoae , tueri , Ugori , Permiae , Viatskae , Bolharae , and aliarum ditionum , domino and magno duci novogrodiae in inferiori region , Chernigae , Rezanae , Polotscoae , Rostovae , Jaroslavae , Bealozeri , Liflandiae , Oudori , and condensae , and gubernatori in tota provincia siberiae , and partium septentrionalium , and aliarum , fratri and amico suo charissimo , salutem . serenissime princeps , frater and amice charissime , ex iis quae nobiscum egit s. V. illustris legatus , intelleximus , quam grate vobis faceremus satis , si legatum aliquem cum mandatis instructum , ad s. V. ablegaremus . in quo certain quidem instituto ad nobis ex animo placuit , quod est honest postulatum , ut non nisi praestita re , possemus nobis quoquo modo satisfacere . atque cum id haberemus apud nos decretum , nobis non incommodi incurrit in mentem and oculos Hieronimus Bowes mile , ex nobilibus nostris domesticis , plurimum nobis dilectus , quem inpraesentiarum ad s. V. ablegamus , cujus prudentiae and fidei , totum hoc quicquid est , quod ad serenitatum mutuo nostrarum dignitatem ornandam pertinere posse 312 1583-arbitramur , commisimus . in quo munere perfungendo , quin omnem curam and diligentiam sit collaturus , neutiquam dubitamus : i s. autem V. rogamus , velit ei eam fidem habere in iis persequendis quae habet a nobis in mandatis , quam nobis habendam putaret , si essemus praesente . Praeteret , cum nobis multum charus sit Robertus jacobus medice , quem superiori two anno , ad 1582. S. V. misimus , rogamus ut eum eo loco s. V. habeat , quo virum probatissimum , and singulari quam plurimarum virtutum laud ornatum habendum esse , boni principe censent . Quem i nobis neutiquam ablegavissemus , nisi amicitiae nostrae , and study gratificandi s. V. plurimum tribuissemus . in qua dum voluntate manemus erga s. V. non nisi optime de bonis vestris meriti in praefatum jacobum nobis pollicemur . et deum Opt. Max. precamur , ut s. V. salvam conservet , and incolumem . Datae e regius nostra Grenovici 19 die mensis Junii , anno domini 1583 , regni verb nostri vicessimo quinto . S. vestrae bona soror . the same in english . ELizabeth by the grace of God , queen of England , France , and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc to the most excellent prince and lord , John Basiliwich , by the same grace of God , king and great duke of all Russia , Volodomer , Moscovie , and Novogrod , king of Cazan and astracan , lord of Plesco , and great duke of Smolensco , of tuer , Ugor , and Permie , Viatsca , Bolhar , and other , lord and great duke of Novogrod in the low country , of Cherniga , rezan , polotsko , Rostove , jaroslave , Bealozera , Lifland , Oudor , Obdor , and condensa , and governor of all the land of Siberia , and of the north part and other , her dear brother and friend , salutation . most excellent prince , most dear brother and friend , by those thing which the worthy ambassador of your excellency declare unto we , we have understand how kind it will be take , if we shall send to your 313 [ i . 458. ] excellency a ambassador from we , with commandment and instruction . in which matter your honourable request have so much please we , that we can not any manner of way satisfy our self , except we perform the same . and have purpose with our self so to do , we think of , and remember Jerome Bowes knight , a gentleman of quality of our household , a man very much belove of we , who at this present we send unto your majesty , and to who wisdom and faithfulness we have commit all , whatsoever we take to appertain to the advancement of both our honour indifferent . in the discharge of which service , we doubt not but that all care and diligence shall be use on his part , so that we entreat your majesty to give he credence in the prosecute of those thing which he have from we in commandment , no less than to our self , if we be present . and whereas doctor Jacob. Robert Jacob doctor of physic be a man very dear unto we , who the last year we send unto your excellency , we desire that he may have that favour and estimation with you , which good prince think a most honest and virtuous man worthy of : for have we not carry great respect to our mutual friendship , and endeavour to gratify your majesty , we shall in no case have part with he . And see we continue still the same good will towards your excellency , we do even promise to our self your honourable kindness towards he : and we pray the almighty god to preserve your majesty in good safety and health . give at our palace of Greenwich the 19 day of June , in the year of our lord 1583 , and of our reign the five and twenty . your majesty good sister . 314 