of the favour of the emperor and Boris Pheodorowich towards m. Horsey , there be the next day send he for his further provision upon the sea by a gentleman and a captain the thing follow . 16. live ox . 70. sheep . 600. hen . 25. flitche of bacon . 80. bushel of meal . 600. loaf of bread . 2000 egg . 10. goose . 2. crane . 2. swan . 65. gallon of mead . 40. gallon of aquavitas . 60. gallon of beer . 3. young bear . 4. hawk . store of onion and garlic . 10. fresh salmon . a wild bore . all these thing be bring he down by a gentleman of the emperor , and another of prince Boris Pheodorowich , and be receive in order by John Frese servant to m. Horsey , together with a honourable present and reward from the prince Boris , send he by m. Francis Cherry a Englishman : which present be a whole very rich piece of cloth of gold , and a fair pair of sable . this gentleman have observe many other rare thing concern those part , which hereafter ( God will ) at moor convenient time and laisure shall come to light . Pheodor Ivanowich the new emperor gracious letter of privilege to the english merchant word for word , obtain by m. Jerome Horsey . 1586. hrough the will of the almighty , and without beginning God , which be before this world , who we glorify in you Trinity , one only God the father , the son , and the holy ghost , maker of all thing , worker of all in all every where , fulfiller of all thing , by which will and work , he both love and give life to man , that 347 our only God , which inspire every one of we his only child with his word , to discern God through our lord Jesus Christ , and the holy quicken spirit of life now in these perilous time , establish we to keep the right sceptre , and suffer we of our self to reign to the good profit of the land , and to the subdue of the people , together with the enemy , and to the maintenance of virtue . we pheodor the offspring of John , the great lord , emperor , king and great prince of all Russia , of volo-demeria , Moscovia and Novogrod , king of Cazan , king of astracan , lord of Plesko , and great prince of Smolensko , of tuer , Yougoria , Permia , viatsko , of Bolghar and other , lord and great prince of the land of the low Novogrod , Chernigo , rezan , polotsko , rostow , yeraslave , the white lake , Liefland , Oudor , condensa , and ruler of all Siberia , and all the northside , and lord of many other country . i have gratify the merchant of England , to wit , sir Rowland haiward , and Richard Martin aiderman , sir George Barnes , Thomas smith esquire , Jerome Horsey , Richard Saltonstall , with their fellow . i have license they to sail with their ship into our dominion the land of Dwina , with all kind of commodity to trade free , and unto our kingdom and the city of Moscow , and to all the city of our empire of Moscovia . and the english merchant sir Rowland haiward and his society desire we , that we will gratify they to trade into our kingdom of Moscovia , and into our heritage of great Novogrod and Plesko , and into all part of our kingdom , to buy and sell with their ware without custom . therefore we for our sister sake queen Elizabeth , and also because that they allege that they have great loss and hindrance by the venture of the sea , and otherwise , have gratify the say english merchant sir Rowland haiward and his society , free to come into 348 our kingdom of Moscovia , and into all our dominion with all kind of commodity , to trade , and traffic free , and at their pleasure with all kind of their commodity : also i have command not to take any manner of custom for their good , nor other custom whatsoever : that be to say , neither for pass by any place by water , nor for launch , neither for pass through any place by land , neither for the vessel or boat , nor for their head , nor for pass over bridge , nor for fery over at any place , neither for acknowledgement at any place where they shall come , nor any manner of custom or duty , by what name soever . only they shall not bring with they into our dominion , neither recarie out of our dominion , or father any other man good but their own , neither sell they nor barter they away for they . also our naturali people shall not buy and sell for they , or from they , neither shall they retain or keep any of our naturali subject good , or pawn by they to colour they . also they shall not send any of their ruff servant about into any city to engross , or buy up commodity , but into what city they themselves shall come , they shall buy and sei , and shall sei their own commodity and not we . and when they shall come into our inheritance of great Novogrod and Plesko , and through all our dominion with their commodity , than our nobleman and captain , and every one of our officer shall suffer they to depart accord to this our letter , and shall take no custom at all of they , for any of their commodity , neither for pass through or pass by , nor for passage over any bridge , nor shall take of they any other duty whatsoever name they have . also into what place of our dominion , or when they shall happen to come , and to proceed to buy or sell , and wheresoever they shall pass through with good not buy of any commodity , neither will sell 349 their own , then in those city and town they shall take no manner of custom or duty of they , accord as before . and i have gratify they and give they free leave to traffic throughout all the dominion of our kingdom in all city with their good , to buy and sell all manner of commodity , without any duty or custom whatsoever . and the english merchant where they be desirous to buy or sell , or barter their ware with our merchant , whole ware for ware , they shall sell their commodity whole , and not by retail : that be to say , neither by small weight nor by the yard , to sell or barter in their own house , and they shall sei and barter their ware whole , cloth by the pack , and by the whole cloth , and damask and velvet by the piece and not by the yard , and all manner of commodity that be to be sell by weight , not to sell by the small weight , as by the pound and ounce , but by whole sale : also they shall sei wine by the pipe : and by the gallon , quart or stoop they shall not sell . and they shall buy , sell and exchange their own commodity themselves , and the ruff merchant shall not make sale or exchange for they or from they any of their commodity , neither shall they themselves convey or carry through any other man good at no place in stead of their own : and which of the english merchant will at any time sell his commodity at colmogro or Vologda or yeraslave , they may , and of their commodity throughout all our city and dominion , our nobleman , captain , and every of our officer shall take no manner of custom , accord as it be write in this our gracious letter : and throughout all our dominion and city they shall hire carrier and vessel with man to labour , at their own charge , to transport their good . so likewise , whensoever the english merchant be dispose to depart out of our kingdom into any other country or into their own land , if our pleasure be , they shall take our good with they from our treasury , 35° and shall sell they , and exchange they for such commodity as be commodious for our kingdom , and shall deliver it into our treasury , and with those our commodity , our nobleman and captain , and every of our officer shall let they pass through all our city also without custom accord to these our letter . also whensoever the english merchant shall have sell their own good and : buy themselves commodity , and will depart out of Moscow , than they shall manifest themselves to our chief secretary Andrew Sholkalove , in the office where the ambassador be always dispatch . and if the english merchant come , have have any mischance by the sea , insomuch that the ship be break , or if that ship do come to any part of our country : than we will cause the good to be seek out in true justice , and to be give to the english people , which at that time shall be here resident in our country : and if so be that it so fall out that at that time there be no Englishmen within our realm : then will we cause these good to be lay up in a place together , and when the people of England shall come into our realm , than we will command all those good to be deliver to the say english people . also we have gratify all the english merchant with the house of one Urie here in the Moscow right over against saint maxim church behind the market , and they shall dwell in the same house accord as before time , and they shall keep one always in the house to keep it , either a ruff , or one of their own people . also the english merchant shall possess their house , to wit , at yeraslave , Vologda , Colmogro , and the house at the haven of the sea , and they shall dwell in those house , accord as our goodness have be to they heretofore : and we have command , that there shall not be take of they no yearly rent , nor no manner of custom , tax , rend or any other duty whatsoever for those house , neither shall they pay any duty or tax with any of the townsman of those place , and in every 351 one of those house , to wit , at yeraslave , Vologda , and colmogro , they shall have man to keep their house , two or three of their own country people , stranger or else russes , man of the mean sort , which shall be no merchant , that they may lay their good in those house , and they may sell the commodity out of those their house to who they please , accord to this our gracious letter : and those that keep their house shall not sell or buy no part of their commodity , except they be there or give order , whereby they be not deceive by they . so likewise i have gratify they with their house at the sea haven , at the mouth of Podezemsky , and we have command that they shall not carry their good from thence to the new castle S. Michael the archangel , but shall arrive , and do as they have do heretofore with their ware at that their house , and shall unlade their commodity out of their ship , and shall lade they again with Russe commodity , even there at that their house without interruption : only they shall permit our officer of colmogro and swear man to write up those commodity , both the commodity of England , and those of Russeland , what the merchant shall declare themselves , and no otherwise , but they shall not overlook their commodity , neither shall they unbind any of their pack . and when the english merchant be dispose to send into their own country , to wit , any of their own people on land through any other kingdom whatsoever , they shall not send their people without our kingly knowledge and commandment , and which of their people so ever they do mean to send out of our kingdom into their own country , than they shall send those their people , not without our kingly majesty knowledge , to wit , those that go of pleasure without carry any commodity with they , and they shall have a letter of pass give unto they , out of the office where the ambassador have always their dispatch . and whosoever have any thing to do with they in 352 dr . Giles FLETCHER’S ambassage a.d. 1588. matter of controversy , either concern merchandise or injury , than they be to be judge by our treasurer and secretary of the ambassador office to do justice between both party , and to seek out the truth of matter in all thing , and whatsoever can be find out by the law , shall|be try by oath and lot : who lot soever be take forth , he to have right . and in what place of all our kingdom , in what city soever they or their people shall be , and that there happen any matter of controversy , either concern merchandise , injury or otherwise , that they have occasion to set upon any man by law , or that any seek upon they , concern what matter soever in all our kingdom and city , than our lieutenant , captain , and our officer shall give they justice , and shall minister [ i . 473. ] all true justice between they , seek out the truth : and what can be true seek by law , shall|be seek out by oath and lot : who lot soever be take out , he to have right accord as before , and the judge or justice shall take of they no kind of duty , for matter of law no where throughout all our realm . this letter be give in our princely palace within the city of Moscow , in the year from the foundation of the world , seven thousand fourscore and fifteen in the month of February . the ambassage of m. Giles Fletcher , doctor of the civil law , send from her majestic to Theodor the emperor of Russia , anno 1588. n the year 1588. be send ambassador from her highness into the country of Russia , Giles Fletcher doctor of the civil law , as well to treat with the new emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , about league and amity , in like manner as be before with his father Ivan Vasilowich , as also for the reestablish and reduce into order in 353 z 