12 of their colony and policy in maintain their purchase by conquest . 13 of their borderer with who they have most to do in war and peace . 14 of their church office and degree . 15 of their liturgy or form of church service . 16 of their manner of administer the sacrament . 17 of the doctrine of the ruff church . 18 of the manner of solemnize their marriage . 19 of the other ceremony of the ruff church . A.D. 1588. third , the Oeconomie or private behaviour of the Russe contain these chapter . 1 of the emperor household officer , and order of his house . 2 of the private behaviour and manner of the ruff people . the description of the country of Russia , with the breadth , length , and name of the shire . he country of Russia be sometime call Sarmatia . it change the name ( as some do suppose ) for that it be part into diverse small , and yet absolute government , not depend , nor be subject the one to the other . for Russe in that tongue do signify as much as to part , or divide . the ruff report that four brethren , trubor , rurico , Sinees , and Varivus divide among they the north part of the country . likewise that the south part be possess by 4. other , Kio , Scieko , Choranus , and their sister Libeda : each call his territory after his own name . of this partition it be call Russia , about the year from Christ 860. as for the conjecture which i find in some cosmographer , that the ruff nation borrow the name of the people call Roxellani , and be the very same nation with they , it be without all good probability , both in respect of the 357 Strabo in his etymologic of the word ( which be very far fetch ) and especial for the seat and dwell of that people , which be betwixt the two river of Tanais and Boristhenes , ( as Strabo report ) quite another way from the country of Russia . when it bear the name of Sarmatia , it be divide into two chief part : the white and the black . the white Sarmatia be all that part that lie towards the north , and on the side of Liefland : as the province now call Dwina , Vagha , ustiug , Vologda , cargapolia , novo-grodia , etc whereof Novogrod velica be the Metropolite or chief city . Black Sarmatia be all that country that lie southward towards the Euxin or black sea : as the dukedom of volodemer , of Moscow , rezan , etc some have think that the name of Sarmatia be first take Gen. 10. from one sarmate , who Moses and Josephus call 1 Asarmathes son to Joktan , and nephew to Heber , off ' the posterity of Sem but this seem to be nothing but a conjecture take out of the likeness of the name Asarmathes . for the dwell of all joktans posterity be describe by Moses to have be betwixt Mescha or Masius ( a hill of the Ammonite ) and sephace , near to u - +75 - ] the river Euphrates : which make it very unlikely that Asarmathes shall plant any colony so far off in you ^rus^ia^ north and northwest country . it be bound northward ’ by the lap and the north ocean . on the southside by the Tartar call crimme . eastward they have the Nagaian tartar , that possess all the country on the east side of Volga towards the caspian sea . on the west and Southwest border lie Lituania , Livonia and Polonia . the shire oj Russia . the whole country be now reduce under the government of one , contain these chief province or shire . volodemer , ( which bear the first place in the emperor stile , because their house come of the duke of that country ) Moscow , Nisnovogrod , Plesko , smolensko , Novogrod velica ( or novgorod of the low country ) rostove , yaruslave , Bealozera , rezan , Duyna , carga-358 polia , Meschora , Vagha , Ustuga , ghaletsa . these be the naturali shire pertain to Russia , but far great and large than the shire of England , though not so well people . the other country or province which the province the ruff emperor have get perforce add of late y^nquest to their other dominion , be these which follow , twerra , Youghoria , Permia , Vadska , Boulghoria , Chernigo , Oudoria , Obdoria , Condora , with a great part of Siberia : where the people though they be not naturali russes , yet obey the emperor of Russia , and be rule by the law of his country , pay custom and tax , as his own people do . beside these he have under he the kingdom of Cazan and astracan , get by conquest not long since . as for all his possession in Lituania ( to the number of 30. great town and more , ) with narve and dorp in Livonia , they be quite go , be surprise of late year by the king of Poland and Sweden . Theise shire and province be reduce all into four jurisdiction , which they call chetfyrd ( that be ) tetrarchy , or fourthpart . the whole country be of great length and breadth . the breadth from the north to the south ( if you measure from Cola country to astracan which bend somewhat eastward ) it reach in length about 4260. verse , or mile . notwithstanding the emperor of Russia have more territory northward , far beyond Cola unto the river of Tromschua , that run a hundred verse , wellnigh Pechinga . beyond Pechinga , near to Wardhouse , but not entire nor clear limit , by reason of the king of Sweden and Denmark , that have diverse town there , aswell as the ruff , plot together the one with the other : every one of they claim the whole of those north part as his own right . the breadth ( if you go from that part of his territory that lie far westward on the narve side , to the part of Siberia eastward , where the emperor have his garrison ) be 4400. verse or thereabouts . A verse ( by their reckon ) be a 1000 pase , yet less by one quarter then a english mile . if the 359 whole dominion of the ruff emperor be all habitable , and people in all place , as it be in some , he will either hardly hold it all within one regiment , or be over mighty for all his neighbour prince . of the soil and climate . the soil of the country for the most part be of a sleight sandy mould , yet very much different one place from another , for the yield of such thing as grow out of the earth . the country northwards towards the part of saint Nicholas and Cola , and Northeast towards Siberia , be all very barren , and full of desert wood by reason of the climate , and extremity of the cold in winter time . so likewise along the river Volgha betwixt the country of Cazan , and astracan : where ( notwithstanding the soil be very fruitful ! ) it be all unhabit , save that upon the river Volgha on the Westside , the emperor have some few castle with garrison in they . This happen by mean of the Crimme tartar , that will neither himself plant town to dwell there , ( live a wild and vagrant life ) nor suffer the ruff ( that be far off with the strength of his country ) to people those part . from Vologda ( which lie almost 1700. verse from the port of saint Nicholas ) down towards Moscow , and so towards the south part that border upon the Crimme , ( which contain the like space of 1700. verse or there about ) be a very fruitful and pleasant country , yield pasture , and corn , with wood and water in very great plenty . the like be betwixt rezan ( that lie southeast from Moscow ) to Novogrod and Vobsko , that reach far towards the northwest . so betwixt Moscow , and smolensko ( that lie southwest towards Lituania ) be a very fruitful and pleasant soil . the whole country differ very much from it self , by reason of the year : so that a man will marveile to see the great alteration and difference betwixt the winter , and the summer Russia . the whole 360 country in the winter lie under snow , which fall continual , and be sometime of a yard or two thick , but great towards the north . the river and other water be all freeze up a yard or more thick , how swift or broad so ever they be . and this continue common five month , viz. from the begin of November till towards the end of march , what time [ i . 476. ] the snow begin to melt . so that it will breed a °f frost in a man to look abroad at that time , and see russta-the winter face of that country . the sharpness of the air you may judge of by this : for that water drop down or cast up into the air congeal into ice before it come to the ground . in the extremity of winter , if you hold a pewter dish or pot in your hand , or any other mettle ( except in some chamber where their warm stove be ) your finger will freeze fast unto it , and draw off the skin at the part . when you pass out of a warm room into a cold , you shall sensible feel your breath to wax stark , and even stifle with the cold , as you draw it in and out . diverse not only that travel ! abroad , but in the very market , and street of their town , be mortal pinch and kill withal : so that you shall see many drop down in the street ; many traveller bring into the town sit dead and stifle in their sled . Divers lose their nose , the tip of their ear , and the ball of their cheek , their toe , foot , etc many time ( when the winter be very hard and extreme ) the bear and wolf issue by troop out of the wood drive by hunger , and enter the village , tear and raven all they can find : so that the inhabitant be fain to fly for safeguard of their life . and yet in the summer time you shall see such a new hue and face of a country , the wood ( for the most part which be all of fir and birch ) so fresh and so sweet , the pasture and meadow so green and well grow , ( and that upon the sudden ) such variety of flower , such noise of bird ( special of nightingale , that seem to be more loud and of a more 361 variable note then in other country ) that a man shall not light travel in a more pleasant country . and this fresh and speedy growth of the spring there seem to proceed from the benefit of the snow : which all the winter time be spread over the whole country as a white robe , and keep it warm from the rigour of the frost , in the spring time ( when the sun wax warm , and dissolve it into water ) do so thorough drench and soak the ground , that be somewhat of a sleight and sandy mould , and then shine so hot upon it again , that it draw the herb and plant forth in great plenty and variety , in a very short time . as the winter exceed in cold , so the summer incline to over much heat , special in the month of June , July and August , be much warm than the summer air in England . the country throughout be very well water with spring , river , and ozera , or lake . wherein the providence of God be to be note , for that much of the country be so far inland , as that some part lie a thousand mile and more every way from any sea , yet it be serve with fair river , and that in very great number , that empty themselves one into another , , run all into the sea their lake be many and large , , some of 60. 80. 100 and 200. mile long , with breadth proportionate . the chief river be these , first , Volgha , that have his head or spring at the root of a aldertree , about 200. verse above yaruslave , and grow so big by the increase of other river by that time it come thither , that it be broad a english mile and more , and so run into the caspian sea , about 2800. verse or mile of length . the next be Boristhenes ( now call neper ) that divide the country from Lituania , and fall into the Euxin sea . the three Tanais or don , ( the ancient bounder betwixt Europe and Asia ) that take his head out of rezan 362 Ozera , and so run through the country of the chrim tartar , fall into the great sea , lake , or mere , ( call Maeotis ) by the city of Azov . by this river ( as the ruff report ) you may pass from their city Moscow to Constantinople , and so into all those part of the world by water , draw your boat ( as their manner be ) over a little isthmus or narrow slip of land , a few verst overthwart . which be prove not long since by a ambassador send to Constantinople , who pass the river of Moscua , and so into another call Ocka , whence he draw his boat over into Tanais , and thence pass the whole way by water . the four be call Duyna , many hundred mile long , that fall northward into the bay of saint Nicholas , and have great alabaster rock on the bank towards the sea side . the five Duna , that empti into the baltic sea by the town Riga . the sixth Onega , that fall into the bay at Solovetsko 90. verse from the port of saint Nicholas . this river , below the town Cargapolia , meet with the river Volock , that fall into the Finland sea by the town Yama . so that from the port of saint Nicholas into the Finland sea , and so into the sound , you may pass all by water , as have be try by the ruff . the seven Suchana , that flow into Duyna , and so into the north sea . the eight Ocka , that fetch his head from the border of the chrim , and stream into Volgha . the nine Moscua , that run through the city Moscow , and give it the name . there be Wichida also a very large and long river that rise out of Permia , and fall into Volgha . all these [ i . 477. ] be river of very large stream , the least to be compare to the Thames in bigness , and in length far more , beside diverse other . the pole at Moscow be 55. degree 10. minute . at the port of saint Nicholas towards the north 63. degree and 50. minute . 363 the native commodity of the country . the fruit and tpor kind of fruit , they have apple , pear , ussia^ plum , cherry , red and black , ( but the black ' wild ) a deene like a musk millian , but more sweet and pleasant , cucumber and goord ( which they call arbouse ) rasp , strawberry , and hurtilbery , with many other berry in great quantity in every wood and hedge . their kind of grain be wheat , rye , barley , oat , pease , buckway , psnytha , that in taste be somewhat like to rice . of all these grain the country yield very sufficient with a overplus quantity , so that wheat be sell sometime for two alteen or ten penny starling the chetfird , which make almost three english bushel . their rye be sow before the winter , all their other grain in the spring time , and for the most part in may . the permians and some other that dwell far north , and in desert place , be serve from the part that lie more southward , and be force to make bread sometime of a kind of root ( call Vaghnoy ) and of the middle rind of the fir tree . if there be any dearth ( as they account this last year anno 1588. wheat and rye be at 13. alteen , or 5. shilling five penny starling the chetfird ) the fault be rather in the practice of their nobility that use to engross it , then in the country it self . the chief the native commodity of the country ( wherewith commodity of serve both their own turn , and send much abroad the country . to great enrich of the emperor , and his people ) i fur . be many and substantiali . first , fur of all sort . wherein the providence of God be to be note , that provide a naturali remedy for they , to help the naturali inconvenience of their country by the cold of the climate . their chief fur be these , black fox , sable , luserne , dun fox , martrones , gurnestalle or armin , laset or Miniver , Bever , wulverin , the skin these rat of a great water rat that smell natural like musk , areinCanada . Calaber or grey squirrel , red squirrel , red and white fox . 364 beside the great quantity spend within you country ( the people be clad all in fur the whole winter ) there be transport out of the country some year by the merchant of turquoise , Persia , Bougharia , Georgia , Armenia , and some other of Christendom , to the value of four or five hundred thousand rubble , as i have hear of the merchant . the best sable fur grow in the country of Pechora , Momgosorskoy and Obdorskoy , the Momgwnkoy worse sort in Siberia , perm , and other place . the perhap\ black fox and red come out of Siberia , white and dun from Pechora , whence also come the white wolf , and white bear skin . the best wulverin also thence and from perm . the best martron be from Siberia , Cadam , morum , perm , and Cazan . Lyserns , Minever , and armin , the best be out of gallet , and ouglit , many from Novogrod and perm . the beaver of the best sort breed in Murmonskey by Cola. other common fur and most of these kind grow in many , and some in all part of the country . the second commodity be of wax , whereof have be 2. wax . ship into foreign country ( as i have hear it report by those that best know it ) the sum of 50000. pood yearly , every pood contain 40. pound , but now about 10000 pood a year . the three be their honey , whereof beside a exceed - 3. Hony. ing great quantity spend in their ordinary drink ( which be mead of all sort ) and their other use , some good quantity be carry out of the country . the chief increase of honey be in Mordua and Cadam near to the Cheremissen tartar : much out of Severskoy , rezan , morum , Cazan , Dorogobose , and Vasma . four , of tallow they afford a great weight for 4. tallow . transportation : not only for that their country have very much good ground apt for pasturage of cattle , but also by reason of their many Lents and other fast : and partly because their great man use much wax for their light , the poor and mean sort birch dry in their stove , and cut into long shiver , which they call 365 luchineos . of tallow there have be ship out of the realm a few year since about 100000. pood yearly , now not past 30000. or thereabouts . the best yield of tallow be in the part and territory of Smolensko , yaruslave , ouglit , Novogrod , and Vologda , otfer , and Gorodetskey . 5. hide . a other principali commodity be their Losh and cow hide . their Losh or buff hide be very fair and large . their bull and cow hide ( for ox they make none , neither yet weather ) be of a small size . there have be transport by merchant stranger some year 100000. hide . now it be decrease to 30000. or thereabouts . beside great store of goat skin , whereof great number be ship out of the country . the large kind of Losh or buff breed about rostove , Wichida , Novogrod , morum , and perm . the lesser sort within the kingdom of Cazan . 6. Trane oil . a other very great and principali commodity be their [ i . 478 ] Trane oil , draw out of the seal fish . where it will the manner of not be impertinent to show the manner of their hunt seal fish . the seal , which they make this oil or : which be in this sort . towards the end of summer ( before the frost begin ) they go down with their boat into the bay of S. Nicholas , to a cape call Cusconesse or Foxnose , where they leave their boat till the next spring tide . when the sun wax warm towards the spring , and yet the ice not melt within the bay , they return thither again . then draw their boat over the sea ice , they use they for house to rest and lodge in . there be common about 17. or 18. fleet of they , of great large boat , which divide themselves into diverse company , five or six boat in a consort . they that first find the haunt , fire a beacon , which they carry with they for the nonce . which be espy by the other company , by such among they as be appoint of purpose , they come altogether and compass the seal round about in a ring , that lie sun themselves together upon the ice , common four or five 366 1588. thousand in a shoal , and so they invade they every man with his club in his hand . if they hit they on the nose , they be soon kill . if on the side or back they bear out the blow , and many time so catch and hold down the club with their tooth by main force , that the party be force to call for help to his fellow . the manner of the seal be when they see themselves beset , to gather all close together in a throng or plump , to sway down the ice , and to break it ( if they can ) which so bend the ice that many time it take the sea water upon it , and make the hunter to wade a foot or more deep . after the slaughter when they have kill what they can , they fall to share every boat his part in equal ! portion : and so they flay they , take from the body the skin , and the lard or fat with all that cleave to the skin . this they take with they , leave the body behind , and so go to shore . where they dig pit in the ground of a fathom and a half deep , or thereabouts , and so take the fat or lard off from the skin , they throw it into the pit , and cast in among it hot burn stone to melt it withal . the uppermost and pure be sell , and use to oil wool for cloth , the gross ( that be of a red colour ) they sell to make soap . likewise of Ickary or cavery , a great quantity be make 7. ickary . upon the river of Volgha out of the fish call bellougina , the sturgeon , the Severiga and the Sterledey . whereof the most part be ship by french and netherlandish merchant for Italy and Spain , some by english merchant . the next be of flax and hemp , whereof there have 8. hemp be ship ( as i have hear merchant say ) at the port an flax . of narve a great part of 100 ship small and great yearly . now , not past five . the reason of this abate and decrease of this and other commodity , that be wont to be transport in a great quantity , be the shut up of the port of you narve towards the Finland sea , which now be in the hand and possession of the Sweden . 367 likewise the stop of the passage overland by the way of Smolensko , and Plotsko , by reason of their war with the polonian , which cause the people to be less provident in maintain and gather these and like commodity , for that they lack sale . for the growth of flax the province of Vobsko , and the country about be the chief and only place . for hemp Smolensko , Dorogobose and Vasma . 9 salt . the country beside make great store of salt . their best salt be make at Stararovse in very great quantity , where they have great store of salt well , about 2 50. verse from the sea . at astracan salt be make natural by the sea water , that cast it up into great hill , and so it be dig down , and carry away by the merchant and other that will fetch it from thence . they pay to the emperor for acknowledgement or custom 3-d . Russe upon every hundred weight . beside these two , they nonock . make salt in many other place of the realm , as in perm , Wichida , Totma , kenitsma , Solovetsky , Ocona , Bombasey , and nonock , all out of salt pit , save at Solovetsky , which lie near to the sea . 10. Tam. likewise of tar they make a great quantity out of their fir tree in the country of Duyna and Smolensko , whereof much be send abroad . beside these ( which be all good and substantiali commodity ) they have diverse other of small account , that be naturali and proper to 11. Riba - that country : as the fish tooth ( which they call riba-zul > a - zuba ) which be use both among themselves , and the persian and bougharians that fetch it from thence for bead , knife , and sword haft of nobleman and gentleman , and for diverse other use . some use the powder of it against poison , as the unicorn horn . the fish that wear it be call a Morse , and be catch about Pechora . Theise fish tooth some of they be almost 2. foot of length , and weigh 11. or 12. pound apiece . 12. Slide . in the province of Corelia , and about the river Duyna towards the north sea , there grow a soft rock which they call slude . this they cut into piece , and so tear 368 it into thin flake , which natural it be apt for , and so use it for glass-lanthorns and such like . it give both inward and outward a clear light than glass , and for this respect be better than either glass or horn : for that it neither break like glass , nor yet will burn like the lantern . saltpetre they make in many place , as at Ouglits , yaruslave and ustiug , and some small store of 1588. 13. saltpetre and brimstone . [ i - 479 - ] brimstone upon the river Volgha , but want skill to refine it . their iron be somewhat brittle , but a great weight of 14. iron . it be make in Corelia , Cargapolia , and ustiug Thelesna . other mine they have none grow within you realm . their beast of strange kind be the Losh , the ollen , nge the wild horse , the bear , the wolvering , or wood dog , ’ the lyserne , the beaver , the sable , the martron , the black that breed in and dun fox , the white bear towards the sea coast of Russia . Pechora , the gurnstale , the laset or Minever . they have a kind of squirrel ! that have grow on the pinion of the shoulder bone a long tuft of hair , much like unto feather with a far broad tail then have any other squirrel , which they move and shake as they leap from tree to tree , much like unto a wing . they skise a large space , and seem for to fly withal , and therefore they call they Letach Vechshe , that be , the fly squirrel . their hare and squirrel in summer be of the same colour with we , in winter the hare change her coat into milk white , the squirrel into grey , whereof come the Calaber . they have fallow dear , the roe buck , and goat very great store . their horse be but small , but very swift and hard , they travel they unshod both winter and summer , without all regard of pace . their sheep be but small and bear course and harsh wool . of fowl they have diverse of the principal kind : first , great store of hawk , the eagle , the gerfalcon , the slightfaulcon , the goshawk , the tassel , the sparhawk , etc but the principal hawk y* breed in the country , be count you gerfalcon . of other fowl their principal kind be the swan tame and wild , ( whereof they have great store ) the three 369 2 a stork , the crane , the tedder of the colour of a pheasant , but far big and live in the fir wood . of pheasant and partridge they have very great plenty . a owl there be of a very great bigness , more ugly to behold than you owl of this country , with a broad face , and ear much like unto a man . for fresh water fish , beside the common sort ( as carp , pike , perch , tench , roach , etc ) they have diverse kind very good and delicate : as the Bellouga or Bellougina of 4. or 5. elne long , the Ositrina or sturgeon , the Severiga and Sterledy somewhat in fashion and taste like to the sturgeon , but not so thick nor long . Theise 4. kind of fish breed in the Volgha , and be catch in great plenty , and serve thence into the whole realm for a great food . of the roe of these four kind they make very great store of Icary or caveary as be say before . they have beside these that breed in the Volgha a fish call the Riba bela , or white salmon , which they account more delicate than they do the red salmon , whereof also they have exceed great plenty in the river northward , as in Duyna , the river of Cola , etc in the Ozera or lake near a town call perislave , not far from the Moscow , they have a small fish which they call the fresh herring , of the fashion , and somewhat of the taste of a sea-herring . their chief town for fish be , yaruslave , Bealozera , Novogrod , astracan , and Cazan : which all yield a large custom to the emperor every year for their trade of fish , which they practise in summer , but send it freeze in the winter time into all part of the realm . the chief city of Russia . the chief city of Russia be Moscow , Novogrod , rostove , Volodomer , Plesko , smolensko , jaruslave , perislave , Nisnovogrod , Vologda , ustiug , Colmogro , Cazan , astracan , cargapolia , Columna . the city of Moscow . Moscow be suppose to be of great antiquity , though 370 the first founder be unknown to the ruff . it seem to have take the name from the river that run on the one side of the town . Berosus the chaldean in his 5. book tell that Nimrod ( who other profane story call Saturn ) send Assyrius , Medus , Moscus , 8c Magog into Asia to plant colony there , and that Moscus plant both in Asia and Europe . which may make some probability , that the city , or rather the river whereon it be build , take the denomination from this Moscus : the rather because of the climate or situation , which be in the very far part 8c list of Europe , border upon Asia . the city be much enlarge by one Ivan or John , son to Daniel , that first change his title of duke into king : though that honour continue not to his posterity : the rather because he be invest into it by the pope legate , who at that time be Innocentius the 4. about the year 1246. which be very much mislike by the ruff people , be then a part of the eastern or greek church . since that time the name of this city have grow more famous , 8c better know to the world : insomuch that not only the province , but the whole country of Russia be term by some by the name of Moscovia the Metropolite city . the form of this city be in manner round with 3. strong wall , circle the one within the other , 8c street lie between , whereof the inmost wall , and the building close within it ( lie safe as the heart within the body , fence and water with the river Moscua , that run close by it ) be all account the emperor castle . the number of house ( as i have hear ) through the whole city ( be reckon by the emperor a little before it be fire by the Crim ) be 41500. in all . since the tartar besiege and fire the town ( which be in the year 1571. ) there lie waste of it a great breadth of ground , which before be well set and plant with building , special that part on the south side of Moscua , build not long before by Basilius the emperor for his garrison 371 [ i . 480. ] of soldier , to who he give privilege to drink mead , and beer at the dry or prohibit time , when other russes may drink nothing but water , and for that cause call this new city by the name of Naloi , that be skink or pour in . so that now the city of Moscow be not much big than the city of London . the next in greatness , and in a manner as large , be the Novograd . ci tie Novograd : where be commit ( as the ruff say ) the memorable war so much speak of in story of the scythian servant , that take arm against their master : which they report in this sort : viz. that the boiarens or gentleman of Novograd and the territory about ( which only be soldier after the discipline of those country ) have war with the Tartar . which be well perform and end by they , they return homeward . where they understand by the way that their Cholopey or bondslave who they leave at home , have in their absence possess their town , land , house , wife and all . at which news be somewhat amaze , and yet disdain the villainy of their servant , they make the more speed home : and so not far from Novograd meet they in warlike manner march against they . whereupon advise what be best to be do , they agree all to set upon they with no other show of weapon but with their horse whip ( which as their manner be every man ride withal ) to put they in remembrance of their servile condition , thereby to terrify they , and abate their courage . and so march on and lash all together with their whip in their hand they give the onset . which seem so terrible in the ear of their villain , and strike such a sense into they of the smart of the whip which they have feel before , that they flee altogether like sheep before the driver . in memory of this victory the novogradians ever since have stamp their coin ( which they call a dingoe Novogrodskoy currant through all Russia ) with the figure of a horseman shake a whip aloft in his hand . Theise 2. city exceed you rest in greatness . for strength 372 of the chief city of Russia a.d. 1588. their chief town be Vobsko , smolensko , Cazan and astracan , as lie upon the border . but for situation jaruslave far exceed the rest . for beside the come - jaruslave . modity that the soil yield of pasture and corn , it lie upon the famous river of Volgha , and look over it from a high bank very fair and stately to behold : whereof the town take the name . for jaraslave in that tongue signify as much as a fair or famous bank . in this town ( as may be guess by they and axo Gr^~ name ) dwell the ruff king Viadimer surname jaruslave , that marry the daughter of Harald king of England , by mediation of Sveno the Dane , as be note in the danish story about the year 1067. the other town have nothing y‘ be great memorable , save many ruin within their wall . the street of their city and town in stead of pave be plank with fir tree , plained and lay even close the one to the other . their house be of wood without any lime or manner stone , build very close and warm with fir tree plain and pile one upon another . they be fasten together ’ with dent or notch at every corner , and so clasp fast together . betwixt the tree or timber they thrust in moss ( whereof they gather plenty in their wood ) to keep out the air . Every house have a pair of stair that lead up into the chamber out of the yard or street after the scottish manner . this building seem far better for their country , than that of stone or brick ; as be cold and more dampish than their wooden house , special of fir , that be a dry and warm wood . whereof the providence of God have give they such store , as that you may build a fair house for 20. or 30. rubble or little moor , where wood be most scant . the great inconvenience of their wooden build be the aptness for fire , which happen very oft and in very fearful sort , by reason of the dryness and fatness of the fir , that be once fire , burn like a torch , and be hardly quench till all be burn up . [ of 373 of the manner of crown or inauguration of the ruff emperor . the solemnity use at you Russe emperor coronation , be on this manner . in the great church of precheste ( or our lady ) within the emperor castle be erect a stage whereon stand a serine that bear upon it the imperial cap and robe of very rich stuff . when the day of the inauguration be come , there resort thither , first the patriarch w‘ the metropolitanes , archbishop , bishop , abbot and prior , all rich clad in their pontificalibus . then enter the deacon with the quire of singer . who so soon as the emperor set foot into you church , begin to sing : many year may live noble Theodore Ivanowich , etc : whereunto the patriarch and Metropolite with the rest of the clergy answer with a certain hymn , in form of a prayer , sing it altogether with a great noise . the hymn be end , the patriarch with the emperor mount up the stage , where stand a seat ready for the emperor . whereupon the patriarch will he to sit down , and then place himself by he upon another seat provide for y‘ purpose , bow down his head towards you ground , and say this prayer : oh lord God king of king , lord of lord , which by thy prophet Samuel do choose thy servant David , and anoint he for king over thy people Israel , hear now our prayer , and look from thy sanctuary upon this thy servant Theodore , who thou have choose and exalt for king over these thy holy nation , anoint he with the oil of [ i . 481 ] gladness , protect by thy power , put upon his head a crown of gold and precious stone , give he length of day , place he in the seat of justice , strengthen his arm , make subject unto he all the barbarous nation . let thy fear be in his whole heart , turn he from a evil faith , and all error , and show he the salvation of thy holy and universal church , that he may judge thy people with justice , and protect the child of the poor , 374 and final attain everlasting life . this prayer he speak with a low voice , and then pronounce aloud : all praise and power to God the father , the son , and the holy ghost . the prayer be end , he commands certain abbot to reach the imperiali robe and cap : which be do very decent , and with great solemnity , the patriarch withal pronounce aloud : peace be unto all . and so he begin another prayer to this effect : bow your self together with we , and pray to he that reign over all . preserve he ( oh lord ) under thy holy protection , keep he that he may do good and holy thing , let justice shine forth in his day , that we may live quiet without strife and malice . this be pronounce somewhat soft by the patriarch , whereto he add again aloud : thou be the king of the whole world , and the saviour of our soul , to thou the father , son and holy ghost be all praise for ever and ever . amen . then put on the robe and the cap , he bless the emperor with the sign of the cross , say withal : in the name of the father , the son and the holy ghost . the like be do by the metropolite , archbishop , and bishop : who all in their order come to the chair , and one after another bless the emperor with their two forefinger . then be say by the patriarch another prayer , that begin : oh most holy virgin , mother of God etc after which a deacon pronounce with a loud voice : many year to noble Theodore , good , honourable , belove of God , great duke of volodemer , of Moscow , emperor , and monarch of all Russia , etc whereto the other priest and deacon that stand somewhat far of by the altar or table , answer sing : many year , many year to the noble Theodore . the same note be take up by the priest and deacon , that be place at the right and left side of the church , and then altogether , they chant and thunder out , sing : many year to the noble Theodore , good , honourable , belove of God , great duke of Volodomer , Moscow , emperor of 375 all Russia , etc Theise solemnity be end , first come the patriarch with the metropolite , archbishop , and bishop , than the nobility , and the whole company in their order , to do homage to the emperor , bend down their head , and knock they at his foot to the very ground . the stile wherewith he be invest at his coronation , run after this manner . THeodore Ivanowich , by the grace of God great lord and emperor of all Russia , great duke of volodemer , Moscow , and Novogrod , king of Cazan , king of astracan , lord of Plesco , and great duke of Smolensco , of Twerria , Joughoria , Permia , Vadska , Bulghoria , and other , lord and great duke of Novogrod of the low country , of Chernigo , rezan , Polotskoy , Rostove , yaru-slaveley , Bealozera , Liefland , Oudoria , Obdoria , and condensa , commander of all Siberia , and of the north part , and lord of many other country , etc this stile contain in it all the emperor province , and set forth his greatness . and therefore they have a great delight and pride in it , force not only their own people but also stranger ( that have any matter to deliver to the emperor by speech or writing ) to repeat the whole form from the beginning to the end . which breed much cavil , and sometime quarrel betwixt they and the tartar , and Poland ambassadors : who refuse to call he Czar , that be emperor , and to repeat the other part of his long stile . my self when i have audience of the emperor , think good to salute he only with thus much vz . emperor of all Russia , great duke of Volodomer , Moscow and Novogrod , king of Cazan , king of astracan . the rest i omit of purpose , because i know they glory , to have their stile appear to be of a large volume than the queen of England . but this be take in so ill part , that the chancellor ( who then attend the emperor , with the rest of the nobility ) with a loud 376 chafe voice , call still upon i to say out the rest . whereto i answer , that the emperor stile be very long , and can not so well be remember by stranger , that i have repeat so much of it , as may show that i give honour to the rest etc but all will not serve till i command my interpreter to say it all out . their force for the war , with the chief officer and their salary . the soldier of Russia be call Sinaboyarskey , or the son of gentleman : because they be all of that degree , by virtue of their military profession . for every soldier in Russia be a gentleman , and none be gentleman , but only the soldier , that take it by descent from their ancestor : so that the son of a gentleman [ i - 482 ] ( which be bear a soldier ) be ever a gentleman , and a soldier withal , and profess nothing else but military ^ „ 7^^ matter . when they be of year able to bear arm , they come to the office of roserade or great constable , and there present themselves : who enter their name , and allot they certain land to maintain their charge , for the most part the same that their father enjoy . for the land assign to maintain the army , be ever certain , annex to this office without improve , or detract one foot . but that if the emperor have sufficient in wage , the room be full so far as the land do extend already , they be many time defer , and have nothing allow they , except some one portion of the land be divide into two . the whole number of his soldier in continual pay , be this . first he have his Dworaney , that be , pensioner , or guard of his person , to the number of 15000 horseman , with their captain and other officer , that be always in a degree readiness . horseman . of these 15000 horseman , there be three sort or 1 • Praetoriani degree , which differ as well in estimation as in wage , or suc^ as one degree from another . the first sort of they be call " e^ennfer-dworaney Bulshey , or the company of head pensioner , son 15000. 377 two other troop to the number of 65000. the english voyage that have some a hundred , some fourscore rubble a year , and none under 70. the second sort be call Seredney Dworaney , or the middle rank of pensioner . Theise have sixty or fifty rubble by the year , none under forty . the three and low sort , be the Dyta Boiarskey , that be , the low pensioner . their salary be thirty rubble a year for he that have most , some have but 25 , some 20 , none under 12. whereof the half part be pay they at the Moscow , the other half in the field by the general , when they have any war , and be employ in service . when they receive their whole pay , it amount to 55000 rubble by the year . and this be their wage , beside land allot to every one of they , both to the great and the less , accord to their degree . whereof he that have least , have to yield he twenty rubble or mark by the year . beside these 15000 horseman , that be of better choice ( as be the emperor own guard when himself go to the war , not unlike the roman soldier call Prsetoriani ) be a hundred and ten man of speciali account for their nobility , and trust , which be choose by the emperor , and have their name register , that find among they for the emperor war , to the number of 65000. horseman , with all necessary meet for the war after the ruff manner . to this end they have yearly allowance make by the emperor for themselves , and their company , to the sum of 40000 rubble . and these 65000 be to repair to the field every year on the border towards the Crim Tartar ( except they be appoint for some other service ) whether there be war with the Tartar , or not . this may seem peradventure somewhat dangerous for some state , to have so great force under the command of nobleman to assemble every year to one certain place . but the matter be so use , as that no danger can grow to the emperor , or his state by this mean . first , because these nobleman be many , to wit , an no . in all , and change by the emperor so oft as he think 378 good . second , because they have their live of the emperor , be otherwise but of very small revenue , and receive this yearly pay of 40000 rubble , when it be present to be pay forth again to the soldier that be under they . third , because for the most part they be about the emperor person be of his counsel , either speciali , or at large . four , they be rather as paymaster , than captain to their company , themselves not go forth ordinary to the war , save when some of they be appoint by speciali order from the emperor himself . So the whole number of horseman that be ever in a readiness , and in continual pay , be 80000 , a few more or less . if he have need of a great number ( which seidome fall out ) than he entertein of those Sinaboiarskey , that be out of pay , so many as he need : and if yet he want of his number , he give charge to his nobleman , that hold land of he to bring into the field every man a proportionable number of his servant ( call kolophey , such as till his land ) with their furniture , accord to the just number that he intend to make . which the service be do , present lie in their weapon , and return to their servile occupation again . of footman that be in continual pay , he have to the number of 12000 all gunner , call Strelsey : whereof 5000 be to attend about the city of Moscow , or any other place where the emperor shall abide , and 2000 ( which be call Stremaney Strelsey , or gunner at the stirrup ) about his own person at the very court or house where himself lodge . the rest be place in his garrison town , till there be occasion to have they in the field , and receive for their salary or stipend every man seven rubble a year , beside twelve measure a piece of rye , and oat . of mercenary soldier , that be stranger ( who they call nimschoy ) they have at this time 4300 of polonians : off Chirchasses ( that be under the polonians ) about 4000 , whereof 3500 be abroad in his garrison : of doutche and Scot about 150 : 379 A.D. 1588. horseman in continual pay 80000. footman in continual pay 12000. stranger mercenary in pay 4300. 1. the Voiavod or general . 2. lieutenant general . 3. Marshals of the field four . four marshal . • deputy eight . the english voyage of greek , Turks , Dane and swedens , all in one band , a 100 or thereabouts . but these they use only upon the tartar side , and against the siberians : as they do the tartar soldier ( who they hire sometime , but only for the present ) on the other side against the polonian and Sweden : think it best policy to use their service upon the contrary border . the chief captain or leader of these force , accord to their name and degree , be these which follow . first , the Voyavoda Bulshaia , that be , the great captain , or lieutenant general under the emperor . This common be one of the four house of the chief nobility of the land . their great Voiavod or general at this present in their war , be common one of these four : Knez Feodor Ivanowich Methisloskey , knez Ivan Michalowich Glinskoy , Cherechaskoy , and Trowbetskoy , all of great nobility . next unto the Voiavod or general there be some other place as lieutenant general , be a man of great valour and experience in the war , who order all thing that the other countenance . at this time their principal man , and most use in their war , be one Knez demetrie Ivanowich Forestine , a ancient and expert captain , and one that have do great service ( as they say ) against the tartar and polonian . next under the Voiavod and his lieutenant general be four other that have the marshal of the whole army divide among they , and may be call the marshal of the field . Every man have his quarter , or four part under he . whereof the first be call the Prava Polskoy , or right wing . the second be the Levoy Polskoy , or leave wing . the three be rusnoy Polskoy , or the break band , because out of this there be choose to send abroad upon any sudden exploit , or to make a rescue or supply , as occasion do require . the four storoshovoy Polskoy , or the ward band . every one of these four marshal have two other under they ( eight in all ) that twice every week at the least must muster and train their several wing or band , and hold and give 380 1588. justice for all fault , and disorder commit in the camp . and these eight be common choose out of the 11 o . ( which i speak of before ) that receive and deliver the pay to the soldier . under these eight be diverse other five colonel captain , as the Gulavoy , captain of thousand five under caf " hundred and 100 the petyde Setskoy or captain of ans ' fifty , and the decetsky or captain of ten . beside the Voiavoda or general of the army ( speak of before ) they have two other that bear the name of Voiavoda , whereof one be the master of the great Ordi - six master nance ( call Naradna voiavoda ) who have diverse under officer , necessary for that service . the other be call it the Voiavoda gulavoy , or the walk captain , that have the wait allow he 1000 good horseman of principali choice , captatne-to range and spy abroad , and have the charge of the run castle , which we be to speak of in the chapter follow . all these captain , and man of charge must once every day resort to the bulsha voiavoda , or general of the army , to know his pleasure , and to inform he , if there be any requisite matter pertain to their office . of their muster , and levy of force , manner of armour , and provision of victuali for the war . when war be towards ( which they fail not of light every year with the tartar , and many time with the polonian and Sweden ) the four lord of the chetfird send forth their summons in the emperor name , to all the duke and dyack of the province , to be proclaim in the head town of every shire : that all the Sinaboiarskey , or son of gentleman make their repair to such a border where the service be to be do , at such a place , and by such a day , and there present themselves to such , and such captain . when they come to the place assign they in the summons or proclamation , their name be take by certain officer that have commission for that purpose from the roserade , or high 381 their order of muster . constable , as clerk of the band . if any make default and fade at the day , he be mulct , and punish very severe . as for the general and other chief captain , they be send thither from the emperor own hand , with such commission and charge as he think behooveful for the present service . when the soldier be assemble , they be reduce into their band , and company , under their several captain of ten , fifty , hundred , thousand , etc and these band into 4 polskei , or legion ( but of far great number than the roman legion be ) under their four great leader , which also have the authority of marshal of the field ( as be say before . ) the horse - concern their armour they be but slight appoint . man fuml - than common horseman have nothing else but his bow in ture ' he case under his right arm , and his quiver and sword hang on the left side : except some few that bear a case of dagge , or a javelin , or short staff along their horse side . the under captain will have common some piece of armour beside , as a shirt of male , or such like . the general with the other chief captain and man of nobility will have their horse very rich furnish , their saddle of cloth of gold , their bridle fair boss and tassele with gold , and silk fringe , bestud with pearl and precious stone , themselves in very fair armour , which [ i . 484. ] they call bullatnoy , make of fair shine steel , yet cover common with cloth of gold , and edge round with armin fur , his steel helmet on his head of a very great price , his sword bow and arrow at his side , his spear in his hand , with another fair helmet , and Shesta pera , or horseman sceptre carry before he . their sword , bow , and arrow be of the turkish fashion . they practise like the tartar to shoot forward and backward , as they fly and retire . the footman the Strelsey or footman have nothing but his piece furniture . jn } ianjj hjs strike hatchet at his back , and his sword by his side . the stock of his piece be not make caliever-wise , but with a plain and strait stock ( somewhat like 382 of foul piece ) the barrel be rude and unartificial make , very heavy yet shoot but a very small bullet . as for their provision of victual , the emperor allow none , provision of either for captain or soldier , neither provide any for they except peradventure some corn for their money . Every man be to bring sufficient for himself , to serve his turn for four month , and if need require to give order for more to be bring unto he to the camp from his tenant that till his land , or some other place . one great help they have , that for lodging and diet every ruff be prepare to be a soldier beforehand . though the chief captain and other of account carry tent with they after the fashion of we , with some better provision of victual then the rest . they bring with they common into the camp for victuali a kind of dry bread , ( which they call Suchary ) with some store of meal , which they temper with water , and so make it into a ball , or small lump of dove , call Tollockno . and this they eat raw in stead of bread . their meat be bacon , or some other flesh or fish dry , after the dutch manner . if the ruff soldier be as hardy to execute a enterprise , as he be hard to bear out toil and travel , or be otherwise as apt and well train for the war , as he be indifferent for his lodging and diet , he will far exceed the soldier of our part . of their march , charge , and other martial discipline . the ruff trust rather to his number , then to the valour of his soldier , or good order of his force . their march or lead be without all order , save that the four Polskey or legion , ( whereinto their army be divide ) keep themselves several under their ensign , and so thrust all on together in a hurry , as they be direct by their generali . their ensign be horseman the image of saint George . the bulsha Dworaney or cumme . chief horseman , have every man a small drum of brass 383 the walk castle . the english voyage at his saddle bow , which he strike when he give the charge , or onset . they have drum beside of a huge bigness , which they carry with they upon a board lay on four horse , that be spar together with chain , every drum have eight striker , or drummer , beside trumpet and shaum , which they sound after a wild manner , much different from we . when they give any charge , or make any invasion , they make a great hallow or shout altogether , as loud as they can , which with the sound of their trumpet , shaum , and drum , make a confuse and horrible noise . so they set on first discharge their arrow , then deal with their sword , which they use in a bravery to shake , and brandish over their head , before they come to stroke . their footman ( because otherwise they want order in lead ) be common place in some ambush or place of advantage , where they may most annoy the enemy , with least hurt to themselves . if it be a set battle , or if any great invasion be make upon the ruff border by the tartar , they be set within you run or move castle ( call Beza , or Gulaygorod ) which be carry about with they by the Voiavoda gulavoy ( or the walk general ) who i speak of before . This walk or move castle be so frame , that it may be set up in length ( as occasion do require ) the space of one , two , three , four , five , six , or seven mile : for so long it will reach . it be nothing else but a double wall of wood to defend they on both side behind and before , with a space of three yard or thereabouts , betwixt the two side : so that they may stand within it , and have room enough to charge and discharge their piece , and to use their other weapon . it be close at both end , and make with loop hole on either side , to lay out the nose of their piece , or to push forth any other weapon . it be carry with the army wheresoever it go , be take into piece , and so lay on cart spar together , and draw by horse that be not 384 see , by reason that they be cover with their carriage as with a shelf or penthouse . when if'is bring to the place where it be to be use ( which be devise and choose out before by the walk Voiavod ) it be plant so much as the present use require , sometime a mile long , sometime two , sometime three or moor : which be soon do without the help of any carpenter , or instrument : because the timber be so frame to clasp together one piece within another : as be easy understood by those that know the manner of the ruff building . in this castle stand their shot well fence for advantage , special against the tartar , that bring no ordinance , nor other weapon into the field with he , save his sword , and bow , and arrow . they have also within it diverse field piece , which they use as occasion do require . of piece for the field they carry no great store , when they war against the tartar : but when they deal with the polonian ( of who force they make more account ) they go better furnish with all kind of munition , and other necessary provision . it be think that no prince of Christendom have better store of munition , than the ruff emperor . and it may partly appear by the artillery house at Moscow , where be of all sort of great ordinance , all brass piece , very fair , to a exceed great number . the ruff soldier be think to be better at his defence within some castle or town , than he be abroad at a set pitch field . which be ever note in the practice of his war , and namely at the siege of Vobsco , about eight year since : where he repulse the polonian king Stepan Batore , with his whole army of iooooo man , and force he in the end to give over his siege , with the loss of many of his best captain and soldier . but in a set field the ruff be note to have ever the worse of the polonian and Sweden . if any behave himself more valiant than the rest , in 385 2 b [ i . 485. ] 1580. reward for valour . or do any special piece of service , the emperor send he a piece of gold , stamp with the image of saint George on horseback . which they hang on their sleeve , and set in their cap . and this be account the great honour they can receive , for any service they do . of their colony , and maintain of their conquest , or purchase by force . the Russe emperor of late year have very much enlarge their dominion , and territory . their first conquest after the dukedom of Moscow , ( for before that time they be but duke of Volodomer , as before be say ) be the city , and dukedom of Novogrod on you west , and northwest side : which be no small enlargement of their dominion , and strengthen to they for the win of the rest . this be do by Ivan great grandfather to Theodor now emperor , about the year 1480. the same begin likewise to encroach upon the country of Lituania and Livonia , but the conquest only intend , and attempt by he , upon some part of those country , be pursue and perform by his son Basileus , who first win the city and dukedom of Plesko , afterward the city and dukedom of Smolensco , and many other fair town , with a large territory belong unto they , about the year 1514. Theise victory against the lettoe or lituanians , in the time of Alexander their duke , he achieve rather by advantage of civil dissension , and treason among themselves , then by any great policy , or force of his own . but all this be lose again by his son Ivan Vasiliwich , about 8 or 9 year past , upon composition with the polonian king Stephan Batore : whereunto he be force by the advantage which the pole have then of he , by reason of the foil he have give he before , and the disquietness of his own state at home . only the ruff emperor , at this time have leave he on that side his country , the city of Smolensco , vobsco , 386 1588. Chernigo , and Bealagorod in Lituania . in Livonia , not Lituania . a town nor one foot of ground . when Basilius first conquer those country , he suffer then the native to keep their possession , and to inhabit all their town , only pay he a tribute , under the government of his ruff captain . but by their conspiracy and attempt not long after , he be teach to deal more sure with they . and so come upon they the second time , he kill and carry away with he , three part of four , which he give or sell to the Tartar that serve he in those war , and in stead of they place there his russes , so many as may overmatch the rest , with certain garrison of strength beside . wherein notwithstanding this oversight be commit , for that ( take away with he the upland , or country people that shall have till the ground , and may easy have be keep in order without any danger , by other good policy ) he be drive afterward many year together , to vitaile the country ( special the great town ) out of his own country of Russia , the soil lie there in the mean while waste , and until . the like fall out at the port of Narve in Liefland , narve . where his son Ivan Vasiliwich devise to build a town , and a castle on the other side the river , ( call Ivangorod ) to keep the town and country in subjection . the castle he cause to be so build and fortify , that it be think to be invincible . and when it be furnish , for reward to the architect ( that be a polonian ) he put out both his eye , to make he unable to build the like again . but have leave the native all within their own country , without abate their number or strength , the town and castle not long after be betray , and surrender again to the king of Sweden . on the southeast side , they have get the kingdom of Cazan , and astracan . Theise be win from the tartar , by the late emperor Ivan Vasiliwich , the one 387 [ i . 486. ] conquest of a 1000 mile . Permia and Pechora . Means of hold chief town . mean of hold the country of Pechora , Permia , and Siberia . the english voyage about thirty five , the other about thirty and three year ago . northward out of the country of Siberia , he have lay unto his realm a great breadth and length of ground , from Wichida to the river of Obba , about a 1000 mile space : so that he be bold to write himself now , the great commander of Siberia . the country likewise of Permia and Pechora be a diverse people and language from the ruff , overcome not long since , and that rather by threaten , and shake of the sword , then by any actuali force : as be a weak and naked people , without mean to resist . that which the ruff have in his present possession , he keep on this sort . in his four chief border town of Vobsko , smolensko , astracan , and Cazan , he have certain of his counsel not of great nobility , but of great trust , which have more authority within their precinct , ( for the countenance and strengthen of their government there ) then the other duke that be set to govern in other place , as be note before , in the manner of order their province . Theise he change sometime every year , sometime every second or three year , but exceed not that time , except upon very speciali trust , and good like of the party , and his service : lest by enlarge of their time , they may grow into some familiarity with the enemy ( as some have do ) be so far out of sight . the town beside be very strong fence with trench , castle , and store of munition , and have garrison within they , to the number of two or three thousand a piece . they be store with victual if any siege shall come upon they , for the space of two or three year before hand . the four castle of Smolensko , vobsko , Cazan and astracan , he have make very strong to bear out any siege : so that it be think that those town be impregnable . as for the country of Pechora and Permia , and that part of Siberia , which he have now under he , they be keep by as easy mean , as they be first get . vz . 388 0 1588. rather by show , then by use of arm . first , he have store the country with as many russes as there be native , and have there some few soldier in garrison , enough to keep they under . second , his officer and magistrate there be of his own ruff people , and he change they very often , vz . every year twice or thrice : notwithstanding there be no great fear of any innovation . third , he divide they into many small government , like a staff break in many small piece : so y* they have no strength be sever , which be but iide neither when they be all in one . four , he provide that the people of the country have neither armour , nor money , be tax and peel so often as he think good : without any mean to shake off that yoke , or to relieve themselves . in Siberia ( where he go on in pursue his con - Siberia . quest ) he have diverse castle and garrison to the number of 6000 soldier of russes and polonians , and send many new supply thither , to plant and to inhabit , as he win ground . at this time beside he have get the king brother of Siberia , allure by certain of his the king captain , to leave his own country by offer of great entertainment , and pleasant life with the ruff emperor , ' then he have in Siberia . he be bring in this last 1588. year , and be now with the emperor at Moscow well entertain . of the Tartar , and other borderer to the country of Russia , with who they have most to do in war , and peace . their neighbour with who they have great deal and intercourse , both in peace and war , be first the tartar . second the polonian who the ruff the polonians call Laches , note the first author or founder of the nation , who be call Laches or Leches , whereunto be e usse ' add Po , which signify ! people , and so be make polach , that be , the people or posterity of Laches : 389 the fill of Moscow by the chrim tartar , in the year 1571. [ I. 487. ] the english voyage which the latin after their manner of writing call Polonos . the three be the swedens . the polonians and swedens be better know to these part of Europe then be the Tartar , that be far off from we ( as be of Asia ) and divide into many tribe , different in name , and government one from another . the great and mighty of they be the chrim tartar , ( who some call the great can ) that lie south , and southeastward from Russia , and do most annoy the country by often invasion , common once every year , sometime enter very far within the inland part . in the year 1571 he come as far as the city of Moscow , with a army of 200000 man , without any battle , or resistance at all , for that the ruff emperor ( than Ivan Vasiliwich ) lead forth his army to encounter with he , march a wrong way . the city he take not , but fire the suburb , which by reason of the building ( which be all of wood without any stone , brick , or lime , save certain out room ) kindle so quick , and go on with such rage , as that it consume the great part of the city almost within the space of four hour , be of 30 mile or more of compass . then may you have see a lamentable spectacle : beside the huge and mighty flame of the city all on light fire , the people burn in their house and street , but most of all of such as labour to pass out of the gate far from the enemy , where meet together in a mighty throng , and so press every man to prevent another , wedge themselves so fast within the gate , and street near unto it , as that three rank walk one upon the other head , the uppermost tread down those that be low : so that there perish at that time ( as be say ) by the fire and the press , the number of 800000 people or more . the principali cause of this continual quarrel betwixt the ruff and the chrim be for the right of certain border part claim by the tartar , but possess by the ruff . the tartar allege that beside astracan and Cazan 390 ( that be the ancient possession of the east Tartar ) the whole country from his bound north and Westward so far as the city of Mosko , and Mosko it self pertaineth to his right . which seem to have be true homage do by the report of the russes they self , that tell of a certain homage that be do by the ruff emperor Tartar . every year to the great chrim or can , the ruff emperor stand on foot and feed the chrims horse , ( himself sit on his back ) with oat out of his own cap , in stead of a bowl or manger , and that within the castle of Mosko . and this homage ( they say ) be do till the time of Basileus grandfather to this man . who surprise the chrim emperor by a stratagem do by one of his nobility ( call Ivan demetro-wich Belschey ) be content with this ransom , viz. with the change of this homage into a tribute of fur : which afterward also be deny to be pay by this emperor father . hereupon they continue you quarrel , the Russe defend his country , and that which he have win , you chrim tartar invade he once or twice every year , sometime about Whitsuntide , but often in harvest . what time if the great can or chrim come in his own person , he bring with he a great army of 100000. or 200000. man . otherwise they make short and sudden road into the country with lesser number , run about the list of the border as wild goose fly , invade and retire where they see advantage . their common practice ( be very populous ) be to the manner of make diverse army , and so draw the ruff to one Tartar or two place of the frontier , to invade at some other and place , that be leave without defence . 1 heir manner of fight , or order of their force be much after the ruff manner ( speak of before ) save that they be all horseman , and carry nothing else but a bow , a sheaf of arrow , and a falcon sword after the turkish fashion . they be very expert horseman , and use to shoot as ready backward , as forward . some will have a horsmans staff like to a 391 bore spear , beside their other weapon . the common soldier have no other armour than his ordinary apparel , viz. a black sheep skin with the wool side outward in the day time , and inward in the night time , with a cap of the same . but their Morseys or nobleman imitate the Turk both in apparel and armour . when they be to pass over a river with their army , they tie three or four horse together , and take long pole or piece of wood , bound they fast to the tail of their horse : so sit on the pole they drive their horse over . at handy stroke ( when they join battle ) they be account far better man than the ruff people , fierce by nature , but more hardy and bloody by continual practice of war : as man know no art of peace , nor any civil practice . yet their subtlety be more than may seem to agree with their barbarous condition . by reason they be practise to invade continual , and to rob their neighbour that border about they , they be very pregnant , and ready witted to devise stratagem upon the sudden for their better advantage . as in their war against Beala the four , king of Hungary , who they invade with 500000. man , and obtain against he a great victory . where , among other , have slay his chancellor call Nicholas Schinick , they find about he the king privy seal . whereupon they devise present to counterfeit letter in the king name , to the city and town next about the place , where the field be fight : with charge that in no case they shall convey themselves , and their good out of their dwelling , where they may abide safe without all fear of danger , and not leave the country desolate to the possession of so vile and barbarous a enemy , as be the tartar nation , term themselves in all reproachful manner . for notwithstanding he have lose his carriage , with some few straggler that have march disorderly , yet he doubt not but to recover that loss , with the access of a notable victory , if the savage tartar dare 392 abide he in the field . to this purpose have write their letter in the polish character , by certain young man who they take in the field , and sign they with the king seal , they dispatch they forth to all the quarter of Hungaria , that lie near about the place . whereupon the ungarians that be now fly away with their good , wife , and child , upon the rumour of the king overthrow , take comfort of these counterfeit letter , stay at home . and so be make a prey , be surprise on the sudden by this huge number of these Tartar , that have compass they about before they be aware . when they besiege a town or fort , they offer much parley , and send many flatter message to persuade a surrendry : promise all thing that the inhabitant will require : but be once possess of the place , they use all manner of hostility , and cruelty . this they do upon a rule they have , vz . that justice be to be practise but towards their own . they encounter not light , but they have some ambush , whereunto ( have once show themselves , and make some short conflict ) they retire as repulse for fear , and so draw the enemy into it if they can . but the Russe be well acquaint with their practice be more wary of they . when they come a rove with some small number , they set on horseback counterfeit shape of man , that their number may seem great . when they make any onset , their manner be to make a great shout , cry all out together olla billa , olla billa , God help we , God help we . they contemn death so much , as that they choose rather to die , than to yield to their enemy , and be see when they be slay to bite the very weapon , when they be past strike or help of themselves . wherein appear how different the tartar be in his desperate courage from the ruff and Turk . for the ruff soldier , if he begin once to retire , put all his safety in his speedy flight . and if once he be take by his enemy , he neither defend 393 [ i . 488. i himself , nor intreat for his life , as reckon straight to die . the Turk common , when he be past hope of escape , fall to intreaty , and cast away his weapon , offer both his hand , and hold they , as it be to be tie : hope to save his life , by offer himself bondslave . the chief booty the Tartar seek for in all their war be to get store of captive , special young boy , and girl , who they sell to the Turk , or other their neighbour . to this purpose they take with they great basket make like baker pannier to carry they tender , and if any of they happen to tire , or to be sick by the way , they dash he against the ground , or some tree , and so leave he dead . the soldier be not trouble with keep the captive and the other booty , for hinder the execution of their war , but they have certain band that intend nothing else , appoint of purpose to receive and keep the captive and the other prey . the ruff borderer ( be use to their invasion light every year in the summer ) keep few other cattle on the border part , save swine only which the tartar will not touch , nor drive away with he : for that he be of the turkish religion , and will eat no swine flesh . of Christ our saviour they confess as much as do the Turk in his Alcoran , viz. that he come of the angel Gabriel and the virgin marie , that he be a great prophet , and shall be the judge of the world at the last day . in other matter likewise , they be much order after the manner and direction of the Turk : have feel the turkish force when he win from they Azov and Caffa , with some other town about the euxine or black sea , that be before tributary to the Crim tartar . so that now the emperor of the crim for the most part be choose one of the nobility who the Turk do commend : whereby it be bring now to pass , that the Crim tartar give to the Turk the ten part of the spoil which he get in his war against the Christians . 394 herein they differ from the turkish religion , for that they have certain idol puppet make of silk , or like stuff , of the fashion of a man , which they fasten to the door of their walk house , to be as januss or keeper of their house . and these idol be make not by all , but by certain religious woman which they have among they for that and like use . they have beside the image of their king or great can , of a huge bigness , which they erect at every stage when the army march : and this every one must bend and bow unto as he pass by it , be he tartar or stranger . they be much give to witchcraft , and ominous conjecture upon every accident which they hear or see . in make of manage they have no regard of alliance or consanguinity . only with his mother , sister , and daughter a man may not marry , and though he take the woman into his house , and accompany with she , yet he account she not for , his wife till he have a child by she . than he begin to take a dowry of her friend of horse , sheep , kine , etc if she be barren after a certain time , he turn she home again . under the emperor they have certain duke , the tartar who they call morsei or divoymorsei , that rule nobiluie . over a certain number of 10000 20000 or 40000. a piece , which they call hoard . when the emperor have any use of they to serve in his war , they be bind to come , and to bring with they their soldier to a certain number , every man with his two horse at the least , the one to ride on , the other to kill , when it come to his turn to have his horse eat . for 7^ Tartar their chief vitaile be horse flesh , which they eat without diet . bread , or any other thing with it . so that if a tartar be take by a ruff , he shall be sure light to find a horse-legge , or some other part of he at his saddle bow . this last year when i be at the Moscow , come in i ; 88-one Kiriach Morsey , nephew to the emperor of the crim that now be ( who father be emperor before ) 395 the english voyage accompany with 300. Tartars , and his two wife , whereof one be his brother widow . where be entertain in very good sort after the ruff manner , he have send unto his lodging for his welcome , to be make ready for his supper and his company , two very large and fat horse , ready flay in a sled . they prefer it before other flesh , because the meat be strong ( as they say ) then beef , mutton , and such like . and yet ( which be marveile ) though they serve all as horseman in the war , and eat all of horse flesh , there be bring yearly to the Moscow to be exchange for other commodity 30. or 40. thousand tartar horse , which they call Cones . they keep also great herd of cow , and flock of black sheep , rather for the skin and milk ( which they carry with they in great bottle ) then for the use of the flesh , though sometime they eat of it . some use they have of rise , fig , and other fruit . they drink milk or warm blood , and for the most part card they both together . they use sometime as they travel by the way , to let their horse blood in a vain , and to drink it warm , as it come from his body . Townes they plant none , nor other stand building , but have walk house , which the latins call Veii , build upon wheel like a shepherd cottage . Theise they draw with they whithersoever they go , drive their cattle with they . and when they come to their stage , or stand place , they plant their cart house very orderly in a rank : and so make the form of street , and of a large town . and this be the manner of the emperor himself , who have no other seat of empire but a Agora , or town of wood , that move with he whithersoever he go . as for the fix and stand building use in other country , they say they be unwholesome and unpleasant . they begin to move their house and cattle in the spring time from the south part of their country towards the north part . and so drive on till they 396 have graze all up to the far part northward , they return back again towards their south country ( where they continue all the winter ) by io . or 12. mile a stage : in the mean while the grass be spring up again , to serve for their cattle as they return from the border of the Shalcan towards the caspian sea , to the ruff frontier , they have a goodly country , special on the south and southeast part , but lose for lack of tillage . of money they have no use at all , and therefore prefer brass and steel before other metal , special bullate , which they use for sword , knife , and other necessary . as for gold and silver they neglect it of very purpose , ( as they do all tillage of their ground ) to be more free for their wander kind of life , and to keep their country less subject to invasion . which give they great advantage against all their neighbour , ever invade and never be invade . such as have take upon they to invade their country ( as of oldetime Cyrus and Darius Hystaspis , on the east and southeast side ) have do it with very ill success : as we find in the story write of those time . for their manner be when any will invade they , to allure and draw they on by fly and recul ( as if they be afraid ) till they have draw they some good way within their country . then when they begin to want victuali and other necessary ( as needs they must where nothing be to be have ) to stop up the passage , and enclose they with multitude . by which stratagem ( as we read in Laonicus Chalcacondylas in his turkish story ) they have wellnigh surprise the great and huge army of Tamerlan , but that he retire with all speed he can towards the river Tanais or don , not without great loss of his man , and carriage . in the story of Pachymerius the greek ( which he write of the emperor of Constantinople from the begin of the reign of Michael Palaeologus to the time of Andronicus the elder ) i remember he tell to the same purpose of one Nogas a tartarian captain 397 pachy merit . under Cazan the emperor of the east Tartars ( of who the city and kingdom of Cazan may seem to have take the denomination ) who refuse a present of pearl and other jewel send unto he from Michael Palaeologus : ask withal , for what use they serve , and whether they be good to keep away sickness , death , or other misfortune of this life , or no . so that it seem they have ever , or long time be of that mind to value thing no further , than by the use and necessity for which they serve . for person and complexion they have broad and flat visage , of a tan colour into yellow and black , fierce and cruel look , thin haired upon the upper lip , and pit of the chin , light and nimble body , with short leg , as if they be make natural for horseman : whereto they practise themselves from their childhood , seidome go afoot about any business . their speech be very sudden and loud , speak as it be out of a deep hollow throat . when they sing you will think a kowe low , or some great bandog howl . their great exercise be shoot , wherein they train up their child from their very infancy , not suffer they to eat till they have shoot near the [ i . 4.90 . ] mark within a certain scantling . they be the very same that sometime be call Scythae nomad , or the scythian shepherd , by the greek and Latines . some think that the turk take their beginning from the nation of the Crim Tartars . of which opinion be Laonicus call - Laonicus Calcocondylas the greek historiographer , in cocmdylas . £rst book of turkish story . wherein he i follow diverse very probable conjecture . the first take from the very name it self , for that the word Turk signify a shepherd or one that follow a vagrant and wild kind of life . by which name these scythian Tartar have ever be note , be call by the greek akvqai vo / nase or the scythian shepherd . 2 his second reason because the Turk ( in his time ) that dwell in Asia the less , to wit , in Lydia , Caria , 398 Phrygia and Cappadocia , speak the very same language that these Tartars do , that dwell betwixt the river Tanais or don , and the country of Sarmatia , which ( as be well know ) be these Tartar call crim . at this time also the whole nation of the Turk differ not much in their common speech from the tartar language . third because the Turk and the Crim tartar agree so well together , as well in religion , as in matter of traffic never invade , or inury one another : save that the Turk ( since Laonicus his time ) have encroach upon some town upon the Euxin sea , that before pertain to the Crim tartar . four , because ortogules son to Oguzalpes , and father to otoman the first of name of the turkish nation make his first road out of those part of Asia , upon the next borderer , till he come towards the country about the hill Taurus , where he overcome the greek that inhabit there : and so enlarge the name and territory of the turkish nation , till he come to Eubaea and Attica , and other part of Greece . this be the opinion of Laonicus , who live among the Turk in the time of Amurat the sixth turkish emperor , about the year 1400. when the memory of their originali be more fresh : and therefore the likely he be to hit the truth . there be diverse other Tartar that border upon Russia , as the nagaye , the cheremissen , the mordwite , the chircass , and then shalcans , which all differ in name more than in regiment , or other condition , from the Crim tartar , except the chircass that border Southwest , towards Lituania , and be far more civil than the rest of the Tartar , of a comely person , and of a stately behaviour , as apply themselves to the fashion of the polonian . some of they have subject themselves to the king of Poland , and profess Christianity . the nagay lie eastward , and be reckon for the best man of war among all the Tartar , but very savage , and cruel above all the rest . the Cheremessen tartar , that lie betwixt the ruff and the nagay , be of two 399 3 4 1400. the nagay Tartar the cruel . the Chircasce the cimll tartar . the cheremissen tartar of two sort : the Lugavoy and the Nagornay . sort , the Lugavoy ( that be of the valley ) and the Nagornay , or of the hilly country . Theise have much trouble the emperor of Russia . and therefore they be content now to buy peace of they , under pretence of give a yearly pension of Russe commodity to their Morseys , or divoymorsei , that be chief of their tribe . for which also they be bind to serve they in their war , under certain condition . they be say to be just and true in their deal : and for that cause they hate the ruff people , who they account to be double , and false in all their deal . and therefore the common sort be very unwilling to keep agreement with they , but that they be keep in by their morsei , or duke for their pension sake . the mordwlt the most rude and barbarous be count tne iviorawit ost^arbar Tartar , that have many self-fashion and strange kind luso / theze . of behaviour , differ from the rest . for his religion , though he acknowledge one God , yet his manner be to worship for God , that live thing ill he first meet in the morning , and to swear by it all that whole day , whether it be horse , dog , cat , or whatsoever else it be . when his friend die , he kill his best horse , and have flay off the skin he carry it on high upon a long pole before the corpse to ' the place of burial . this he do ( as the ruff say ) that his friend may have a good horse to carry he to heaven : but it be likely to declare his love towards his dead friend , in that he will have to die with he the best thing that he have . next to the kingdom of astracan , that be the far part southeastward of the ruff dominion , lie the Shalcan , and the country of Media : whither the ruff merchant trade for raw silk , syndon , saphion , skin , and other commodity . the chief town of Media where the ruff trade , be derbent ( build by Alexander the great , as the inhabitant say ) and Zamachi where the revive the staple be keep for raw silk . their manner be in of silkworm . the spring time to revive the silkworm ( that lie dead all the winter ) by lay they in the warm 400 liberty to trade down the caspian of the Tartar a.d. 1588. sun , and ( to hasten their quicken that they may soon go to work ) to put they into bag , and so to hang they under their child arm . as for the worm call Chrinisin ( as we call it chrymson ) Chrinisin a that make colour silk , it be breed not in Media , but kind of silkin Assyria . this trade to derbent and Samachi for raw silk , and other commodity of that country , as also into Persia , and Bougharia down the river of Volga , and through the caspian sea , be permit aswell to the english as to the ruff merchant , by the emperor last grant at my be there . which he account for a very speciali favour , and may prove indeed very [ i . 491. ] beneficial ! to our english merchant , if the trade be well and orderly use . the whole nation of the Tartar be utter void of all learning , and without write law : yet certain rule they have which they hold by tradition , common to all the hoard for the practice of their life . which be of this sort . first , to obey their emperor and other 1 magistrate , whatsoever they command about the public service . 2 except for the public behoof , every 2 man to be free and out of controlment . 3 no private 3 man to possess any land , but the whole country to be as common . 4 to neglect all daintiness and 4 variety of meat , and to content themselves with that which come next to hand , for more hardness , and readiness in the execute of their affair . 5 to wear 5 any base attire , and to patch their clothes whether there be any need or not : that when there be need , it be no shame to wear a patch coat . 6 to take 6 or steal from any stranger whatsoever they can get , as be enemy to all man , save to such as will subject themselves to they . 7 towards their own hoard and nation to be true in word and deed . 8 to suffer no stranger to come within the realm . if any do , the same to be bondslave to he that first take he , except such merchant and other as have the tartar bull , or passport about they . in 401 2 c 7 8 no strange without passport admit . the samoit religion . Slata Baba or the golden Hag. a fable . the sea the english voyage of the permians , samoite , and lap . the permians and samoite that lie from Russia , north and Northeast , be think likewise to have take their beginning from the tartar kind . and it may partly be guess by the fashion of their countenance , as have all broad and flat face as the Tartar have , except the chircass . the permians be account for a very ancient people . they be now subject to the ruff . they live by hunt , and . trade with their fur , as also do the samoit , that dwell more towards the north sea the samoit have his name ( as the ruff say ) of eat himself : as if in time past , they live as you cannibal , eat one another . which they make more probable , because at this time they eat all kind of raw flesh , whatsoever it be , even the very carrion that lie in the ditch . but as the samoit themselves will say , they be call Samoie , that be , of themselves , as though they be Indigenae , or people breed upon that very soil , that never change their seat from one place to another , as most nation have do . they be subject at this time to the emperor of Russia . i talk with certain of they , and find that they acknowledge one God : but represent he by such thing as they have most use and good by . and therefore they worship the sun , the ollen , the Losh , and such like . as for the story of Slata Baba , or the golden hag , ( which i have read in some map , and description of these country , to be a idol after the form of a old woman ) that be demand by the priest , give they certain oracle , concern the success , and event of thing , i find it to be a very fable . only in the province of Obdoria upon the sea side , near to the mouth of the great river Obba , there be a rock , which natural ( be somewhat help by imagination ) may seem to bear the shape of a ragged woman , with a child in her arm ( as the rock by the 402 north cape the shape of a friar ) where the obdorian samoite use much to resort , by reason of the commodity of the place for fish : and there sometime ( as their manner be ) conceive , and practise their sorcery , and ominous conjecturing about the good or bad speed of their journey , fishing , hunt , and such like . they be clad in seal skin , with the hairy side outward down as low as the knee , with their breech and netherstocke of the same , both man and woman . they be all black haired , natural beardless . and therefore , the man be hardly discern from the woman by their look : save that the woman wear a lock of hair down along both their ear . they live in a manner a wild and savage life , rove still from one place of the country to another , without any property of house or land more to one then to another . their leader or directer in every company , be their papa or priest . on the north side of Russia next to Corelia , lie the lap . the country of Lappia , which reach in length from the far point northward , ( towards the northcape ) to the far part southeast ( which the ruff call sweetness or holy nose , the english man capegrace ) about 345. verse or mile . from sweetness to Candelox by the way of Versega ( which measure the breadth of that country ) be 90. mile or thereabouts . the whole country in a manner be either lake , or mountain , which towards the sea side be call Tondro , because they be all of hard and craggy rock , but the inland part be well furnish with wood that grow on the hill side , the lake lie between . their diet be very bare and simple . bread they have none , but feed only [ i . 492. ] upon fish and foul . they be subject to the emperor • of Russia , and the two king of Sweden and Denmark : which all exact tribute and custom of they ( as be say before ) but the emperor of Russia bear the great hand over they , and exact of they far more than the rest . the opinion be that they be 403 the samoit habit and behaviour . the people of Meta incognita such . first term lap of their brief and short speech . the ruff divide the whole nation of the lap into two sort . the one they call Nowremanskoy lapary , that be , the norvegian lap because they be of the danish religion . for the Dane and norvegians they account for one people . the other that have no religion at all but live as bruit and heathenish people , without God in the world , they call Dikoy lapary , or the wild lap . the whole nation be utter unlearned , have not so much as the use of any alphabet , or letter among they . for practice of witchcraft and sorcery they pass all nation in the world . though for enchant of ship that sail along their coast , ( as i have hear it report ) and their give of wind good to their friend , and contrary to other , who they mean to hurt by tie of certain knot upon a rope ( somewhat like to the tale of Aeolus his windbag ) be a very fable , devise ( as may seem ) by themselves , to terrify sailor for come near their coast . their weapon be the long bow , and handgunne , wherein they excel , aswell for quickness to charge and discharge , as for nearness at the mark by reason of their continual practice ( whereto they be force ) of shoot at wild fowl . their manner be in summer time to come down in great company to the sea side , to wardhuyse , Cola , Kegor , and the bay of Vedagoba , and there to fish for Codde , salmon , and but-fish , which they sei to the russes , Dane , and norvegian , and now of late to the english man that trade thither with cloth , which they exchange with the lap and corelians for their fish , oil , and fur , whereof also they have some store . they hold their mart at Cola on saint Peter day : what time the captain of Wardhuyse ( that be resiant there for the king of Denmark ) must be present , or at least send his deputy to set price upon their stockfish , train oil , fur , and other commodity : as also the ruff emperor customer , or tribute taker , to receive his custom , which 404 of the north and east region a.d. 1588. be ever pay before any thing can be buy or sell . when their fish be do , their manner be to draw their carbass or boat on shore , and there to leave they with the keel turn upwards , till the next spring tide . their travail to and fro be upon sleds swx draw draw by the Olen deer : which they use to turn mth deere-a graze all the summer time in a island call Kildyn , ( of a very good soil compare with other part of that country ) and towards the winter time , when the snow begin to fall they fetch they home again for the use of their sled . the description of the region , people , and river , lie north and east from Moscovia : as the way from Moscovia to the river Petzora , and the province Jugaria or Juhra , and from thence to the river Obi. likewise the description of other country and region , even unto the empire of the great can of Cathay , take out of Sigismundus ab Herberstein . he dominion of the prince of Moscovia , reach far towards the east and north , unto the place which we will now describe . as concern which thing , i translate a book y‘ be present unto i in the moscovite tongue , and have here make a brief rehearsal of the same . i will first therefore describe the journey from Moscovia to Petzora , and so to Jugaria and Obi. from Moscovia to the ci tie of Vologda , be number five hundred verst , one verse contain almost the space of a italian mile . from Vologda to ustiug towards the right hand , descend with the course of the river of Vologda and Suchana with who it join , be count five hundred verstes , where within two verst of the town call Strelze , and hard by the city of ustiug , Suchana join unto lug 405 the dominion of the duke of Moscovia . Vdogda . verse . ustiug . 