of prefer suit in Russia a.d. .. J583 - her majesty presence draw a sled and a man upon it , after the manner of the samoed , a people that inhabit in the north-east from Russia , and be that year come over the sea in the winter season upon the ice , in their sled , draw with these dear into Russia , where the ambassador buy of they seventeen , whereof he bring nine alive into Kent . the manner of the prefer of suit in Russia , by the example of our english merchant bill , exhibit to the emperor . JOhn Basiliwich , lord , king , and great duke of all Russia , the english merchant , William , son of Thomas , with his company sue unto . lord , in the 7082. year of the world creation , thy majesty treasurer , name Gregory Mekitowich boroz-den , take of we for thy use 12. pood of loaf sugar , prise at 8. roble the pood , which sugar be send to the two Sloboda . moor , the say Gregory treasurer , take of we two the empe-for thy majesty 200. ream of paper , prise at 20. rours altines the ream , for all which the money have not be ' pay which amount to 216. roble . and in the 84. year thy diake Stephan Lighachdo take of we for thy majesty copper plate , for the sum of 1032. roble and one four part unpaid for . also in the say 84. year thy majesty diake call Ivan Blasghoy , and Ivan Sobakin take of we for thy use , sundry commodity , and have not pay 630. roble , the rest of the money due for the say good . in the 85. year thy majesty treasurer Peter [ i . 464. ] gholoven take of we for thy majesty , cloth of sundry sort , and have not pay of the money due therefore 538. roble . in the 88 year , thy diake Andrea Shalkan , and Istomay Yevskoy take of we lead for thy majesty , to the value of 267. roble and a half not pay . and in the same year thy majesty diak Boris Gregoriwich have for thy use 15. broad clothes of diverse 329 sort , prise at 210. roble , whereof 90. roble be unpaid . also in the say 88 year thy diak Andrea Shalkan take from we 1000 roble for thou ( lord ) in ready money , yet we know not whether by thy majesty appointment . and also in the 89. year ( lord ) thy diak Andrea Shalkan take from we for thy majesty 500 roble , we know not whether by thy majesty order or no , because that thy authorize people do yearly take away from we , neither do they give we right in any cause . all the money ( lord ) which be not pay we out of thy majesty treasury for our commodity or ware , with the money take from we by Andrea Shalkan , be 4273. roble 25. all tine . right noble king and lord , show thy mercy , and cause the money to be pay we which be owe for our good , as also that which have be take from we : extend thy favour , king and lord . a letter of m. Henry lane to the worshipful m. William Sanderson , contain a brief discourse of that which pass in the north-east discovery for the space of three and thirty year . Aster Sanderson , as you late request i , so have i seek , and though i can find thing that heretofore i keep in writing , and lend out to other , yet peruse at London copy of my old letter to content one that mean to pleasure many , i have brief and as true as i may , draw out as follow : the rough hew may be plane at your leisure , or as please he that shall take the pain . First the honourable attempt to discover by sea Northeast and northwest name for Cathay , be chief 33° 