ambassage of sir Jerome Bowes ajx 1583 - a brief discourse of the voyage of sir Jerome Bowes knight , her majesty ambassador to Ivan Vasilivich the emperor of Muscovia , in the year 1583. he emperor of Russia that then live , by name Ivan Vasiliwich , have deliberate consider how necessary it be for the strengthen of his estate , that a sure commerce and intercourse of merchant shall be again renew between he and her sacred majesty of England , with such further immunity and privilege for the honour and utility of both their dominion , and subject of the same , as upon mutual treaty of person interpose on both side , may be assent unto : send over into this realm , in the year of our lord 1582 , as his ambassador for that purpose , a ancient discreet gentleman of his household call Pheodor Andrevich Phisemsky , accompany with one of his secretary , for his better assistance in that expedition : and beside his many other direction , whereof part be to be deliver by word of mouth , and the rest set down in a letter under the emperor signature , address to her majesty : he have in speciali charge to solicit her majesty to send over with he to his master a ambassador from she , to treat and contract of such affair of importance as concern both the realm , which be the principali end of his employment hither . whereupon her majesty very gracious incline to the emperor motion , and at the humble suit of the english merchant trade those country being carry with the same princely respect , to satisfy his demand in that behalf , make choice of sir Jerome bow , a gentleman of her court , ordinary attend upon her majesty person , towards who be apparent express her princely opinion and favour by the credit of this negotiation . 3*5 Pheodor Andrevich Phisemsky the emperor ambassador . the Hollander intrude into our trade . the english voyage after he have receive his commission , with other speciali letter to the emperor , with all other instruction appertain to his charge , and that the say Russe ambassador be licence to return home to his master , be honorable entertain and reward , the english ambassador be attend upon with forty person at the least , very honourable furnish , whereof many be gentleman , and one m. Humphrey Cole a learned preacher , take his leave of her majesty at the court at Greenwich the eighteenth of June , and with the other ambassador , with their several ! company , embark themselves at Harwich the two and twenty of the same , and after a stormy voyage at the sea , they arrive both in safety in the road of saint Nicholas the three and twenty of July next follow . the ruff ambassador lodge himself at the abbey of saint Nicholas : and the english ambassador be lodge and well entertain by the english merchant , at their house at saint Nicholas , stand in a island call rose island . the ruff ambassador have repose himself one whole day , take his leave of the english ambassador , and depart towards Moscow . the english ambassador abide yet at saint Nicholas four or five day , when have make provision of boat , and mean to that purpose , he go forward upon his journey towards Moscow , to a town call Colmogro , about four score mile distant from saint Nicholas . you must here understand that before the english ambassador go into Russia , there be diverse stranger , but especial certain dutch merchant , who have intrude themselves to trade into those country . notwithstanding a privilege of the sole trade thither be long before grant to the english merchant . Theise dutch man have already so handle the matter , as they have by chargeable mean win three of the chief counsellor to the emperor to be their 316 assure friend , namely , Mekita Romanovich , Bodan Belskoy , and Andrew Shalkan the chancellor : for beside daily gift that they bestow upon they all , they take so much money of they at interest at five and twenty upon the hundred , as they pay to some one of they five thousand mark yearly for the use of his money , and the english merchant at that time have not one friend in court . the ambassador have now spend five week at saint Nicholas and at Colmogro , there come to he then a gentleman send from the emperor to entertain he , and have in charge to conduct he up the river towards Moscow , and to deliver he provision of all kind of victual necessary . this gentleman be a follower of Shalkan the chancellor , be by he ( as it seem ) foist into that service of purpose , as afterward appear by the course he take , to offer discourtesy , and occasion of mislike to the ambassador : for you must understand that the chancellor and the other two great counsellor ( speak of as friend to the Dutchman ) have a purpose to oppose themselves direct against her majesty ambassage , especial in that point , for the bar of all stranger from trade into the emperor country . this gentleman conduct the english ambassador a thousand mile up the river of Dwina and Soughana , to a city call Vologda , where receive he another gentleman send from the emperor , a man of better countenance than the other , who present the ambassador from the emperor with two fair gelding well furnish after their manner . at a city call yeraslave upon the river Volga there meet the ambassador a duke well accompany , send from the emperor , who present he from the emperor a coach and ten gelding for the more easy convey of he to Moscow , from whence this city be distant five hundred mile . two mile on this side Moscow there meet the be - 317 the english voyage bassador four gentleman of good account , accompany with two hundred horse : who after a little salutation , not familiar , without embrace , tell he that they have to say to he from the emperor , and will have have he light on foot to have hear it , notwithstanding themselves will still have fit on horseback : which the ambassador soon refuse to do , and so they stand long upon term , whether both party shall light or not : which afterward agree upon , there be yet great niceness who foot shall not be first on ground . their message be deliver , and after have embrace each other , they conduct the say ambassador to his lodging at Moscow , a house build of purpose for he , themselves be place in the next house to it , as appoint to furnish he of all provision , and to be use by he upon all other occasion . the ambassador have be some day in Moscow , and have in all that time be very honorable use from the emperor ( for such be his will ) though some of his chief counsellor ( as be say ) have another purpose , and do often time cunning put it in use : he be send for to court , and be accompany thither with about forty gentleman honorable mount , and sumptuous array , and in his passage from his lodging to the court , be set in a ward five or six thousand shot , that be of the emperor guard . at the entry into the court there meet he four noble man apparel in cloth of gold , and rich fur , their cap embroider with pearl and stone , who conduct he towards the emperor , till he be meet with four other of great degree than they , who guide he yet further towards the emperor , in which passage there stand along the wall , and sit upon bench and form in row , seven or eight hundred person , say to be nobleman and gentleman , all apparel in garment of colour satin and cloth of gold . Theise four nobleman accompany he to the emperor chamber door , where meet he the emperor 318 ambassage of sir Jerome Bowes a.d. . 1583 - herald , who office be there hold great : and with he all the great officer of the emperor chamber , who all conduct he to the place where the emperor sit in his state , have three crown stand by he , viz. of Moscovia , Cazan , and Astrakan , and also by he 4 young nobleman of about twenty year of age , of each side twain , costly apparel in white , hold upon their shoulder each of they a broad axe , much like to a gallogal axe of Ireland , thin and very sharp , the steel or handle not past half a yard long , and there sit about the chamber upon bench and other low seat , above a hundred nobleman rich apparel in cloth of gold . the ambassador be thus bring to the emperor to kiss his hand , after some compliment and inquiry [ i . 460. ] of her majesty health , he will he to go sit down in a place provide for that purpose , nigh ten pase distant from he , from whence he will have have he to have send he her majesty letter and present , which the ambassador think not reasonable step forward towards the emperor : in which passage the chancellor come to meet he , and will have take his letter : to who the ambassador say , that her majesty have direct no letter to he ; and so go on , and deliver they himself to the emperor own hand . and after , have thus deliver her majesty letter and what he have else to say at that time , he be conduct to the council chamber , where have have conference with the council of matter of his ambassage , he be soon after send for again to the emperor , where he dine in his presence at a side table , near unto he , and all his company at another board by , where also dine at other table in the same place , all the chief noble man that be about the court , to the number of a hundred . and in the time of this dinner , the emperor use many favor to the ambassador and about the midst of dinner ( stand up ) drink a great carouse to the health of the queen his 319 good sister , and send he a great bowl full of rhenish wine and sugar to pledge he . the ambassador after this , be often call to court , where he have conference both with the emperor and his council of the matter in question , touch both ambassage , which diverse time raise many jar : and in the end , after sundry meeting , the emperor find himself not satisfy to his like , for that the ambassador have not power by his commission to yield to every thing that he think fit , as a man who will be seidome wont to be gainsay , let loose his passion , and with a stern and angry countenance tell he that he do not reckon the queen of England to be his fellow : for there be ( quoth he ) that be her better . the ambassador great mislike these speech , and be very unwilling ( how dangerous soever it may prove to his own person ) to give way to the emperor , to derogate aught from the honour and greatness of her majesty : and find also that to subject himself to the angry humour and disposition of the emperor be not the mean to win aught at his hand , with like courage and countenance to answer his , tell he that the queen his mistress be as great a prince as any be in Christendom , equal to he that think himself the great , well able to defend herself against his malice whosoever , and want no mean to offend any that either she have , or shall have cause to be enemy unto . yea ( quoth he ) how say thou to the french king , and the king of Spain ? Mary ( quoth the ambassador ) i hold the queen my mistress as great as any of they both . then what say thou ( quoth he ) to the emperor of Germany ? such be the greatness of the queen my mistress ( quoth the ambassador ) as the king her father have ( not long since ) the emperor in his pay , in his war against France . this answer mislike the emperor yet so much more , 320 as that he tell the ambassador , that be he not a ambassador , he will throw he out of the door . whereunto he answer that he may do his will , for he be now fast within his country : but he have a mistress who ( he doubt not ) will be revenge of any injury that shall be do unto he . whereupon the emperor in great sudden bid he get he home . and he with no more reverence than such usage require , salute the emperor , and go his way . all this notwithstanding , the ambassador be not much soon out of the chamber , and the emperor choler somewhat settle , but he deliver to his council that stand about he many commendation in the favour of the ambassador , for that he will not endure one ill word to be speak against his mistress , and therewithal ! wish himself to have such a servant . the ambassador have not be much more than one hour in his lodging , but the emperor imagine ( as it seem ) by the extraordinary behaviour of the ambassador ( for he want not wit to judge ) that he have find what be the emperor case , send his principali secretary unto he , to tell he , that notwithstanding what have pass , yet for the great love that he bear to the queen his sister , he shall very short be call again to court , and have a resolution of all the matter in question : and this secretary be now further content to impart , and say to the ambassador that the emperor be full resolve to send a great noble man home with he in ambassage to the queen his sister , then ever he yet at any time send out of his country : and that he determine also to send to the queen a present worth three thousand pound , and to gratify himself at his departure with a gift that shall be worth a thousand pound : and tell he also that the next day the emperor will send a great noble man unto he , to confer with he of certain abuse do he by Shalkan the chancellor , and his minister . and so the day follow he send Bodan Belskoy then in 321 ten chief counsellor that he have , a man most in credit with he : this man examine all matter wherewith the ambassador have find himself grieve , and supply he with what he want , and right he in all thing wherein he have be wrong . [ I. 461. ] not long after the return of this noble man , the emperor cause to be set down in his own presence , a new and much large allowance of diet for the ambassador than he have have before , and short after send the same to the ambassador by his principali secretary Savio Frollo . this diet be so great , as the ambassador often time seek to have it lessen , but the emperor will not by any mean . the scroll of the new diet be this : one bushel of fine meal for three day . one bushel of wheat meal for a day and a half . two live goose for one day . twenty hen for the day . Seven sheep for a day . one ox for three day . one side of pork for a day . seventie egg for a day . ten pound of butter . seventy penny white loaf of bread . twelve penny loaf of bread . one veather or gallon of vinegar . two veather of salt cabige . one peck of onion . ten pound of salt . on altine , or six penny worth of wax candle . two all tine of tallow candle . one four part of a veather of cherry mead . as much of Mallynovomead . half a veather of burn wine . one veather of sodden mead call obarni . three veather of sweet mead . ten veather of white mead . fifteen veather of ordinary mead . 322 1583-foure veather of sweet beer . fifteen veather of beer . half a pound of pepper . three sollitinck or ounce of saffron . one sollitincke of maze . one sollitincke of nutmeg . two sollitinck of clove . three sollitinck of cinnamon . foe bushel of oat . provender , < one load of hay . ^one load of straw . now he begin so much to discover his purpose and affection towards her majesty and her country , as he send to the ambassador , entreat he that his two preacher , and m. coal . doctor Jacob his English physician , may set down the point of the religion in use in England , which the ambassador cause to be do accord , and send they unto he , who seem so well to like they , as he cause they ( with much good allowance ) to be public read before diverse of his council , and many other of his nobility . now he draw hot again in question to marry some kinswoman of her majesty , and that he will send again into England , to have some one of they to wife , and if her majesty will not upon his next ambassage send he such a one as he require , himself will then go into England , and carry his treasure with he , and marry one of they there . here you must understand that the year before this ambassage , he have send to her majesty by his ambassador to have have the lady mary Hastings in marriage , which entreaty by mean of her inability of body , by occasion of much sickness , or perhaps , of no great like either of herself or friend , or both , take no place . the ambassador be now so far grow into the emperor favour , and his affection so great to England , as those great counsellor that be the ambassador great enemy before , be now desirous of some public 323 courtesy at his hand for their advantage to the emperor : neither dare they now any more interpose themselves betwixt the emperor and he : for not long before this , the emperor for abuse the ambassador , have ( to show his favour towards he ) beat Shalkan the chancellor very grievous , and have send he word , that he will not leave one of his race alive . now while the ambassador be thus strong possess of the emperor favour , he employ himself in all he may , not only for the speedy dispatch of the negotiation he have in hand , but labour also by all the good mean he may , further to benefit his country and countryman , and so not long after win at the emperor hand not only all those thing he have in commission to treat for by his instruction , but also some other of good and great importance , for the benefit of the merchant . private suit obtain of the emperor by the ambassador . leave for Richard Fransham a english man and apothecary to the emperor , his wife , and child , to come home into England , and to bring with he all such good as he have get there . he obtain like leave for Richard Elmes a english man one of the emperor surgeon . he also get leave for Jane ricard the widow of doctor Bomelius a Dutchman , and physician to the emperor , who for treason practise with the king of pole against the say emperor , be roast to death at the city of Moscow , in the year 1579. Theise follow he obtain for the behoof of the merchant . he procure for the merchant promise of recompense for certain good take from their factor . by robbery upon the Volga . 324 he obtain likewise the payment of five hundred mark , which be pay for ten year before his go into Russia ( into the emperor receit ) for a rent of a house that they have at Vologda . he also get grant for they the repayment of fifteen hundred mark , which have be exact of they the two last year before his come thither . he get also for they order for the repayment of a old and desperate debt of three thousand mark , a debt so desperate , as four year leave out of their account , and by the opinion of they all , not think fit to be deal with , for too much offend the emperor , or impeach his other business , which be think at least otherwise sufficient , and be therefore leave out of his instruction from her majesty . he obtain that all stranger be forbid to trade any more into Russia , and that the passage and trade to all the emperor northern coast and country , from the Wardhouse to the river of ob shall be only free to the english nation . last , of a great desire he have to do the merchant good , without motion either of themselves here , or their agent there , or any other of they , he obtain of the emperor the abatement of all their custom which they have long before pay , and agree still to continue , which custom the Dutchman and stranger be remove , as now it be agree , amount to two thousand pound yearly . all these be grant , some already pay before his come from Moscow , the old privilege ratify , new write , sign and seal , and be to be deliver to the ambassador at his next come to court , before when the emperor fall sick of a surfeit , and so die . after who death the case be wondrous alter with the ambassador : for whereas both in his own conceit , and in all man opinion else , he be in great forwardness to have grow a great man with the emperor , what for the love he bear to her majesty , and the 325 particular like he have of himself , he now fall into the hand of his great enemy , Mekita Romanovich and Andre Shalkan the chancellor , who , after the death of the emperor , take the speciali government upon themselves , and so present cause the ambassador to be shut up a close prisoner in his own house , for the space of nine week , and be so straight guard and bad use by those that attend he , as he daily suspect some further mischief to have follow : for in this time there grow a great uproar in Moscow of nigh twenty thousand person , which remember that his enemy reign , somewhat amaze the ambassador , but yet afterward the matter fall out against that great counsellor Bodan Belskoy , who i note before to be a special man in the old emperor favour : who be now notwithstanding so outrageous assault , as that he be force to seek the emperor chamber for his safety , and be afterward send away to Cazan , a place he have in government , five hundred mile from Moscow , where he have remain ever since , and never as yet call again to court , at which time the ambassador expect some such like measure , and prepare himself aswell as he can , for his defence : yet happy after this , be send for to court , to have his dispatch , and to take his leave of the emperor : whither be conduct ( not after the wont manner ) and bring to the council chamber , come to he only Shalkan the chancellor and a brother of he , who without more ado , tell he for the sum of his dispatch , that this emperor will not treat of further amity with the queen his mistress , than such as be between his late father and she , before his come thither : and will not hear any reply to be make by the ambassador , but present cause both himself and all his company to be disarm of their weapon , and go towards the emperor . in which passage there be such outrage offer he , as have he not use more patience than his disposition afford he , or the occasion require , he have not in likelihood escape with life , but 326 yet at length be bring to the presence of the emperor , who say nothing to he , but what the chancellor have already do , but offer he a letter to carry to her majesty , which the ambassador ( for that he know it contain nothing that do concern his ambassage ) refuse till he see his danger grow too great : neither will the emperor suffer the ambassador to reply aught , nor well he can , for they have now of purpose take away his interpretor , be yet unwilling [ i . 463. ] ( as it seem , and suspect the ambassador purpose ) that the emperor and other shall know how dishonourble he have be handle : for there be at that time , in that presence a noble brave gentleman , one Boris the great Pheodorovich Godenoe , brother to the emperor that now en^s0^ be , who yet after the death of the emperor do always pheQ^rovich use the ambassador most honorable , and will very willing have do he much more kindness , but his authority be not yet , till the coronation of the emperor : but notwithstanding he send often unto he , not long before his departure , and accompany his many honourable favour with a present of two fair piece of cloth of gold , and a timber of very good sable : and desire that as there be kindness and brotherhood betwixt the emperor and her majesty , so there may be love and brotherhood betwixt he and the ambassador . save from this man , there be now no more favour nor friendship leave for the ambassador in Moscovia : for the chancellor Shalkan have now send he word that the english emperor be dead : he have now nothing offer he but danger and disgrace too many , and a hasty dispatch from the Moscow , that he may not tarry the coronation of the new emperor : offence many in his preparation for his long journey , only one mean gentleman appoint to accompany he to the sea side , expect daily in his passage some sudden revenge to be do upon he , for so he understand it be threaten before his come from the Moscow , and therefore with resolution provide by all the mean 327 he may , by himself and his servant for his defence ( for now be his danger know such , as the english merchant do altogether leave he , although he command they in her majesty name to accompany he ) that if any such thing shall happen to be offer he , as many of they as he can that shall offer to execute it , shall die with he for company : which be perceive be think to make his passage the safe . so afterward be drive to digest many injury by the way , at length he recover S. Nicholas , where remember his unfortunate loss of the old emperor , and his ill usage since then at the Moscow , he be force to take a bare letter for the sum of his dispatch , containing nothing of that he come for , and the poor and disgraceful present send he ( in the name of the emperor ) in respect of that that be mean he by the old emperor , know all these to be do in disgrace of her majesty and himself , determine now to be discharge of some part of they in such sort as he can , and so provide as he may to prevent his danger , in get to his ship , furnish and place his man to answer any assault that shall be offer he , after he have bid farewell to the uncourteous gentleman that bring he thither , by three or four of the valiant and discreet man he have , he send to be deliver he or leave at his lodging , his master weak letter , and worse present , and so afterward happy ( though hardly ) recover his ship in safety , although present afterward , there be great hurly burly after he , to force he to receive the same again , but fail of their purpose . So come the ambassador from saint Nicholas the twelve day of August , and arrive at Gravesend the twelve of September follow , and attend her majesty at the court at otelands , where , after have kiss her majesty hand , and deliver some part of the success of his ambassage , he present she a elk or Loshe , the red deer of the country , and also a brace of rain dear , buck and doe , both bear very huge home : they in 328 of prefer suit in Russia a.d. .. J583 - her majesty presence draw a sled and a man upon it , after the manner of the samoed , a people that inhabit in the north-east from Russia , and be that year come over the sea in the winter season upon the ice , in their sled , draw with these dear into Russia , where the ambassador buy of they seventeen , whereof he bring nine alive into Kent . the manner of the prefer of suit in Russia , by the example of our english merchant bill , exhibit to the emperor . JOhn Basiliwich , lord , king , and great duke of all Russia , the english merchant , William , son of Thomas , with his company sue unto . lord , in the 7082. year of the world creation , thy majesty treasurer , name Gregory Mekitowich boroz-den , take of we for thy use 12. pood of loaf sugar , prise at 8. roble the pood , which sugar be send to the two Sloboda . moor , the say Gregory treasurer , take of we two the empe-for thy majesty 200. ream of paper , prise at 20. rours altines the ream , for all which the money have not be ' pay which amount to 216. roble . and in the 84. year thy diake Stephan Lighachdo take of we for thy majesty copper plate , for the sum of 1032. roble and one four part unpaid for . also in the say 84. year thy majesty diake call Ivan Blasghoy , and Ivan Sobakin take of we for thy use , sundry commodity , and have not pay 630. roble , the rest of the money due for the say good . in the 85. year thy majesty treasurer Peter [ i . 464. ] gholoven take of we for thy majesty , cloth of sundry sort , and have not pay of the money due therefore 538. roble . in the 88 year , thy diake Andrea Shalkan , and Istomay Yevskoy take of we lead for thy majesty , to the value of 267. roble and a half not pay . and in the same year thy majesty diak Boris Gregoriwich have for thy use 15. broad clothes of diverse 329 