dr . Giles FLETCHER’S ambassage a.d. 1588. matter of controversy , either concern merchandise or injury , than they be to be judge by our treasurer and secretary of the ambassador office to do justice between both party , and to seek out the truth of matter in all thing , and whatsoever can be find out by the law , shall|be try by oath and lot : who lot soever be take forth , he to have right . and in what place of all our kingdom , in what city soever they or their people shall be , and that there happen any matter of controversy , either concern merchandise , injury or otherwise , that they have occasion to set upon any man by law , or that any seek upon they , concern what matter soever in all our kingdom and city , than our lieutenant , captain , and our officer shall give they justice , and shall minister [ i . 473. ] all true justice between they , seek out the truth : and what can be true seek by law , shall|be seek out by oath and lot : who lot soever be take out , he to have right accord as before , and the judge or justice shall take of they no kind of du tie , for matter of law no where throughout all our realm . this letter be give in our princely palace within the city of Moscow , in the year from the foundation of the world , seven thousand fourscore and fifteen in the month of February . the ambassage of m. Giles Fletcher , doctor of the civil law , send from her majestic to Theodor the emperor of Russia , anno 1588. n the year 1588. be send ambassador from her highness into the country of Russia , Giles Fletcher doctor of the civil law , as well to treat with the new emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , about league and amity , in like manner as be before with his father Ivan Vasilowich , as also for the reestablish and reduce into order in 353 z then decay trade of our Englishman there . who notwithstanding at his first arrival at the Moscow , find some part of hard entertainment , by mean of certain rumour concern the late naval victory which be there report to have fall on the spanish side , as also for some dislike conceive against the privilege trade of our english merchant . yet in the end he obtain of the emperor many good and equal condition , and be courteous and honourable dismiss by he . the principali point which he entreat of , and be grant unto he by the say emperor , be these : 1 a continuation of league and amity between her highness and the say emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , in like manner as be before with his father Ivan Vasilowich . 2 a confirmation and reestablishment of the former privilege of the company of our english merchant , which be infringe and annul in the principal point , with diverse necessary addition to the same , for the better order of their trade in those country hereafter , viz. that the state of the privilege grant before in the name of some private and particular man , be alter in that point , and the same grant by the name and stile of their incorporation , viz. to the fellowship of english merchant for the discovery of new trade . 3 that upon every surmise and light quarrel , the say privilege be not revoke and annul , as before time it have be . 4 that justice shall be administer to the say company and their agent without delay , upon such as shall offer they any despite or injury , or shall exact or impose upon they any payment , taxation or imposition whatsoever , contrary to the freedom of the say grant . 5 that the good and commodity of the say company , be not forcible take as before time they have be by the emperor officer or people of authority , 354 dr . Giles Fletchers ambassage a.d. 1588. either for the use of the say emperor or of his officer . but in case they have need of the say commodity , the same to be take at reasonable price , and for ready money . 6 that the say company be not charge hereafter with the answer of such debt as be make by any Englishman not be of the society . 7 that the emperor authorize people shall not hereafter repute any Englishman resiant in that country , to be any factor , servant , or dealer in the say company affair , but such as the agent shall inregister by name , within the office where custom be enter in all such place of the land where the say company have residence to traffic . 8 that the name of such as shall so be inregistre be no long continue in record , nor themselves repute as factor or dealer for the say company , than the agent shall think good . but in case the say agent in his discretion shall think meet to strike out of the register any name of such as have be employ in the company service , the say person to be hold as private , and who act in bargain or otherwise , shall not charge the say company . 9 that if any english man within the country of Russia be suspect for any notorious crime , as felony , treason , etc the same be not straightway set upon the * Pudkey , nor otherwise torment , till such time * it be rest as he shall be convict by plain and evident proof : t0 which be do , the whole proceed to be send over to the queen of England . 10 that the say privilege with the addition , shall be publish in all town and part of the emperor dominion , where the say company have traffic . 11 that the say company shall be permit to use a sole trade through the emperor country , by the river Volga into Media , Persia , Bogharia , and the other the east country . 12 whereas there be claim of the say company 355 [ i . 474. ] the sum of 23553. mark of debt , make by certain of their factor for the say company , for payment whereof , their whole stock be in danger of arrest , by public authority : further also 2140. rubble for custom and houserent , he obtain a rebatement of eighteen thousand , one hundred fifty and three mark of the say debt . the say ambassador m. Giles Fletcher , as i understand , have draw a book entitle , of the ruff common wealth , contain : first , a cosmographical description of the country , which have these chapter . 1 of the length and breadth of the country of Russia , with the name of the shire . 2 of the soil and climate . 3 of the native commodity of the country . second , a description of their policy contain in these chapter , viz. 1 of the constitution or state of the ruff common wealth . 2 of their parliament , and manner of hold they . 3 of the ruff Nobili tie and mean whereby it be keep in a under , proportion agreeable to that state . 4 of the manner of govern their province or shire . 5 of the emperor privy counsel . 6 of the emperor custom and their revenue , with the practise for the increase of they . 7 of the ruff commonalty and their condition . 8 of their public justice and manner of proceed therein . 9 of the emperor force for his war , with the chief officer , and their salary or pay . 10 of their manner of muster , armour , and provision for victuali . 11 of their order , march , charge , and their martial discipline . 356 12 of their colony and policy in maintain their purchase by conquest . 13 of their borderer with who they have most to do in war and peace . 14 of their church office and degree . 15 of their liturgy or form of church service . 16 of their manner of administer the sacrament . 17 of the doctrine of the ruff church . 18 of the manner of solemnize their marriage . 19 of the other ceremony of the ruff church . A.D. 1588. third , the Oeconomie or private behaviour of the Russe contain these chapter . 1 of the emperor household officer , and order of his house . 2 of the private behaviour and manner of the ruff people . the description of the country of Russia , with the breadth , length , and name of the shire . he country of Russia be sometime call Sarmatia . it change the name ( as some do suppose ) for that it be part into diverse small , and yet absolute government , not depend , nor be subject the one to the other . for Russe in that tongue do signify as much as to part , or divide . the ruff report that four brethren , trubor , rurico , Sinees , and Varivus divide among they the north part of the country . likewise that the south part be possess by 4. other , Kio , Scieko , Choranus , and their sister Libeda : each call his territory after his own name . of this partition it be call Russia , about the year from Christ 860. as for the conjecture which i find in some cosmographer , that the ruff nation borrow the name of the people call Roxellani , and be the very same nation with they , it be without all good probability , both in respect of the 357 