these country , or of the privilege grant by his majesty to our merchant , that he may by advertisement treat with your lordship thereupon : which we by reason of our great princely affair can not so [ i . 502. ] convenient at all time do with such expedition as the cause may require . and thus with our princely commendation we bid you farewell . from our royal palace of Whitehall the fourteen day of januariee , anno domini 1591. to the right honourable my very good lord , the lord Boris Pheodorowich , master of the horse to the great and mighty emperor of Russia , his highness lieutenant of Cazan and astracan , William Cecill lord Burghley , knight of the noble order of the garter , and lord high treasurer of England , send greeting . ight honourable my very good lord , upon the last return of our merchant ship out of Russia , there be bring unto my hand , by one Francis cherry a english merchant , a letter direct to the queen majesty , from the great and mighty emperor of Russia , and another letter from your lordship direct to i : which say letter write from the emperor to her majesty have be considerate and advise by she highness read and peruse , and the matter of complaint against Jerome Horsey therein comprise thorough examine : which have turn the same Horsey to some great displeasure . i do also acquaint our majesty with the content of your lordship letter write to i , and inform she of your lordship honourable favour show to her highness merchant from time to time : who take the same in most gracious part , and confess her self 43° .... 15911 infinite behold unto your lordship for many honourable office do for her sake , the which she mean to acknowledge by her letter to be write to your lordship under her princely hand and seal . and forasmuch as it have please your good lordship to take into your hand the protection of her majesty merchant , and the redress of such injury as be , or shall be offer unto they contrary to the meaning of the privilege and the free liberty of the intercourse , wherein in some point your lordship have already use a reformation , as appear by your say letter : yet the continuance of traffic move new occasion and other accident tend to the loss of the say merchant , whereof some particular have be offer unto i to treat with your lordship upon : i think it good to refer they to your honourable consideration , that order may be take in the same , for that they be apparent repugnant to the emperor letter write to her majesty , and do much restrain the liberty of the trade : one be , that at the last come of our merchant to the port of saint « a new Michael the Archangel , where the mart be hold , their ? ort ' good be take by the emperor officer for his highness service at such rate , as the say officer be dispose to set upon they , so far under their value , that the merchant can not assent to accept of those price : which be deny , the say officer restrain they of all further traffic for the space of msrc^ants 3 three week , by which mean they be compel to strmn fnm yield unto their demand how unwilling soever , their mart another be , that our say merchant be drive to pay the emperor officer custom for all such ruff money as they bring down from the Moscow to the sea side to employ there at the mart within the emperor own land ; which seem strange unto i , consider the same money be bring from one place of the country to another , and there employ without any transport over of the say money . Theise interruption and imposition seem not to stand with the liberty of the 431 emperor privilege and freedom of the intercourse , which shall be restrain neither to time or condition , but to be free and absolute : whereof it may please your lordship to be advise , and to continue your honourable course hold between the emperor and her majesty , to reconcile such difference as any occasion do offer to their league or traffic . thus not doubt of your lordship furtherance herein , i humble take my leave of your good lordship . from her majesty royal 1591. palace of Whitehall this 15 of January , 1591. I592 - a letter from the emperor of Russia , Theodore Ivanovich to the queen majesty . [ i - 5°3-l the emperor stile late enlarge . hrough the tender mercy of our god , whereby the dayspring from on high have visit we , thereby to guide our foot into the way of peace . even this our god by mercy we glorify in Trini tie . we the great lord , king and great duke Theodore Ivanowich , governor of all Russia , of Volodimer , Moscow , and Novogrod , king of Cazan and astracan , lord of Vobsco , and great duke of Smolensco , otver , ughori , perm , Viatsky , Bulgary , and other region , lord and great duke also of Novogrod in the low country , of Chernigo , of rezan , polotsko , Rostove , yeroslave , Bealozera , and of Lifland , of Udorsky , Obdorsky , Condinsky , and all the country of Siberia , and commander of all the north part , and lord over the country of Iversky , and king of Grusinsky , and of the country of Kabardinsky , Cherchasky , and duke of Igorsky , lord and ruler of many country moor etc to our love sister Elizabeth queen of England , France , and Ireland , etc love sister , your letter send by your servant Thomas Lind , we have receive , and read what you have write in the same touch our title , and touch your order hold in your letter heretofore send we by your servant Jerome Horsey : 432 