the queen majesty letter to the lord Boris Pheodorowich . Lizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , France , and Ireland , defendor of the faith , etc to the right honourable and noble prince lord Boris Pheodorowich Godonova , master of the horse to the great and mighty emperor of Russia , his highness lieutenant of Cazan and astracan , our most dear and love cousin , greeting . right honourable , it have appear unto we upon the read and peruse of the letter late send unto our highness from our deer and love brother the emperor , in what part his majesty take the late employment of our messenger Jerome Horsey in our affair into Russia : wherein we do also find the honourable endeavour use by your lordship to appease his highness mislike and exception take aswell to the person of our messenger , as to our princely letter send by he : both of which point we have answer in our letter send by this bearer direct to our say love brother the emperor : upon peruse whereof we doubt not but his majesty will be well satisfy touch our say messenger and former letter . and for the honourable course hold by your lordship in the interpose of your opinion and favourable construction in a thing which may grow to the offence of the league and amity stand between your sovereign lord and we ( wherein your lordship perform the office of a honourable and grave counsellor ) we take our self behold to your lordship for your readiness in that behalf , and do assure our self that the same do proceed of the especial love and kind affection that your lordship have ever bear and continue towards we , whereof our princely nature will never be unmindful . we have be also from time 428 to time make acquaint by our chief and principali counsellor William lord Burghley , lord high treasurer of our highness realm of England , of your letter which have pass between your lordship and he , concern the intercourse of our merchant traffic in your country , and of the honourable office do by your lordship with the emperor in favour of our say merchant . and last ( which we take a most assure argument of your undoubted love and affection towards we ) that your lordship have vouchsafe , and of purpose take into your hand the protection of our say merchant , and the hear and determine of all their cause and occasion whatsoever , which shall concern they or their trade . all which we conceive to be do for our sake , and therefore do acknowledge our self too be , and still will continue behold unto you for the same . and whereas we have make mention in our say letter write to our love brother the emperor of certain debt due aswell to our merchant , as to other of our subject by one William Turnbull a subject of we late decease in Russia , we pray you to be refer to the say letter . and forasmuch as the say cause will fall under your lordship jurisdiction by reason of your acceptation of all their cause into your patronage and protection : we be so well assure of your honourable inclination to justice , and your good affection towards our merchant for our sake , that we shall not need to entreat your honourable furtherance either of justice or expedition in the say cause . and last consider that your noble lineage together with your great wisdom and desert have make you a principali counsellor and director of the state of so great a monarchic , whereby your advice and direction be follow in all thing that do concern the same , we have give order to our say principali counsellor William lord Burghley , treasurer of our realm of England , that as any occasion shall arise to the hindrance of the intercourse between 429 A.D. I59I - these country , or of the privilege grant by his majesty to our merchant , that he may by advertisement treat with your lordship thereupon : which we by reason of our great princely affair can not so [ i . 502. ] convenient at all time do with such expedition as the cause may require . and thus with our princely commendation we bid you farewell . from our royal palace of Whitehall the fourteen day of januariee , anno domini 1591. to the right honourable my very good lord , the lord Boris Pheodorowich , master of the horse to the great and mighty emperor of Russia , his highness lieutenant of Cazan and astracan , William Cecill lord Burghley , knight of the noble order of the garter , and lord high treasurer of England , send greeting . ight honourable my very good lord , upon the last return of our merchant ship out of Russia , there be bring unto my hand , by one Francis cherry a english merchant , a letter direct to the queen majesty , from the great and mighty emperor of Russia , and another letter from your lordship direct to i : which say letter write from the emperor to her majesty have be considerate and advise by she highness read and peruse , and the matter of complaint against Jerome Horsey therein comprise thorough examine : which have turn the same Horsey to some great displeasure . i do also acquaint our majesty with the content of your lordship letter write to i , and inform she of your lordship honourable favour show to her highness merchant from time to time : who take the same in most gracious part , and confess her self 43° 