emperor privilege and freedom of the intercourse , which shall be restrain neither to time or condition , but to be free and absolute : whereof it may please your lordship to be advise , and to continue your honourable course hold between the emperor and her majesty , to reconcile such difference as any occasion do offer to their league or traffic . thus not doubt of your lordship furtherance herein , i humble take my leave of your good lordship . from her majesty royal 1591. palace of Whitehall this 15 of January , 1591. I592 - a letter from the emperor of Russia , Theodore Ivanovich to the queen majesty . [ i - 5°3-l the emperor stile late enlarge . hrough the tender mercy of our god , whereby the dayspring from on high have visit we , thereby to guide our foot into the way of peace . even this our god by mercy we glorify in Trini tie . we the great lord , king and great duke Theodore Ivanowich , governor of all Russia , of Volodimer , Moscow , and Novogrod , king of Cazan and astracan , lord of Vobsco , and great duke of Smolensco , otver , ughori , perm , Viatsky , Bulgary , and other region , lord and great duke also of Novogrod in the low country , of Chernigo , of rezan , polotsko , Rostove , yeroslave , Bealozera , and of Lifland , of Udorsky , Obdorsky , Condinsky , and all the country of Siberia , and commander of all the north part , and lord over the country of Iversky , and king of Grusinsky , and of the country of Kabardinsky , Cherchasky , and duke of Igorsky , lord and ruler of many country moor etc to our love sister Elizabeth queen of England , France , and Ireland , etc love sister , your letter send by your servant Thomas Lind , we have receive , and read what you have write in the same touch our title , and touch your order hold in your letter heretofore send we by your servant Jerome Horsey : 432 wherein you have answer we sufficient and most gracious . and whereas your majesty have write in your letter concern the good of William Turnbull late decease in our kingdom , that your subject , for who he be factor , shall have debt grow unto they from he by account : we at your majesty request have cause not only order to be take , but for your highness sake , love sister , we have cause the good to be seek out and deliver to your merchant agent and his company , together with his stuff , book , bill and write , as also money to the value of six hundred rubble , which Christopher Holmes and Francis Cherry be to pay for | | ycarie : and we have set at liberty the say turnebulles kinsman Raynold kitchen and his fellow and deliver they to your merchant agent . and further , where you write unto we for such your subject as have depart out of your majesty realm secret without licence , that we shall give order to send they home : concern such your subject for which you have write unto our majesty by letter , we will cause search to be make , and such as be willing to go home into your kingdom , we will command forthwith to be deliver unto your merchant agent , and so to pass . and such of your majesty people as have give themselves under our government as subject , we think it not requisite to grant to let they pass . and further , where you have write unto we concern the good of John Chappell , we have write heretofore the whole discourse thereof , not once , but sundry time , and therefore it be not needful to write any more thereof . and such good as be find out of the good of the say chapel , the money thereof be restore to your majesty people William Turnbull and his fellow . your majesty servant Thomas Lind m. Thomas we have send with our letter the same way whereby he Lind. come into our kingdom . the long abide here of ni 433 2 e this be a dainty meat make of the roas of sturgeon . your majesty servant in our kingdom , be for the come of your people from the sea port . write in our princely court and royal seat in the city of Moscow in the year from the begin of the world 1592. 7101 , in the month of January . to the queen most excellent majesty from the lord Boris Pheodorovich Godonova . y the grace of God great lord and great duke Theodore Ivanovich governor of Russia , Volodimer , Moscow , and novgorod , king of Cazan and astracan , lord of Vobsko , and great duke of Smolensco , otver , ughori , perm , Viatsky , Bulgary , and other region , lord and great duke of Novogrod in the low country , of Chernigo , of rezan , polotsko , Rostove , jeroslave , Bealozera , and of Lifland , of Udorsky , Obdorsky , Condinsky , and all the country of Sibery , and commander of all the north part , and lord over the country of Iversky , and king of Grusinsky , and of the country of Kabardinsky , Cherchasky , and duke of Igorsky , lord and ruler of many country moor , etc most resplendent queen Elizabeth of England , France , and Ireland , etc his princely majesty servant , lord and master of his horse , and high steward of his house , and precedent of the territory of Cazan and astracan , Boris Pheodorovich Godonova , unto your most excellent majesty , great lady queen Elizabeth , send my humble commendation . it have please your majesty to write unto i your gracious and princely letter by your servant Thomas Lind : which letter i receive with all humbleness . during the time of the abode of your messenger Thomas Lind here in the Moscow , it please God of his mercifulness , and our lady the mother of God , and holy saint , by the prayer of our lord and king his majesty Theodore Ivanovich 434 