the gentlewoman apparel may differ in the stuff , but be all one for the make or fashion . as for the poor mousick and his wife they go poor clothe . the man with his honoratkey , or loose gown to the small of the leg , tie together with a lace before , of course white or blue cloth , with some shube or long waistcoat of fur , or of sheepskin under it , and his fur cap , and buskin . the poor sort of they have their honoratkey , or upper garment , make of kowe hair . this be their winter habit . in the summer time , common they wear nothing but their shirt on their back , and buskin on their leg . the woman go in a red or blow gown , when she make the best show , and with some warm shube of fur under it in the winter time . but in the summer , nothing but her two shirt ( for so they call they ) one over the other , whether they be within door , or without . on their head , they wear cap of some colour stuff , many of velvet , or of cloth of gold : but for the most part kerchief . without earing of silver or some other mettle , and her cross about her neck , you shall see no ruff woman , be she wife , or maid . A.D. 1590. the mousicks or common man attire . the lord Boris Pheodorowich his letter to the [ i . 498. ] right honourable William Burghley lord high treasurer of England , etc y the grace of God the great lord emperor , and great duke Theodore ivano-wich , great lord , king , and great duke of all Russia , of volodemer , Moscow , and Novogorod , king of Cazan , and astracan , lord of Vobsko , and great duke of Smolensco , tver , ughori , Permi , viatsko , Bolgorie , and other place , lord and great duke of Novogrod in the low country , of Chernigo , rezan , the emperor Polotsky , Rostove , yeroslave , Bealozera , and Liefland , stile increase . 419 of Oudorski , Obdorski , Condinski , and commander of all Sibierland , and the north coast , great lord over the country of Iverski , Grisinski , emperor of kabar-dinski , and of the country Charchaski , and the country of Gorsky , and lord of many other region . from Boris Pheodorowich his majesty brother in law , master of his horse , governor of the territory of Cazan and astracan , to William lord Burghley , lord high treasurer to the most virtuous lady Elizabeth , queen of England , France , and Ireland , and other dominion : i receive your lordship letter , wherein you write that you have receive very joyful my letter send unto you , and advise read they , and impart the same unto her majesty : and that your merchant find themselves aggrieve , that when they approach these part , and be arrive here , they be not permit to enter into a free and liberali course of barter , traffic , and exchange of their commodity , as heretofore they have do , but be compel before they can enter into any traffic to accept the emperor wax , and other good , at high rate far above their value , to their great loss : and that they be by reason of this restraint long hold upon these coast to the danger of winter by the way . hereafter there shall no cause of offence give to the merchant of the queen majesty queen Elizabeth : they shall not be force to any thing , neither be there or shall be any demand make of custom or debt . such thing as have be heretofore demand , all such thing have be already upon their petition and supplication command to be discharge . i have solicit his majesty for they , that they be not trouble hereafter for those matter , and that a favourable hand be carry over they . And accord to your request i will be a mean to the emperor for they in all their occasion , and will my self show they my favourable countenance . and i pray you ( William Burghley ) to signify to her majesty merchant that i promise to have a care of 420 letter from Boris PHEODOROWICH a.d. 159° . they , and for the queen majesty of England sake , i will take her merchant into my protection , and will defend they as the emperor select people under the emperor commission : and by my appointment all his majesty officer and authorize people shall be careful over they . the emperor gracious favour towards they be never such as it be now . and where you write that at the port the emperor officer sell their wax by commission at a set rate give they , far above the value , and that they enforce your merchant to accept it , they deny that they take any such course , but say they barter their wax for other ware , and also put their wax to sale for ready money to your merchant , accord to the worth thereof , and as the price go in the custom house here . it have be heretofore dear , and now be sell as good cheap as in any other place , and as they can best agree : they enforce no man to buy it , but rather keep it : therefore your merchant have no just cause to make any such report . i have express give order , that there shall be no such course use to enforce they , but to buy accord to their own will , and to tarry at the port or to depart at their pleasure . and as touch the custom already past , and debt demand at your merchant hand , whereof you write : our lord great emperor and great duke Theodore Ivanowich of all Russia of famous memory have show his majesty especial favour and love , for the great love of his well-beloved sister queen of England , and by my petition and mediation , whereas there be commandment give to take marsh whole debt of your merchant and factor , it be moderate to the half , and for the other half , commandment give it shall not be take , and the merchant bill to be deliver they . and to the end hereafter that her majesty merchant move no contention betwixt our lord the emperor and great duke of Russia , and his well-beloved sister queen Elizabeth , his majesty desire order to be give , that english merchant in great favour with the emperor . half the debt of Antony Marsh remit . 421 your merchant do deal just in their traffic , and plain without fraud or guile . and i will be a favourer of they above all other , under his majesty authority : Ann. dam themselves shall see it . write in our great lord the I59O > emperor city of Moscow in the month of July , 7°99 - [ l 499 - ] 1590. the queen majesty letter to Theodore Ivanovich emperor of Russia , 1591. Lizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , France , and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc to the right high , mighty , and right noble prince Theodore Ivanovich great lord , king , and great duke of all Russia , volodemer , Moscow , Novogrod , king of Cazan , and astracan , lord of Vobsko , and great duke of Smolensko , otver , Ughory , perm , Viatski , Bolgory , and other place : lord and great duke of Novogrod in the low country , of Chernigo , rezan , Polotsky , Rostove , yeraslave , Bealozero , and Lifland , of Oudorsky , Obdorsky , condinsky , and commander of all Sibierland and the north coast , great lord over the country of Iversky , Grisinsky , emperor of Kabardinsky , and of the country of Charkasky , and of the country of Gorsky , and lord of many other country , our most dear and love brother , greeting . right noble and excellent prince , we have receive your majesty letter bring over by our merchant in their return of their | | last voyage from your port of saint Nicholas ; which letter we have advise read and consider , and thereby perceive that your majesty do great mislike of our late employment of Jerome Horsey into your dominion as our messenger with our highness letter , and also that your majesty do think that we in our letter send by the say messenger have not observe that due order or respect which appertain to your princely majesty , in the form of the same letter , aswell touch the 422 