BoSmia : to which place this m. Edward garland come to m. thou with two moscovite to serve he , etc he have six more , which by m. this counsel be send back . witness m. Edward Kelley , and m. Francis garland , brother to the foresay Edward , and diverse other . it seem that this princely offer of the emperor Pheodor Ivanowich , and of the lord Boris Pheodorowich protector to his majesty , be make unto the learned and famous mathematitian m. John Dee , partly to use his counsel and direction about certain discovery to the north-east ; and partly for some other weighty occasion : but because their conquest to Siberia be not as then full settle , and for diverse other secret reason , it be for y‘ time with all thankfulness refuse . a branch of a letter from m. John Merick , agent unto the Moscovie company in Russia , close up in the Moscow the 14. of march , anno 1597. touch the death of Pheodor Ivanowich late emperor of all Russia , etc 10. Febr. 1597 - ave thus far proceed with this my answer unto the chief point of your worship letter receive , my desire be to have send one unto you long since , as you may perceive by | | the first date : but by reason i can not get leave , i have defer it of till this instant , for that there be none suffer to pass out of the land . the cause may be judge , for that it please God to call out of this world , the emperor his majesty , who depart about the 7. of January : and ever since have be a mourn time , and no suit for any matter can be hear . but it have be a very dead season . yet ( thanks be to God ) through the wise government of lord Boris Pheodorowich the lord protector 448 unto the say late emperor , since his death all thing have be very quiet without any dissension ; as the like in such a great kingdom i have not hear of . and now through the providence of almighty God , and by surrender of the late empress Irenia Feodoruna , and the common consent of the patriarch , noble , bishop , and the whole clergy , with the whole commons beside , choice be make of none other but of the say lord protector , lord Boris Pheodorowich to Pnnce bons be emperor , and great duke of all Russia , who be most unwilling to receive the kingdom , but the people consent choose will make no other choice , nor have any other . so emperor of that with much ado and entreaty , it have please his Rusia . majesty to take upon he the kingdom , and he be absolute emperor to he and his heir . and certain God have do much for this country , and have make the people great happy , in that he have provide and appoint so famous and worthy a prince : who excellent government and experience these fourteen year have be manifest to all Russia . God grant his highness a most prosperous and long reign , with his lady the empress , the prince his son , and the princess his daughter . all man do rejoice both ruff and stranger for this most famous emperor . the coronation be think shall on the ascension day next , till which time i can depart from Moscow : which be a little before the time that ordinary i do take my journey from hence . And touch his majesty favour towards i on your behalf , especial for her majesty sake , as in foretime it be extraordinary , and so special show to i , as to none the like : so have his highness promise the continuance thereof , with further favour as shall desire . whereof i have no doubt : for daily i do find the same . [ A learn in 449 2 f 