the incarnation of Christ , and be bury at Constantinople , Octavius be then king of Britain : who life Eusebius bishop of Caesarea have write in greek in 4. book , which afterward be translate into the latin tongue by John Portes a Frenchman . [ ii i . 4. . ] the life and travail of Pelagius bear in wale . Elagius Cambrius ex ea britanniae parte oriundus , famati illius Collegii ban-nochorensis a Cestria non procul , praepositus erat , in quo Christianorum philosophorum dvo millia ac centum , ad plebis in christo commoditatem militabant , manuum suarum laboribus , juxta Pauli doctrinam victitant . post quam plures exhibitos , pro Christiana Repub. labores , vir erudition insignis , and tum Greece , tum latin peritus , ut Tertullianus alter , quorundam clericorum lacessitus injuriis , gravatim tulit , ac tandem a fide defecit . Peragratis igitur deinceps Galliis , in aegyptum , and syriam aliasque orientis Regiones demum pervenit . ubi ex earum partium monacho praesul ordinatus , svi nominis haeresim fabricabat : asserens hominem sine peccato nasci , ac solo voluntatis imperio sine gratia salvari posse , ut ita nefarius baptismum ac fidem tolleret . come his and consimilibus impostricis doctrinae foecibus in patriam svam reversus , omnem illam regionem , Juliano and Caelestino Pseudoepiscopis fautoribus , conspurcabat . verum ante lapsum suum studia tractabat honestissima , ut post Gennadium , Bedam , and Honorium alii ferunt authore , composuitque multos libros ad christianam utilitatem . at postquam est Hereticus publicatus , multo plures edidit haeresi succurrente , and ex diametro cum vera pietate pugnante , unde erat a suis Britannis in exilium pulsus , ut in Epistola ad martinum 5. Valdenus habet . claruit anno post Christum incarnatum , 390. sub Maximo Britannorum rege . 276 PElagius , bear in that part of Britain which be call Wales , be head or governor of the famous college of Bangor , not far from Chester , wherein live a society of 2100. divine , or student of Christian philosophic , apply themselves to the profit of the christian people , and live by the labour of their own hand , accord to Paul doctrine . he be a man excellent learn , and skilful both in the greek and latin tongue , and as it be another Tertullian , after his long and great travail for the good of the christian common wealth , see himself abuse , and injurious deal withal by some of the clergy of that time , he take the matter so grievous , that at the last he relapse from the faith . whereupon he leave wale , and go into France , and have go through France , he go therehence into Egypt , Syria , and other country of the east , and be make priest by a certain monk of those part , he there hatch his heresy , which accord to his name be call the heresy of the pelagians : which be , that man be bear without sin , and may be save by the power of his own will without grace , that so the miserable man may take away faith and baptism . with this and the like dregs of false doctrine , he return again into wale , and there by the mean of the two false prelate Julian and Celestine , who favour his heresy , he infect the whole country with it . but before his fall and apostasy from the faith , he exercise himself in the best study , as Gennadius , Beda , Honorius , and other author do report of he , and write many book serve not a little to christian utility : but be once fall into his heresy , he write many more erroneous book , than he do before honest , and sincere : whereupon , at the last his own countryman banish he , as Walden testify in his epistle to pope Martine the five . he flourish in 277 the year after the incarnation , 390. Maximus be then king of Britain . certain Englishman send to Constantinople by the french king to Justinian the emperor , about the year of Christ , 500 out of the four book of Procopius de bello Gothico . ritanniam insulam tres numerosissimae gentes incolunt : quorum unicuique suus rex imperat . nominantur hae gentes Angili , frisone , and qui ejusdem sunt cum insula cognominis Britones . tanta vero hominum multitudo esse videtur , ut singulis annis inde magno numero cum uxoribus and liberis ad francos emigrent . illi autem in eorum terram , quae maximi deserta videtur , excipiunt . unde insulam sibi vendicare ferunt . utique non ita pridem , cum francorum rex quosdam e suis constan-tinopolim add Justinianum legaret , Anglos etiam misit , ambitiosius vendicans , quasi haec insula suo subesset imperio . [ ii i . 5. ] the same in english . the isle of Britain be inhabit by three most populous nation , every of which be govern by a several king . the say nation be name Angili , frisone , and britone , which last be call after the name of the island . in this isle there be such swarm of people , that every year they go forth in great number with their wife and child into France . and the Frenchman right willing receive they into their land , which seem very desolate for want of inhabitant . whereupon it be say that the french do challenge the foresay island unto themselves . for not long since , when the king of the Frankes send certain of his subject ambassador to Constantinople unto Justinian the emperor , he send english man also , am-278 