it be not unlike that the briton accompany the cimbrians and Gaul in those expedition to Italy and Greece . for beside the common name , it be record in that most ancient british book call Liber Triadum , ( wherein also mention be make of three huge army that be levy out of Britain ) that a certain outlandish captain gather from hence a mighty army ; who have waste a great part of Europe , at length take up his abode ( perhaps the author mean in Gallatia ) near unto the sea of Greece . likewise , that the warlike captain Britomarus ( of who Florus and Appian do make report ) be himself a briton , his very name do testify , which signify a great briton . neither will i wrest that testimony of Strabo ( who report Brennus to have be a Prause by birth ) that i may prove he also to have be a briton bear . the travail of Helena . Elena Flavia Augusta serenissimi coeli britannici regis haeres , and unica filia , magni Constantini caesaris mater , incomparabili decore , fide , religion , bonitate , ac magnificentia pia , Eusebio etiam testae , per totum resplenduit orbem : inter omnes aetatis svae fceminas , nulla invenie - batur ea in liberalibus artibus doctior , nulla in instrumentis musicis peritior , aut in linguis nationum copiosior . Innatam habebat ingenii claritudinem , oris facundiam , ac morum ornatissimam compositionem : Hebraici , Graeci , and latin erudita . caruerat pater alia sobole ( inquit Virumnius ) quae Regni solio potiretur . Illam propterea he instrui fecit per optimos praeceptores , ut ed commodius Regni tractaret negotia . unde ob incredibilem ejus pulchritudinem , atque alias eximias animi and corporis dote , Constantius Chlorus Caesar illam duxit in uxorem , 270 .... c - 274‘ atque ex ei filium in Britanni^ genuit Constantinum magnum . say eo tandem Eboraci defuncto , cum Anna illa Evangelic^ , in sancti viduitate perduravit ad ultimum vitae diem , tota Christianae religioni dedita . sunt enim [ ii i . 2. ] authores , qui narrent per istam , cessante persecution , pacem ecclesiis datam : ad tantam coelestibus Philosophiae cognitionem eam ferunt post agnitum Evangelium pervenisse , ut olim multos ediderit libros , and carmina quaedam Graeca , quae hucusque and Pontico superesse perhibentur . visionibus admonita hierosolymam petiit , and omnia salvatoris loca perlustravit . Romae tandem octogenaria fceliciter in christo quievit . 15. Kalendas septembris , filio adhuc superstite , anno salutis humanae 337. Regnante apud britannos Octavio . huius corpus non minimi nunc cura veneriis servatur . the same in english . HElena Flavia Augusta , the heir and only daughter of Coelus sometime the most excellent king of Britain , the mother of the emperor Constantine the great , by reason of her singular beauty , faith , religion , goodness and godly majesty ( accord to the testimony of Eusebius ) be famous in all the world . among all the woman of her time , there be none either in the liberali art more learned , or in instrument of music more skilful , or in the diverse language of nation more abundant than herself . she have a naturali quickness or excellency of wit , eloquence of speech , and a most notable grace in all her behaviour . she be see in the hebrew , greek and latin tongue . her father ( as Virumnius report ) have no other child to succeed in the kingdom after he but she , and therefore cause she to be instruct in these thing by the best teacher , that thereby she may the better in time govern the realm : so that by reason of her pass beauty , and other her excellent gift of body and mind , Constantius Chlorus the emperor marry she , and have by she a son call Constantine the 271 great , while he remain in Britain . who at length decease at York , this Helena ( not otherwise then Anna of who mention be make in the new testament ) continue a virtuous and holy widow to the end of her life . there be some writer which do affirm , that persecution cease , and peace be grant to the christian church by her good mean . after the light and knowledge of the gospel , she grow so skilful in divinity , that she write and compose diverse book , and certain greek verse also , which ( as Ponticus report ) be yet extant . be warn by some vision she go to Jerusalem , and visit all the place there , which Christ have frequent . she live to the age of fourscore year , and then die at Rome the 15 day of August , in the year of our redemption 337. Octavius be then king of Britain , and her son Constantine the emperor then also live , and her body be to this day very careful preserve at Venice . the life and travel of Constantine the great , emperor and king of Britain . Lavius Constantinus cognomento magnus post genitorem Constantium Britannorum Rex , ac romanorum Caesar Augustus , ex britannica matre in britannia natus , and in britannia creatus imperator , patriam natalem magnifici svae glori® participem fecit . Profligatis Alemanis , Hispanis , and Francis , eorumque regibus pro spectaculo bestiis objectis , Galliam subjectam tenuit : tres Helen® matris avunculos britannos , Leolinum , Traherum , and Marium , quos c®teris semper fidentiores habuerat in suis fortunis , Italis two maxentii tyrannide fcelicit^r liberatis , in senatorum ordinem Rom® promovit . Innumer® in eo ( ut Eutropius habet ) claruere tam animi , quam corporis virtute , 272 