the year after the incarnation , 390. Maximus be then king of Britain . certain Englishman send to Constantinople by the french king to Justinian the emperor , about the year of Christ , 500 out of the four book of Procopius de bello Gothico . ritanniam insulam tres numerosissimae gentes incolunt : quorum unicuique suus rex imperat . nominantur hae gentes Angili , frisone , and qui ejusdem sunt cum insula cognominis Britones . tanta vero hominum multitudo esse videtur , ut singulis annis inde magno numero cum uxoribus and liberis ad francos emigrent . illi autem in eorum terram , quae maximi deserta videtur , excipiunt . unde insulam sibi vendicare ferunt . utique non ita pridem , cum francorum rex quosdam e suis constan-tinopolim add Justinianum legaret , Anglos etiam misit , ambitiosius vendicans , quasi haec insula suo subesset imperio . [ ii i . 5. ] the same in english . the isle of Britain be inhabit by three most populous nation , every of which be govern by a several king . the say nation be name Angili , frisone , and britone , which last be call after the name of the island . in this isle there be such swarm of people , that every year they go forth in great number with their wife and child into France . and the Frenchman right willing receive they into their land , which seem very desolate for want of inhabitant . whereupon it be say that the french do challenge the foresay island unto themselves . for not long since , when the king of the Frankes send certain of his subject ambassador to Constantinople unto Justinian the emperor , he send english man also , am-278 bitious boast , as though the say isle have be under his jurisdiction . a testimony of the send of Sighelmus bishop of Shirburne , by king Alphred , unto saint Thomas of India in the year of our lord 883 , record by William of Malmesburie , in his second book and four chapter de gestis regum anglorum . Leemosynis intentus privilegia ecclesiarum , sicut pater statuerat , roboravit ; and trans mare romam , and ad sanctum thomam in indiam multa munera misit . legatus in hoc missus sighelmus Shirburnensis episcopus cum magna prosperitate , quod quivis hoc seculo miretur , indiam pene travit ; inde redien exotico splendore gemmarum , and liquore aromatum , quorum illa humus ferax est , reportavit . the same in english . king Alphred be addict to give of alm , confirm the privilege of church as his father have determine ; and send also many gift beyond the sea unto room , and unto saint Thomas of India . his messenger in this business be Sighelmus bishop of schir-burne ; who with great prosperity ( which be a matter to be wonder at in this our age ) travail through India , and return home bring with he many strange and precious union and costly spice , such as that country plentiful yield . [ A second 279 