a voyage of three ambassador , who in the time of king Edward the confessor , and about the year of our lord 1056 , be send unto Constantinople , and from thence unto Ephesus , together with the occasion of their send , etc record by William of Malmesburie , lib . 2. de gestis regum anglorum , capite 13. je sancti paschatis ad mensam apud westmonasterium assederat , diademate fastigatus , and optimatum turma circumvallatus . ciimque alii longam quadragesimae inediam recentibus cibis compensante , acriter comederent , ille a terrenis revocato animo , divinum quiddam speculatus , mente convivantium permovit ampliorem perfusus in risum : null6que causam laetitiae perquirere praesumente , tunc quidem ita tacitum , donec edendi satieta obsoniis finem imposuit . say remotis mensis , cum in triclinio regalibus exueretur , tres optimate eum prosequuti , quorum unus erat comes Haroldus , secundus abbas , tertius episcopus , familiaritatis ausu interrogant quid riserat : mirum omnibus nec immerito videri , quare in tanta serenitate diei and negotii , tacentibus caeteris , scurrilem cachinnum ejecerit . Stupenda ( inquit ) vidi , nec ideo sine causa risi . tum illi , ut moris est humani ingenii , sciscitari and quaerere causam ardentius , ut supplicibus dignanter remember impertiatur . I|will multiim cunctatus tandem instantibus mira respondit : septem dormiente in monte Caelio requiescere jam ducentis annis in dextro jacentes late : sed tunc in hora ipsa risus svi , latus invertisse sinistrum : futurum ut septuaginta quatuor annis ita jaceant : dirum nimirum miseris mortalibus omen . nam omnia ventura in his septuaginta quatuor annis , quae dominus circa finem mundi praedixit discipulis suis : gentem contra gentem sur-recturam , and regnum adversus regnum , terrae motus 284 per loca , pestilentiam and famem , terrores de coelo and signa magna , regnorum mutationes , gentilium in christianos bella , item christicolarum in paganos victorias . Talia mirantibus inculcans passionem septem dormientium , and habitudines corporum singulorum , quas nulla docet litera , ita prompti disseruit : ac si cum eis quotidiano victitaret contubernio . his auditis , comes militem , episcopus clericum , abbas monachus , ad veritatem verborum exsculpendam , manicheti constan-tinopolitano imperitori misere , adjectis regis svi literis and muneribus . Eos ille benign secum habitos episcopo Ephesi destinavit , epistola pariter , quam sacram vocant , comitante : ut ostenderentur legatis regis anglia : septem dormientium marturiales exuviae . factdmque est ut vaticinium regis edwardi graecis omnibus comprobatum , qui se a patribus accepisse jurarent , super dextrum illos latus quiescere : sed post ihtroitum anglorum in speluncam , veritatem peregrinae prophetiae contubernalibus suis praedicarunt . nec moram festinatio malorum fecit , quin Agareni , and arabe , and Turei , alienae scilicet a christo gentes , syriam , and lyciam , and minorem asiam omnino , and majoris multas urbe , inter quas and ephesum , ipsam etiam hierosolymam depopulati , super christianos invaderent . the same in english . upon Easter day king Edward the confessor be crown with his kingly diadem , and accompany with diverse of his noble , sit at dinner in his palace at Westminster . and when other , after their long abstinence in the lend , refresh themselves with dainty meat , and feed thereupon very earnest , he lift up his mind from earthly matter and meditate on heavenly vision ( to the great admiration of those which be present ) break forth into a exceed laughter : and no man presume to inquire the cause of his mirth , they all keep silence till dinner be end . but after dinner as he be in his bedchamber put 285 A.D. c . 1056. off his solemn robe , three of his noble , to wit earl Harold , a abbot , and a bishop , be more familiar with he then the residue follow he in , and bold ask he what be the occasion of his laughter : for it seem very strange unto they all , what shall move he at so solemn a time and assembly , while other keep silence , to laugh so excessive . i see ( quoth he ) admirable thing , and therefore laugh i not without occasion . than they ( as it be the common guise of all man ) demand and inquire the cause more earnest , humble beseech [ ii i . 8. ] he that he will vouchsafe to impart that secret unto they . whereupon muse a long while unto himself , at length he tell they wonderful thing : namely that seven sleeper have rest in mount Caelius two hundred year , lie upon their right side ; but in the very hour of his laughter , that they turn themselves on their left side ; and that they shall continue so lie for the space of 74. year after ; be a dismal sign of future calamity unto mankind . for all thing shall come to pass within those 74. year , which , as our saviour Christ foretell unto his disciple , be to be fulfil about the end of the world ; namely that nation shall rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom , and that there shall be in many place earthquake , pestilence , and famine , terrible apparition in the heaven , and great sign , together with alteration of kingdom , war of infidel against the christian , and victory of the christian against the infidel . and as they wonder at these relation , he declare unto they the passion of the seven sleeper , with the proportion and shape of each of their body ( which thing no man live have as then commit unto writing ) and that so plain and distinct , as if he have converse a long time in their company . hereupon the earl send a knight , the bishop a clerk , and the abbot a monk unto maniche the emperor of Constantinople , with the letter and gift of their king . who give they 286 friendly entertainment , send they over unto the bishop of Ephesus ; and write his letter unto he give he charge , that the english ambassador may be admit to see the true , and material habiliment of the seven sleeper . and it come to pass that king Edward vision be approve by all the greek , who protest they be advertise by their father , that the foresay seven sleeper have always before that time rest upon their right side ; but after the Englishman be enter into the cave , those sleeper confirm the truth of the outlandish prophesy , unto their countryman . neither be the calamity foretell , any long time delay : for the Agarens , arabian , Turk and other unbelieve nation invade the christian , harry and spoil Syria , Lycia , the lesser Asia , and many city of Asia the great , and among the rest Ephesus , yea , and Jerusalem also . the voyage of Alured bishop of Worcester unto Jerusalem , an . 1058. record by Roger Hoveden in part priore annalium , folio 255. linea 15. Luredus Wigorniensis Episcopus eccle - A.D. 1058. siam , quam in civitate Glavorna a fundamentis construxerat , in honore principis Apostolorum Petri honorifice dedicavit : and postea regis licentia wol-stanum Wigorniensem monachus a se ordinatum abbatem constituit ibidem . dein praesulatu dimisso Wiltoniensis ecclesiae , qui sibi ad regendum commissus fuerat , and Hermanno , cujus supra mentionem fecimus , reddito , mare transiit , and per Hungariam profectus est hierosolymam , etc the same in english . in the year of our lord 1058. Alured bishop of Worcester , very solemn dedicate a church ( which himself have found and build in the city of Gloucester ) 287 