body , and commend to the custody of duke Godfrey , depart out of this life , and be bury after the christian manner . her name be Godwera . the voyage of Edgar the son of Edward which be the son of Edmund surname Ironside , brother unto king Edward the confessor , ( be accompany with valiant Robert the son of Godwin ) unto Jerusalem , in the year of our lord 1102. record by William of Malmesburie , lib . 3. histo . folio 58. Ubsequenti tempore cum Roberto filio A.D. 1102. Godwini milite audacissimo Edgarus hierosolymam pertendit . illud fuit tempus quo Turei baldwinum regem apud Ramas obsederunt : qui cum obsidionis injuriam far nequiret , per medias hostium acies effugit , solius Roberti opera liberatus praeeuntis , and evaginato gladio dextra levaque Tureos caedentis . say cum successu ipso truculentior , alacritate nimia procurreret , ensis manu excidit . ad quem recolligendum cum se inclinasset , omnium incursu oppressus , vinculis palmas dedit . Ind babyloniam ( ut aiunt ) ductus , cum Christum abnegare nollet , in medio foro ad signum positus , and sagittis terebratus , martyrium consecravit . Edgarus amisso milite regressus , multaque beneficia ab imperatoribus graecorum , and Alemannorum adeptus ( quippi qui etiam eum retinere progeneris amplitudine tentassent ) omnia pro natalis soli desiderio sprevit . Quosdam enim profecto fallit amor patriae , ut nihil eis videatur jucundum , nisi consuetum hauserint coelum . Und& Edgarus fatua cupidine illusus angliam rediit , ubi ( ut superius dixi ) diverso fortunae ludicro rotatus , nunc remotus and tacitus , canos suos in agro consumit . [ the same 295 when the author be write of this history . the same in english . afterward Edgar be son unto the nephew of Edward the confessor , travel with Robert the son of Godwin a most valiant knight , unto Jerusalem . and it be at the same time when the Turk besiege king Baldwin at Rama : who not be able to endure the straight siege , be by the help of Robert especial , go before he , and with his draw sword make a lane , and slay the Turk on his right hand and on his left , deliver out of that danger , and escape through the midst of his enemy camp . but upon his happy success be more eager and fierce , as he go forward somewhat too hasty , his sword fall out of his hand . which as he stoop to take up , be oppress with the whole multitude , he be there take and bind . from whence ( as some say ) be carry unto Babylon or alcair in Egypt , when he will not renounce Christ , he be tie unto a stake in the midst of the market place , and be shoot through with arrow , die a martyr . Edgar have lose his knight return , and be honour with many reward both by the greekish and by the germane emperor ( who both of they will right glad have entertain he still for his great nobility ) contemn all thing in respect of his native soil . for in very deed some be so inveigle with the love of their country , that nothing can seem pleasant unto they , unless they breathe in the same air where they be breed . wherefore Edgar be mislead with a fond affection , return into England ; and afterward be subject unto diverse change of fortune ( as we have above signify ) he spendeth*now his extreme old age in a obscure and private place of the country . 296 