a second testimony of the foresay Sighelmus his voyage unto saint Thomas of India etc out of William of Malmesbury his second book de gestis pontificum anglorum , cap . de episcopis schireburnensibus , salisburiensibus , wil-tunensibus . Sighelmus trans mare , causa eleemosynarum regis , and etiam ad sanctum thomam in indiam missus , mira prosperitate , quod quivis in hoc seculo miretur , indiam penetravit ; indeque redien exotici generis gemma , quarum illa humus ferax est , reportavit . Nonnullae illarum adhuc in ecclesiae monumentis visuntur . the same in english . Sighelmus be for the performance of the king alm send beyond the sea , and travail unto saint Thomas of India , very prosperous ( which a man will wonder at in this age ) pass through the say country of India , and return home bring with he diverse strange and precious stone , such as that climate afford . many of which stone be as yet extant in the monument of the church . the life and travail of John Erigena . Oannes Erigena Britannus nation , in Menevia urbe , seu ad fanum Davidis , and patricio genitore natus , dum Anglos Daci crudeles bellis ac rapinis molestarent , ac omnia illic essent tumultibus plena , longam ipse peregrinationem Athenas usque suscepit , annosque quamplures literis graecis , chaldaicis , and arabicis insudavit : [ il i . omnia illic invisit philosophorum loca , ac studia , imo and ipsum oraculum solis , quod Aesculapius sibi construxerat . in-6 . ] veniens tandem quod longo quaesierat labour , in italiam and Galliam est reversus ubi ob insignem eruditionem , 280 Carolo Calvo , and postea Ludovico Balbo acceptus , Dionysii areopagitse libros de coelesti hierarchia , ex constantino-poli tunc missos Latino fecit , anno Dom. 858. profectus postea in britanniam , Alphredi anglorum regis , and suorum liberorum factus est praeceptor , atque ipso mox adhortante , inter ocia literaria and graeco transtulit in tres linguas , scilicet chaldaicam , arabicam , and latinam , aristotelis moralia , de secretis secretorum , seu recto regimine principum , opus certain exquisitum . in malms-buriensi caenobio tandem , quo recreationis gratia se contulerat , inter legendum a quibusdam discipulis malevolis interimebatur , anno christi , 884. the same in english . JOhn Erigene a Britain , descend of honourable parent , and bear in the town of S. David in Wales , see the Englishman to be oppress with the war and rapine of the cruel Dane , and all the land in a hurly burly , he in the mean time undertook a long journey , even as far as Athens , and there spend many year in the study of the greek , Chaidie , and arabian tongue : he there frequent all the place and school of the philosopher , and the oracle also of the sun , which Aesculapius have build unto himself . and have find at length that which he have with long travel search , he return again into Italy , and France , where for his singular learning , he be much favour of the two king Charles and Lewes , and in his be there , he translate into latin the book of Dionysius Areopagita concern the heavenly hierarchic , which be send from Constantinople in the year 858. after this he come back again into his own country , and be schoolmaster unto Alphred then king of England , and his son : and upon his request , at his time of leisure , he translate Aristotle moral , of the secret of secret , or of the right government of prince , out of greek into these three tongue , chaidie , arabian , and latin , 281 A . d 858. which he do very exquisite . at the last , be in the Abbie of Malmsburie , whither he go for his recreation , and there accord to his manner dispute , and read to the student , some of they mislike and hate he , rise against he , and slay he in the year of Christ , 884. the travail of Andrew Whiteman alias leucand , Centur. 2. Ndrasas Leucander alias Whiteman ( juxta Lelandum ) Monachus , and Abbas rame-siensis Caenobii tertius fuit . hic bonis artibus study quodam incredibili noctes atque dies invigilabat , and operae praecium ingens inde retulit . Accessit praeterea and Arden quoddam desiderium , ea propriis and aperti oculis videndi loca , in quibus Servator christus redemptionis nostrae mysteria omnia consummavit , quorum prius sola nomina ex scripturarum lectione noverat : unde and sacram hierosolymorum urbem , miraculorum , praedicationis , ac passionis ejus testem invisit , atque domum redien factus est Abbas . claruisse fertur anno nati Servatoris , 1020. sub canuto Dano . the same in english . ANdrew Leucander otherwise call Whiteman ( as Leland report ) be by profession a monk , and the three abbot of the abbey of Ramsey : he be exceed give to the study of good art , take pain therein day and night , and profit great thereby . and among all other thing , he have a incredible desire to see those place with his eye , wherein Christ our saviour perform and wrought all the mystery of our redemption , the name of which place he only know before by the read of the scripture . whereupon he begin his journey , and go to jeru-282 