thirty horseman which go out of Normandy fat , lusty , and frolic , we return thither scarce twenty poor pilgrim of we , be all footman , and consume with leanness to the bare bone . A.D. c . 1097. diverse of the honourable family of the beauchamp , with Robert curtoys son of William the conqueror , make a voyage to Jerusalem 1096. Hol. page . 22. vol. 2. open Urbane call a council at Clermont in Auvergne , exhort the christian prince so earnest to make a journey into the holy land , for the recovery thereof out of the Saracen hand , that the say great and generail journey be conclude upon to be take in hand , wherein many noble man of Christendom go under the lead of Godfrey of Bouillon and other , as in the chronicle of France , of Germany , and of the holy land do moor plain appear . there go also among other diverse noble man forth of this realm of England , special that worthy bear the surname of Beauchampe . the voyage of gutwere a english lady marry to Baldwine brother of godfreide duke of Bouillon , towards Jerusalem about 1097. and the 11. year of William Rufus king of England . he Christian army of godfrie of Bouillon pass the city of Iconium , alias Agogna in the country of Licaonia , and from thence by the city of Heraclia , come at length unto the ci tie of Marasia , where they encamp , and sojourn there three whole day , because of the wife of Baldwine brother germane of the duke of Loraigne . « 93 which lady be long time vex with a grievous [ li . 11. ] malady , be in extremity , where at length pay the debt due to nature , she change this transitory life , for life eternal ; who , in her life time , be a very worthy and virtuous lady , bear in England , and descend of most noble parentage name gutwere ; which , accord to her degree , be there most honourable inter , to the great grief of all the whole army . as report William archbishop of tyre , lib . 3. cap . 17. hist , belli sacri . the same author in the 10. book 8c first chapter of the same history concern the same english lady , write further as follow , Baldwine have follow the war for a time , give his mind to marriage , so that be in England he fall in love with a very honourable and noble lady name gutwere , who he marry and carry with he in that first happy expedition , wherein he accompany his brethren the lord , duke Godfrey and Eustace , person very commendable in all virtue and of immortali memory . but he have hard fortune in his journey , because his foresay wife , be weary with a long sickness finish her life with a happy end near the city of Marasia , before the christian army come unto Antioch , where she be honourable bury , as we have declare before . chronicon Hierosolymitanum in lib . 3. cap . 27. make also mention of this english lady , which he call Godwera in this manner . ac in region Maresch uxor baldewini nobilissima , quam de regno angliae eduxit , diutina corporis molestia aggravata , 8c duci Godefrido come - data , vitam exhalavit , sepulta Catholicis obsequiis ; cujus nomen erat godwera . the same in english . in this province of Maresch the most noble wife of Baldwine , which he carry with he out of England be visit with daily sickness and infirmity of 294 body , and commend to the custody of duke Godfrey , depart out of this life , and be bury after the christian manner . her name be Godwera . the voyage of Edgar the son of Edward which be the son of Edmund surname Ironside , brother unto king Edward the confessor , ( be accompany with valiant Robert the son of Godwin ) unto Jerusalem , in the year of our lord 1102. record by William of Malmesburie , lib . 3. histo . folio 58. Ubsequenti tempore cum Roberto filio A.D. 1102. Godwini milite audacissimo Edgarus hierosolymam pertendit . illud fuit tempus quo Turei baldwinum regem apud Ramas obsederunt : qui cum obsidionis injuriam far nequiret , per medias hostium acies effugit , solius Roberti opera liberatus praeeuntis , and evaginato gladio dextra levaque Tureos caedentis . say cum successu ipso truculentior , alacritate nimia procurreret , ensis manu excidit . ad quem recolligendum cum se inclinasset , omnium incursu oppressus , vinculis palmas dedit . Ind babyloniam ( ut aiunt ) ductus , cum Christum abnegare nollet , in medio foro ad signum positus , and sagittis terebratus , martyrium consecravit . Edgarus amisso milite regressus , multaque beneficia ab imperatoribus graecorum , and Alemannorum adeptus ( quippi qui etiam eum retinere progeneris amplitudine tentassent ) omnia pro natalis soli desiderio sprevit . Quosdam enim profecto fallit amor patriae , ut nihil eis videatur jucundum , nisi consuetum hauserint coelum . Und& Edgarus fatua cupidine illusus angliam rediit , ubi ( ut superius dixi ) diverso fortunae ludicro rotatus , nunc remotus and tacitus , canos suos in agro consumit . [ the same 295 