friendly entertainment , send they over unto the bishop of Ephesus ; and write his letter unto he give he charge , that the english ambassador may be admit to see the true , and material habiliment of the seven sleeper . and it come to pass that king Edward vision be approve by all the greek , who protest they be advertise by their father , that the foresay seven sleeper have always before that time rest upon their right side ; but after the Englishman be enter into the cave , those sleeper confirm the truth of the outlandish prophesy , unto their countryman . neither be the calamity foretell , any long time delay : for the Agarens , arabian , Turk and other unbelieve nation invade the christian , harry and spoil Syria , Lycia , the lesser Asia , and many city of Asia the great , and among the rest Ephesus , yea , and Jerusalem also . the voyage of Alured bishop of Worcester unto Jerusalem , an . 1058. record by Roger Hoveden in part priore annalium , folio 255. linea 15. Luredus Wigorniensis Episcopus eccle - A.D. 1058. siam , quam in civitate Glavorna a fundamentis construxerat , in honore principis Apostolorum Petri honorifice dedicavit : and postea regis licentia wol-stanum Wigorniensem monachus a se ordinatum abbatem constituit ibidem . dein praesulatu dimisso Wiltoniensis ecclesiae , qui sibi ad regendum commissus fuerat , and Hermanno , cujus supra mentionem fecimus , reddito , mare transiit , and per Hungariam profectus est hierosolymam , etc the same in english . in the year of our lord 1058. Alured bishop of Worcester , very solemn dedicate a church ( which himself have found and build in the city of Gloucester ) 287 unto the honour of saint Peter the chief apostle : and afterward by the king permission ordain Wolstan a monk of Worcester of his own choice , to be Abbate in the same place . and then have leave his bishopric which be commit unto he over the church of Wilton , and have resign the same unto Hermannus above mention , pass over the sea , and travail through Hungary unto Jerusalem , etc the voyage of Ingulphus abbot of Croiland unto Jerusalem , perform ( accord to Florentius Wigorniensis ) in the year of our lord , 1064 , and describe by the say Ingulphus himself about the conclusion of his brief history . A.D. 1064. go Ingulphus humilis minister sancti Guthlaci monasteriique svi croilan - densis , natus in anglia , and a parentibus Anglicis , quip urbis pulcherrimae londoniarum , pro literis addiscendis in teneriori aetate constitutus , primum west-monasterio , postmodum oxoniensi study traditus eram . cumque in Aristotele arripiendo supra multos coaetaneos meos profecissem , etiam rhetoricam [ two . i . 9 ] A.D. 1051. A.D. 1064 , accord to florentine ifigomieneie . Tullii primam and secundam talo tenus induebam . Factus ergo adolescentior , fastidiens parentum meorum exiguitatem , paternos lares relinquere , and palatia regum aut principum affectans , mollibus vestiri , pomposisque laciniis amiciri indies ardentius appetebam . et ecce , inclytus nunc rex noster angliae , tunc adhuc comes normanniae wilhelmus ad colloquium tunc regis angliae edwardi cognati svi , cum grandi ministrantium comitatu lon-donias adventabat . quibus citius insertus , ingerens i ubique ad omnia emergentia negotia peragenda , cum prosper plurima perfecissem , in brevi agnitus illustrissimo comiti and astrictissimi adamatus , cum ipso normanniam enavigabam . Factus ibidem scriba ejus , pro libito totam comitis curiam , ad nonnullorum invidiam 288 