which he do very exquisite . at the last , be in the Abbie of Malmsburie , whither he go for his recreation , and there accord to his manner dispute , and read to the student , some of they mislike and hate he , rise against he , and slay he in the year of Christ , 884. the travail of Andrew Whiteman alias leucand , Centur. 2. Ndrasas Leucander alias Whiteman ( juxta Lelandum ) Monachus , and Abbas rame-siensis Caenobii tertius fuit . hic bonis artibus study quodam incredibili noctes atque dies invigilabat , and operae praecium ingens inde retulit . Accessit praeterea and Arden quoddam desiderium , ea propriis and aperti oculis videndi loca , in quibus Servator christus redemptionis nostrae mysteria omnia consummavit , quorum prius sola nomina ex scripturarum lectione noverat : unde and sacram hierosolymorum urbem , miraculorum , praedicationis , ac passionis ejus testem invisit , atque domum redien factus est Abbas . claruisse fertur anno nati Servatoris , 1020. sub canuto Dano . the same in english . ANdrew Leucander otherwise call Whiteman ( as Leland report ) be by profession a monk , and the three abbot of the abbey of Ramsey : he be exceed give to the study of good art , take pain therein day and night , and profit great thereby . and among all other thing , he have a incredible desire to see those place with his eye , wherein Christ our saviour perform and wrought all the mystery of our redemption , the name of which place he only know before by the read of the scripture . whereupon he begin his journey , and go to jeru-282 salem of witness of the miracle , preach , and passion of Christ , and be again return into his country , he be make the aforesaid abbot . he flourish in the year of Christ 1020. under Canute the Dane . the voyage of Swanus one of the son of earl Godwin unto Jerusalem , anno Dom. 1052 , record by William of Malmsburie lib . 2. de gestis regum anglorum , capite 13. s perversi ingenii and infidi in regem , mula patre and fratre Haroldo descivit : and pirata ; , praedis maritimis virtute majorum polluit . postremd pro conscientia Brunonis cognati interempti , and ( ut quidam dicunt ) fratris jerosolimam abiit : indeque redien , a saracenis circumventus , and ad mortem caesus est . the same in english . [ ii i . 7 ] SWanus be of a perverse disposition , and faithless to the king , often time disagree with his father and his brother Harold : and afterward prove a pirate , he stain the virtue of his ancestor with his robbery upon the sea . last of all , be guilty unto himself of the murder of his kinsman Bruno , and ( as some do report ) of his own brother , he travail unto Jerusalem : and in his return home , be take by the Saracen , be beat , and wound unto death . 283 [ a voyage 