William the prior of the canon regular in the church of Jerusalem , call the lord sepulchre , be a Englishman bear , and of a virtuous and good behaviour . after that the city of tyre be restore again to the christian faith , Guimunde the patriarch of Jerusalem make he the first archbishop of tyre , in the year 1128. which tyre be a very ancient city , the metropolis of all Phoenicia , and have be account the chief province of Syria , both for fruitful commodity and multitude of inhabitant . This William have in his life write many book and epistle , die at last in the year 1130. have be archbishop the space of two year , and be bury in the church of tyre . the travail of Robertus Ketenensis . Obertus Ketenensis nation and cognomine anglus , degustatis primum per anglorum gymnasia humanarum artium elementis literariis , ultramarinas statim visitare provincias in animo constituit : peragratis ergo Galliis , Italia , Dalmatia , and Graecia , tum demum pervenit in asiam , ubi non parvo labour , ac vitae svae periculo inter Saracenos truculentissimum hominum genus , arabicam linguam ad amussim didicit . in hispaniam postea navigio traductus , circa fluvium hiberum astrologicae artis study , claruit sub cum Hermanno quodam Dalmata , magni svi itineris Stephana . eomite se totum dedit . claruit anno servatoris nostri , 1143 Stephano regnante , and Pampilonae sepelitur . the same in english . this Robert Ketenensis be call a Englishman by surname , as he be by birth : who after some time spend in the foundation of humanity , and in the 308 element of good art in the university of England , determine to travail to the part beyond sea : and so travail through France , Italy , Dalmatia , and Greece , and come at last into Asia , where he live in great danger of his life among the cruel Saracen , but yet learned perfect the arabian tongue . afterwards he return by sea into Spain , and there about the river Iberus , give he self whole to the study of astrology , with one Hermannus a dalmatian , who have accompany he in his long voyage . he flourish in the year 1143. Steven be then king of England , and be bury at Pampilona . a voyage of certain english man under the [ il ' ■ * 7 - ] conduct of Lewes king of France unto the holy land . Antae expeditionis explicito apparatu uterque princeps iter arripuit , and exercitu separtito . Imperator enim Conradus praecedebat itinere aliquot dierum , cum italorum , Germanorum , aliariimque gentium amplissimis copiis . Rex vero Lodovicus sequebatur francorum , Flandrensium , Normannorum , Britonum , anglorum , burgundionum , provincialium , Aquitanorum , equestri simul and pedestri agmine comitatus . Gulielmus Neobrigensis , folio 371. 1147. tempore regis Stephani the same in english . both the prince provision be make for so great a expedition , they sever their army , enter on their journey . for the emperor Conradus go before , certain day journey , with very great power of italian , german , and other country . and king Lewes follow after accompany with a band of horseman and footman of french man , Fleming , norman , briton , english man , burgundions , man of ; Provence , and Gascon . 309 