1177 - the voyage of John Lacy to Jerusalem . Nno domini 1172 fundata fuit abbatia de Stanlaw per dominum johannem Lacy constabularium cestriae and dominum de Halton , qui obiit in terra sancta anno sequenti : qui fuit vicessimus annus regni regis henrici secundi . the same in english . in the year of our lord 1172 be found the abbey of Stanlaw by the lord John Lacy constable of Chester , and lord of Halton , who decease in the holy land the year follow : which be in the twenty year of king Henry the second . the voyage of William Mandevile to Jerusalem . William Mandevile earl of Essex , with diverse english lord and knight , go to the holy land in the 24 year of Henry the second . Holinshed page . 101. English man be the guard of the emperor of Constantinople in the reign of John the son of Alexius Comnenus . malmes-buriensis , Curopolata and Camden , page . 96. be inde anglia non minus belli gloria , quam humanitatis cultu inter Florentissimas orbis Christiani gentes inprimis floruit . adeo ut ad custodiam corporis Constantinopolitanorum Imperatorum evocati fuerint Angli . Joannes enim Alexii comneni filius , ut refert noster Malmesburiensis , eorum fidem suspiciens praecipue familiaritati svae applicabat , amorem eorum filio transcribens : adeo ut jam inde longo tempore fuerint imperatorum illorum satellite , Inglini Bipenniferi Nicetae Choniatae , Barangi Curopolatae dicti . Qui ubique imperatorem prosequebantur ferente humeris secure , 310 quas tollebant , cum imperator ex oratorio spectandum se exhibebat , anglice vitam diuturnam secure suas collidentes ut sonitum ederent , comprecabantur . the same in english . from this time forward the kingdom of England be repute among the most flourish estate of Christendom , no less in chivalry than humanity . so farforth that the english man be send for to be the guarder of the person of the emperor of Constantinople . for John the son of Alexius Comnenus , as our countryman William of Malmesburie report , high esteem their fidelity , use they very near about he , recommend they over to his son : so that long time afterward the guard of those emperor be english halberdier , call by Nicetas Choniata , Inglini Bipenniferi , and by Curopolata , Barangi , which always accompany the emperor with their halberd on their shoulder , which they hold up when the emperor coming from his oratory show himself to the people ; and clash their halberd together to make a terrible sound , they in the english tongue wish unto he long life . a great supply of money to the holy land by Henry the 2. [ ii i . 18. ] he same year king Henry the second be at Waltham , assign a aid to the maintenance of the christian soldier in the holy land , that be to wit , two and forty thousand mark of silver , and five hundred mark of gold . Matth. Paris , and Helen . page . 105. [ A letter 3 ” 