cens , but that he mean to go through with the work , that he have begin . whereupon send a message unto Japhet , he advise the english soldier to come down to acre with their fleet , and to confer and consult with he touch the besiege and assault of the city of Sagitta , which rise immediate upon the king commandment , and forthwith hoist up the sail of their ship aloft with pendant and stremer of purple , and diverse other glorious colour , with their flag of scarlet colour and silk , come thither , and cast their ancres , ride hard by the city . the king the next day call unto he such as be privy and acquaint with his deal , open his grief unto the chief captain of the english man and Dane , touch the slaughter of Hugh , and the death of his brother , and what great confidence he repose in they concern these war : and that now therefore they be depart and dead , he must of necessity differre the besiege of Sagitta , and for this time dismiss the army assemble . this resolution of the king be spread among the people , the army be dissolve , and the Englishman , Dane and Fleming , with sail and oar go aboard their fleet , salute the king , and return home unto their native country . the travail of one Athelard a Englishman , record by master bale Centur. 2. Bathoniensis Coenobii monachus , natuum mysteria , and causas omnes , dili-undecunque exquisiti perscrutatus est , ut cum aliquibus veteris seculi philosophis non indigni conferri possit . hic olim spectatae indolis Adolescens , ut virente adhuc aetate juvenile ingenium fcecundaret , [ ii i . 16. ] atque ad res magnas pararet , relicta dulci patria longinquas petiit regiones . cum verb tegyptum and arabiam peragrans , plura invenisset , quae ejus desiderabat animus , cum magno laborum , ac literarum lucro in angliam 306 Thelardus ralium rer gentis tam 1130. tum demum revertebatur . claruit anno virginei partus , 1130. Henrico primo regnante . the same in english . AThelard a monk of the Abbie of bath be so diligent a searcher of the secret , and cause of naturali thing , that he deserve worthy to be compare with some of the ancient philosopher . this man although young , yet be of a good wit , and be desirous to increase and enrich the same with the best thing , and to prepare himself as it be for great matter , leave his country for a time , and travail into foreign region . he go through Egypt , and Arabia , and find out many thing which he desire to his own private contentment , and the profit of good letter general , and so be satisfy , return again into his country : he flourish in the year 1130. Henry the first be then king of England . the life and travail of one William of Tyre , a Englishman . Centur. 13. hic etiam guilielmus Tyrensis claruit sub henricoprimo . Ulielmus , Ecclesiae Dominici sepulchri hierosolymae regularium canonicorum prio , nation Anglicus vir vita and moribus commendabilis , anno Dom. 1128. postquam Tyrorum Civitas fidei Christianae restituta est a Guimundo hierosolymorum patriarcha , eidem urbi primus archiepiscopus praeficiebatur . est autem Tyrus civitas antiquissima , Phoeniciae universae Metropolis , quae inter Syriae provincias , and bonorum omnium pen^ commoditate , and incolarum frequentia primum semper obtinuit locum : post conscripta quaedam opuscula , and Epistolas , ad dominum migravit , An. Christi 1130. quum dvobus tantum sedisset annis , and in tyrensi Ecclesia sepelitur . 3°7 