1130. tum demum revertebatur . claruit anno virginei partus , 1130. Henrico primo regnante . the same in english . AThelard a monk of the Abbie of bath be so diligent a searcher of the secret , and cause of naturali thing , that he deserve worthy to be compare with some of the ancient philosopher . this man although young , yet be of a good wit , and be desirous to increase and enrich the same with the best thing , and to prepare himself as it be for great matter , leave his country for a time , and travail into foreign region . he go through Egypt , and Arabia , and find out many thing which he desire to his own private contentment , and the profit of good letter general , and so be satisfy , return again into his country : he flourish in the year 1130. Henry the first be then king of England . the life and travail of one William of Tyre , a Englishman . Centur. 13. hic etiam guilielmus Tyrensis claruit sub henricoprimo . Ulielmus , Ecclesiae Dominici sepulchri hierosolymae regularium canonicorum prio , nation Anglicus vir vita and moribus commendabilis , anno Dom. 1128. postquam Tyrorum Civitas fidei Christianae restituta est a Guimundo hierosolymorum patriarcha , eidem urbi primus archiepiscopus praeficiebatur . est autem Tyrus civitas antiquissima , Phoeniciae universae Metropolis , quae inter Syriae provincias , and bonorum omnium pen^ commoditate , and incolarum frequentia primum semper obtinuit locum : post conscripta quaedam opuscula , and Epistolas , ad dominum migravit , An. Christi 1130. quum dvobus tantum sedisset annis , and in tyrensi Ecclesia sepelitur . 3°7 William the prior of the canon regular in the church of Jerusalem , call the lord sepulchre , be a Englishman bear , and of a virtuous and good behaviour . after that the city of tyre be restore again to the christian faith , Guimunde the patriarch of Jerusalem make he the first archbishop of tyre , in the year 1128. which tyre be a very ancient city , the metropolis of all Phoenicia , and have be account the chief province of Syria , both for fruitful commodity and multitude of inhabitant . This William have in his life write many book and epistle , die at last in the year 1130. have be archbishop the space of two year , and be bury in the church of tyre . the travail of Robertus Ketenensis . Obertus Ketenensis nation and cognomine anglus , degustatis primum per anglorum gymnasia humanarum artium elementis literariis , ultramarinas statim visitare provincias in animo constituit : peragratis ergo Galliis , Italia , Dalmatia , and Graecia , tum demum pervenit in asiam , ubi non parvo labour , ac vitae svae periculo inter Saracenos truculentissimum hominum genus , arabicam linguam ad amussim didicit . in hispaniam postea navigio traductus , circa fluvium hiberum astrologicae artis study , claruit sub cum Hermanno quodam Dalmata , magni svi itineris Stephana . eomite se totum dedit . claruit anno servatoris nostri , 1143 Stephano regnante , and Pampilonae sepelitur . the same in english . this Robert Ketenensis be call a Englishman by surname , as he be by birth : who after some time spend in the foundation of humanity , and in the 308 