and long exercise therein , he grow to be such a orator and poet , as few be in that age live , by reason whereof he grow in favour with Richard then king of England , and undertake that long voyage with he into Palestina and Syria against the Turk . from whence be return again into England , he faithful describe both in verse and prose all such thing as he have see in the city , field and tent of the soldier , where he be present , and omit not to note the behaviour , form , and proportion of body in the foresay king , give to his notable work this most apt name for the title , the journal of king Richard . he flourish in the year of our redemption 1200. under John king of England . the travail of Gulielmus Peregrinus . iter illud , non ulielmus Peregrinus , poeta quidem per eam aetatem excellens , genere anglus florebat , literarum , ut multi tunc erant , amator maximus , and qui bona tempora melioribus impenderat studiis . hic cum accepisset , expeditionem in Saracenos per regem richardum parari , accinxit se ad 1 tantum ut mile , sed etiam peregrinus . vidit ea quae in Mari Hispanico fiebant , vidit quae in Syria and Palaestina commissa fuerunt , in Sultanum babyloniae regem , ac perfidos Saracenos . omnia haec scripsit , and vivis depinxit coloribus , ita ut quasi prae oculis , totum poneret negotium , idemque argumentum cum Richardo Canonico non infoeliciter , heroico pertractavit carmine , opusque jam absolutum Huberto Cantuariorum Archiepiscopo , and Stephano turnhamo capitaneo rerum bellicarum expertissimo dedicavit , addito hoc titulo , Odeporicon richardi regis . multaque alia edidisse Poetam talem non dubito , sed num extent illa ejus scripta , mihi non constat . hoc tamen satis constat , eum fuisse in pretio , anno a salutifero virginis partu 1200. sub anglorum rege Joanne . 344 William the pilgrim , a very excellent poet in those day and a Englishman bear , be of great fame , be much give to good letter , ( as many then be ) and bestow his good time in the best kind of study . he understand of the preparation of king Richard against the Saracen , prepare himself also for the same voyage , not only as a soldier , but as a pilgrim also . he see those thing which happen in the spanish sea , and which be do in Syria and Palestina , against the sultan the king of Babylon , and the treacherous Saracen . all which thing he write and express they as it be in lively colour , as if they have be still in do before his eye , and handle the same argument in heroical verse which the forename Richard Canonicus do . and have finish his work he dedicate it to Hubert archbishop of Canterbury , and to Stephen Turneham a most expert captain of the war , give it this title , the expedition of king Richard . and i doubt not but that so good a poet as he be publish many other thing , but whether they be extant yea or no , i know not : but this i know , that he be a man well account of , and flourish in the year after the birth of Christ 1200. under king John. the large contribution to the succour of the [ n i . 31. ] holy land , make by king John king of England , in the three year of his reign 1201. Matth. Paris and Holinsh. page . 164. t the same time also the king of France and England give large money towards the maintenance of the army which at this present go forth under the lead of the earl of Flanders and other , to war against the enemy of the christian faith at the instance of pope innocent . there be furthermore grant unto they 345 