Palaestina and come in his journey into Sicilia , he there hear of the ill fortune of the king be fall into his enemy hand , and thereupon leave his journey homeward , he go present and in all haste to the place where the king be captive , who the king immediate upon his come send into England , that by the authority of the council , a tribute may be collect for his redemption : which this Hubert perform with great diligence , and deliver the king . after this he be make archbishop of Canterbury , and after the death of king Richard he show the like duty of fidelity and trust to his brother John that succeed he . for by a long oration he persuade the whole nation of the english man , that ke be a very circumspect man , virtuous , valiant , bear of noble parentage , and most worthy of the crown . whereupon he be so receive of all the people and crown king . he write certain book , and die at the last with very great grief of mind , in the year 1205 , have be archbishop the space of 11 year 8 month and six day , by reason of the civil discord abroad , whereby all thing go topsy turvy , and in the reign of king John. the travail of Robert Curson . Obertus Curson ex nobili quodam an-glorum ortus genere , disciplinis tum prophanis , tum sacris studiosus incubuit , idque ( quantum ex conjecturis colligo ) in celebratissima oxonii Academia . prae-stantissimis illic institutoribus usus , ex summa circa ingenuas art industria , and assiduo literarum labour , famam sibi inter suos celeberrimam comparavit . Ampliora deinde meditatus Parisiorum lutetiam , atque romam ipsam petiit , illic Theologus doctor , hic vero cardinalis effectus . unde uterque Matthaeus Parisius , ac Westmonasterius , hoc de ipso testimonium adferunt : hic libro 2. ille 8. suorum chronicorum . anno domini . 1218 ( inquiunt ) in cap-347 tione Damiatae jEgypti urbis , sub Joanne Brenno hierosolymorum rege , fuit cum Pelagio albaneiisi magister Robertus de Curson , Anglus , clericus celeberrimus , genere nobilis , ac romanae Ecclesiae cardinalis , etc [ ii i . 32. ] Bostonus Buriensis in suo Catalogo Cursonum aliquos libros composuisse narrat . claruit anno superius numerato per praedictos teste in Anglia regnante Henrico tertio Joannis regis filio : fuitque hic diebus Honorii tertii Romani pontificis in angliam , Bostono testae , legatus . the same in english . RObert Curson descend of a noble family of England , use great diligence aswell in profane as in divine study in the famous university of Oxford ( as i conjecture . ) he have there the best schoolmaster that be to be get , and be most industrious in the art and continual exercise of learning : by mean whereof he grow to be of great renown where he live . afterwards think of great matter he go to Paris , and thence to roam it self , and at parish he proceed doctor of divinity , at room he be make cardinali : whereupon both Matthew Paris and Matthew of Westminster produce this testimony of he , the one in his second book , the other in his eight book of chronicle . in the year of our lord ( say they ) 1218 , at the take of Damiata a city of Egypt under John burn king of Jerusalem , m. Robert Curson a english man , a most famous clerk of noble parentage , and cardinali of the church of room , be there with Pelagius Albanensis , etc Boston of bury in Suffolk in his catalogue report , that he write diverse book . he flourish in the year aforesaid by the witness aforesaid . Henry the three son of king John be then king of England : and by the further testimony of Boston , this Curson be legate into England in the day of honorious the three , bishop of Rome . 348 