William the pilgrim , a very excellent poet in those day and a Englishman bear , be of great fame , be much give to good letter , ( as many then be ) and bestow his good time in the best kind of study . he understand of the preparation of king Richard against the Saracen , prepare himself also for the same voyage , not only as a soldier , but as a pilgrim also . he see those thing which happen in the spanish sea , and which be do in Syria and Palestina , against the sultan the king of Babylon , and the treacherous Saracen . all which thing he write and express they as it be in lively colour , as if they have be still in do before his eye , and handle the same argument in heroical verse which the forename Richard Canonicus do . and have finish his work he dedicate it to Hubert archbishop of Canterbury , and to Stephen Turneham a most expert captain of the war , give it this title , the expedition of king Richard . and i doubt not but that so good a poet as he be publish many other thing , but whether they be extant yea or no , i know not : but this i know , that he be a man well account of , and flourish in the year after the birth of Christ 1200. under king John. the large contribution to the succour of the [ n i . 31. ] holy land , make by king John king of England , in the three year of his reign 1201. Matth. Paris and Holinsh. page . 164. t the same time also the king of France and England give large money towards the maintenance of the army which at this present go forth under the lead of the earl of Flanders and other , to war against the enemy of the christian faith at the instance of pope innocent . there be furthermore grant unto they 345 the forty part of all the revenue belong unto ecclesiastical person , towards the aid of the Christians then be in the holy land : and all such aswell of the nobility , as other of the weak sort , which have take upon they the cross , and secret lay it down be compel eftsoon to receive it now again . the travail of Hubert Walter bishop of Sarisburie . Ubertus Walterus Sarisburiensis copus , vir probus , ingenioque ac pietate clarus , inter praecipuos unus eorum erat , qui post richardum regem expugnandorum Saracenorum gratia in syriam proficiscebantur . cum ex Palaestina redien , audiret in Sicilia , quod idem richardus in inimicorum manus incidisset , omisso itinere incoepto , ad eum cursim divertebat : quem and ille statim in Angliam misit , ut illic regii Senatus authoritate , indicto pro ejus redemption tributo pecuniam colligeret , quod and industrius fecit ac regem liberavit . Ind cantuariorum archiepiscopus factus , post ejus mortem Joanni illius fratri ac successori paria fidelitatis officia praestitit . Longa enim oration toti anglorum nationi persuasit , quod vir providus , praestan , fortis , genere nobilissimus , and imperio dignissimus esset : quo salutatus a populo fuit , atque in regem coronatus . Composuit quaedam opuscula , and ex immenso animi dolore demum obiisse fertur , anno salutis humanae 1205. cum sedisset annos 11. Menses octo , and die sex : quum vidisset ex intestinis odiis , omnia in transmarinis regionibus pessum ire , regnante Joanne . the same in english . HUbert Walter bishop of Sarisburie , a virtuous man , and famous for his good wit and piety , be one of the chief of they that follow king Richard into Syria go against the Saracen . as he return from 346 