the come of the emperor of Constantinople call Baldwine into England in the year 1247 , out Matth. Paris , and holensh . page . 239. vol. 2. IBout the same time , Baldwine name himself emperor of Constantinople , come again into ------ England , to procure some new aid of the king towards the recovery of his empire , out of the which he be expel by the Greeks . the voyage of William | | longespee earl of two or , Sarisburie into Asia , in the year 1248 , and sword ' in the 32 year of the reign of Henry the three , king of England . Ewis the french king be recover of his sickness which he fall into , in the year 1234 , vow thereupon for a free will sacrifice to God , that he ( if the council of his realm will suffer he ) will in his own person visit the holy land : which matter be open and debate in the parliament of France hold in the year 1247. where at length it be conclude , that the king accord to his vow shall take his journey into Asia , and the time thereof be also prefix , which shall [ H. i . 34. ] be after the feast of saint John Baptist the next year ensue . at which time William Longespee a worthy warrior , with the bishop of Worcester and certain other great man in the realm of England ( move with the example of the Frenchman ) prepare themselves likewise to the same journey . it fall out in this enterprise , that about the begin of October , the french king assault and take Damiata , be the principali fort or hold of the iv 353 z Saracens in all Egypt , anno 1249. and have fortify the city with a able garrison leave with the duke of Burgundy , he remove his tent from thence to go eastward . in who army follow William longespee , accompany with a pike number of english warrior retain unto he . but such be the disdain of the Frenchman against this William Longespee and the Englishman that they can not abide they , but flout they after a opprobrious manner with english tail , insomuch that the french king himself have much ado to keep peace between they . the originali cause of this grudge between they begin thus . there be not far from Alexandria in Egypt a strong fort or castle replenish with great a fort win by lady and rich treasure of the Saracen : which hold the english - chance the say William Longespee with his com-men‘ pany of english soldier to get , more by politic dexterity then by open force of arm , wherewith he and his retinue be great enrich . when the Frenchman have knowledge hereof ( they not be make privy hereto ) begin to conceive a heart burn against the english soldier , and can not speak well of they after that . it happen again not long after , that the say William have intelligence of a company of rich merchant among the Saracen go to a certain fair about the part of Alexandria , have their camel , ass and mule , rich load with silk , precious jewel , spice , gold and silver , with cart load of other ware , beside victuali and other furniture , whereof the soldier then a rich booty stand in great need : he have secret knowledge “ the english - hereof ’ gather all the power of Englishman unto he man . that he can , and so by night fall upon the mere - chant , some he slay with their guide and conductor , some he take , soihe he put to flight : the cart with the driver , and with the ox , camel , ass and mule , with the whole carriage and victual he take and bring with he , loose in all the skirmish but one soldier , 354 and eight of his servitor : of who notwithstanding some he bring home wound to be cure . This be know in the camp , forth come the Frenchman which all this while loiter in their pavilion , and meet this carriage by the way , take all the foresay pray whole to themselves , rate the say injury of William and the Englishman for adventure and issue out of the camp without leave or knowledge ' of their generali , contrary to the discipline of war . William say again he have do nothing but he will answer to it , who purpose be to have the spoil divide to the behoof of the whole army . when this will not serve , he be sore grieve in his mind so cowardly to be spoil of that which he so adventurous have travail for , go to the king to complain : but when no reason nor complaint will serve by reason of the proud earl of artoys the king brother , which upon spite and disdain stand against he , he bid the king farewell say he will serve he no long : and so William de Longespee with the lons-rest of his company break from the french host go to Achon . upon who departure the earl or artoys king . say , now be the army of french man well rid of these tail people , which word speak in great despite be ill take of many good man that hear they . but not long after , when the keeper of Cayro and Babylonia , bear a good mind to the christian religion , and be offend also with the sultan , promise to deliver the same to the french king , instruct he what course be best for he to take to accomplish it , the king hereupon in all haste send for William Longespee , promise he a full redress of all his injury before receive : who at the king request come to he again , and so join with the french power . after this , it happen that the french king pass with his army towards Cayro aforesaid , come to the great river Nilus , on the further part whereof the sultan have pitch himself to withstand his come over : 355 there be at this time a sarazen late convert to Christ , serve the earl Robert the french king brother , who tell he of the absence of the sultan from his tent , and of a shallow ford in the river where they may easy pass over . whereupon the say earl Robert and the master of the temple with a great power , esteem to the three part of the army issue over the river , after who follow W. longspee with his band of english soldier . Theise be join together on the other side of the water , encountered the same day with the Saracen remain in the tent and put they to the worst . which victory be get , the french earl surprise with pride and triumph , as though he have conquer the whole earth , [ ii i , 35. ] will needs forward , divide himself from the main host , think to win the spur alone . to who certain sage man of the temple , give he contrary counsel , advise he not to do so , but rather to return and take their whole company with they , and so shall they be more sure against all deceit and danger , which may be lay privy for they . the manner of that people ( they say ) they better know , and have more experience thereof then he : allege moreover their weary body , their tire horse , their famish soldier , and the insufficiency also of their number , which be not able to withstand the multitude of the enemy , especial at this present brunt , in which the adversary do well see the whole state of their dominion now to consist either in win all or lose all . which when the proud earl do hear , be inflate with no less arrogancy than ignorance , with opprobrious taunt revile they , call they cowardly dastard , and betrayer of the whole country , object unto they the common report of many , which say , that the land of the holy cross may soon be win to christendom , be it not for rebellious templary , with the hospitalary , and their follower . to these contumelious rebuke , when the master of 356 the temple answer again for he and his fellow , bid he display his ensign when he will , and where he dare , they be as ready to follow he , as he to go before they . then begin William de longespe the worthy knight to speak , desire the earl to give ear to those man of experience , who have better knowledge of those country and people then have he , commend also their counsel to be discreet and wholesome , and so turn to the master of the temple , begin with gentle word to mitigate he likewise . the knight have not half end his talk , when the earl take his word out of his mouth , begin to fume and swear , cry out of those cowardly Englishman with tail : what a pure army ( say he ) shall we have here , if these tail and tail people be purge from it , with other like word of villainy , and much disdain : whereunto the english knight answer again , well , earl Robert ( say he ) wheresoever you dare set your foot , my step shall go as far as you , and ( as i believe ) we go this day where you shall not dare to come near the tail of my horse , as in deed in the event it prove true : for earl Robert will needs set forward , ween to get all the glory to himself before the come of the host , and first invade a little village or castle , which be not far off , call Mansor . the country boor and pagan in the village , see the Christians come , run out with such a main cry and shout , that it come to the sultan hear , who be near than our man do think . in the mean time , the Christians invade and enter into the munition incircumspect , be pelt and pash with stone by they which stand above , whereby a great number of our man be lose , and the army sore maim , and almost in despair . then immediate upon the same , come the sol-dan with all his main power , which see the christian army to be divide , and the brother separate from the brother , have that which he long wish for , and so 357 the worthy answer of williamlong-spe to earl Robert . enclose they round about , that none shall escape , have with they a cruel fight . then the earl begin to repent he of his heady rashness , but it be too late , who then see William the english knight doughty fight in the chief brunt the cowardly of the enemy , cry unto he most cowardly to fly , fi^^eark see God ( say he ) do fight against we : to who a ere|it ' the knight answer again , God forbid ( say he ) that my father son shall run away from the face of a saracen . the earl then turn his horse , flee away , think to avoid by the swiftness of his horse , and so take the river Thafnis , oppress with harness , be there sink and drown . thus the earl be go , the Frenchman begin to despair and scatter . then William de longespe bearing all the force of the enemy , stand against they as long as he can , wound and slay many a sarazen , till at length his horse be kill , and his leg the valiant maim , he can no long stand , who yet notwith-ende of will - stanj ; hang . as he be jowne mangle their foot and leg , and do the Saracen much sorrow , till at last after many blow and wound , be stone of the Saracen , he yield his life . and after the death of he , the Saracen set upon the residue of the army , who they have compass on every side , devour and destroy they all , insomuch that scarce one man remain alive , save two templary , one hospitale , and one poor rascal soldier , which bring tiding , hereof to the king . and thus by the imprudent and foolish hardiness of that french earl , the Frenchman be discomfit , and that valiant english knight overmatch , to the grief of all christian people , the glory of the Saracen , and the utter destruction and ruin of the whole french army , as afterward it appear . 358 