the voyage of prince Edward the son of king [ two i . 36. ] Henry the three into Asia in the year 1270. Bout the year of our lord , 1267. Octobonus the pope legate be in England , prince Edward the son of king Henry , and diverse other noble man of England take upon they the cross upon saint John Baptists day , by the say legate hand at Northhampton , to the relief of the holy land , and the subversion of the enemy of the cross of Christ . for which purpose , and for the better furnish of the prince towards the journey , there be grant he a subsidy throughout all the realm , and in the month of May , in the year of our lord 1270. he begin to set forward . at Michaelmas follow he with his company come to Eguemortes , which be from Marsilia eight league westward , and there take ship again ( have a merry and prosperous wind ) within ten day arrive at Tunez , where he be with great joy welcome , and entertain of the christian prince that there be to this purpose assemble , as of Philip the french king , who father Lodovicus die a little before , of Carolus the king of Sicilia , and the two king of Navarre and Arragon , and as this lord Edward come thither for his father the king of England , thither come also Henry the son of the king of almain for his father , who at his return from the voyage be slay in a chapel at Viterbium . when prince Edward demand of these king and prince what be to be do , they answer he again , and say , the prince of this city and the province adjoin to the same have be accustom to pay tribute unto the king of Sicily every year : and now for that the same have be for the space of seven year unpaid and more , therefore we think good to make invasion upon he . but the king know 359 than same tribute to be but just demand , have now accord to our own desire satisfy for the time past , and also pay his tribute before hand . then say he , my lord , what be this to the purpose ? be we not here all assemble , and have take upon we the lord character to fight against the infidel and enemy of Christ ? what mean you then to conclude a peace with they ? God forbid we shall do so , for now the land be plain and hard , so that we may approach to you holy city Jerusalem . then say they , now have we make a league with they , neither be it lawful for we to break the same . but let we return again to Sicilia , and when the winter be past we may well take ship to Aera . but this counsel nothing at all like he , neither do he show himself well please therewith : but after he have make they a princely banquet , he go into his closet or privy chamber from among they , neither will be partaker of any of that wicked money which they have take . they notwithstanding continue their purpose , at the next merry wind take ship , and for want of ship leave 200. of their man a shore , cry out , and piteous lament for the peril and hazard of death that they be in : wherewith prince Edward be somewhat move to compassion , come back again to the land , and receive and stow they in his own ship , be the last that go aboard . within seven day after , they arrive in the kingdom of Sicilia , over against the city trape , cast their anchor a league from thence within the sea , for that their ship be of great burden , and thorough fraught : and from the haven of the city they send out barge and boat to receive and bring such of the nobility to land as will , but their horse for the most part , and all their armour they keep still within board . at length towards the evening the sea begin to be rough , and increase to a great tempest and a mighty : insomuch that their ship be beat one against another side , and drown there be of they at that 360 tempest lie at anchor more than 120. with all their armour and munition , with innumerable soul beside , and that wicked money also which they have take before , likewise perish , and be lose . but the tempest hurt not so much as one ship of prince Edward , who have in number 13. nor yet have one man lose thereby , for that ( as it may be presuppose ) he consent not to the wicked counsel of the rest . when in the morning the prince and king come to the sea side , and see all their ship drown , and see their man and horse in great number cast upon the land drown , they have full heavy heart , as well they may , for of all their ship and mariner , which be in number 1500. beside the common soldier , there be no more save than the mariner of one only ship , and they in this wise . there be in that ship a good and wise matron , a countess or a earl wife , who perceive the tempest to grow , and fear her self , call to she the m. of the ship , and ask he whether in attempt to the shore it be not possible to save themselves : he answer , that to save the ship it be impossible : howbeit the man [ ii i . 37 - ] that be therein by god help he doubt not . then say the countess , for the ship force no whit , save the soul therein , and have to thou double the value of the ship : who immediate hoist the sail with all force , run the ship aground so near the shore as be possible , so that with the vehemency of the weather and force he come withal , he brace the ship and save all that be within the same , as he have show , and say before . then the king and prince ( alter their purpose after this so great a shipwreck ) return home again every one unto their own land : only Edward the son of the king of England , remain behind with his man and ship , which the lord have save and preserve . then prince Edward renovate his purpose , take ship again , and within fifteen day after easter 361 the arrival of arrive he at Aera , and go aland , take with he a prince ed - thousand of the best soldier and most expert , and war at ci a. tarjej there a whole month , refresh both his man and horse , and that in this space he may learn and know the secret of the land . after this he take with Nazareth take by the prince . a victory against the Saracen , wherein iooo of they be slay . the prince of Cyprus acknowledge obedience to the king of England . he six or seven thousand soldier , and march forward twenty mile from Aera , and take Nazareth , and those that he find there he slay , and afterward return again to Aera . but their enemy follow after they , think to have set upon they at some strait or other advantage , be espy by the prince , and return again upon they give a charge , and slay many of they , and the rest they put to flight . after this , about midsummer , when the prince have understanding that the Saracen begin to gather at cakow which be forty mile from Aera , he march thither , set upon they very early in the morning , and slay of they more than a thousand , the rest he put to flight , and take rich spoil , march forward till they come to a castle name Castrum peregrinorum , situate upon the sea coast , and tarry there that night , and the next day they return again towards Aera . in the mean season the king of Jerusalem send unto the noble man of Cyprus , desire they to come with speed to aid the christian , but they will not come , say they will keep their own land , and go no further . then prince Edward send unto they , desire that at his request they will come and join in aid with he : who immediady thereupon come unto he with great preparation and furniture for the war , say , that at his commandment they be bind to do no less , for that his predecessor be sometime the governor of that their land , and that they ought always to show their fidelity to the king of England . then the Christians be herewith animate , make a three voyage or road , and come as far as the fort call vincula sancti Petri , and to saint Georgius , and when they have slay certain there , not find any to make 362 resistance against they , they retire again from whence they come : when thus the fame of prince Edward grow among his enemy , and that they begin to stand in doubt of he , they devise among themselves how by some policy they may circumvent he , and betray he . whereupon the prince and admiral of Joppa send unto he , feign himself under great deceit willing to become a christian , and that he will draw with he a great number beside , so that they may be honorable entertain and use of the Christians . this talk please the prince well , and persuade he to finish the thing he have so well begin by write again , who also by the same messenger send and write back unto he diverse time about the same matter , whereby no mistrust shall spring . this messenger ( say my author ) be one ex caute nutriti , one of the stony heart , that neither fear God nor dread death . the five time when this messenger come , and be of the prince servant search accord to the manner and custom what weapon and armour he have about he , as also his purse , that not so much as a knife can be see about he , he be have up into the prince chamber , and after his reverence do , he pull out certain letter , which he deliver the prince from his lord , as he have do other before . this be about eight day after Whitsuntide , upon a Tuesday , somewhat before night , at which time the prince be lay upon his bed bear head , in his jerkin , for the great heat and intemperature of the weather . when the prince have read the letter , it appear by they , that upon the Saturday next follow , his lord will be there ready to accomplish all that he have write and promise . the report of these news by the prince to the standard by , like they well , who draw somewhat back to consult thereof among themselves . in the mean time , the messenger kneel , and make his obeisance to the prince ( question further with he ) 363 prince Edward traitorous wound . [ H. i - 38. ] the english voyage put his hand to his belt , as though he will have pull out some secret letter , and sudden he pull out a envenome knife , think to have strike the prince into the belly therewith as he lie : but the prince lift up his hand to defend the blow , be strike a great wound into the arm , and be about to fetch another stroke at he , the prince again with his foot take he such a blow , that he fell he to the ground : with that the prince gate he by the hand , and with such violence wrast the knife from he , that he hurt himself therewith on the forehead , and immediate thrust the same into the belly of the messenger and striker , and slay he . the prince servant be in the next chamber not far off , hear the bustle , come with great haste run in , and find the messenger lie dead in the floor , one of they take up a stool , and beat out his brain : whereat the prince be wroth for that he strike a dead man , and one that be kill before . but the rumour of this accident , as it be strange , so it go soon throughout all the court , and from thence among the common people , for which they be very heavy , and great discourage . to he come also the captain of the temple , and bring he a costly and precious drink against poison , lest the venom of the knife shall penetrate the lively blood , and in blame wise say unto he : do i not tell your grace before of the deceit and subtlety of this people ? notwithstanding , say he , let your grace take a good heart , you shall not die of this wound , my life for you . but straight way the surgeon and physician be send for , and the prince be dress , and within few day after , the wound begin to putrify , and the flesh to look dead and black : whereupon they that be about the prince begin to mutter among themselves , and be very sad and heavy . which thing he himself perceive , say unto they : why mutter you thus among your self ? what see 364 1270. you in i , can i not be heal ? tell i the truth , be you not afraid . whereupon one say unto he , and it like your grace you may be heal , we mistrust not , but yet it will be very painful for you to suffer . May suffer ( say he again ) restore health ? yea say the other , on pain of lose my head . then say the prince , i commit my self unto you , do with i what you think good . then say one of the physician , be there any of your noble in who your grace repose special trust ? to who the prince answer yea , name certain of the noble man that stand about he . then say the physician to the two , who the prince first name , the lord Edmund , and the lord John voisie , and do this lord you also faithful love your lord and prince ? who Edmund be answer both , yea undoubted . then say he , take you away this gentlewoman and lady ( mean his wife ) ' and let she not see her lord and husband , till such time as i will you thereunto . whereupon they take she from the prince presence , cry out , and wring her hand . then say they unto she , be you content good lady and madam , it be better that one woman shall weep a little while , then that all the realm of England shall weep a great season . then on the morrow they cut out all the dead and invenime flesh out of the prince arm , and throw it from they , and say unto he : how cheer your grace , we promise you within these fifteen day you shall show your self abroad ( if God permit ) upon your horseback , whole and well as ever you be . And accord to the promise he make the prince , it come to pass , to the no little comfort and admiration of all his subject . when the great sultan hear hereof , and that the prince be yet alive , he can scarce believe the same , and send unto he three of his noble and prince , excuse himself by they , call his god to witness that the same be do neither by he nor his 365 consent . which prince and messenger stand aloof off from the king son , worship he , fall flat upon the ground : you ( say the prince ) do reverence i , but yet you love i not . but they understand he not , because he speak in English unto they , speak by a interpreter : nevertheless he honourable entertain they , and send they away in peace . thus when prince Edward have be eighteen month in Aera , he take ship about the assumption of our lady , as we call it , return homeward , and after seven week he arrive in Sicilia at trape , and from thence travail through the mid of Apulia , till he come to roam , where he be of the pope honorable entertain . from thence he come into France , who fame and noble prowess be there much bruit among the common people , and envy of the nobility , especial of the earl of Chalons , who think to have entrap he and his company , as may appear in the story : but prince Edward continue forth his journey to Paris , and be there of the french king honourable entertain : and after certain day he go thence into Gascon , where he tarry till that he hear of the death of the king his father , at which time he come home , and be crown king of England , in the year of our lord 1274. the travail of Robert Turneham . [ ii i . 39 ] Obertus Turneham Franciscanus , Theologiae prong^ fessor insignis , lynnae celebri Irenorum ad ripas ■ - — i Isidis emporio , collegio suorum fratrum magnifice praefuit . Edwardus princeps , cognomento Longus , henrici tertii filius , bellicam expeditionem contra Sara cenos Assyriam incolente , anno Dom. 1268. parabat . ad quam profectionem quaesitus quoque orator vehemen , qui plebis in causa religionis animos excitaret , turnehamus principi visus vel dignissimus est , qui munus hoc obiret . sic tanquam signifer constitutus 366 