consent . which prince and messenger stand aloof off from the king son , worship he , fall flat upon the ground : you ( say the prince ) do reverence i , but yet you love i not . but they understand he not , because he speak in English unto they , speak by a interpreter : nevertheless he honourable entertain they , and send they away in peace . thus when prince Edward have be eighteen month in Aera , he take ship about the assumption of our lady , as we call it , return homeward , and after seven week he arrive in Sicilia at trape , and from thence travail through the mid of Apulia , till he come to roam , where he be of the pope honorable entertain . from thence he come into France , who fame and noble prowess be there much bruit among the common people , and envy of the nobility , especial of the earl of Chalons , who think to have entrap he and his company , as may appear in the story : but prince Edward continue forth his journey to Paris , and be there of the french king honourable entertain : and after certain day he go thence into Gascon , where he tarry till that he hear of the death of the king his father , at which time he come home , and be crown king of England , in the year of our lord 1274. the travail of Robert Turneham . [ ii i . 39 ] Obertus Turneham Franciscanus , Theologiae prong^ fessor insignis , lynnae celebri Irenorum ad ripas ■ - — i Isidis emporio , collegio suorum fratrum magnifice praefuit . Edwardus princeps , cognomento Longus , henrici tertii filius , bellicam expeditionem contra Sara cenos Assyriam incolente , anno Dom. 1268. parabat . ad quam profectionem quaesitus quoque orator vehemen , qui plebis in causa religionis animos excitaret , turnehamus principi visus vel dignissimus est , qui munus hoc obiret . sic tanquam signifer constitutus 366 1415 - the english voyage Assyrios una cum anglico exercitu petiit , ac suum non sine laud praestitit officium . claruit anno salutiferi partus , 1280 , varia componens , sub eodem Edwardo ejus nominis primo post Conquestum . the same in english . RObert Turneham franciscan , a notable professor of divinity , be with great dignity prior of the coiledge of his order in the famous mart town of Linne , situate upon the river of Isis in Norfolk . prince Edward surname the long , the son of Henry the three , prepare his warlike voyage against the Saracen dwell in Syria , in the year of our lord , 1268. for the which expedition some earnest preacher be seek to stir up the people mind in the cause of religion . and this Turneham seem to the prince most worthy to perform that office : so that he be appoint as it be a standard bearer , go into Syria with the english army , and perform his duty with good commendation . he flourish in the year of Christ 1280 , set forth diverse work under the same king Edward the first of that name after the conquest . 368 view of Tyre in the sixteenth century iv 369 2 a 