the come of lion king of Armenia into England , in the year 1386 , and in the nine year of Richard the second , in trust to find some mean of peace or good agreement between the king of England and the french king . John Froyssart lib . 3. cap . 56. hus in abide for the duke of Berrie , and for the constable , who be behind , than king lion of Armenia , who be in France , and have assign he by the king , six thousand frank by the year to maintain his estate , take upon he for a good intent to go into Eng land to speak with the king there and his council , to see if he may find any matter of peace to be have , between the two realm , England and France : and so he depart from his lodging of saint albeyne beside saint Denice , alone with his own company , and with no great apparel . so he ride to boloine , and there he take a ship , and so sail forth till he come to Dover ; and there he find the earl of Cambridge , and the earl of Buckingham , and more than a hundred man of arm , and a two thousand archer , who lie there to keep that passage , for the brute run , that the Frenchman shall land there or at Sandwich , and the king lie at London , and part of his council with he , and daily hear tiding from all the port of England . when the king of Armenia be arrive at Dover , he have there good cheer , because he be a stranger , and so he come to the king uncle there , who sweet receive he , and at a time convenient , they demand of he from whence he come and whither he will . the king answer and say , that in trust of goodness he be come thither to see the king of England , and his council , to treat of peace between England and France , for he say that he 445 thought the war be not meet : for he say , by reason of war between these two realm , which have injure so long , the Saracen , Jew and Turk be wax proud , for there be none that make they any war , and by occasion thereof i have lose my land and realm , and be not like to recover they again without there be firm peace in all Christendom : and i will glad show the matter that touch all Christendom to the king of England , and to his council , as i have do to the french king . then the king uncle demand of he if the french king send he thither or no ; he answer and say , no : there be no man that send i , but i be come hither by my own motion to see if the king of England and his council will any thing lean to any treaty of peace , then be he demand where the french king be , he answer i believe he be at sluice , i see not he since i take my leave of he at Senlize . than he be demand , how he can make any treaty of peace , and have no charge so to do , and sir , if you be convey to the king our nephew and to his counsel , and the french king in the mean season enter with his puissance into England ; you may happen thereby to receive great blame , and your person to be in great jeoperdy with they of the country . then the king answer and say , i be in surety of the french king , for i have send to he , desire he till i return again , not to remove from sluice , and 1 repute he so noble and so well advise , that he will grant my desire , and that he will not enter into the sea , till i come again to he . wherefore , sir , i pray you in the instance of love and peace , to convey i to speak with the king , for i desire great to see he : or else you that be his uncle , if you have authority , to give i answer to all my demand . then the earl of Buckingham say , sir king of Armenia , we be ordain here to keep and defend this passage , and the frontier of England , by the king and his counsel , and we have no charge to meddle 446 any further with the business of the realm , without we be otherwise command by the king . but sith you be come for a good intent into this country , you be right welcome ; but sir , as for any firm answer you can have none of we , for as now we be not of the council , but we shall convey you to the king without peril or danger . the king thank they , and say : i desire nothing else but to see the king and to speak with he . how the king of Armenia return out of England , and of the answer that be make to he . Hen the king of Armenia be refresh at Dover a day , and have speak with the king uncle at good leisure , than he depart towards London , with a good conduct that the lord appoint to he , for fear of any recounter : so long he ride that he come to London , and in his ride through London he be well regard , because he be a stranger , and he have good cheer make he , and so be bring to the king , who lie at the royal at the queen wardrobe , and his council be in London at their lodging : the Londoner be sore fortify of their city . when the come of the king of Armenia be know , the king council draw to the king to hear what tiding the king bring in that troublous season : when the king of Armenia be come into the king presence , he make his salutation and then begin his process to the state , how he be come out of France principal to see the king of England who he have never see before , and say , how he be right joyous to be in his presence , trust that some goodness may come thereby . and there he show by his word , that to withstand the great pestilence that be likely to be in England ; therefore he be come of his own good will to do good therein if he may , not send from the 447 french king , will to set some accord and peace between the two realm England and France . many fair pleasant word the king of Armenia speak to the king of England , and to his counsel , than he be short answer thus : sir king , you be welcome into this realm , for the king our sovereign lord , and all we be glad to see you here , but sir , we say that the king have not here all his council , but short they shall be here , and than you shall be answer . the king of Armenia be content therewith , and so return to his lodging . within four day after the king be counsel ( and i think he have send to his uncle to know their intent , but they be not present at the answer give ) to go to the palace at Westminster and his council with he , such as be about he , and to send for the king of Armenia to come thither . and when he be come into the presence of the king of England and his council , the king sit down , and the king of Armenia by he , and then the prelate and other of his council . there the king of Armenia rehearse again his request that he make , and also show wise how all Christendom be sore decay and feeblish by occasion of the war between England and France . and how that all the knight and squire of both realm intend nothing else , but always to be on the one part or of the other : whereby the empire of Constantinople leese , and be like to lose ; for before this war the knight and squire be wont to adventure themselves . and also the king of Armenia show that by occasion of this war he have lose his realm of Armenia , therefore he desire for God sake that there may be some treaty of peace have between the two realm England and France . to these word answer the archbishop of Canterbury , for he have charge so to do ; and he say , sir king of Armenia , it be not the manner nor never be see between two such enemy as the king of England and the french king , that the king my sovereign lord shall be require of peace , and he to enter his land with 448 1386. a puissant army , wherefore sir , we say to you , that if it please you , you may return to the french king , and cause he and all his puissance to return back into their own [ ii i . 69. ] country . and when every man be at home , than if it please you you may return again hither , and then we shall glad intend to your treaty . this be all the answer the king of Armenia can get there , and so he dine with the king of England , and have as great honour as can be devise , and the king offer he many great gift of gold and silver , but he will take none though he have need thereof , but alone a ring to the value of a hundred frank . after dinner he take his leave and return unto his lodging , and the next day depart , and be two day at Dover , and there he take his leave of such lord as be there , and so take the sea in a passager , and arrive at Calais and from thence go to sluice , and there he speak with the french king and with his uncle , and show they how he have be in England , and what answer he have : the french king and his uncle take no regard of his say , but send he back again into France , for their full intention be to enter into England as soon as they may have wind and weather , and the duke of berry and the constable come to they : the wind be sore contrary to they , for therewith they can never enter into England but the wind be good to go into Scotland . iv 449 [ the voyage 2 f 