Thomas Walsingham . the come of the emperor of Constantinople into England , to desire the aid of Henry the 4. against the Turk , 1400. Ub eodem tempore imperator Constantinopolitanus venit in angliam , postulaturus subsidium contra Tureas . cui occurrit rex cum apparatu nobili ad le Blackheath , die sancti Thomae Apostilo , suscepitque , prout decuit , tantum heroem , duxitque Londonias , and per multos dies exhibuit gloriose , pro expensis hospitii svi solven , and eum respiciens tanto fastigio donativis . et paulo post : he auditis rumoribus , imperator laetior recessit ab Anglis , honoratus a rege donariis preciosis . the same in english . a bout the same time the emperor of Constantinople come into England , to seek aid against the Turk : who the king accompany with his nobili tie , meet withal upon Blackheath upon the day of saint Thomas the apostle , and receive he as beseem so great a prince , and bring he to London , and royal entertain he for a long season , defray the charge of his diet , and give he many honourable present . and a livre tie afterward : upon the hear of these news , the emperor depart with great joy out of England , who the king honour with many precious gift . the voyage of the bishop of Winchester to Jerusalem , in the sixth year of the reign of Henry the five , which be the year of our lord , 1417. Thomas walse . ltimo die mensis octobris , episcopus Wintoniensis accessit ad concilium Constanciense , peregrinaturus hierosolymam post electionem summi pontificis celebratam , ubi tantum valuit ejus facunda persuasio , ut and excitaret dominos cardinal ad concordiam , and ad electionem summi pontificis se ocyus praepararent . 454 the last day of October the bishop of Winchester come to the council of Constance , which after the choose of the pope determine to take his journey to Jerusalem : where his eloquent persuasion so much prevail , that he both persuade my lord the cardinal to unity and concord , and also move they to proceed more speedy to the election of the pope . a preparation of a voyage of king Henry the four to the holy land against the infidel in the year 1413 , be the last year of his reign : wherein he be prevent by death : write by Walsingham , Fabian , Polydore Virgile , and Holenshed . n this fourteen and last year of king Henry reign a council be hold in the white friar in London , at the which among other thing , order be take for order take ship and galley to be build and make ready , and all other thing necessary to be provide for a voyage , which he mean to make into the holy land , there to recover the city of Jerusalem from the infidel : for it grieve he to consider the great malice of christian prince , that be bend upon a mischievous purpose to destroy one another , to the peril of their own soul , rather than to make war against the enemy of the christian faith , as in conscience , it seem to he , they be bind . we find , say Fabian in his chronicle , that he be take with his last sickness , while he be make his prayer at saint Edward shrine , there as it be , to take his leave , and so to proceed forth on his journey . he be so sudden and grievous take , that such as be about he fear lest he will have die present : wherefore to relieve he , if it be possible , they bear 455 