both at his conquest of Barbary , and at his siege at Tunis , as also in other place . who have give he by the say emperor for his valiant deed the order of Barbary . who die the 29 day of December , in the year of our lord God 1566. the voyage of sir Thomas Chaloner to Alger with Charles the lift 1541 , draw out of his book de Republica anglorum instauranda . Homas Chalonerus patria londinensis , study Cantabrigensis , education aulicus , religion pius , vereque Christianus fuit . itaque cum juvenilem aetatem , mentemque svam humanioribus studiis roborasset , domino Henrico Knevetto a potentissimo rege Henrico ejus nominis octavo ad carolum quintum imperatorem transmisso legato , una cum illo profectus est , tanquam familiaris amicus , vel eidem a consiliis . quo quidem tempore Carolo quinto navali certamine a Genua and Corsica in Algyram in Africa contra Tureas classem solvente ac hostiliter proficiscente , ornatissimo illo Knevetto legato regis , Thoma Chalo-nero , Henrico Knolleo , and Henrico Isamo , illustribus viris eundem in illa expedition suapte sponte sequentibus , pariterque militantibus , mirifice vitam svam Chalonerus tutatus est . nam triremi illa , in qua fuerat , vel scopulis allisa , vel gravissimis procellis conquassata , naufragus cum se diu natatu defendisset , deficientibus viribus , brachiis manibusque languidis ac quasi enervatis , prehensa dentibus cum maxima difficultate rudenti , quae ex altera triremi jam propinqua tum fuerat ejecta , non sine dentium aliquorum jactura ac fractura seize tandem recuperavit , ac domum integer relapsus est . the same in english . THomas Chaloner be by birth a londiner , by study a cantabrigian , by education a courtier , by religion a devout and true christian . therefore after he have confirm his youth and mind in the study of good learning , when sir Henry Knevet be send ambassador from the mighty prince Henry the 8. to the emperor Charles the five , he go with he as his familiar friend , or as one of his council . at which time the say Charles the 5. pass over from Genoa and Corsica to Alger in Africa in warlike sort , with a mighty army by sea , that honourable Knevet the king ambassador , Thomas Chaloner , Henry Knolles , and Henry Isham , right worthy person , of their own accord accompany he in that expedition , and serve he in that war , wherein Thomas Chaloner escape most wonderful with his life . for the gay wherein he be , be either dash against the rock , or shake with mighty storm , and so cast away , after he have save himself a long while by swim , when his strength fail he , his arm and hand be faint and weary , with great difficulty lay hold with his tooth on a cable , which be cast out of the next gay , not without break and loss of certain of his tooth , at length recover himself , and return home into his country in safety . the voyage of m. Roger Bodenham with the great bark Aucher to Candia and Chio , in the year 1550. n the year 1550. the 13 of November i Roger Bodenham captain of the bark Aucher enter the say ship at Gravesend , for my voyage to the hand of Candia and Chio in the Levant . the master of my ship be one William Sherwood . from thence we depart to the bark Tilbery hope , and there remain with contrary wind aucher g > eth until the 6. of January 1551. the 6 of Januarie , the f°rlevant-m . come to Tilbery , and i have provide a skilful pilot to carry i over the land end , who name be m. wood , and with all speed i vale down that night 71 