until we come through the strait of Gibraltar into the main ocean . we have also a great long boat and a skiff . we be out upon this voyage eleven month , yet in all this time there die of sickness but one man , who name be George forest , be servant to our carpenter call Thomas Plummer . in a great lygier book of one William eym , servant unto sir William Bowyer Aiderman of London , bear date the 15 of November 1533 , and continue until the 4 of July 1544. i find that he the say William Eyms be factor in Chio , not only for his master , but also for the duke of Norfolk grace , and for many other worshipful merchant of London , among who i find the account of these especial , to wit , of his say master , sir William Bowyer , of William and Nicholas Wilford merchant-tailors of London , of Thomas Curtis pewterer , of John Starky mercer , of William ostrige merchant , and of Richard field draper . and further i find in the say ligier book , a note of the say eym , of all such good as he leave in the hand of Robert buy in Chio , who become his master factor in his room , and another like note of particular of good that he leave in the hand of Oliver lesson , servant to William and Nicholas Wilford . and for proof of the continuance of this trade until the end of the year 1552. i find annex unto the former note of the good leave with Robert buy in Chio , a letter be date the 27 of November 1552 inn London . the epitaph of the valiant esquire m. Peter [ ii i . 99 ] Read in the south he of saint Peter church in the city of Norwich , which be knight by Charles the lift at the win of Tunis in the year of our lord 1538. here under lie the corpse of Peter read esquire , who have worthy serve , not only his prince and country , but also the emperor Charles the five , 69 both at his conquest of Barbary , and at his siege at Tunis , as also in other place . who have give he by the say emperor for his valiant deed the order of Barbary . who die the 29 day of December , in the year of our lord God 1566. the voyage of sir Thomas Chaloner to Alger with Charles the lift 1541 , draw out of his book de Republica anglorum instauranda . Homas Chalonerus patria londinensis , study Cantabrigensis , education aulicus , religion pius , vereque Christianus fuit . itaque cum juvenilem aetatem , mentemque svam humanioribus studiis roborasset , domino Henrico Knevetto a potentissimo rege Henrico ejus nominis octavo ad carolum quintum imperatorem transmisso legato , una cum illo profectus est , tanquam familiaris amicus , vel eidem a consiliis . quo quidem tempore Carolo quinto navali certamine a Genua and Corsica in Algyram in Africa contra Tureas classem solvente ac hostiliter proficiscente , ornatissimo illo Knevetto legato regis , Thoma Chalo-nero , Henrico Knolleo , and Henrico Isamo , illustribus viris eundem in illa expedition suapte sponte sequentibus , pariterque militantibus , mirifice vitam svam Chalonerus tutatus est . nam triremi illa , in qua fuerat , vel scopulis allisa , vel gravissimis procellis conquassata , naufragus cum se diu natatu defendisset , deficientibus viribus , brachiis manibusque languidis ac quasi enervatis , prehensa dentibus cum maxima difficultate rudenti , quae ex altera triremi jam propinqua tum fuerat ejecta , non sine dentium aliquorum jactura ac fractura seize tandem recuperavit , ac domum integer relapsus est . the same in english . THomas Chaloner be by birth a londiner , by study a cantabrigian , by education a courtier , by religion a devout and true christian . therefore after he have 70 