your highness letter to your officer who it may concern , that we may perceive , that our subject right and liberty have especial be maintain upon this our commendation . which we will take in most thankful part , and your highness shall find we in the like or a great matter most ready to gratify you , who we wish most hearty well to fare . from our court at Waltham the 15. of October 1531. a voyage make with the ship call the holy [ ii i . 98. ] cross , and the Matthew Gonson , to the isle of Candia and Chio , about the year 1534 , accord to a relation make to master Richard Hackluit , by John Williamson , Cooper and citizen of London , who live in the year 1592 , and go as cooper in the Matthew Gonson the next voyage after . the holy cross and the Matthew Gonson depart for Turkle . he ship call the holy cross , and the Matthew Gonson , make a voyage to the island of Candia and Chio in turkic , about the year 1534. and in the Matthew go as captain m. Richard Gonson , son of old master William Gonson , paymaster of the king navy . in this first voyage go William Holstocke ( who afterward be controller of her majesty navy , late decease ) as page to m. Richard Gonson aforesaid , which m. Gonson die in Chio in this his first voyage . the ship call the holy cross be a short ship , and of burden 160 ton . and have be a full year at the sea in performance of this voyage , with great danger she return home , where , upon her arrival at Blackwall , in the river of Thames , her wine and oil cask be find so weak , that they be not able to hoist they out of the ship , but be constrain to draw they as they lie , and put their wine and oil into new vessel , and so to unlade the ship . their chief fraught , 67 be very excellent Muscatels and red malmesy , the like whereof be seldom see before in England . they bring home also good quantity of sweet oil , cotton wool , turquoise carpet , gall , cinnamon , and some other spice . the say ship call the holy cross be so shake in this voyage , and so weaken , that she be lay up in the dock , and never make voyage after . another voyage to the isle of Candia and Chio make by the ship the Matthew Gonson , about the year 1535 , accord to the relation of John Williamson , than Cooper in the same ship , make to m. Richard Hackluit in the year 1592. the Matthew Gonson go into turquoise . he good ship call the Matthew Gonson , of burden 300 ton , whereof be owner old m. William Gonson , paymaster of the king navy , make her voyage in the year 153 5. in this ship go as captain Richard grey , who long after die in Russia . master William Holstocke afterward controller of the queen navy go then as purser in the same voyage . the master be one John Pichet , servant to old m. William Gonson , James rumnie be master mate . the master cooper be John Williamson citizen of London , live in the year 1592 , and dwell in sant Dunston parish in the east . the m. gunner be John Godfrey of bristol . in this ship be 6 gunner and 4 trumpeter , all which four trumpeter at our return homeward go on land at Messina in the hand of Sicilia , as our ship ride there at anchor , and get they into the galley that lie near unto we , and in they go to roam . the whole number of our company in this ship be about 100 man , we be also furnish with a great boat , which be able to carry 10 ton of water , which at our return homeward we tow all the way from Chio 68 