a marvellous great number of people , he can not be overthrow . wherefore he most humble beseech the king as saint George knight , and defender of the faith , to assist the king his master in that godly war and virtuous purpose . to this oration the king by the mouth of sir Thomas Moore answer ; that much he lament the loss that happen in Hungary , and if it be not for the war he mean which be between the two great prince , he think the emperor that the Turk will not have enterprise that act : e frenc wherefore he with all his study will take pain , first , to set a unity and peace throughout all Christendom , and after that , both with money and man he will be ready to help towards that glorious war , as much as any other prince in Christendom . after this do , the ambassador be well cherish , and diverse time resort to the court , and have great cheer and good reward , and so the three day of May next follow , they take their leave and depart homeward . the antiquity of the trade with english ship into the Levant . n the year of our lord , 1511. 1512. etc till the year 1534. diverse tall ship of London , namely , the Christopher Campion , wherein be factor one Roger Whitcome ; the Mary George , wherein be factor William Gresham ; the great mary grace , the owner whereof , be William Gunson , and the master one John Hely ; the Trinity fitzwilliams , whereof be master Laurence Arkey ; the Matthew of London , whereof be master William capling , with certain other ship of Southampton and Bristol , have a ordinary and usual trade to Sicilia , Candie , Chio , and somewhiles to Cyprus , as also to Tripoli and Barutti in Syria . the commodity which they carry thither be fine kersey of diverse colour , course kersey , white western dozen , cotton , 62 certain clothes call statute , and other call Cardinalwhites , and calveskin which be well sell in Sicily , etc the commodity which they return back be silk , chamlet , rhubarb , malmesy , muskadel and other wine , sweet oil , cotton wool , turquoise carpet , gall , pepper , cinamom , and some other spice , etc beside , the naturali inhabitant of the foresay place , they have , even in those day , traffic with Jew , Turk , and other foreigner . neither do our merchant only employ their own english ship before mention , but sundry stranger also : as namely , candiot , raguseans , sicilian , Genouezes , venetian galliass , spanish and Portugal ship . all which particular do most evident appear out of certain ancient ligier book of the R. W. sir William lock mercer of London , of sir William Bowyer Aiderman of London , of master John Gresham , and of other ; which i Richard Hakluyt have diligent peruse and copy out . and here for authority sake i do annex , as a thing not impertinent to this purpose , a letter of king Henry the eight , unto don John the three , king of Portugal . a letter of the king of England Henry the eight , to John king of Portugal , for a Portugal ship with the good of John Gresham and Wil. Locke with other , unlade in Portugal from Chio. erenissimo principi , domino Joanni dei gratia regi portugalliae , and Algarbiorum citra and ultra mare in Africa , ac domino Guineas , and conquistae , navigationis , and commercii tethiopiae , Arabiae , Persiae , atque Indiae , etc fratri , and amico nostro charissimo . Henricus dei gratia , rex angliae and Francias , fidei defensor , ac dominus hiberniae , serenissimo principi ; 63 A.D. 1531 - 