the king of Spain his letter to the lieutenant , for the place of John fox in the office of a gunner . to the illustrious prince , Vespasian Gonsaga Colonna , our lieutenant and captain generali of our realm of Valentia . Having consideration , that John fox Englishman have serve we , and be one of the most principali , which take away from the Turk a certain galley , which they have bring to Tarento , wherein be two hundred , fifty , and eight christian captive : we licence he to practise , and give he the office of a gunner , and have ordain , that he go to our say realm , there to serve in the say office in the galley , which by our commandment be late make . and we do command , that you cause to be pay to he eight ducat pay a month , for the time that he shall serve in the say galley as a gunner , or till we can otherwise provide for he , the say eight ducat monthly of the money which be already of our provision , present and to come , and to have regard of those which come with he . from escuriall the ten of August , 1577. i the king . Juan deal gado . and under that a confirmation of the council . the renew and increase of a ancient and commodious trade unto diverse place in the Levant sea , and to the chief part of all the great turk dominion , by the mean of the right worsh . citizen sir Edward Osburne Aiderman , and m. Richard staper merchant of London . his trade into the Levant ( as be before mention , page 96 of this present volume , whereunto i refer the reader ) be very usual and much frequent from the year of our lord 1511 , till the year 1534 , and afterward also , though not so common , 167 the voyage of John wight , and Joseph Clements to Constantinople . the first voyage of m. William har-borne to Constantinople . the english voyage until the year 1550 , when as the bark Aucher under the conduct of m. Roger Bodenham make a prosperous voyage unto Sicilia , Candia , Sio , and other place within the Levant . since which time the foresay trade ( notwithstanding the grand signior ample privilege grant to m. Anthony Jenkenson 1553 , and the strong and weighty reason of Gaspar Campion for that purpose ) be utter discontinue , and in manner quite forget , as if it have never be , for the space of 20 year and more . howbeit the discreet and worthy citizen sir Edward Osborne and m. Richard staper serious consider what benefit may grow to the common wealth by renew of the foresay discontinue trade , to the enlarge of her majesty custom , the further of navigation , the vent of diverse generali commodity of this realm , and the enrich of the city of London , determine to use some effectual ! mean for the reestablish and augment thereof . wherefore about the year 1575 then foresaid R. W. merchant at their charge and expense send John wight and Joseph Clements by the way of Poland to Constantinople , where the say Joseph remain 18 month to procure a safe conduct from the grand signior , for m. William Harborne , than factor for sir Edward Osborne , to have free access into his highness dominion , and obtain the same . which business after two year chargeable travel and suit be accomplish , the say m. Harborne the first of July 1578 depart from London by the sea to Hamburgh , and thence accompany with Joseph Clements his guide and a servant , he travail to Leopolis in Poland , and then apparel himself , his guide , and his servant after the turkish fashion ( have first obtain the king of Poland his safe conduct to pass at Camienijecz the frontier town of his dominion next unto Turkey ) by good mean he obtain favour of one Acmet Chaus the Turks ambassador then in Poland , and ready to return to Constantinople , to be receive into his come - 168 panie and carovan . and so the four of September 1578 he depart with the say acmet from Leopolis in Poland , and travel through Moldavia , Valachia , Bulgaria , and Romania , gratify the voiavode with certain courtesy , he arrive at Constantinople the 28 of October next ensue . where he behave himself so wise and discreet , that within few month after he obtain not only the great Turk large and ample privilege for himself , and the two worshipful person aforesaid , but also procure his honourable and friendly letter unto her majesty in manner follow . the letter send from the imperiali musulmanlike highness of zuldan Murad can , to the sacred regal majesty of Elizabeth queen of England , the fifteen of march 1579 , contain the grant of the first privilege . n greatness and glory most renown Elizabeth , most sacred queen , and noble prince of the most mighty worshipper of Jesus , most wise governor of the cause and affair of the people and family of Nazareth , cloud of most pleasant rain , and sweet fountain of nobleness and virtue , lady and heir of the perpetuali happiness and glory of the noble realm of England ( who all sort seek unto and submit themselves ) we wish most prosperous success and happy end to all your action , and do offer unto you such pleasure and courtesy as be worthy of our mutual and eternal familiarity : thus end ( as best beseem we ) our former salutation . in most friendly manner we give you to understand , that a certain man have come unto we in the name of your most excellent regal majesty , commend unto we from you all kindness , courtesy and friendly office on your part , and do humble require that our Imperiali 169 A.D. 1579 - 