a discourse of the trade to Chio , in the year 1569. make by Gaspar Campion , unto master Michael lock , and unto master William winter , as by his letter unto they both shall appear . write the 14. of February . orshipfull sir , etc as these day past 1569. i speak unto you about the procurement of a safe conduct from the great Turk , for a trade to Chio : the way and manner how it may be obtain with great ease shall plain appear unto you in the line follow . sir , you shall under stand that the island of Chio in time pass have be a signiory or lordship of it self , and do belong unto the genoese . there be 24. of they that govern the island which be call maunese . but in continuance of time the Turk wax so strong and mighty , that they , consider they be not able to keep it , unless they shall become his tributary , because the island have no corn , nor any kind of victual to sustain themselves , but only that which must of necessity come out of the Turk dominion , and the say island be enclose with the turk round about , and but 12. mile from the Turks continent , therefore the say genoese do compound and agree to be the Turk tributary , and to pay he 14000. thousand ducat yearly . always provide , that they shall keep their law both spirituali and temporali , as they do when the hand [ ii i . 115. ] be in their own hand . thus he grant they their privilege , which they enjoy for many year , so that all stranger , and also many english man do trade thither of long continuance , and go and come in safety . the prince in this mean time , the prince Pedro Doria ( be a Pedro Doria Genouois ) become a captain to serve the emperor with u °f 30 or 40 galley against the Turk . and since that time diverse other captain belong to Genoa have be in emperor . the mauneses put out of the hand of Chio by the Turk . the custom throughout all turquoise be ten in every hundred . English man do buy more commodity of Chio then any other nation . the english voyage the service of king Philip against the Turk . Moreover , whensoever the Turk make out any army , he perceive that no nation do he more hurt than those genouois , who be his tributary . likewise at the Turk siege of Malta , before which place he lie a great while , with loss of his man , and also of his galley , he find none so troublesome unto his force , as one Juanette Doria a genouois , and diverse other of the hand of Chio , who be his tributary . at which sight , he take such displeasure against they of Chio , that he send certain of his galley to the hand , for to seize upon all the good of the 24 maunese , and to turn they with their wife and child out of the hand , but they will let none other depart , because the hand shall not be unpeople . so that now the Turk have send one of his chief man to rule there : whereby now it will be more easy for we to obtain our safeconduct then ever it be before . for if the townsman of Chio do know that we will trade thither ( as we do in time past ) they themselves , and also the customer ( for the Turk in all his dominion do rend his custom ) will be the chief procurer of this our safeconduct for his own gain : which be no small matter : for we can pay no less than ten in the hundred throughout the turk whole dominion . insomuch , that if one of our ship shall go thither , it will be for the customer profit 4000 ducat at least , whereas if we shall not trade thither , he shall lose so much . also the burgess , and the common people will be very glad of our trade there , for the Communally do get more by our countryman than they do by any other nation whatsoever : for we do use to buy many of their silk quilt , and of their scamato and dimite , that the poor people make in that town , more than any other nation , so that we will not so glad trade , but the people of the country will be twice so willing . wherefore they themselves will be a mean unto their governor , by their petition to bring this trade to pass : give he to understand that of 112 all nation in the world we do he least hurt , and that we may do his country great good in consume those commodity which his country people make . Furthermore , it be far more requisite that we shall carry our own commodity , than to suffer a stranger to carry they thither , for that we can afford they better cheap than a stranger can . 1 write not this by hearsay of other man , but of my own experience , for i have trade in the country above this 30 year , and have be marry in the town of Chio full 24 year , so that you may assure yourself that i will write nothing but truth . now i will declare unto you the ware and commodity that be in the country near about Chio. there be great store of very good gall , the best sort whereof be sell in sundrycom-England five shilling dear than any other country ‘ gall . there be also cotton wool , tan hide , hide in the hair , wax , chamlet , mocayare , grogerams , silk of diverse country , cordovan skin tan white , to be make black , of they great quantity , and also course wool to make bed . the naturali commodity grow in the hand it self be silk raw , and mastic . of these commodity there be lade yearly ten or twelve great ship of Genoa , beside five or six that do belong to the town of Chio , which ship be fraught for Genoa , Messina , and Ancona . and now that the mauneses and the chief merchant of Genoa be banish , the trade be clean lose , by reason whereof merchandise must now of necessity be better cheap than they have be in time past . but yet when all those ship do trade to the country , and also our ship , we never have less than three kintal of gall for a carsie , and in England we sell they for 35 and 36 shilling the hundred . and whereas now they be bring by the venetian , they sell they unto we for three pound ten shilling , and four pound the hundred . also we have three kintal of cotton wool for a carsie , and sell the wool in England for 50 shilling or 3 pound at the most , whereas now the italian fall the same to we five 113 h diverse place where we may have sweet tile fir our clothing far cheap than out of Spain . the english voyage for 4 pound 10 shilling and 5 pound the hundred . in like manner chamlet , whereas we have three piece , and of the best sort two and a half for a carsie , and can not sell they above 20 shilling and 22 shilling the piece , they sell they for 30 and 3 5 shilling the piece . also grogerams , where we have of the best , two piece and a half for a carsie , they sell they for four shilling and four shilling and six penny the yard . carpet the small sort which serve for cupboard , we have three for a carsie : whereas we at the most can not sell they but for 20 shilling the piece , they sell they for 35 shilling the piece . and so all other commodity that the venetian do bring , they sell they to we for the three part more gain than we our self in those day that we trade in those part . likewise the barrel of oil that they bring from Candia , we never can sell they above four noble the barrel ! , where they sell they always for 50 shilling and 3 pound the barrel . what great pity be this , that we shall lose so good a trade , and may have it in our own hand , and be better welcome to that country then the venetian . Moreover , the venetian come very little to Chio , for their most trade be into Alexandria . and for to assure you that we have these commodity in barter of our carsy , look into your father book , and the book of sir John Gresham , and his brethren , and you shall find what i have say to be true . also you know , that we be force to seek oil out of Spain , and that for these many year they have be sell for 25 pound and 30 pound the ton : whereas , if we can obtain the foresay safeconduct from the Turk , there be diverse place in his dominion , where we may lade 500 ton , at 5 pound sterling the ton . the place be Modon , and Coron , which be but twelve mile distant the one from the other , and do stand in our way to Chio , as you may plain see by the card also these be place where we may utter our own commodity , and not only these two place , 114 but many other , where we may have oil , and be better use than we be in Spain , where we pay very dear , and also be very evil entreat many way , as to you be not unknown . so that by these mean ( if the merchant will ) we may be ease , and have such a trade as the like be not in Christendom . now , as for get they safeconduct , if i be but able to spend one hundred pound by the year , i will be bind to lose it , if that i do not obtain the foresay safeconduct . for i know that if the inhabitant of Chio do but think that we will trade thither again , they at their own cost will procure to we a safeconduct , without any penny of charge to the merchant . so that if the merchant will but bear my charge to solicit the cause , i will undertake it my self . wherefore i pray you speak to m. winter and the other merchant , that this matter may take effect . and let i have your answer herein assoon as convenient you may , for that the time of the year draw nigh that this business must be do . thus i commit you to God , and rest always you to command . you as your servant Gaspar Campion . to the worshipful m. William winter . t may please your worship to understand , that as concern the voyage to Chio , what great profit will be get , both for merchant , and also for owner of ship ( as it be well know in those day when the Matthew Gonson , the Trinity Fitzwilliams , and the saviour of Bristol , with diverse other ship which trade thither yearly , and make their voyage in ten or twelve month , and the long in a year ) m. Francis Lambert , m. John brook , and m. Drauer can true inform you hereof at large . and by reason that we have not trade into those part these many year , and the Turk be grow mighty , whereby our ship do not trade as ir5 