use traffic in any place or part whatsoever , subject to the government of that empire , to appoint the place of their traffic , in what haven or city it shall please he , and to prohibit they from all other place , and wheresoever their traffic be appoint to be keep , there to make and create consul or governor , to enact law and statute , by the virtue and tenor whereof all our foresay subject , and every one of they , shall both public and private use and behave themselves , to correct and punish the breaker of those law : and last of all , to do and fulfil all and singular thing whatsoever , which shall seem requisite and convenient for the honest and orderly government of our say subject , and of the manner of their traffic in those part . promise assure , and in the word of a prince , that whatsoever shall be do of our say orator and agent , in all , or in any of the premise , not repugnant and contrary to our law , shall be accept , ratify , and confirm by we . in witness whereof , we have cause these our letter to be make patent , and our seal thereunto to be appense . give at our castle of Windsor , the 20. day of November , in the year of Christ 1582. and of our reign the 24. the queen letter to the great Turk 1582. write in commendation of master hareborne , when he be send ambassador . LIZABETH etc augustissimo invic-tissim6que principi , etc ciim and postu - latum nostrum Caesarea vestra majestas , anno salvatoris nostri Jesus 1580. pacis foedus nobiscum pepigerit , conjunctum cum liberalissima privilegiorum quorun-dam concession , quorum beneficio sub - diti nostri cum omni securitate tutissime liberrim6que ad universas and singulas Musulmanici imperii vestri part terra marique proficisci , in iisque commercii exercendi gratia , 224 negotiari , habitare , manner , exind^que ire and redire come volent queant , ab iis qui sub Caesarea vestra majestate in magistratu sunt ubique locorum protegendi defendendique sine ulla vel corporum , vel bonorum laesion : nos tantae concessionis beneficium gratum acceptiimque habentes , quantum in nobis est , approbamus confirmamusque : pollicentes in verbo regio , quod nos eandem pacem sine ulla violation sartam tectamque conservabimus : facie-miisque ut subditi nostri privilegiorum sibi indultorum concession ita utantur , ut Caesaream vestram majestatem magnificentissimae svae liberalitatis nunquam poenitere queat . quoniam autem concessionis huius virtus in usu potius quam verbis , majestatis utriiisque nostrum sententia , ponenda videtur , voluimus hunc mandatarium virum guilielmum hareborne , ex satellitibus quibus ad corporis nostri tutelam utimur unum , virum compluribus virtutibus ornatum , ad Caesaream vestram majestatem ablegare , qui tum nomine nostro vobis gratias ageret , tum ut ejus opera uteremur ad eam subditorum nostrorum mercimoniorum rationem stabiliendam , tam in imperiali vestra civitate Constantinopoli , quam aliis imperii vestri Musulmanici locis , quae ex praescripto privilegiorum , Caesareae vestrae majestatis benignitate , conceditur , and ex usu subditorum utriiisque nostrum erit . ad quam remember quoniam opus illi erit Caesareae vestrae majestatis , authori-tate , summa contention ab eadem rogamus , velit id agere apud omnes qui sub se in magistratu sunt , ut quibuscunque poterunt melioribus modis huic nostro mandatario in Caesareae vestra : majestatis placito exequendo , adjutores sint and esse velint . Ei enim hanc curam demandavimus , in qua qualm fidem svam sit honesti liberaturus erga majestatem utriusque nostrum neutiquam dubitamus : cvi etiam , ut in omnibus sint obtemperante nostri subditi , quantum Caesareae vestrae majestatis concessio patitur , volumus . praeterea , cum praeclarus vir Mustafa sacrae Caesareae vestrae majestatis Musulmannorum interpres egregiam navarit operam ut hoc inter nos foedus fieret , rogamus summopere ut in nostram gratiam eum in five 225 p A.D. 1582. Mustafa interpres . Mustafaracarum ordinem Caesarea vestra majestas recipere dignetur . si in his aliisque omnibus honestis causis hic noster agens subdi tique nostri Imperatoriae vestrae sublimitatis aequanimitatem senserint , florebit inter have gentes nobile commercium , and nos omnibus officiis huic vestrae majestatis favori and benevolentiae ( si ulla ratione rebus vestris commodare poterimus ) respondere libentissime semper paratae erimus . Deus optimus maximus mundi opifex , etc the same in english . ELizabeth by the grace of the most mighty God and only creator of heaven and earth , of England , France , and Ireland queen , the most invincible and most mighty defender of the christian faith against all kind of idolatry of all that live among the Christians and false profess the name of Christ , unto the most imperiali and most invincible prince , sultan Murad can , the most mighty ruler of the kingdom of turquoise , sole above all , and most sovereign monarch of the east empire , greeting . whereas at our request your Imperiali majesty in the year of our saviour Jesus 1580. have enter into a league of peace with we , whereunto be unite a most large sc bountiful grant of certain privilege , by benefit whereof our subject may with all securi tie most safe and free travel ! by sea and land into all and singular part of your musulmanlike empire , and in the same exercise the trade of merchandise , may traffic , dwell , remain , depart from thence , and return thither at their pleasure , and in all place be maintain and defend from all damage of body and good , by such as be in authority under your imperiali majesty : we thankful and grateful receive the benefit of so great a privilege , as much as in we lie do approve and confirm the same , promise in the word of a prince , that we will keep the say league perfect and inviolable , and will cause our subject so to use the grant of the 226 privilege give unto they , as your Imperiali majesty shall never have occasion to repent you of your most princely liberality . and because the force of this grant , in the judgement of both our majesty , seem rather to consist in the use thereof , then in the word , we think good to send unto your imperiali majesty this our ambassador William hareborne , one of the esquire of m-our body , which both on our behalf shall yield thank Harebo ™ e unto your majesty , and also that we may use his good sa < qor t0 the endeavour for the establish of such order in our subject Turk . trade of merchandise , as well in your imperiali city of Constantinople , as in other place of your musulmanlike empire , as accord to the prescript of the privilege be grant by your princely majesty goodness , and shall be for they . benefit e of both our subject . for performance whereof , because he stand in need of your Imperiali majesty authority , we earnest beseech the same , that you will cause all those which bee in authority under your highness , by all their best mean to aid and assist this our ambassador in execute this your Imperiali majesty pleasure , for unto he we have commit this charge : wherein how honest he will discharge his credit towards both our majesty , i no whit stand in doubt : to who also our pleasure be , that all our subject shall be obedient , as far as the grant of your imperiali majesty do permit . Moreover , whereas request fir that worthy personage Mustafa , your Imperiali majesty the prefer interpretor , have take speciali pain for the procure £ we of this league between we , we earnest beseech you that for our sake your imperiali majesty will vouchsafe to advance he unto the degree of the Mustafaraks or chief pensioner . if in these and in all other honest cause , our aforesaid agent and our subject shall find your Imperiali highness favour , a noble traffic will flourish between these nation , and we ( if by any way we may stand your state in stead ) will always most willing be ready to requite this your majesty favour and good will with all kind of good office . almighty 227 God the maker of the world preserve and keep your Imperiali majesty , etc a letter of the queen majesty to Alli bassa the Turk high admiral , send by her ambassador m. William hareborne , and deliver unto he aboard his galley in the arsenal . LIZABETHA , etc illustrissimo viro Alli Bassa , magni Musulmanici Cassaris ad-miralio , salutem and successus fortunatos . Non ignotum esse excellentiae vestrae arbitramur , privilegia quasdam a potentissime Caesare Musulmanico domino vestro clementissime subditis nostris Anglicis concessa esse , ut illis liceat in omnibus imperii musulmanici provinciis tuto and securi manner ac negotiari : non [ ii i . 160. ] aliter quam hoc ipsum Francis , Polonis , venetis , Germanis antea indultum est . qua ex causa nos gulielmum hareborne nobis dilectum , and corporis custodibus unum , ac multis nominibus ornatum ad inclytam constantino-polis civitatem pro agent misimus : qui ex privilegiorum praedictorum praescripto nostras and subditorum nostrorum res in illis locis constitueret . facere igitur non potuimus , quin excellentiae vestrae guilielmum hunc , pro ea qua apud magnum caesarem poll authoritate , commendaremus : petentes summopere ut tuto in mari sine Classiariorum vestrorum violentia , and securi in portibus absque ministrorum rapinis and injuria , tam ipse quam omnes Angli subditi nostri possint versari : uti pro tenore literarum patentium i magno Caesare concessarum illis licere ex illarum conspectione perspicuum esse potest . gratissimum ergo nobis excellentia vestra fecerit , si portuum omnium , alionimque locorum , qui vestrae jurisdictioni parent , custodibus , item classium and navium praefectis omnibus mandare velit , ut guilielmus iste , iliique Angli subditi nostri cum in illorum erunt potestate , amice and 228 