commission to William hareborne a.d. 1582. the queen commission under her great seal , [ n . i . 157. ] to her servant master William hareborne , to be her majesty ambassador or agent , in the part of turquoise . 1582. LIZABETHA , dei optimi maximi , conditoris , and rectoris unici clementia , angliae , francia , and hiberniae regina , verae fidei contra Idololatras falso christi nomen profitentes invicta and potentissima propug-natrix , universis , and singulis praesente have litera visuris , and inspecturis , salutem . cum augustissimus , and invictissimus princeps , zuldan Murad can , Turcici regni dominator potentissimus , imperiique orientis monarcha , foedus , amicitiamque nobiscum percusserit , juraveritque , ( quam nos perpetuis futuris temporibus , quantum in nobis erit , inviolati servare destinamus ) ad eamque magis ornandam , illus-trandamque concesserit idem augustissimus imperator subditis nostris liberam suas merce excercendi rationem in omnibus Musulmanici imperii svi partibus , cum tam ampla privilegiorum concession , quam aliis bonis principibus , sociis , and foederatis nostris largitus est , quorum privilegiorum donationem nos gratam , accepfemque habentes , pari cum animi gratitudine colere certum habemus , deliberatumque , nihil in votis habentes potius , quam bonorum erga nos principum animos benevolos honoratissima mente fovere , promererique : Sciatis , nos de singulari erga nos , obsequiumque nostrum , fide , observantia , prudentia , and dexteritate multiim nobis chari Guilielmi hareborne , e custodibus corporis nostri unius , plurimum confidentes , eum oratorem , Nuntium , procuratorem , and agentem nostrum certum and indubitatum ordinamus , fecimus , and constituimus , per praesente : dante ei , and concedentes potestatem , and authoritatem , nomine nostro , and pro nobis praedictum amicitiae foedus confirmandi , privilegiorum concessionem in manus suas 221 capiendi , ratamque habendi , omnibus and singulis subditis nostris , Musulmanicis oris terrisque negotiantibus , pro majestatis nostras authoritate praecipiendi , mandandique , ut sint in suis commerciis , quamdiu , quoti6sque cum Mansulmanicis versantur , dictorum privilegiorum praescripto obtemperante in omnibus , ac per omnia , ad obsequia tanta amicitia digna se componentes , ac in delinquente in foedus nostrum justitiam exequatur . potestatem , and authoritatem ei damus in omnes , and singulos subdito nostros in quibuscunque and locis , and partibus Musulmanici imperii dominationi subjectis negotiante , constituendi emporiorum suorum sedes in quibus voluerit portubus , and civitatibus , in aliis vetandi , in constitutis autem emporiorum sedibus , consul curandi , leges praeception^sque ferendi , condendique , quarum ex praescripto dicti nostri subditi , and eorum quilibet seize publici , and privatim gerant , eorum violatore corrigendi , castigandique , omnia denique and singula faciendi , perimplendique , quae ad dictorum subditorum nostrorum honestam gubernationem , and commercii exercendi in illis partibus rationem pertinent : promittente bona fide , and in verbo regio , nos ratum , gratum , and firmum habituras , quaecunque dictus orator , and Agens noster , and legibus nostris non abhorrentia in praemissis aut praemissorum aliquo fecerit . in cujus rei testimonium , have litera nostras fieri fecimus patentes , and sigilli nostri impression jussimus muniri . Datum e castro nostro Windesoriae , 20. die mensis novembris , anno Jesus Christi 1582. regni vero nostri , vicesimo quarto . the same in english . ELizabeth , by the clemency of the most good and most great God , the only creator and governor of all thing , queen of England , France , and Ireland , invincible , and most mighty defender of the true faith , against all idolater false profess the name of Christ , to all and singular person , to who sight and view these our present letter may come , greeting . whereas the 222 commission to William hareborne o . 1582. most renown , and most invincible prince zuldan Murad can , the most mighty governor of the kingdom of turquoise , and monarch of the east empire , have enter into league and friendship with we , ( which we for our part , as much as lie in we , do purpose solemn , and inviolable to keep in all time to come ) and whereas for the better countenance and authorize of the same , the foresay renown emperor have grant unto our subject free liberty of traffic , in all the part of his sacred empire , with as ample and large a grant of privilege , as be give to other good prince our neighbour and confederate , the grant of which privilege , we take very thankful , and acceptable , be certain , and thorough determine to keep and maintain , with the like goodness and courtesy of mind , desire nothing more , than with a honourable respect to nourish , and deserve the benevolent affection of good prince towards we : know you , that we think well , and have good [ ii i . 158. ] confidence in the singular trustiness , obedience , wisdom , and disposition of our well-beloved servant William hareborne , one of the esquire of our body , towards we , and our service , do by these present , make , ordain and constitute he our true and undoubted orator , messenger , Deputie , and agent . give and grant unto he power and authority , in our name , and for we , to confirm the foresay league of friendship , to take into his hand , and to ratify the grant of the privilege , and to command , and enjoin by the authority of our majesty , all and singular our subject trade and deal in any of the coast and kingdom of that empire , that as long as they remain in traffic with his subject , they be obedient to the prescription and order of the foresay privilege , apply themselves in all thing , and through all thing , to such duty and service as appertain to so great a league and friendship , and the offender against this our league to receive justice , and punishment accord . we further give unto he power and authority over all and singular our subject , deal , and 223 use traffic in any place or part whatsoever , subject to the government of that empire , to appoint the place of their traffic , in what haven or city it shall please he , and to prohibit they from all other place , and wheresoever their traffic be appoint to be keep , there to make and create consul or governor , to enact law and statute , by the virtue and tenor whereof all our foresay subject , and every one of they , shall both public and private use and behave themselves , to correct and punish the breaker of those law : and last of all , to do and fulfil all and singular thing whatsoever , which shall seem requisite and convenient for the honest and orderly government of our say subject , and of the manner of their traffic in those part . promise assure , and in the word of a prince , that whatsoever shall be do of our say orator and agent , in all , or in any of the premise , not repugnant and contrary to our law , shall be accept , ratify , and confirm by we . in witness whereof , we have cause these our letter to be make patent , and our seal thereunto to be appense . give at our castle of Windsor , the 20. day of November , in the year of Christ 1582. and of our reign the 24. the queen letter to the great Turk 1582. write in commendation of master hareborne , when he be send ambassador . LIZABETH etc augustissimo invic-tissim6que principi , etc ciim and postu - latum nostrum Caesarea vestra majestas , anno salvatoris nostri Jesus 1580. pacis foedus nobiscum pepigerit , conjunctum cum liberalissima privilegiorum quorun-dam concession , quorum beneficio sub - diti nostri cum omni securitate tutissime liberrim6que ad universas and singulas Musulmanici imperii vestri part terra marique proficisci , in iisque commercii exercendi gratia , 224 