panie and carovan . and so the four of September 1578 he depart with the say acmet from Leopolis in Poland , and travel through Moldavia , Valachia , Bulgaria , and Romania , gratify the voiavode with certain courtesy , he arrive at Constantinople the 28 of October next ensue . where he behave himself so wise and discreet , that within few month after he obtain not only the great Turk large and ample privilege for himself , and the two worshipful person aforesaid , but also procure his honourable and friendly letter unto her majesty in manner follow . the letter send from the imperiali musulmanlike highness of zuldan Murad can , to the sacred regal majesty of Elizabeth queen of England , the fifteen of march 1579 , contain the grant of the first privilege . n greatness and glory most renown Elizabeth , most sacred queen , and noble prince of the most mighty worshipper of Jesus , most wise governor of the cause and affair of the people and family of Nazareth , cloud of most pleasant rain , and sweet fountain of nobleness and virtue , lady and heir of the perpetuali happiness and glory of the noble realm of England ( who all sort seek unto and submit themselves ) we wish most prosperous success and happy end to all your action , and do offer unto you such pleasure and courtesy as be worthy of our mutual and eternal familiarity : thus end ( as best beseem we ) our former salutation . in most friendly manner we give you to understand , that a certain man have come unto we in the name of your most excellent regal majesty , commend unto we from you all kindness , courtesy and friendly office on your part , and do humble require that our Imperiali 169 highness will vouchsafe to give leave and liberty to | | these two he and unto two two other merchant of your kingdom , to resort hither and return again , and that by way of ^andm^vh - traffic they may be suffer to trade hither with their ard staper . good and merchandize to our Imperiali dominion , and in like sort to make their return . our stately court and country have be ever open for the access both of our enemy and friend . but because we be inform that your most excellent regal majesty do abound with good will , humani tie , and all kind of love affection towards we , so much the rather shall the same our country be always open to such of your subject , as by way of merchandise shall trade hither : and we will never fail to aid and succour any of they that be or shall be willing to esteem of our friendship , favour , and assistance : but will reckon it some part of our duty to gratify they by all good mean . and forasmuch as our Imperiali highness be give to understand that your most excellent regal majesty do excel in bounty and courtesy , we therefore have send out our Imperiali commandment to all our king , judge , and traveller by sea , ' to all our captain and voluntary seafaring man , all condemn person , and officer of port and custom , straight charge and command they , that such foresay person as shall resort hither by [ ii i . 138.3 sea from the realm of England , either with great or small vessel to trade by way of merchandise , may lawful come to our imperiali dominion , and free return home again , and that no man shall dare to molest or trouble they . and if in like sort they shall come into our dominion by land , either on foot or on horseback , no man shall at any time withstand or hinder they : but as our familiar and confederate , the french , venetian , | | he call polonians , and the two king of Germany , with diverse other the germane our neighbour about we , have liberty to come hither , and emperor but ° t ’ king of her - to return again into their own country , in like sort many . the merchant of your most excellent regal majesty kingdom shall have safe conduct and leave to repair 170 hither to our Imperiali dominion , and so to return again into their own country : straight charge that they be suffer to use and trade all kind of merchandise as any other Christians do , without let or disturbance of any . therefore when these our Imperiali letter shall be bring to your most excellent regal majesty , it shall be meet , accord to our benevolence , humanity , and familiarity towards your most excellent majesty , that you likewise bethink your self of your like benevolence , humanity and friendship towards we , to open the gate thereof unto we , and to nourish by all good mean this kindness and friendship : and that like liberty may be grant by your highness to our subject and merchant to come with their merchandize to your dominion , either by sea with their ship , or by land with their wagon or horse , and to return home again : and that your most excellent regal majesty do always declare your humanity , good will , and friendship towards we , and always keep open the door thereof unto we . the Turk demandethlike privilege for his subject in the queen dominion . give at our city of Constantinople the fifteen day of march , and in the year of our most holy prophet Mahomet two 987. two at * e year 1579. the answer of her majesty to the aforesaid letter of the great Turk , send the 25 of October 1579 , in the prudence of London by master Richard Stanley . LIZABETHA dei ter maximi , and unici cceli terraeque Conditoris gratia , angliae , francia and hiberniae regina , fidei Christianae contra omnes omnium inter christianos degentium , and christi nomen falso profitentium Idololatrias invictissima and potentissima defensatrix , augus tissimo , invictissimoque principi sultan Miirad can , Turcici regni dominatori potentissimo , imperiique 171 