term of seven year then next follow . willing , and straight command , and charge all and singular our admiral , viceadmiral , justice , major , sheriff , escheater , constable , bailiff , and all and singular our other officer , minister , liege man , and subject whatsoever , to be aid , favour , help , and assist unto the say governor , and company , and their successor , and to their deputy , officer , servant , assign , and minister , and every of they , in execute and enjoy the premise , as well on land as on sea , from time to time , and at all time when you , or any of you , shall be thereunto require , any statute , act , ordinance , proviso , proclamation , or restraint heretofore have , make , set forth , ordain , or provide , or any other matter , cause or thing to the contrary , in any wise notwithstanding . in witness whereof we have cause these our letter to be make patent , witness our self , at Westminster , the 11. day of September , in the 23. year of our reign . the first voyage or journey , make by master Laurence Aldersey , merchant of London , to the city of Jerusalem , and Tripoli , etc in the year 1581. pen and set down by himself . depart from London the first day of April , in the year of our lord 1581 , pass through the nether-land and up the river Rhine by Colen , and other city of Germany . and upon Thursday , the third day of May , i come to Augusta , where i deliver the letter i have to master Jenise , and master Castler , who i find very willing to pleasure i , in any thing that i can or will reasonable demand . he first furnish i with a horse to Venice , for my money , and then take i with he a walk , to show i the ci tie , for that i have a day 202 to tarry there , for he that be to be my guide . he the descrip-shewed i first the statehouse , which be very fair , and . beautiful : than he bring i to the fine garden , and orchard , that ever i see in my life : for there be in it a place for canary bird , as large as a fair chamber , trim with wire both above and beneath , with fine little branch of tree , for they to sit in , which be full of those canary bird . there be such a other for turtle dove : also there be two pigeon house joining to they , have in they store of turtle dove , and pigeon . in the same garden also be six or seven fishpond , all rail about , and full of very good fish . also , seven or eight fine fountain , or water spring , of diverse fashion : as for fruit , there want none of all sort , as orange , fig , raisin , walnut , grape , beside apple , pear , fillbird , small nut , and such other fruit , as we have in England . then do he bring i to the water tower of the same city , that by a sleight and devise have the water bring up as high , as any church in the town , and to tell you the strange devise of all , it pass my capacity . than he bring i to another fair garden , call the shooter hose , where be butt for the long bow , the cross bow , the stone bow , the long piece , and for diverse other exercise more . after this , we walk about the wall of the city , where be a great , broad , and deep ditch , upon one side of the town , so full of fish , as ever i see any pond in my life , and it be reserve only for the state of the city . and upon the other side of the city be also a deep place all green , wherein deer be keep , and when it please the state to hunt for their pleasure , thither they resort , and have their course with grayhound , which be keep for that purpose . the five of May , i depart from Augusta towards Venice . Venice , and come thither upon Whitsunday , the thirteenth of the same month . it be needless to speak of the height of the mountain that i pass over , and 203 [ ii i . i 5 i . ] the number of i ewe in Venice . the english voyage of the danger thereof , it be so well know already to the world : the heighth of they be marvelous , and i be the space of six day in pass they . i come to Venice at the time of a fair , which last fourteen day , wherein i see very many , and fair show of ware . i come thither too short for the first passage , which go away from Venice about the seven or eight of may , and with they about three score pilgrim , which ship be cast away at a town call Estria , two mile from Venice , and all the man in she , save thirty , or thereabouts , lose . within eight day after fell corpus christi day , which be a day among they of procession , in which be show the plate and treasure of Venice , which be esteem to be worth two million of pound , but i do not account it worth half a quarter of that money , except there be more than i see . to speak of the sumptuousness of the cope and vestment of the church , i leave , but the truth be , they be very sumptuous , many of they set all over with pearl , and make of cloth of gold . and for the Jesuit , i think there be as many at Venice , as there be in Colen . the number of Jewesis there think to be 1000 , who dwell in a certain place of the city , and have also a place , to which they resort to pray , which be call the Jew synagogue . they all , and their offering use to wear red cap , ( for so they be command ) because they may thereby be know from other man . for my further knowledge of these people , i go into their synagogue upon a Saturday , which be their sabbath day : and i find they in their service or prayer , very devout : they receive the five book of Moses , and honour they by carry they about their church , as the papist do their cross . their synagogue be in form round , and the people sit round about it , and in the midst , there be a place for he that read to the rest : as for their apparel , all of they wear a large white lawn over their 204 garment , which reach from their head , down to the ground . the psalm they sing as we do , have no image , nor use any manner of idolatry : their error be , that they believe not in Christ , nor yet receive the new testament . this city of Venice be very fair , and great to be commend , wherein be good order for all thing : and also it be very strong and populous : it stand upon the main sea , and have many island about it , that belong to it . to tell you of the duke of Venice , and of the signiory : there be one choose that ever bear the name of a duke , but in truth he be but servant to the signiory , for of himself he can do little : it be not otherwise with he , then with a priest that be at mass upon a festival day , which put on his golden garment , seem to be a great man , but if any man come unto he , and crave some friendship at his hand , he will say , you must go to the master of the parish , for i can not pleasure you , otherwise then by prefer of your suit : and so it be with the duke of Venice , if any man have a suit , come to he , and make his complaint , and deliver his supplication , it be not in he to help he , but he will tell he , you must come this day , or that day , and then i will prefer your suit to the signiory , and do you the best friendship that i may . Furthermore , if any man bring a letter unto he , he may not open it , but in the presence of the signiory , and they be to see it first , which be read , perhaps they will deliver it to he , perhaps not . of the signiory there be about three hundred , and about fourty of the privy counsel of Venice , who usual be array in gown of crimson satin , or crimson damask , when they sit in counsel . in the city of Venice , no man may wear a weapon , except he be a soldier for the signiory , or a scholar of Padua , or a gentleman of great countenance , and yet he may not do that without licence . 205 the excess of as for the woman of Venice , they be rather monster , the woman of then woman . every shoemaker or tailor wife will Venice . have a gown of silk , and one to carry up her train , wear their shoe very near half a yard high from the ground : if a stranger meet one of they , he will sure think by the state that she go with , that he meet a lady . i depart from this city of Venice , upon midsummer day , be the four and twenty of June , and think that the ship will the next day depart , i stay , and lie a shippeboord all night , and we be make believe from time to time , that we shall this day , and that day depart , but we tarry still , till than his embark - fourteenth of July , and then with scant wind we set ing at Venice say } ej anj sail that day and that night , not above or erusaem . miies . anJ upon the sixteen day at night , the wind turn flat contrary , so that the master know not what to do : and about the five hour of the night , which we reckon to be about one of the clock after midnight , the pilot descry a sail , and at last perceive it to be a galley of the Turk , whereupon we be in great fear . the master be a wise fellow , and a good sailor , begin to devise how to escape the danger , and to loose little of our way : and while both he , and all of we be in our dump , God send we a merry gale of wind , that we run threescore and ten league before it be twelve a clock the next day , and in six day after we be seven league past Zante . and upon Monday morning , be the three and twenty of the same month , we come in the sight of Candia which day the wind come contrary , with great blast , and storm , until the eight and twenty of the same month : in which time , the mariner cry out upon i , because i be a english man , and say , i be no good christian , and wish that i be in the midst of the sea , say , that they , and the ship , be the worse for i . i answer , true it may well be , for i think my self the 206 worst creature in the world , and consider you your self also , as i do my self , and then use your discretion . the friar preach , and the sermon be do , i be demand whether i do understand he : i answer , yea , and tell the friar himself , thus you say in your sermon , that we be not all good Christians , or else it be not possible for we to have such weather : to which i answer , be you well assure , that we be not indeed all good Christians , for there be in the [ ii i . 152. ] ship some that hold very unchristian opinion : so for that time i satisfy he , although ( they say ) that i will not see , when they say the procession , and honour their image , and pray to our lady , and saint mark . there be also a gentleman , a italian , which be a passenger in the ship , and he tell i what they say of i , because i will not sing , salve Regina , and have Maria , as they do : i tell they , that they that pray to so many , or seek help of any other , then of God the father , or of Jesus Christ his only son , go a wrong way to work , and rob God of his honour , and wrought their own destruction . all this be tell the friar , but i hear nothing of it in three day after : and then at evening prayer , they send the purser about with the image of our lady to every one to kiss , and i perceive it go another way from he , and will not see it : yet at last he fetch his course about , so that he come to i , and offer it to i as he do to other , but i refuse it : whereupon there be a great stir : the patron and all the friar be tell of it , and every one say i be a lutheran , and so call i : but two of the friar that be of great authority , seem to bear i better good will then the rest , and travel to the patron in my behalf , and make all well again . the second day of August we arrive in Cyprus , at Cyprus . a town call missagh : the people there be very rude , and like beast , and no better , they eat their meat sit 207 upon the ground , with their leg a cross like tailor , their bed for the most part be hard stone , but yet some of they have fair mattrace to lie upon . Joppa . upon Thursday the eight of August we come to Joppa in a small bark , which we hire betwixt missagh and Selina , and can not be suffer to come on land till noon the next day , and then we be permit by they the bassa of great bassa , who sit upon the top of a hill to see we Joppa . send away , be come on land , we may not enter into any house for victual , but be to content our self with our own provision , and that which we buy to carry with we be take from we . i have a pair of stirrup , which i buy at Venice to serve i in my journey , and try to make they fit for i , when the bassa see i up before the rest of the company , he send one to dismount i , and to strike i , whereupon i turn i to the bassa , and make a long leg , say , grand mercy signior : and after a while we be horse upon little ass , and send away , with about fifty light horseman to be our conduct through the wilderness , call , Deserta foelix , who make we good sport by the way with their pike , gun , and falchion . Rama . that day be saint Laurence day , we come to Rama , which be ten italian mile from Joppa , and there we stay that night , and pay to the captain of the castle every man a chekin , which be seven shilling and two penny sterling . so than we have a new guard of soldier , and leave the other . the house we lodge in at Rama have a door so low to enter into , that i be fain to creep in , as it be upon my knee , and within it be three room to lodge traveller that come that way : there be no bed , except a man buy a mat , and lie it on the ground , that be all the provision , without stool or bench to sit upon . our victual be bring we out of the town , as hen , egg , bread , great store of fruit , as pom-granates , fig , grape , oringe , and such like , and drink we draw out of the well . the town it self 208 1581-is so ruinate , that i take it rather to be a heap of stone than a town . then the next morning we think to have go away , but we can not be permit that day , so we stay there till two of the clock the next morning , and then with a fresh guard of soldier we depart towards Jerusalem . we have not rid five english mile , but we be encounter with a great number of the arabian , trope of who stay we , and will not suffer we to pass till they ara~ have somewhat , so it cost we for all our guard above ’ twenty shilling a man betwixt Joppa and Jerusalem . Theise arabian trouble we oftentimes . our truchman that pay the money for we be strike down , and have his head break because he will not give they as much as they ask : and they that shall have rescue both he and we , stand still , and dare do nothing , which be to our cost . be come within sight of Jerusalem , the manner be arrival to kneel down , and give God thanks , that it have “ the please he to bring we to that holy place where he ' himself have be : and there we leave our horse , and go on foot to the town , and be come to the gate , there they take our name , and our father name , and so we be permit to go to our lodging . the governor of the house meet we a mile out of the town , and very courteous bid we all welcome , and bring we to the monastery . the gate of the city be all cover with iron , the entrance into the house of the Christians be a very low and narrow door , bar or plate with iron , and then come we into a very dark entry : the place be a monastery : there we lie , and diet of free cost , we fare reasonable well , the bread and wine be excellent good , the chamber clean , and all the meat [ ii i . 153. ] well serve in , with clean linen . we lay at the monastery two day , Friday and Saturday , and then we go to Bethlem with two or three of the friar of the house with we : in the way thither we see many monument , as : five 209 o the monument in and about Jerusalem . the english voyage the mountain where the angel take up Abacuch by the hair , and bring he to Daniel in the lion den . the fountain of the prophet Jeremie . the place where the wise man meet that go to Bethlem to worship Christ , where be a fountain of stone . be come to Bethlem we see the place where Christ be bear , which be now a chapel with two altar , whereupon they say mass : the place be build with grey marble , and have be beautiful , but now it be partly decay . near thereto be the sepulchre of the innocent slay by Herod , the sepulchre of Paul , of Jerome , and of Eusebius . also a little from this monastery be a place under the ground , where the virgin mary abode with Christ when Herod seek he to destroy he . we stay at Bethlem that night , and the next day we go from thence to the mountain of Judea , which be about eight mile from Jerusalem , where be the ruin of a old mohasterie . in the mid way from the monastery to Jerusalem be the place where John Baptist be bear , be now a old monastery , and cattle keep in it . also a mile from Jerusalem be a place call Inventio sanctae crucis , where the wood be find that make the cross . in the city of Jerusalem we see the hall where Pilate sit in judgement when Christ be condemn , the stair whereof be at room , as they tell we . a little from thence be the house where the be bear . there be also the piscina or fishpool where the sick folk be heal , which be by the wall of Jerusalem . but the pool be now dry . the mount of Calvaria be a great church , and within the door thereof , which be little , and bar with iron , and five great hole in it to look in , like the hole 210 virgin marry of tavern door in London , they sit that be appoint to receive our money with a carpet under they upon a bank of stone , and their leg a cross like tailor : have pay our money , we be permit to go into the church : right against the church door be the grave where Christ be bury , with a great long stone of white marble over it , and rail about , the outside of the sepulchre be very foul , by mean that every man scrape his name and mark upon it , and be ill keep . within the sepulchre be a partition , and in the further part thereof be a place like a altar , where they say mass , and at the door thereof be the stone whereupon the angel sit when he say to marry , he be rise , which stone be also roll to the door of the sepulchre . the altar stone within the sepulchre be of white marble , the place able to contain but four person , right over the sepulchre be a devise or lantern for light , and over that a great lover , such as be in England in ancient house . there be also the chapel of the sepulchre , and in the mid thereof be a canopy as it be of a bed , with a great sort of ostrich egg hang at it , with tassel of silk and lamp . behind the sepulchre be a little chapel for the chaldean and syrian . upon the right hand come into the church be the tomb of Baldwine king of France , and of his son : and in the same place the tomb of mel-chisedech . there be a chapel also in the same church erect to saint Helen , through which we go up to the place where Christ be crucify : the stair be fifty step high , there be two altar in it : before the high altar be the place where the cross stand , the hole whereof be trim about with silver , and the depth of it . be half a man arm deep : the rent also of the mountain be there to be see in the crevice , wherein a man may put his arm . 211 saint Helen chapel . the english voyage upon the other side of the mount of Calvarie be the place where Abraham will have sacrifice his son . where also be a chapel , and the place pave with stone of diverse colour . there be also the house of Annas the high priest , and the olive tree whereunto Christ be bind when he be whip . also the house of Caiphas , and by it the prison where Christ be keep , which be but the room of one man , and have no light but the open of the door . without Jerusalem in the valley of Josaphat be a church under the ground , like to the shroud in Paul , where the sepulchre of the virgin mary be : the stair be very broad , and upon the stair go down be two sepulchre : upon the left hand lie Josaphat , and upon the right hand lie Joachim and Anna , the father and mother of the virgin mary . go out of the valley of Josaphat we come to mount Olivet , where Christ pray unto his father before his death : and there be to be see ( as they tell i ) the water and blood that fall from the eye of Christ . a little high upon the same mount be the place where the apostle sleep , and watch not . at the foot of the mount be the place where Christ be imprison . upon the mountain also be the place where Christ stand when he weep over Jerusalem , and where he ascend into heaven . now have see all these monument , i with my company set from Jerusalem , the 20 day of August , and come again to Joppa the 22 of the same month , where we take ship present for Tripoli , and in four day we come to Mecina the place where the ship lie that come for Tripoli . the city of Tripoli be a mile and a half within the land , so that no ship can come further than Mecina : so that night i come thither , where i lie nine day for passage , and at last we embark our 212 1581. self in a good ship of Venice call the new nave Ragasona . we enter the ship the second of September , the four we set sail , the seven we come to Selina , which be 140 mile from Tripoli : there we stay four day to take in more lade , in which mean time i fall sick of a ague , but recover again , i praise God . Selina be a ruinate city , and be destroy by the Selina . Turk ten year past : there be in it now but seventeen person , woman and child . a little from this city of Selina be a salt piece of ground , where the water grow salt that rain upon it . Thursday the 21 of September , we come to missagh , missagh a and there we stay eight day for our lade : the 18 inn of September before we come to missagh , and within ten cmrtts-mile of the town , as we lay at a anchor , because the wind be contrary , there come a great boat full of man to board we , they make a excuse to seek for four man which ( they say ) our ship have take from they about Tripoli , but our captain will not suffer any of they to come in to we . the next morning they come to we again with a great gay , man with 500 man at you least , whereupon our captain send the boat to they with twelve man to know their pleasure : they say they seek for 4 man , and therefore will talk with our master : so than the master mate be send they , and he they keep , and go their way : the next morning they come again with he , and with three other galley , and then will needs speak with our captain , who go to they in a gown of crimson damask , and other very brave apparel , and five or six other gentleman rich apparel also . they have the turk safe conduct , show it to the captain of the galley , and lay it upon his head , charge he to obey it : so with much ado , and with the gift of 100 piece of gold we be quit of they , and have our man again . that day as aforesaid , we come to missagh , and there Candie . 213 stay eight day , and at last depart towards Candie , with a scant wind . the 11 day of October we be board with four galley , man with 1200 man , which also make a sleeveless arrant , and trouble we very much , but our captain passport , and the gift of 100 chekin discharge all . Zante , the 27 of October we pass by Zante with a merry wind , the 29 by Corfu , and the three of November we arrive at Istria , and there we leave our great ship , and take small boat to bring we to Venice . the 9 of November i arrive again at Venice in good health , where i stay nine day , and the 25 of the same month i come to Augusta , and stay there but one day . the 27 of November i set towards Nuremberg where i come the 29 , and there stay till the 9 of December , and be very well entertain of the english merchant there : and the governor of the town send i and my company sixteen gallon of excellent good wine . from thence i go to Frankford , from Frankford to Collen , from Collen to Arnam , from Arnam to utreight , from utreight to dort , from dort to Antwerp , from Antwerp to Flushing , from flush to London , where i arrive upon twelve eve in safety , and give thank to God , have finish my journey to Jerusalem and home again , in the space of nine month and five day . 214 