to three hundred and thirty thousand * , and in sterling english money to fourscore and nineteen thousand pound . the captain of the guard in the mean time go to the great Turk , and return again , than they of the court make obeisance to he , bow down their head , and their hand on their breast , and he in like order resalute they : he be in cloth of silver , he go and come with two or three with he and not more . than we go out at the first gate , and there we be command to stay until the captain of the guard be pass by and all his guard with he , part before he and part behind he , some on horseback and some on foot , but the most part on foot carry on their shoulder the money before mention , and so we pass home . there be in the court during our abode there , for the most part a fool resemble the first , but not naked as be the other at the bassa : but he turn he continual , and cry Hough very hollow . the three of May i see the Turk go to the church : he have more than two hundred and fifty horse before and behind he , but most before he . there be many empty horse that come in no order . many of his nobility be in cloth of gold , but himself in white satin . there do ride behind he six or seven youth , one or two whereof carry water for he to drink as they say . there be many of his guard run before he and behind he , and when he alight , they cry Hough very hollow , as the aforesaid fool . a letter of Mustapha Chaus to the queen most excellent majesty . bffrbalerenissima , prudentissima , and sacra regius majestas , domina mihi semper clementissima , meorum fidelium officiorum promptam paratissimamque commendationem . generosus and virtuosus Gulielmus hareborne legatus vestrae majestatis venit ad portam excelsissimam potentissimi and invictissimi , and semper augustissimi caesaris sultan Murad can , cvi deus omni-258 potens benedicat . et quanto honore , quanta dignitate , quantaque humanitate aliorum confcederatorum legati accipiuntur , praefatus quoque legatus vester tanta reverentia , tantaque amplitudine acceptus and collocatus est in porta excelsissima . et posthac subditi and homines vestrae sacrae majestatis ad ditiones omnes caesareas venire , and sva negocia tractare , and ad svam patriam redire sine impedimento , ut in literis excelsissimi , potentissimi , and invictissimi , and semper augustissimi caesaris ad vestram sacram regiam majestatem datis facile patet , tranquilli and pacifici possunt . ego autem imprimis diligentem operam and fidele studium and nunc eodem confirmando navavi , and in futurum quoque usque in ultimum vitae spiritum in negotiis potentissimi and invictissimi caesaris , and vestrae sacrae Regiae majestatis egregiam navabo operam . quod deus omnipotens ad emolumentum and utilitatem utriilsque reipublicae secundet . Arnen . sacram regiam majestatem foelicissime valere exopto . Datum Constantinopoli anno 1583 , die octavo Maii. a letter of the english ambassador to m. Harvie Miller , appoint he consuli for the english nation in Alexandria , Cairo , and other place of Egypt . ave to appoint our Consuli in Cayro , Alexandria , Egypt , and other part adjacent , for the safe protection of body and good of her majesty subject ; be well persuade of your sufficient ability ; in her majesty name i do elect and make choice of you , good friend Harvie Miller , to execute the same [ ii i . 172. ] worshipful office , as shall be require for her majesty better service , the commodity of her subject , and my contentation : have and enjoy for merit of your travel in the premise the like remuneration incident to the rest of we in such office in other part of this empire . require you ( all other affair set aside ) to 259 