William HAREBORNE’S ambassage a.d. . 1583 - of the realm , and win you perpetuali fame , and the prayer of the poor , which be more worth than all the gold of Peru and of all the west Indies . the voyage of the Susan of London to Constantinople , wherein the worshipful m. William Harborne be send first ambassador unto sultan Murad can , the great Turk , with who he continue as her majesty ligier almost six year . he 14 of November 1582 , we depart from Blackewall , bind for the city of Constantinople , in the tall ship call the Susan of London : the master whereof be Richard Parsons , a very excellent and skilful man in his faculty . but by occasion of contrary weather we spend two month before we can recover the kowe in the isle of wight . where the 14 of [ ii i . 166. ] January follow we take in the worshipful m. l^nuar1 fa William hareborne her majesty ambassador to the jottreteent • Turk , and his company , and sail thence to Yarmouth in the foresay isle of wight . the 19 we put from wight . the 26 we do see Cavo de Sant Vincente . the same day we be thwart of cavo santa maria . the 27 we pass by Tariffa , and Gibraltar . the 28 in the morning we pass by Velez Malaga : and that night be thwart of cavo de gate . the 29 at night we have sight of cavo de Palos . the 30 in the morning we do see the high land of Denia , in the kingdom of Valentia , and that night we have sight of the hand Formentera . the 31 in the morning appear the hand of Cabrera . the first of February we put into a port in Mallorca , call porto de sant 0 Pedro : where they will have evil entreat we for and ? • , come into the harbour : we think we may malkrctt ' have be as bold there as in other place of christian - c Vincente . C. Santa maria . Tariffa . Velez Malaga . C. de gate . C. de Pahs . Denia . it Formentera . Cabrera . February the 243 the ship dome , but it prove far otherwise . the first man man give on we meet on ] and be a simple shepherd , of who we demand whether we may have a sheep or such like to refresh our self , who tell we yea . and by such conference have with he , at the last he come aboard once or twice , and have the best cheer that we can make he : and our ambassador himself talk with he , and still he make we fair promise , but nothing at all mean to perform the same , as the end show . in the mean time come in a ship of Marseils , the master whereof do know our ambassador very well , with who our ambassador have conference , and with his merchant also . they come from Alger in Barbary , which be under the government of the great Turk . they do present our ambassador with a ape , wherefore he make very the Ambassa - much of they , and have they often aboard . by they dour betray . i suppose , he be bewray of his purpose as touch his message , but yet still we have fair word of the shepherd aforesaid , and other . so that upon their word , our purser and another man go to a town which be three or four mile from the port , and there be well entertain , and have of the people very fair speech , and such small thing as can be get upon the sudden , and so return to the ship that day . than we be embolden , and think all have be well , accord to their talk . the next day , February then be the six day of February , two of our Gentlesixth . man , with one of our merchant , and the purser , and one of the ambassador man go to the town aforesaid , think to do as the purser and the other have do before , but it prove contrary : for at their come thither they have fair word a while , and have bread and wine , and such necessary for their money , until such time as they be beset with man , and the majorcans never show in their countenance any such matter , but as the manner of all the people in the dominion of Spain be , for the most part to 244 be treacherous to we , if they think they have any advantage . for upon the sudden they lay hand on they , and put they in hold , as sure as may be in such a simple town . then be they well guard with man both day and night , and still delude with fair word , and they say to our man it be for no hurt , but that the viceroy of the hand will come aboard to see the ship . but they present send the purser to the town of Majorca , where he be examine by the viceroy very straight , what their ship and captain be , and what voyage they intend , but he confess nothing at all . in the mean time they in the town be likewise straight examine by a priest and other officer upon their oath : who for their oath sake declare the whole estate of their voyage . the ambassador man be a french man , and therefore be suffer to go to the ship on a message , but he can tell the ambassador none other news , but that the viceroy will come aboard the ship , and that our man shall come with he , but they have another meaning . for the Marseilian merchant be stay in like manner in the town , only to make a better show unto we . but in the mean time , be there three or four day , there come man unto we every day , more or less , but one day especial there come two man on horseback , who we take to be officer , be lusty man , and very well horse . Theise man desire to speak with our captain ( for all thing that pass there be do in the name of our captain John Gray ) for it be say by we there , that he be captain of one of her majesty ship : wherefore all thing pass in his name : and the ambassador not see in any thing but rather conceal , and yet do all , because of his tongue and good indite in that language . for he himself go on land clothe in velvet , and talk with these man , and with he ten or twelve lusty fellow well weapon , each one have 245 a . d 1583 - the english man be surprise . the Spaniard a boarespeare or a Cali ver , the captain John grey come to the sea be one of they , and our boat lie by very wary keep and ready . for then we begin to suspect , taine . because the place be more frequent with man than it be wont . the man on horseback be in doubt to come near , because he come so well weapon . but they bid he welcome , and give he great salutation in word as their manner be : and demand why he come so strong , for they say he need not to fear any man in the hand . answer be make , that it be the manner of english captain to go with their guard in strange place . than they tell our [ ii i . 167. ] ambassador ( think he to be the captain ) that they be send from the viceroy to know what they do lack , for they promise he beef or mutton , or any thing that be in the hand to be have , but their purpose be to have get more of our man if they can , and they say that we shall have our man again the next day : with such pretty delusion they feed we still . than our ambassador do write a letter to the viceroy in her majesty name , and in our captain John Gray name , and not in his own , and send it by they , desire he to send his man , and not to trouble he in his voyage , for he have give he not such cause , nor any of he . so these man depart with great courtesy in word on both part . and in all this time we do see man on horseback and on foot in the wood and tree more than they be accustom to be , but we can perceive nothing thereby . the next day , or the second , come either four or six of the best of they as we think ( the viceroy except ) and very many man beside in the field , both on foot and on horse , but come not near the Spaniard the water side . and those in like order desire to cparlegame ta spea^e captain , and that when he come on pare ' land the trumpet may sound : but than the ambassador , who they think to be captain , will not go , nor suffer the trumpet to be sound ( for that 246 William HAREBORNE’S ambassage a.d. . 1583. he think it be a trap to take himself , and more of his company . but do send one of the principali of the merchant to talk with they . and the captain John Gray go also with he , not be know of the Spaniard , for he go as a soldier . thus they receive of those man the like word as they have of the other before mention , who say we shall have our man again , for they mean we no hurt . than our theambana-ambassadour do write another letter , and send it mrw^th by they to the viceroy , in like order as he do before , tot e ker°y ' but he receive no answer of any of they . in all this time they have privy gather together the principali man of the hand , and have labour day and night to bring down ordinance , not make any show of their treachery towards we . but the same night follow , ' we see very many light pass in the wood among the tree . and in the morning when the watch be break up , be Saturday the nine of February , at fair day tf light , one of our man look forth , and see stand e ruary‘ on land the carriage of a piece : then be one command to go into the top , and there he do descry two or three piece , and also many man on the shore , with diverse weapon that they bring . than they sudden take four or five brass piece , and place they on either side of the harbour where we shall go out , and hide they with stone and bush that we shall not see they . now i think the harbour not to be above the eight part of a mile over . thus perceive their meaning which be most plain : we agree to take up our anchor and go out , and leave our man there , have none other way to take . than our ambassador entreat the master of the Marseilian , his friend , to go on land with his boat , and to know the truth : who satisfy his request . and at his return he tell we that it be very true , that they will lay hold of we if they can . than we weigh our anchor : but have little wind , we tow the ship forward with the boat . the viceroy himself be at the water side with more than 247 five hundred man on both side of the harbour as we think . and when we come out with our ship as the ship far as their ordinance , our ambassador and the captain pareth^tode * n their armour , the master command of the fend herself . company , and trim of the sail , the pilot stand on the poop , attend to his charge , with other very well furnish , and every man in order about their business very ready , they on land on the contrary part have a very fair piece mount on the north side open in all our sight , as the ship pass by , they traverse that piece right with the main mast or afterquarter of the ship , and a gunner stand by , with > a lint-stocke in his hand , about fourteen or fifteen foot long , be ( as we think ) ready to give fire . our whole noise of trumpet be sound on the poop with drum and flute , and a minion of brass on the summer deck , with two or three other piece , always by our gunner traverse mouth to mouth with they on land , still look when they on land shall shoot , for to answer they again . the pilot stand on the poop , see this readiness , and the ship go very soft , because of the calmness of the wind , he call to they on the south side , where the viceroy be , and say unto he : have you war with we ? if you have , it be more than we know ; but by your provision it seem so : if you have , shoot in god name , and spare not , but they hold all fast and shoot not . then the viceroy himself hold up a paper , and say he have a letter for our captain , and desire we to stay for it . than we answer and say we will not , but will he to send it by the marseilians boat , and our man also . all this while , our trumpet , drum and flute sound , and so we pass out in the face of they all . when they perceive that they can lay no hold on we , they present send to the the effect of town for our man , who within less than three hour thettceroy after ey send aboard with the say letter , wherein he captain of desire our captain and his company not to take it in ill the Susan . part , for he mean they no harm , but will have see 248 William HAREBORNE’S ambassage a.d. ..... I583 ' our ship . his letter do import these and such like fair speech : for it altogether contain courteous salutation , say that he may bold come into any port [ ii i . 168. ] within his hand , and that he and his will show he what friendship they may : and that the injury that be offer be do at the request of the shepherd and poor people of the country , for the more safeguard of their flock , and because it be not a thing usual to have any such ship to come into that port , with many other deceitful word in the say letter . than our effect °f ambassador write unto he another letter to answer ambassa-that , and give he thank for his man that he have send °rs anmere ' he , and also for his good will , and send he a present . this do , we shoot off half a dozen piece , hoist our sail , and depart on our voyage . then the purser and the rest of our man that have be in hold , tell we that they do see the captain , and other gentleman of the hand , have their buskin and stocking tear from their leg , with labour in the bush day and night to make that sudden provision . the 12 of February we see a hand of Africa side call Galata , where they use Galata . to drag out of the sea much coral , and we see likewise Sardinia , which be a hand subject to Spain . the 13 Sardinia . in the morning we be hard by Sardinia . the 15 we do see a hand near Sicilia , and a hand on Africa side Fauagniana . call Cysimbre . the same day likewise we see a hand Cisimbri . call Pantalaria , and that night we be thwart the Pantalaria . middle of Sicilia . the 16 at night we be as far as Sicilia . Capo Passaro , which be the southeast part of Sicilia . the C. Passaro . 24 we be put into a port call Porto de Conte , in a porto de Conte hand call Cephalonia : it be a out hand in the m cephalma-dominion of Grecia , and now at this present govern by the signory of Venice , as the rest of Grecia be under the Turk , for the most part . the 27 we come from thence , and that day arrive at Zante which be also in Zante . Grecia : for at this present we enter the part of Grecia . the second of march we come from Zante ; and the same day be thwart of a hand call , Prodeno : and Prodeno . 249 Cerigo . C. Malto . Menelaus . Bellapola . both Milos . Falconara . Antemila . Fermenia , Zea . Negroponte . Andri . Psara . Sarafo . signora , a port in Metelin . Porto Delfin . the city of Chio. A by . ermine , or customer . the english voyage the 4 we be thwart of a hand call sapientia . there stand a fair town and a castle on the main over against it , call Modon . the same day by reason of contrary wind we put back again to Prodeno , because we can not fetch sapientia . the nine we come from thence , and be as far as sapientia again . the ten we be as far shoot as Cavo Matapan ; and that day we enter the archipelago , and pass through between Cerigo and Cavo Malio . This Cerigo be a hand where one Menelaus do sometime reign , from who be steal by Paris fair Helena , and carry to Troy , as ancient record do declare . the same day we have sight of a little hand call Bellapola , and do likewise see both the Milos , be hand in they . Archipelago . the 11 in the morning we be hard by a hand call Falconara , and the hand of Antemila . the 12 in the morning we be between Fermenia and Zea , be both hand . that night we be between Negroponte and Andri , be likewise hand . the 13 in the morning we be hard by Psara and Sarafo , be hand nine or ten mile from Chio , and can not fetch Chio. so we put room with a port in Metelin call signora , and about nine of the clock at night we anchor there . the 15 we come from thence , the sixteenth we put into Porto Delfi . the port be 9 English mile to the northward of the city of Chio , ( and it may be twelve of their mile ) this night we stay in the say port , be in the hand of Chio. then go our merchant and one or two with he to the city of Chio. and when then by , who be the governor of the hand ( and be in their language a duke ) have commune with the merchant , and those that be with he , and understand of our arrival within his dominion , the day follow he arm his galley , and come to welcome our ambassador , accompany with the ermine , that be , the king customer , and also the french Consuli , with diverse of the chief of the city , and offer he as much friendship as he can or will desire : for he do offer to attend 25° upon we , and tow we if need be to the castle . the 21 we depart from thence , and that day pass by port signora again . this hand of Metelin be part of Asia , and be near to Anatolia . the 22 we pass by a head land call Baberno , and be also in Asia . and that day at night we pass by the isle of Tenedo , part of Asia , and by another hand call Maure . and the same day we pass through the straight of Galipoli , and by the castle , and also by the town of Galipoli it self , which stand in Europa . and that night we be in sight of Marmora which be near Anatolia , and part of Asia . the 23 in the morning we be thwart of Araclia , and that night we anchor in Silauria . the 24 in the morning the merchant and the pilot be set on land to go to the city about the ambassador business , but there A.D. I583 - Baberno . Tenedo . Maure . Galipoli . Marmora . Araclia . Silauria . they can not land because we have the wind fair . that place of some be call Ponte grande , and be four Ponte grande . and twenty mile on this side of Constantinople , and because of the wind , they follow in the skiff until they come to a place call Ponte picola , and there Ponte plcola . be a little bridge , it stand eight turkish mile from Constantinople , there the merchant and the pilot land . at this bridge be a house of the great Turk with a fair garden belong unto it , near the which be a point call Ponta S. Stephano , and there the p°nte s-shippe anchor that day . the 26 day the ship come fhano . to the seven tower , and the 27 we come near . the 29 there come three galley to bring we up further : [ ii i . 169. ] and when the ship come against the great Turks the arnvall palace , we shoot off all our ordinance to the number of °f the Susan at four and thirty piece . then land our Ambassa - onstawtm-dour , and then we discharge four and twenty piece , who be receive with more than fifty or threescore ople . man on horseback . the nine of April he present the great bassa with six clothes , four can of silver double gilt , and one piece of fine holland , and to three other bassa , that be to say , the second bassa , which be a geld man , and his name be Mahomet bassa , to 25* the ambassador give a present to the great bassa . the ambassador entertainment with the bassa . a.d. the english voyage J583 - . the three who marry the great Turks sister , and to the four who they call Abraham bassa , to every one of these he give four clothes . now , before the great bassa , and Abraham bassa , at their return from the court ( and as we think at other time , but at a man half that time for a certain ) there come a man in manner naked go of a fool > who give a great shout three or four Bassa^^^ timesj cry very hollow , the place rebound with the sound , and this man , say they , be a prophet of Mahomet , his arm and leg naked , on his foot he do wear wooden patten of two sort , in his hand , a flag , or streamer set on a short spear paint , he carry a mat and bottle , and other trumpery at his back , and sometime under his arm , on his head he have a cap of white camel hair , flat like a helmet , write about with letter , and about his head a linen roll . other servingman there be with the say bassa , with red attire on their head , much like french hood , but the long flap somewhat small towards the end , with scufy or plate of mettle , like unto the chape of a ancient arm sword , stand on their forehead like other janissary . Theise bassa entertain we as follow : first , they bring we into a hall , there to stand on one side , and our ambassador and gentleman on the other side , who sit they down on a bench cover with carpet , the ambassador in the midst ; on his left hand sit our gentleman , and on his right hand the Turk , next to the door where their master go in and out : the common sort of Turk stay in the court yard , not suffer to come near we . when our ambassador have sit half a hour , the bassa ( who sit by themselves in a inner small room ) send for he ; to who the ambassador and his gentleman go : they all kiss his hand , and present return ( the ambassador only except , who stay there , and a turk chaus with he ) with the ambassador and his gentleman go in also so many of our man as there 252 William HAREBORNE’S ambassage a.d. 1583. be present to carry in , but these neither kiss his hand nor tarry . after this i go to visit the church of Santa Sophia , which be the chief church when it santa Sophia . be the christian , and now be the chief see and church of primacy of this Turk present : before i enter i be will to put off my shoe , to the end i shall not profane their church , i be a christian . the pillar on both side of the church be very costly description and rich , their pulpit seemly and handsome , two be °ft , le'trchurc , l common to preach in , the three reserve only for their Paschall . the ground be cover with mat , and the wall hang with tapestry . they have also lamp in their church , one in the middle of the church of exceed greatness , and another in another part of the church of clean gold , or double gild , full as big as a barrel . round about the church there be a gallery build upon rich and stately pillar . that day i be in both the chapel , in one of the which lie the Turk father , and five of his son in tomb right costly , with their turbent very white and clean , shift ( as they say ) every Friday , they be not on their head , but stand on mould make for that purpose . at the end , over , and about their tomb be belt , like girdle , beset with jewel . in the other chapel be four other of his son , and one daughter , in like order . in the first chapel be a thing four foot high , cover with green , beset with mother of pearl very rich . this be a relic of Mahomet , and stand on the left side of the head of the great Turks tomb . Theise chapel have their floor cover , and their wall hang with tapestry of great price , i can value the cover and hang of one of the chapel , at no less than five hundred pound , beside their lamp hang rich gild . Theise chapel have their roof curious wrought with rich stone , and gild . and there lie the book of their law for every man to read . the 11 day of April the ship come to the key of the custom custom house . 253 the ambassador present the admiral UchaK . the Susan gp from the customhouse . the AdmiraU depart to the sea . [ ii i . 170. ] the ambassadors repair to the great Turks court . the english voyage house . the 16 the ambassador and we his man go to the captain bassa , who be admiral of the sea , his name be Uchali , he will not receive we into his house , but into his galley , to deliver our present , which be as follow : four piece of cloth , and two silver pot gild and grave . the poop or stern of his gay be gild both within and without , and under his foot , and where he sit be all cover with very rich tapestry . our ambassador and his gentleman kiss his hand , and then the gentleman be command out , and our ambassador sit down by he on his left hand , and the chaus stand before he . our man may walk in the gay fore and after , some of we tarry , and some go out again . the gay have seven piece of brass in her prow , small and great , she have thirty bank or oar on either side , and at every bank or oar seven man to row . the 18 day the ship go from the key . and 21 the admiral take his leave of the great Turk , be bind to the sea with six and thirty galley , very fair beautify with gild and paint , and beset with flag and streamer , all the which galley discharge their ordinance : and we for his farewell give he one and twenty piece . than he go to his house with his galley , and the 22 he go to the sea , and the castle that stand in the water give he fourteen or sixteen piece : and when he come against the Turks seraglio he shoot off all his caliver and his great piece , and so he go his way . the 24 our ambassador go to the court , who entertainment with the order thereof follow . when we come first on land there be way make for we by two or three bassa and diverse chause on horseback with their man on foot , to accompany , our ambassador to the court . also they bring horse for he and his gentleman for to ride , which be very rich furnish : and by the way there meet with we other chause to accompany we to the court . 254 William HAREBORNE’S ambassage a.d. 1583 - when we come there we pass through two gate , at the second gate there stand very many man with horse attend on their master . when we come within that gate we be within a very fair court yard , in compass twice so big as Paul churchyard . on the right hand of the say court be a fair gallery like a alley , and within it be place rail and such other provision . on the left side be the like , half the court over : it be divide into two part , the innermost fair than the other . the other part of that side be the place where the council do usual sit , and at the inner end of that be a fair place to sit in , much like unto that place in Paul churchyard , where the mayor and his brethren use to sit , thither be our ambassador bring , and set in that place . within that say place be another like open room , where he do eat . assoon as we come enterin , we be place in the innermost alley of the second room , on the left side of the court , which ambassador be spread with carpet on the ground fourscore or man . fourscore and ten foot long , with a hundred and fifty several dish set thereon , that be to say , mutton boil and roast , rice diverse dress , fritter of the fine fashion , and dish dainty dight with pretty pap , with infinite other , i know not how to express they . we have also roast hen with sundry sort of fowl to i unknown . the gentleman and we sit down on the ground , for it be their manner so to feed . there be also greek and other set to furnish out the room . our drink be make with rose water and sugar and spice brew together . those that do serve we with it have a great bag tie over their shoulder , with a broad belt like a arm belt full of plate of copper and gilt , with part of the say bag under his arm , and the mouth in his hand : than he have a devise to let it out when he will into cup , when we call for drink . the ambassador when he have eat , pass by we , with 2ss the chause aforesaid , and sit he down in a inner room . this place where he sit be against the gate where we come in , and hard by the council chamber end , somewhat on the left side of the court , this be at the east end of the court , for we come in at the west . all this time our present stand by we until we have dine , and dinner once end , this be their order of take up the dish . certain be call in , like those of the black guard in the court of England , the turk call they moglan . Theise come in like rude and raven mastiff , without order or fashion , and make clean riddance : for he who hungry eye one dish can not fill turn two , one into the other , and thus even on the sudden be make a clean riddance of all . then come certain chause and bring our gentleman to sit with the ambassador . immediate come officer and appoint janiser to bear from we our present , who carry they on the right side of the court , and set they hard by the door of the privy chamber , as we call it : there all thing stand for the space of a hour . thus the ambassador and his gentleman sit still , and to the southward of they be a door whereas the great Turk himself go in and out at , and on the south side of that door sit on a bench all his chief lord and gentleman , and on the north side of the west gate stand his guard , in number as i guess they a thousand man . Theise man have on their head round cap of mettle like skull , but sharp in the top , in this they have a bunch of ostrich feather , as big as a brush , with the corner or edge forward : at the low end of these feather be there a small feather , like those that be common wear here . some of his guard have small staff , and most of they be weapon with bow and arrow . here they wait , during our abode at the court , to guard their lord . after the ambassador with his gentleman have sit a hour and more , there come three or four chause , and bring they into the great Turk as6 William HAREBORNE’S ambassage a.d. 1583-presence . at the privy chamber door two noble man take the ambassador by each arm one , and put their finger within his sleeve , and so bring he to the great Turk where he sumptuous sit alone . he kiss his hand and stand by until all the gentleman be bring before he in like manner , one by one , and lead backwards again his face towards the Turk ; for they may neither tarry nor turn their back , and in like manner return the ambassador . the salutation that the noble man do , be take they by the hand . all this time they tread on cloth of gold , most of the noble man that sit on the south side of the privy chamber sit likewise on cloth of gold . many officer [ ii i . 171. ] or janissary there be with staff , who keep very good order , for no Turk whatsoever may go any further than they will he . at our ambassador enter they follow that bear his present , to say , twelve fine Turk be broad clothes , two piece of fine holland , ten piece of plate double gilt , one case or candlestick , the case whereof be very large , and three foot high and more , two very great can or pot , and one lesser , one basin and ewer , two poppinjaye of silver , the one with two head : they be to drink in : two bottle with chain , three fair mastiff in coat of red cloth , three spaniel , two bloodhound , one common hunt hound , two greyhound , two little dog in coat of silk : one clock value at five hundred pound sterling : over it be a forest with tree of silver , among the which be dear chase with dog , and man on horseback follow , man draw of water , other carry my oar on barrow : on the top of the clock stand a castle , and on the castle a mill . all these be of silver . and the clock be round beset with jewel . all the time that we stay at the council chamber door they be tell or weigh of money to send into Persia for his soldier pay . there be carry out a hundred and three and thirty bag , and in every bag , as it be tell we , one thousand ducat , which amount five 257 r to three hundred and thirty thousand * , and in sterling english money to fourscore and nineteen thousand pound . the captain of the guard in the mean time go to the great Turk , and return again , than they of the court make obeisance to he , bow down their head , and their hand on their breast , and he in like order resalute they : he be in cloth of silver , he go and come with two or three with he and not more . than we go out at the first gate , and there we be command to stay until the captain of the guard be pass by and all his guard with he , part before he and part behind he , some on horseback and some on foot , but the most part on foot carry on their shoulder the money before mention , and so we pass home . there be in the court during our abode there , for the most part a fool resemble the first , but not naked as be the other at the bassa : but he turn he continual , and cry Hough very hollow . the three of May i see the Turk go to the church : he have more than two hundred and fifty horse before and behind he , but most before he . there be many empty horse that come in no order . many of his nobility be in cloth of gold , but himself in white satin . there do ride behind he six or seven youth , one or two whereof carry water for he to drink as they say . there be many of his guard run before he and behind he , and when he alight , they cry Hough very hollow , as the aforesaid fool . a letter of Mustapha Chaus to the queen most excellent majesty . bffrbalerenissima , prudentissima , and sacra regius majestas , domina mihi semper clementissima , meorum fidelium officiorum promptam paratissimamque commendationem . generosus and virtuosus Gulielmus hareborne legatus vestrae majestatis venit ad portam excelsissimam potentissimi and invictissimi , and semper augustissimi caesaris sultan Murad can , cvi deus omni-258 