potens benedicat . et quanto honore , quanta dignitate , quantaque humanitate aliorum confcederatorum legati accipiuntur , praefatus quoque legatus vester tanta reverentia , tantaque amplitudine acceptus and collocatus est in porta excelsissima . et posthac subditi and homines vestrae sacrae majestatis ad ditiones omnes caesareas venire , and sva negocia tractare , and ad svam patriam redire sine impedimento , ut in literis excelsissimi , potentissimi , and invictissimi , and semper augustissimi caesaris ad vestram sacram regiam majestatem datis facile patet , tranquilli and pacifici possunt . ego autem imprimis diligentem operam and fidele studium and nunc eodem confirmando navavi , and in futurum quoque usque in ultimum vitae spiritum in negotiis potentissimi and invictissimi caesaris , and vestrae sacrae Regiae majestatis egregiam navabo operam . quod deus omnipotens ad emolumentum and utilitatem utriilsque reipublicae secundet . Arnen . sacram regiam majestatem foelicissime valere exopto . Datum Constantinopoli anno 1583 , die octavo Maii. a letter of the english ambassador to m. Harvie Miller , appoint he consuli for the english nation in Alexandria , Cairo , and other place of Egypt . ave to appoint our Consuli in Cayro , Alexandria , Egypt , and other part adjacent , for the safe protection of body and good of her majesty subject ; be well persuade of your sufficient ability ; in her majesty name i do elect and make choice of you , good friend Harvie Miller , to execute the same [ ii i . 172. ] worshipful office , as shall be require for her majesty better service , the commodity of her subject , and my contentation : have and enjoy for merit of your travel in the premise the like remuneration incident to the rest of we in such office in other part of this empire . require you ( all other affair set aside ) to 259 repair thither with expedition , and attend upon this your charge , which the almighty grant you well to accomplish . for the due execution whereof , we herewith send you the grand signior patent of privilege with we , and what else be needful therefore , in so ample manner , as any other Consuli whosoever do or may enjoy the samein aid whereof , accord to my bind duty to her majesty our most gracious mistress , i will be ready always to employ my self to the generali benefit of her majesty subject , for your maintenance in all just cause incident to the same . and thus eftsoon require and command you as above say , to perform my request , i bid you most hearty well to fare , and desire God to bless - you . from my mansion Rapamat nigh Pera this 25 of April 1583. commission give by m. William hareborne the english ambassador , to Richard Forster , authorise he consul of the english nation in the part of Aleppo , Damascus , Aman , Tripoli , Jerusalem , etc William Harborne , her majesty ambassador , Ligier with the grand signior , for the affair of the Levant do in her majesty name confirm and appoint Richard Forster gentleman , my deputy and Consuli in the part of Aleppo , Damascus , Aman , Tripoli , Jerusalem , and all other port whatsoever in the province of Syria , Palestina , and jury , to execute the office of Consuli over all our nation her majesty subject , of what estate or quality soever : give he hereby full power to defend , protect , and maintain all such her majesty subject as to he shall be obedient , in all honest and just cause whatsoever : and in like case no less power to imprison , punish , and correct any and all such as he shall find disobedient to he in the like cause , even in 260 