i her ambassador , your true christian mind and english heart , intentive bend to God honour , and the liberty of the poor man , for which i trust you be ordain another Joseph , to follow his example in true piety , in such sort that notwithstanding your body be subject to turkish thraldom , yet your virtuous mind free from those vice , next under God addict to you good service of your liege lady and sovereign prince , her most excellent majesty , will continual seek by all good mean to manifest you same in this and the like faithful service to your singular commendation , whereby both my self and other in that place have find you in all good office faithful affectionate , may in like case perform the like towards you , when and where you may have occasion to use i : which as i for my part do assure promise , and will no less faithful perform : so accord i expect herein , and hereafter the like of you , who most hearty salute i commend to the divine tuition and holy direction . from my house Rapamat , this 28. of June 1586. your love and good friend her majesty ambassador with the grand signior , will . hareborne . a petition exhibit to the viceroy for reforma - [ ii i . 181. ] cion of sundry injury offer our nation in Morea , as also for sundry demand needful for the establish of the traffic in those part . irst that our people may be free of such wont molestation , as the janiser of Patrasso have always from time to time offer they , not regard the king commandment to the contrary . that they be remove and call away from thence , and none other remain in their place . 2 that where heretofore the king commandment have be grant to we , that no person whatsoever 283 shall forcible take from they any of their commodity , otherwise then pay they before the delivery thereof , for the same in ready money , at such price as they themselves will , and sell ordinary to other , as also that no officer whatsoever , of the king or any other , shall force they to buy any commodity of that country , otherwise then the needful , at their own will and pleasure , that the say commandment not heretofore obey may be renew with such straight charge for the execution of the same , as be requisite for their due effect . 3 that whereas sundry exaction and oppression be offer we by such Byes , sanjacby , justice and cady , janissary , capagy , and other , officer of the king come down into those part , who find there resident no other nation but only we , will under the name of present forceable take from they what they please : we do require to obvent these harm , it may be specify by a commandment from the king to which of such his officer , present may be give , and their sundry value , whereby both they and we may rest content , severe prohibit in the say commandment , that they take no more than that appoint they , and that no other officer but those only specify in that commandment , do forcible require of they any thing whatsoever . 4 that the Nadir and customer of the port , have permit our ship to lade , do not after demand of the merchant any other than the outward custom due to the king for the same good . And be so lade , may by they and the Cadie with other their inferior officer be visit , require for the visit no more than former they be accustom to pay at their first come . after which the say ship to depart at the consul pleasure , without any molestation of they , or any other officer whatsoever . 5 that Mahomet Chaus , sometime Nadir of Lepanto , and Azon ago his substitute be with he may be severe punish to the example of other , for often 284 and unjust molest our nation , contrary to the king commandment , which they disdainful contemn , as also that the say Mahomet restore and pay unto we thirty for 300 sack of currant now take forcible out of a bark , come thither from the hither part of Morea , to pay the king his custom , and that from hence forth , neither the say Mahomet , Azon Agon , nor any other officer or person whatsoever do hinder or trouble any of we go thither or to any other place about their affair . 6 that whereas certain Jew of Lepanto owe money to our merchant for commodity sell they , have not hitherto satisfy they , notwithstanding we have from the king a commandment for the recovery of the same debt , but flee and absent themselves out of the town at the come of the same , another more forcible commandment may be grant we , that for nonpaiment , whatsoever may be find of they in good , house , vineyard , or any other thing , may be sell , and we satisfy of their say debt , accord to equity and reason . a commandment to Patrasso in Morea . when this commandment shall come unto you , know you , that the consuli of the english nation in our port of Patrasso , have give we to understand , that former we grant he a commandment that have pay once custom for the currant buy to lade in their ship , they shall not pay it again : accord to which they bring it to the port of Petrasso , inform thereof Mahomet the Nadir of Lepanto , he contrary to the tenor thereof and former order , do again take another custom of he , and require he to know why he so do contrary to our commandment , he answer we , he take it not for custom , but for a present . Moreover the say Consuli certify we how that the say Nadir contrary to ancient custom do not take for the king right as he ought current , but will have of the 285 