Ginger for 14. ducat . you must take canvas to make bag to put your commodity in from Alexandria , for there be none . there be also fine flax , and good store of buff hide . a letter of the english ambassador to m. Edward Barton . Aster Barton i send you 3. commandments in turkish , with a copy thereof in english , to the end our ship may not come in danger of breach of league , if they shall shoot at the galley of those of Algiers , Tunis , and Tripoli in the west : which after you have show the bassa , receive again into your hand , and see they register , and then deliver one of they to our friend m. Tipton , and the like you be to do with the privilege which you carry with you , and see they joint register in the cadies book , deliver the copy of the say privilege seal by the Cadi , also to the say our friend m. Tipton , take a note of his hand for the receipt thereof , and for delivery at all time to we or our assign . and require they in her majesty and the grand signors name , that they will have our ship pass too and fro under licence and safeconduct for recommend in friendly manner . touch your proceed in Tripoli with Romadan , as i have not receive any advise thereof , since your departure , so must i leave you to God and my former direction . the ship patronise of Hassan ray , which you write to be we , prove to be a catalonian . as for we , by report of that Hassan and other Jew in his ship , it be affirm to be sell to the Malteses , which with the rest you be to receive there . and have end these affair and register our privilege , and these three commandments , in Tripoli , Tunis , and Alger , i pray you make 274 speedy return , and for that which may be recover , make over the same either to Richard row for Patrasso in Morea , or otherwise hither to John bear in the sure manner you may , if the register of that your privilege and these commandment will not suffer you in person to return with the same . from my mansion Rapamat in Pera this 24. of June 1584. the commandment obtain of the grand signior by her majesty ambassador m. will . hareborne , for the quiet pass of her subject to and from his dominion , send in An. 1584. to the viceroy of Algiers , Tunis and Tripoli in Barbary . to our Beglerbeg of Algiers . e certify thou by this our commandment , that the right honourable will . hareborne ambassador to the queen majesty of England have signify unto we , that the ship of that country in their come and return to and from our empire , on the one part of the sea have the Spaniard , florentine , sicilian and Malteses , on the other part our country commit to your charge : which abovesaid Christians will not quiet suffer their egress and regress , into , and out of our dominion , but do take and make the man captive , and forfeit the [ ii i . 178. ] ship and good , as the last year the Malteses do one , which they take at Gerbi , and to that end do continual lie in wait for they to their destruction , whereupon they be constrain to stand to their defence at any such time as they may meet with they . wherefore consider by this mean they must stand upon their guard , when they shall see any galley afar off , whereby if meeting with any of your galley and not know they , in their defence they do shoot at they , and yet after when they do certain know they , do not shoot any more , but 275 