a commandment to Patras aa ... * 584 - and unjust molest our nation , contrary to the king commandment , which they disdainful contemn , as also that the say Mahomet restore and pay unto we thirty for 300 sack of currant now take forcible out of a bark , come thither from the hither part of Morea , to pay the king his custom , and that from hence forth , neither the say Mahomet , Azon Agon , nor any other officer or person whatsoever do hinder or trouble any of we go thither or to any other place about their affair . 6 that whereas certain Jew of Lepanto owe money to our merchant for commodity sell they , have not hitherto satisfy they , notwithstanding we have from the king a commandment for the recovery of the same debt , but flee and absent themselves out of the town at the come of the same , another more forcible commandment may be grant we , that for nonpaiment , whatsoever may be find of they in good , house , vineyard , or any other thing , may be sell , and we satisfy of their say debt , accord to equity and reason . a commandment to Patrasso in Morea . when this commandment shall come unto you , know you , that the consuli of the english nation in our port of Patrasso , have give we to understand , that former we grant he a commandment that have pay once custom for the currant buy to lade in their ship , they shall not pay it again : accord to which they bring it to the port of Petrasso , inform thereof Mahomet the Nadir of Lepanto , he contrary to the tenor thereof and former order , do again take another custom of he , and require he to know why he so do contrary to our commandment , he answer we , he take it not for custom , but for a present . Moreover the say Consuli certify we how that the say Nadir contrary to ancient custom do not take for the king right as he ought current , but will have of the 285 poor man money at his pleasure , and therewith buy current at a very low price , which after he do forcible sell to we at a much high price , say it be remainder of the good of the king , and by this mean do hurt the poor man and do they wrong . wherefore i come - [ ii i . 182. ] man you by this my commandment , that you look to this matter between this Consuli , the Nadir , and this people , and do therein equal accord to right . and see that our commandment in this matter be observe in such sort , as they have once in the port pay full custom , do not pay it again , neither that this Nadir do take any more money of they by the way of present , for that therein it be most certain he do they injury contrary to the canon . and if with you shall be find to the value of one Asper take heretofore wrongful of they , see it present restore to they , without any default . and from henceforth see that he do neither he nor his people wrong , but that he deal with they in all thing accord to our canon , that the consuli and his hereafter have no occasion any more to complain here in our court , and that the Nadir proceed in gather corant of the people after the old order and not otherwise . This know you for certain , and give credit to this my commandment , which have read deliver again into the consul hand . from Constantinople the year of Mahomet 993. a commandment for Chio. vobis , beg and Cadi and ermini , qui estis in Chio , significamus : quod serenissimae reginae majestatis angliae orator , qui est in excelsa porta per litera significavit nobis , quod ex navibus Anglicis una navis venisset ad portum Chio , and illinc constantinopolim recto cursu voluisset venire , and contra privilegium detinuistis , and non sivistis venire . haec praedictus orator significavit nobis : and petivit a nobis in hoc negocio hoc mandatum , ut nave anglicae veniant and redeant in nostras ditiones caesareas . Privilegium datum and concessum est ex parte 286 