understand to be acceptable to your imperiali majesty , which God , the only maker of the world , most best and most great , long keep in health , and flourish . give in our palace at London , the five day of the month of September , in the year of Jesus Christ our saviour , 1584. and of our reign , the 26. the Turk letter to the king of Tripoli in Barbary , command the restitution of a english ship , call the Jesus , with the man , and good , send from Constantinople , by Mahomet beg , a justice of the great Turk , and a english gentleman , call master Edward Barton . anno 1584. onourable , and worthy bassa Romadan Beglerbeg , most wise and prudent judge of the west Tripoli , we wish the end of all thy enterprise happy , and prosperous . by these our highness letter , we certify thou , that the right honourable , William hareborne , ambassador in our most famous porch , for the most excellent queen majesty of England , in person , and by letter have certify our highness , that a certain ship , with all her furniture , and artillery , worth two thousand ducat , arrive in the port of Tripoli , and discharge of her lade and merchandise , pay our custom accord to order , and again , the merchant jade their ship with oil , which by constraint they be enforce to buy of you , and have answer in like manner the custom for the same , determine to depart : a Frenchman assistant to the merchant , unknown to the Englishman , carry away with he another Frenchman indebt to a certain moor in four hundred ducat , and by force cause the Englishman , and ship to depart : who neither suspect fraud , nor deceit , hoist sail . in the mean time , this man , who debtor the Frenchman have 314 steal away , go to the bassa with the supplication , by who mean , and force of the castle , the Englishman be constrain to return into the port , where the Frenchman , author of the evil , with the master of the ship a Englishman , innocent of the crime be hang , [ il i . 193. ] and six and twenty Englishman cast into prison , of who through famine , thirst , and stink of the prison , eleven die , and the rest like to die . further , it be signify to our majesty also , that the merchandise and other good , with the ship , be worth 7600. ducat : which thing if they be so , this be our commandment , which be grant and give by our majesty , that the english ship , and all the merchandise , and whatsoever else take away be whole restore , and that the Englishman be let go free , and suffer to return into their country . wherefore when this our commandment shall come unto thou , we straight command , that the foresay business be diligent look unto , and discharge . and if it be so , that a Frenchman , and no Englishman have do this craft , and wickedness unknown to the Englishman , and as author of the wickedness be punish , and that the Englishman commit nothing against the peace and league , or their article : also if they pay custom accord to order , it be against law , custom of country , and their privilege , to hinder or hurt they . neither be it meet , their ship , merchandise , and all their good take , shall be withhold . we will therefore , that the english ship , merchandise , and all other their good , without exception , be restore to the Englishman : also that the man be let go free , and if they will , let none hinder they , to return peaceable into their country : do not commit , that they another time complain of this matter , and how this business be dispatch , certify we at our most famous porch . Dated in the city of Constantinople , in the 992. year of Mahomet , and in the end of the month of October ; and in the year of Jesus 1584. 315 a letter of master William hareborne , the english ambassador , Ligier in Constantinople , to the bassa Romadan , the Beglerbeg of Tripoli in Barbary , for the restore of a english ship call the Jesus , with the good , and man , detain as slave , anno 1585 - Edoardo Barton y mahume Beg. Olto magnifico signor , noi ha stato significato per diverse lettere the quanto ha passato circa di una nave nostra chiamata jesus , sopra il quale in agiuto di ricciardo skeg , uno de gli nostri mercanti di essa gia morto , veniva un certo Francese per sopra cargo , chiamato Romano soning , il quale per non esser ben portato secondo che doveva , volendo importar seco un altro Francese debitore a certi vostri sensa pagarcene , per giusticia era appiccato col patron Inglese Andre Dier , i come simplice credendo all detto Francese , senza aveder-cene de la sva ria malitia , non retornava , quando da vostra magnifica Signoria gli era mandato . la morte deal detto tristo Francese approviamo como cosa benfatta . ma all contrario , dove lei ha confiscato la detta nave e mercantia en essa , and fatto sciavi li marinari , como cosa molto contraria a li privilegii dal grand Signor quattro anni passati concessi , 8c da noi confirmati di part de la serenissimus Magesta d’ingilterra nostra patrona , e molto contraria a la liga del detto grand signior , il quale essendo dal sopra detto apieno informato , noi ha conceduto il suo regale mandamento di restitution , la qual mandiamo a vostra magnifica Signoria col present portator Edoardo Barton , nostro Secretario , and mahume beg , droguemano di sva porta excelsa , con altre lettere del excellentissimo vizir , and invictissimo capitan di mar : chiedendo , tanto di parte del grand signior , quanto di sva serenissimus Magesta di V. saint m. che gli huomini , oglii , nave col fornimento , 316 