deliverance aforesaid : and also for her honourable privy counsel , and i especial for the prosperity and good estate of the house of the late decease , the right honourable the earl of Bedford , who honour i must confess , most diligent at the suit of my father now depart , travel herein : for the which i rest continual bind to he , who soul i doubt not , but be already in the heaven in joy , with the almighty , unto which place he vouchsafe to bring we all , - that for our sin suffer most vile and shameful death upon the cross , there to live perpetual world without end , amen . the queen letter to the Turk 1584. for the restitution of the ship call the Jesus , and the english captive detain in Tripoli in Barbary , and for certain other prisoner in Argier . LIZABETHA , dei ter maximi and unici coeli terraeque conditoris gratia , angliae , francia , and hiberniae regina , fidei Christianae contra omnes omnium inter christianos degentium , christique nomen falso profitentium idololatrias , invictissima and potentissima defensatrix : augustissimo , invictissim6que principi , zultan Murad can , Musulmanici regni dominatori potentissimo , imperiique orientis Monarchae , supra omnes soli and supremo salutem , and multos cum summa rerum optimarum affluentia foelice and fortunatos annos . augustissime and potentissime imperator , biennio jam peracto , ad Caesaream vestram majestatem scripsimus , ut dilectus noster famulus guilielmus harebornus , vir ornatissimus pro legato nostro Constantinopoli , aliisque Musulmanici imperii ditionibus , sublimi vestra autho-ritate reciperetur : simul etiam Angli subditi nostri commercium and mercaturam , in omnibus illis provinciis exerceant , non miniis liberi , quam Galli , Poloni , Veneti , 3 ” Germani , caeterique vestri confcederati , qui varias orientis part peragrant , operam nauante , ut mutuis commerciis conjungatur oriens cum occident . quae privilegia , cum nostris subditis Anglis invictissima vestra majestas literis and diplomat suo liberalissime in-dulserit , facere non potuimus , quin quas maximas animus noster capere potest gratias , eo nomine ageremus : sperante fore , ut haec instituta commerciorum ratio maximas utilitate , and commoda utrinque , tam in imperii vestri ditiones , quam regni nostri provincias secum adferat . id ut plane fiat , ciim nuper subditi nostri nonnulli Tripoli in Barbaria and Argellae ab ejus loci incolis voluntatem vestram forte nescientibus male habiti fuerint , and immaniter di vexati , Caesaream vestram majestatem benevole rogamus , ut per legatum nostrum eorum causam cognoscas , and postremd earum provinciarum pros ac praefectis imperes , ut nostri libere in illis sine vi aut injuria deinceps versari , and negotia gerere possint . et nos omni opera vicissim studebimus ea omnia praestare , quae Imperatoriae vestrae majestati ullo pacto grata before intelligemus : quam deus unicus mundi conditor optimus maximus diutissime incolumem and florentem servet . Datae in palatio nostro Londini , [ ii i . 192. ] quinto die mensis septembris : anno Jesus christi Servatoris nostri , 1584. Regni vero nostri vicessimo sexto . regibu locis , the same in english . Lizabeth , by the grace of the most high God , and only maker of heaven and earth , of England , France and Ireland queen , and of the christian faith , against all the idolater and false professor of the name of Christ dwell among the christian , most invincible and puissant defender : to the most valiant and invincible prince , zultan Murad can , the most mighty ruler of the kingdom of Musulman , and of the east 312 empire the only and high monarch above all , health , and many happy and fortunate year , with great abundance of the best thing . most noble and puissant'emperour , about two year now pass , we write unto your imperial ! majesty , that our well-beloved servant , William hareborne , a man of great reputation and honour , may be receive under your high authority , for our ambassador in Constantinople , and other place , under the obedience of your empire of Musulman : and also that the Englishman , be our subject , may exercise intercourse and merchandise in all those province , no less free than the french , polonians , venetian , germane , and other your confederate , which travel through diverse of the east part : endeavour that by mutual traffic , the east may be join and knit to the west . which privilege , when as your most puissant majesty , by your letter and under your dispensation most liberal and favourable grant to our subject of England , we can not less doe , but in that respect give you as great thanks , as our heart can conceive , trust that it will come to pass , that this order of traffic , so well ordain , will bring with it self most great profit and commodity to both side , as well to the party subject to your empire , as to the province of our kingdom .. which thing that it may be do in plain and effectual manner , whereas some of our subject of late at Tripoli in Barbary , and at Argier , be by the inhabitant of those place ( be perhaps ignorant of your pleasure ) evil entreat and grievous vex , we do friendly and love desire your Imperiali majesty , that you will understand their cause by our ambassador , and afterward give commandment to the lieutenant and president of those province , that our people may henceforth free , without any violence , or injury , travel , and do their business in those place . and we again with all endeavour , shall study to perform all those thing , which we shall in any wise 313 A.D. 1584. understand to be acceptable to your imperiali majesty , which God , the only maker of the world , most best and most great , long keep in health , and flourish . give in our palace at London , the five day of the month of September , in the year of Jesus Christ our saviour , 1584. and of our reign , the 26. the Turk letter to the king of Tripoli in Barbary , command the restitution of a english ship , call the Jesus , with the man , and good , send from Constantinople , by Mahomet beg , a justice of the great Turk , and a english gentleman , call master Edward Barton . anno 1584. onourable , and worthy bassa Romadan Beglerbeg , most wise and prudent judge of the west Tripoli , we wish the end of all thy enterprise happy , and prosperous . by these our highness letter , we certify thou , that the right honourable , William hareborne , ambassador in our most famous porch , for the most excellent queen majesty of England , in person , and by letter have certify our highness , that a certain ship , with all her furniture , and artillery , worth two thousand ducat , arrive in the port of Tripoli , and discharge of her lade and merchandise , pay our custom accord to order , and again , the merchant jade their ship with oil , which by constraint they be enforce to buy of you , and have answer in like manner the custom for the same , determine to depart : a Frenchman assistant to the merchant , unknown to the Englishman , carry away with he another Frenchman indebt to a certain moor in four hundred ducat , and by force cause the Englishman , and ship to depart : who neither suspect fraud , nor deceit , hoist sail . in the mean time , this man , who debtor the Frenchman have 314 