Abilfada Ishmael his cos-mogra / aye . the english voyage add the security of passage , with other privilege most necessary to use the trade with your man , your majesty shall do that which belong to a most honourable and liberal prince , and deserve so much of we , as by no continuance or length of time shall|be forget . which request of we we do most instant desire to be take in good part of your majesty , and so great a benefit towards we and our man , we shall endeavour by diligence to requite when time shall serve thereunto . the God almighty long preserve your imperial majesty . a letter of m. John Newberry , write from Aleppo , to m. Richard Hakluit of Oxford , the 28. of may , anno 1583. ight well-beloved , and my assure good friend , i hearty commend i unto you , hope of your good health , etc after we set sail from grave end , which be the 13. day of February last , we remain upon our coast until the 11. day of march , and that day we set sail from Falmouth , and never anchor till we arrive in the road of Tripoli in Syria , which be the last day of April last pass , where we stay 14. day : and the twenty of this present we come hither to Aleppo , and with God help , within five or six day go from hence towards the Indies . since my come to Tripoli i have make very earnest inquiry both there and here , for the book of cosmography of Abilfada Ishmael , but by no mean can hear of it . some say that possible it may be have in Persia , but notwithstanding i will not fade tp make inquiry for it , both in Babylon , and in Balsara , and if i can find it in any of these place , i will send it you from thence . the letter which you deliver i for to copy out , that come from m. Thomas Stevens in goa , as also the note you give i of Francis Fernandes the Portugal , i bring thence with i among other write unaware , the which i have send you here enclose . here be great preparation for the war in 452 Persia , and from hence be go the bassa of a town call Rahemet , and short after go the bassa of Tripoli , and the bassa of Damascus , but they have not all with they above 6000. man from hence , and they go to a town call Asmerome , which be three day journey from trapezunde , where they shall meet with diverse captain and soldier that come from Constantinople and other place thereabouts , which go altogether into Persia . this year many man go into the war , and so have there every year since the beginning thereof , which be eight year or thereabouts , but very few of they return again . notwithstanding , they get of the persian , and make castle and hold in their country . i pray you make my hearty commendation to master Peter Guillame , and master Philip Jones , and to m. Walter Warner , and to all the rest of our friend . master Fitch have he hearty commend unto you : and so i commit you to the tuition of the almighty , who bless and keep you , and send we a joyful meeting . from Aleppo , the 28. of May 1583. your love friend to command in all that i may . John Newberie . another letter of the say m. Newberie , write to master Leonard poor of London , from Aleppo . ight well-beloved , my very hearty commendation unto you , and the rest of my friend remember . my last i send you be the 25. of February last , from deal out of the down , after which time with contrary wind we remain upon our own coast , until the 11. day of march , and then we set sail from march u . Falmouth , and the thirteenth day the wind come contrary with a very great storm , which continue eight day , and in this great storm we have some of our good wet , but God be thank no great hurt do . after which time we sail with a fair wind within the strait , and so remain at sea , and anchor at no 453 