Persia , and from hence be go the bassa of a town call Rahemet , and short after go the bassa of Tripoli , and the bassa of Damascus , but they have not all with they above 6000. man from hence , and they go to a town call Asmerome , which be three day journey from trapezunde , where they shall meet with diverse captain and soldier that come from Constantinople and other place thereabouts , which go altogether into Persia . this year many man go into the war , and so have there every year since the beginning thereof , which be eight year or thereabouts , but very few of they return again . notwithstanding , they get of the persian , and make castle and hold in their country . i pray you make my hearty commendation to master Peter Guillame , and master Philip Jones , and to m. Walter Warner , and to all the rest of our friend . master Fitch have he hearty commend unto you : and so i commit you to the tuition of the almighty , who bless and keep you , and send we a joyful meeting . from Aleppo , the 28. of May 1583. your love friend to command in all that i may . John Newberie . another letter of the say m. Newberie , write to master Leonard poor of London , from Aleppo . ight well-beloved , my very hearty commendation unto you , and the rest of my friend remember . my last i send you be the 25. of February last , from deal out of the down , after which time with contrary wind we remain upon our own coast , until the 11. day of march , and then we set sail from march u . Falmouth , and the thirteenth day the wind come contrary with a very great storm , which continue eight day , and in this great storm we have some of our good wet , but God be thank no great hurt do . after which time we sail with a fair wind within the strait , and so remain at sea , and anchor at no 453 amber grief . Sope. break glass . the english voyage place until our come into the road of Tripoli in Syria , which be the last day of April . this be a very good passage . God make we thankful for it . the fourteen day of this present we come from Tripoli , and the twenty day arrive here in Aleppo , and with the help of God to morrow or next day , we begin our voyage towards Babylon and Balsara , and so into India . our friend master Barret have he commend to you , who have send you in the Emanuel a ball of nutmeg for the small trifle you send he , which i hope long since you have receive . also he have by his letter certify you in what order he sell those thing , whereof i can say nothing , because i have not see the account thereof , neither have demand it : for ever since our come hither he have be still busy about the dispatch of the ship , and our voyage , and i likewise in buy of thing here to carry to Balsara , and the Indies . we have buy in coral for 1200. and odd ducat , and amber for four hundred ducat , and some soap and break glass , with all other small trifle , all which thing i hope will serve very well for those place that we shall go unto . all the rest of the account of the bark Reinolds be send home in the Emanuel , which be 3600. ducat , which be 200. pound more than it be rate . for master staper rate it but 1100. livre . and it be 1300. pound , so that our part be 200. pound . beside such profit as it shall please God to send thereof : wherefore you shall do very well to speak to m. staper for the account . and if you will content your self to travel for three or four year , i will wish you to come hither or go to Cairo , if any go thither . for we doubt not if you have remain there but three or four month , you will like so well of the place , that i think you will not desire to return again in three or four year . And , if it shall be my chance to remain in any place out of England , i will choose this before all other that i know . my reason be , the place be healthful and 454 letter from John Newberry a.d. 1583. pleasant , and the gain very good , and no doubt the profit will be hereafter better , thing be use in good order : for there shall come in every ship the four part of her cargason in money , which will help to put away our commodity at a very good price . also to have two very good ship to come together , will do very well : for in so do , the danger of the voyage may be account as little as from London to Antwerp . master Giles porter and master Edmund porter , go [ ii i . 247 - ] from Tripoli in a small bark to Jaffa , the same day that we come from thence , which be the 14 day of this present , so that no doubt but long since they be in Jerusalem : God send they and we safe return e . at this instant i have receive the account of m. Barret , and the rest of the ring , with two and twenty ducat , two medines in ready money . so there be nothing remain in his hand but a few book , and with Thomas Bostocke i leave certain small trifle , which i pray you demand . and so once again with my hearty commendation i commit you to the tuition of the almighty , who always preserve we . from Aleppo the 29 of May 1583. you assure , John Newberie . another letter of master Newberie to the aforesaid m. poor , write from Babylon . you last 1 send you , be the 29 of may last pass from Aleppo , by George Gill the purser of the tiger , which the last day of the same month come from u thence , and arrive at feluge the 19 day of June , which feluge be one day ------------- journey from hence . notwithstanding some of our company come not hither till the last day of the last month , which be for want of camel to carry our good : for at this time of the year , by reason of the great heat that be here , camel be very scant to be get . and since our come hither we have 455 