some liberty and see ri tie of voyage to gratify it , with such privilege as to you shall seem good : which courtesy if your Imperiali majesty shall to our subject at our request perform , we , accord to our royal honour , will recompense the same with as many desert as we can . and herewith we bid your imperial majesty to farewell . a letter write by her majesty to the king of China , in February 1583. Lizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , etc most imperial and invincible prince , our honest subject John Newberry the bringer hereof , who with our favour have take in hand the voyage which now he pursue to the part and country of your empire , not trust upon any other ground then upon the favour of your imperiali clemency and humanity , be move to undertake a thing of so much difficulty , be persuade that he have enter into so many peril , your majesty will not dislike the same , especial , if it may appear that it be not damageable unto your royal majesty , and that to your people it will bring some profit : of both which thing he not doubt , with more willing mind have prepare himself for his destinate voyage unto we well like of . for by this mean we perceive , that the profit which by the mutual trade on both side , all the prince our neighbour in you west do receive , your imperial majesty and those that be subject under your dominion , to their great joy and benefit shall have the same , which con-sisteth in the transport outward of such thing whereof we have plenty , and in bring in such thing as we stand in need of . it can otherwise be , but that see we be bear and make to have need one of another , and that we be bind to aid one another , but that your imperial majesty will well like of it , and by your subject w‘ like endeavour will be accept . for the increase whereof , if your imperial majesty shall 451 Abilfada Ishmael his cos-mogra / aye . the english voyage add the security of passage , with other privilege most necessary to use the trade with your man , your majesty shall do that which belong to a most honourable and liberal prince , and deserve so much of we , as by no continuance or length of time shall|be forget . which request of we we do most instant desire to be take in good part of your majesty , and so great a benefit towards we and our man , we shall endeavour by diligence to requite when time shall serve thereunto . the God almighty long preserve your imperial majesty . a letter of m. John Newberry , write from Aleppo , to m. Richard Hakluit of Oxford , the 28. of may , anno 1583. ight well-beloved , and my assure good friend , i hearty commend i unto you , hope of your good health , etc after we set sail from grave - end , which be the 13. day of February last , we remain upon our coast until the 11. day of march , and that day we set sail from Falmouth , and never anchor till we arrive in the road of Tripoli in Syria , which be the last day of April last pass , where we stay 14. day : and the twenty of this present we come hither to Aleppo , and with God help , within five or six day go from hence towards the Indies . since my come to Tripoli i have make very earnest inquiry both there and here , for the book of cosmography of Abilfada Ishmael , but by no mean can hear of it . some say that possible it may be have in Persia , but notwithstanding i will not fade tp make inquiry for it , both in Babylon , and in Balsara , and if i can find it in any of these place , i will send it you from thence . the letter which you deliver i for to copy out , that come from m. Thomas Stevens in goa , as also the note you give i of Francis Fernandes the Portugal , i bring thence with i among other write unaware , the which i have send you here enclose . here be great preparation for the war in 452 