Letters from John Newberry a.d. 1583. pleasant , and the gain very good , and no doubt the profit will be hereafter better , thing be use in good order : for there shall come in every ship the four part of her cargason in money , which will help to put away our commodity at a very good price . also to have two very good ship to come together , will do very well : for in so do , the danger of the voyage may be account as little as from London to Antwerp . master Giles porter and master Edmund porter , go [ ii i . 247 - ] from Tripoli in a small bark to Jaffa , the same day that we come from thence , which be the 14 day of this present , so that no doubt but long since they be in Jerusalem : God send they and we safe return e . at this instant i have receive the account of m. Barret , and the rest of the ring , with two and twenty ducat , two medines in ready money . so there be nothing remain in his hand but a few book , and with Thomas Bostocke i leave certain small trifle , which i pray you demand . and so once again with my hearty commendation i commit you to the tuition of the almighty , who always preserve we . from Aleppo the 29 of May 1583. you assure , John Newberie . another letter of master Newberie to the aforesaid m. poor , write from Babylon . you last 1 send you , be the 29 of may last pass from Aleppo , by George Gill the purser of the tiger , which the last day of the same month come from u thence , and arrive at feluge the 19 day of June , which feluge be one day ------------- journey from hence . notwithstanding some of our company come not hither till the last day of the last month , which be for want of camel to carry our good : for at this time of the year , by reason of the great heat that be here , camel be very scant to be get . and since our come hither we have 455 the best sort of spice at Babylon . Balsara . ormus . the price of spice at Babylon . the english voyage find very small sale , but diverse say that in the winter our commodity will be very well sell , i pray God their word may prove true . i think cloth , kersy and tin , have never be here at so low price as they be now . notwithstanding , if i have here so much ready money as the commodity be worth , i will not doubt to make a very good profit of this voyage hither , and to Balsara , and so by god help there will be reasonable profit make of the voyage . but with half money and half commodity , may be buy here the best sort of spice , and other commodity that be bring from the Indies , and without money there be here at this instant small good to be do . with god help two day hence , i mind to go from hence to Balsara , and from thence of force i must go to ormus for want of a man that speak the indian tongue . at my be in Aleppo i hire two nazarany , and one of they have be twice in the Indies , and have the language very well , but he be a very lewd fellow , and therefore i will not take he with i . here follow the price of ware as they be worth here at this instant . clove and mace , the bateman , 5 ducat . cinnamon 6 ducat , and few to be get . nutmeg , the bateman , 45 medin , and 40 medin make a ducat . Ginger 40 medin . pepper , 75 medin . Turbetta , the bateman , 50 medin . Neel the churl , 70 ducat , and a churl be 27 rottil and a half of Aleppo . silk , much better than that which come from Persia , 11 ducat and a half the bateman , and every bateman here make 7 pound and 5 ounce English weight . from Babylon the 20 day of July , 1583. you , John Newberie . 456 