[ ii i . 245. ] Letters concern the voyage of m. John Newberry and m. Ralph Fitch , make by the way of the Levant sea to Syria , and overland to Balsara , and thence into the east Indies , and beyond , in the year 1583. a letter write from the queen majesty , to Zelabdim echebar , king of Cambaia , and send by John Newberry . in February anno 1583. Lizabeth by the grace of God , etc to the most invincible , and most mighty prince , lord Zelabdim echebar king of Cambaya . invincible emperor , etc the great affection which our subject have , to visit the most distant place of the world , not without good will and in - tention to introduce the trade of merchandise of all nation whatsoever they can , by which mean the mutual and friendly traffic of merchandise on both side may come , be the cause that the bearer of this letter John Newberry , joint with those that be in his company , with a courteous and honest boldness , do repair to the border and country of your empire , we doubt not but that your imperial majesty through your royal grace , will favourable and friendly accept he . and that you will do it the rather for our sake , to make we great behold to your majesty ; we shall more earnest , and with more word require it , if we do think it needful . but by the singular report that be of your imperial majesty humanity in these uttermost part of the world , we be great ease of that burden , and therefore we use the few and less word : only we request that because they be our subject , they may be honest entreat and receive . and that in respect of the hard journey which they have undertake to place so far distant , it will please your majesty with 45° some liberty and see ri tie of voyage to gratify it , with such privilege as to you shall seem good : which courtesy if your Imperiali majesty shall to our subject at our request perform , we , accord to our royal honour , will recompense the same with as many desert as we can . and herewith we bid your imperial majesty to farewell . a letter write by her majesty to the king of China , in February 1583. Lizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , etc most imperial and invincible prince , our honest subject John Newberry the bringer hereof , who with our favour have take in hand the voyage which now he pursue to the part and country of your empire , not trust upon any other ground then upon the favour of your imperiali clemency and humanity , be move to undertake a thing of so much difficulty , be persuade that he have enter into so many peril , your majesty will not dislike the same , especial , if it may appear that it be not damageable unto your royal majesty , and that to your people it will bring some profit : of both which thing he not doubt , with more willing mind have prepare himself for his destinate voyage unto we well like of . for by this mean we perceive , that the profit which by the mutual trade on both side , all the prince our neighbour in you west do receive , your imperial majesty and those that be subject under your dominion , to their great joy and benefit shall have the same , which con-sisteth in the transport outward of such thing whereof we have plenty , and in bring in such thing as we stand in need of . it can otherwise be , but that see we be bear and make to have need one of another , and that we be bind to aid one another , but that your imperial majesty will well like of it , and by your subject w‘ like endeavour will be accept . for the increase whereof , if your imperial majesty shall 451 