Spodium and many other kind of drug come from podium . Cambaia . now to return to my voyage ; from ormus i go to Balsara or Basora , and from Basora to Babylon : and Basora . we pass the most part of the way by the strength of ba ° ” ' man by hail the boat up the river with a long cord . from Babylon i come by land to mosul , which stand mosul . never to Ninive , which be all ruinate and destroy ; it stand fast by the river of Tigris . from mosul i go to Merdin , which be in the country of the Merdin . Armenians ; but now there dwell in that place a people which they call Cordies , or Curdi . from Merdin i go to Orfa , which be a very fair town , and it have a goodly Orfa . fountain full of fish ; where the moor hold many great ceremony and opinion concern Abraham : for they say he do once dwell there . from thence i go to by|our , and so pass the river of Euphrates . from by|our i Bir. go to Aleppo , where i stay certain month for Aleppo . company ; and than i go to Tripoli ; where find Tripoli . English ship , i come with a prosperous voyage to London , where by God assistance i safe arrive the 29 of April 1591 , have be eight year out of my native country . the report of John Huighen van Linschoten concern m. newberry and m. fitch imprisonment , and of their escape , which happen while he be in goa . n the month of December , anno 1583 , there arrive in the town and island of ormus four english man , which come from Aleppo in the country of Syria , have sail out of England , and pass through the straight of Gibraltar to Tripoli a town and haven lie on the coast of Syria , where all the ship discharge their ware and merchandise , and from thence be carry by land unto 505 Aleppo , which be nine day journey . in Aleppo there be resident diverse merchant and factor of all nation , as italian , french man , english man , armenian , Turks and moor , every man have his religion apart , pay tribute unto the great Turk . in that town there be great traffic , for that from thence every year twice , there travel two caffyl , that be , company of people and camel , which travel unto India , Persia , Arabia , and all the country border on the same , and deal in all [ ii i . 266. ] sort of merchandise , both to and from those country , as i in another place have already declare . three of the say english man aforesaid , be send by the company of english man that be resident in Aleppo , to see if in ormus they may keep any factor , and so traffic in that place , like as also the italian do , that be to say , the venetian which in ormus , goa , and Malacca have their factor , and traffic there , aswell for stone and pearl , as for other ware and spice of those country , which from thence be carry over land JohnNewbery into Venice . one of these english man have be once rmusbefor bef°re in the say town of ormus , and there have take anno 1581 good information of the trade , and upon his advice and advertisement , the other be as then come thither with he , bring great store of merchandise with they , as clothes , saffron , all kind of drink glass , and haberdasher ware , as look glass , knife , and such like stuff : and to conclude , bring with they all kind of small ware that may be devise . and although those ware amount unto great sum of money , notwithstanding it be but only a shadow or colour , thereby to give no occasion to be mistrust , or see into : for that their principali intent be to buy great quantity of precious stone , as diamond , pearl , ruby , etc to the which end they bring with they a great sum of money and gold , and that very secret , not to be deceive or rob thereof , or to run into any danger for the same . they be thus arrive in ormus , hire a shop , and begin to sell 506 their ware : which the italian perceive , who factor continue there ( as i say before ) and fear that those english man find good vent for their commodity in that place , will be resident therein , and so daily increase , which will be no small loss and hindrance unto they , do present invent all the subtle mean they can to hinder they : and to that end they go unto the captain of ormus , as then call don Gonsalo de Meneses , tell he that there be certain english man come into ormus , that be send only to spy the country ; and say further , that they be heretic : and therefore they say it be convenient they shall not be suffer so to depart , without be examine , and punish as enemy , to the example of other . the captain be a friend unto the english man , by reason that one of they which have be there before , have give he certain present , will not be persuade to trouble they , but ship they with all their ware in a ship that be to sail for goa , and send they to the viceroy , that he may examine and try they , as he think good : where when they be arrive , they be cast into prison , and first examine whether they be good Christians or no : and because they can speak but bid Portugal , only two of they speak good dutch , as have be certain year in the low country , and there traffic , there be a dutch Jesuite bear in the town of Bruges in Flanders , that have be resident in the Indies for the space of thirty year , send unto they , to undermine and examine they : wherein they behave themselves so well , that they be hold and esteem for good and catholic Christians : yet still suspect , because they be stranger , and special english man . the Jesuit still tell they that they shall be send prisoner into Portugal , wish they to leave off their trade of maj-chandise , and to become Jesuit , promise they thereby to defend they from all trouble . the cause why they say so , and persuade they in that earnest manner , be , for that the dutch Jesuite have secret 5°7 be advertise of great sum of money which they have about they , and seek to get the same into their finger , for that the first vow and promise they make at their entrance into their order , be , to procure the welfare of their say order , by what mean soever it be . but although the english man deny they , and refuse the order , say , that they be unfit for such place , nevertheless they proceed so far , that one of they , be a painter ( that come with the other three for company , to see the country , and to seek his fortune , and be not send thither by the english merchant ) partly for fear , and partly for want of mean to relieve himself , promise they to become a Jesuite : and although they know and well perceive he be not any of those that have the treasure , yet because he be a painter , whereof there be but few in India , and that they have great need of he to paint their church , which otherwise will cost they great charge , to bring one from portugal , they be very glad thereof , hope in time to get the rest of they with all their money into their fellowship : so that to conclude , they make this painter a Jesuite , . where he continue certain day , give he good store of work to do , and entertain he with all the favour and friendship they can devise , and all to win the rest , to be a prey for they : but the other three continue still in prison , be in great fear , because they understand no man that come to they , nor any man almost know what they say : till in the end it be tell they that certain dutch man dwell in the archbishop house , and counsel give they to send unto they , whereat they much rejoice , and send to i and a other dutch man , desire we once to come and speak with they , which we present do , and they with tear in their eye make complaint unto we of their hard usage , show we from point to point ( as it be say before ) why [ ii i . 267. ] they be come into the country , withal desire we for God cause , if we may by any mean , to help they , that they may be set at liberty upon surety , 508 being ready to endure what justice shall ordain for they , say , that if it be find contrary , and that they be other then travel merchant , and seek to find out further benefit by their ware , they will be content to be punish . with that we depart from they , promise they to do our best : and in the end we obtain so much of the archbishop , that he go unto the viceroy to deliver our petition , and persuade he so well , that he be content to set they at liberty , and that their good shall be deliver unto they again , upon condition they shall put in surety for two thousand pardawe , not to depart the country before other order shall be take with they . thereupon they present find a citizen of the town that be their surety for two thousand pardawe , to who they pay in hand one thousand and three hundred pardawe , and because they say they have no more ready money , he give they credit , see what store of merchandise they have , whereby at all time life need be , he may be satisfy : and by that mean they be deliver out of prison , and hire themselves a house , and begin to set open shop : so that they utter much ware , and be present well know among all the merchant , because they always respect gentleman , special such as buy their ware , show great courtesy and honour unto they , whereby they win much credit , and be belove of all man , so that every man favour they , and be willing to do they pleasure . to we they show great friendship , for who sake the archbishop favour they much , and show they very good countenance , which they know well how to increase , by offer he many present , although he will not receive they , neither will ever take gift or present at any man hand . likewise they behave themselves so discreet that no man carry a evil eye , no , nor a evil think towards they . which like not the Jesuit , because it hinder they from that they hope for , so that they cease not still by this dutch Jesuite to put they in fear , that 5°9 they shall be send into Portugal to the king , counsel they to yield themselves Jesuit into their cloister , which if they do , he say they will defend they from all trouble , say further , that he counsel they therein as a friend , and one that know for certain that it be so determine by the viceroy privy council : which to effect he say they stay but for ship that shall sail for Portugal , with diverse other persuasion , to put they in some fear , and so to effect their purpose . the english man to the contrary , dare not say any thing to they , but answer , that as yet they will stay a while , and consider thereof , thereby put the Jesuit in comfort , as one among they , be the principali of they ( call John Newberry ) complain unto i often time , say that he know not what to say or think therein , or which way he may be rid of those trouble : but in the end they determine with themselves to depart from thence , and secret by mean of other friend they employ their money in precious stone ; which the better to effect , one of they be a jeweller , and for the same purpose come with they . which be conclude among they , they dare not make know to any man , neither do they credit we so much , as to show we their mind therein , although they tell we all whatsoever they know . but on a Whitsunday they go abroad to sport themselves about three mile from goa , in the mouth of the river in a country call bard , have with they good store of meat and drink . and because they shall not be suspect , they leave their house and shop , with some ware therein unsold , in custody of a dutch boy , by we provide for they , that look unto it . this boy be in the house not know their intent , and be in bard , they have with they a Patamar , which be one of the indian post , which in the winter time carry letter from one place to the other , who they have hire to guide they : and because that between bard and the firm land there be but a little river , in a manner half dry , they pass over it on foot , and so travel by land , 5iq ... i584‘ be never hear of again : but it be think they arrive in Aleppo , as some say , but they know not certain . their great hope be that John Newberry can speak the arabian tongue , which be use in all Arabian those country , or at the least understand ; for it be very general ! common in all place there about , as French with we . news be come to goa , there be a great stir and murmur among the people , and we much wonder at it : for many be of opinion , that we have give they counsel so to do : and present their surety seize upon the good remain , which may amount unto above two hundred pardawe ; and with that and the money he have receive of the english man , he go unto the viceroy , and deliver it unto he : which the viceroy have receive , forgive he the rest . this flight of the english man grieve the Jesuit most , because they have lose such a prey , which they make sure account of : whereupon the dutch Jesuite come to we to ask we if we know thereof , say , that if he have suspect so much , he will have deal otherwise , for that he say , he once have in his hand of they a bag wherein be forty thousand veneseander ( each veneseander be two [ ii i . 268. ] pardawe ) which be when they be in prison . and that they have always put he in comfort to accomplish his desire : upon the which promise he give they their money again , which otherwise they shall not so light have come by , or peradventure never , as he open say : and in the end he call they heretic , and spy , with a thousand other rail speech , which he utter against they . the english man that be become a Jesuite , hear that his companion be go , and perceive that the Jesuit show he not so great favour , neither use he so well as they do at the first , repent himself ; and see he have not as then make any solemn promise , and be counsel to leave the house , and tell that he can not want a live in the town , as also that the Jesuit can not keep he there without he be willing to stay , so they can not accuse he of any thing , he tell they flat that he have no desire to stay within the cloister . and although they use all the mean they can to keep he there , yet he will not stay , but hire a house without the cloister , and open shop , where he have good store of work : and in the end marry a mestizos daughter of the town , so that he make his account to stay there while he live . by this english man i be instruct of all the way , trade , and voyage of the country , between Aleppo and ormus , and of all the ordinance and common custom which they usual hold during their voyage over the land , as also of the place and town where they pass . and since those english man departure from goa , there never arrive any stranger , either english or other , by land , in the say country , but only italian which daily traffic over land , and use continual trade go and come that way . end of volume V. Glasgow : print at the university press by Robert maclehose and counterfeit . 