the voyage of m. Ralph Fitch merchant of London by the way of Tripoli in Syria , to ormus , and so to goa in the east India , to Cambaia , and all the kingdom of Zelabdim echebar the great Mogor , to the mighty river Ganges , and down to Bengala , to Bacola , and Chonderi , to Pegu , to Imahay in the kingdom of Siam , and back to Pegu , and from thence to Malacca , Zeilan , Cochin , and all the coast of the east India : begin in the year of our lord 1583 , and end 1591 , wherein the strange rite , manner , and custom of those people , and the exceed rich trade and commodity of those country be faithful set down and diligent describe , by the aforesaid m. Ralph Fitch . n the year of our lord 1583 , i Ralph Fitch of London merchant be desirous to see the country of the east India , in the company of m. John Newberie merchant ( which have be at ormus once before ) of William leede jeweller , and James story painter , be chief set [ ii i . 251. ] forth by the right worshipful sir Edward Osborne knight , and m. Richard 0 stape citizen and merchant of London , do ship my self in a ship of London call the tiger , wherein we go for Tripoli in Syria : and from thence we take the way for Aleppo , which we go in seven day with the caro van . be in Aleppo , and find good company , we go from thence to birra , which be two day and a half travail with camel . birra be a little town , but very plentiful of victual : birra . and near to the wall of the town run the river of Euphrates . here we buy a boat and agree with a master and bargeman , for to go to Babylon . Theise boat be but for one voyage ; for the stream do run five 465 2 g so fast downwards that they can return . they carry you to a town which they call Felugia , and there you sell the boat for a little money , for that which cost you fifty at birra you sell there for seven or eight . from birra to Felugia be sixteen day journey , it be not good that one boat go alone , for if it shall chance to break , you shall have much a do to save your good from the arabian , which be always there about rob : and in the night when your boat be make fast , it be necessary that you keep good watch . for the arabian that be thief , will come swim and steal your good and flee away , against which a gun be very good , for they do fear it very much . in the river of Euphrates from birra to Felugia there be certain place where you pay custom , so many medines for a some or camel lade , and certain raison and soap , which be for the son of aborise , which be lord of the arabian and all that great desert , and have some village upon Beluga . the river . Felugia where you unlade your good which come from birra be a little village : from whence you go to Babylon in a day . Babylon . Babylon be a town not very great but very populous , and of great traffic of stranger , for that it be the way to Persia , Turkia and Arabia : and from thence do go Carovans for these and other place . here be great store of victual , which come from Armenia down the river of Tigris . they be bring upon raft make of goat skin blow full of wind and board lay upon they : and thereupon they lade their good which be bring down to Babylon , which be discharge they open their skin , and carry they back by camel , to serve another time . Babylon in time past do belong to the kingdom of Persia , but now be subject to the Turk . over against Babylon there be a very fair village from whence you pass to Babylon upon a long bridge make of boat , and tie to a great chain of iron , which be make fast on either side of the river . when any boat be to pass up or down the river , 466 they take away certain of the boat until they be past . the tower of Babel be build on this side the river Tigris , towards Arabia from the town about seven or eight mile , which tower be ruinate on all side , and with the fall thereof have make as it be a little mountain , so that it have no shape at all : it be make of brick dry in the son , and certain cane and leaf of the palm tree lay betwixt the brick . there be no entrance to be see to go into it . it do stand upon a great plain betwixt the river of Euphrates and Tigris . by the river Euphrates two day journey from Babylon at a place call ait , in a field near unto it , be a strange thing to see : a mouth that do continual throw forth against the air boil pitch with a filthy smoke : which pitch do run abroad into a great field which be always full thereof . the moor say that it be the mouth of hell . by reason of the great quantity of it , the man of that country do pitch their boat two or three inch thick on the out side , so that no water do enter into they . their boat be call Danec . A.D. i583-9i . the tower of Babel . boil pitch continual issue out of the earth . when there be great store of water in Tigris you may go from Babylon to Basora in 8 or 9 day : if there be small store it will cost you the more day . Basora in time past be under the arabian , but now be subject to the Turk . but some of they the Turk can subdue , for that they hold certain island in the river Euphrates which the Turk can win of they . they be thief all and have no settle dwelling , but remove from place to place with their camel , goat , and horse , wife and child and all . they have large blue gown , their wife ear and nose be ring very full of ring of copper and silver , and they wear ring of copper about their leg . Basora stand near the gulf of Persia , and be a town of great trade of spice and drug which come from ormus . also there be great store of wheat , rice , 467 the english voyage and date grow thereabouts , wherewith they serve Babylon and all the country , ormus , and all the part of India . i go from Basora to ormus down the gulf of Persia in a certain ship make of board , and sow together with cayro , which be thread make of the husk of cocoe , and certain cane or straw leave sow upon the seam of the horde which be the cause that they leak very much . and so have Persia always on the left hand , and the coast of Arabia on the right hand we pass many island , and among other the famous hand baharim from whence come the best pearl which be round and orient . ormus be a island in circuit about five and twenty or thirty mile , and be the dry island in the world : for there be nothing grow in it but only salt ; for their water , wood , or victual , and all thing necessary come out of Persia , which be about twelve mile from thence . all the hand thereabouts be very fruitful , from whence all kind of victual be send unto ormus . the portugal have a castle here which stand near unto the sea , wherein there be a captain for the king of Portugal have under he a convenient number of soldier , whereof some part remain in the castle , and some in the town . in this town be merchant of all nation , and many moor and gentile . here be very great trade of all sort of spice , drug , silk , cloth of silk , fine tapestry of Persia , great store of pearl which come from the isle of baharim , and be the best pearl of all other , and many horse of Persia , which serve all India . they have a moor to their king , which be choose and govern by the Portugal . their woman be very strange attire , wear on their nose , ear , neck , arm and leg many ring set with jewel , and lock of silver and gold in their ear , and a long bar of gold upon the side of their nose . their ear with the weight of their jewel be wear so wide , that a man may thrust three of his finger into they . here very short after our arrival we be put in prison , and have part of our good take 468 from we by the captain of the castle , who name be don Mathias de Albuquerque ; and from hence the eleven of October he ship we and send we for goa unto the viceroy , which at that time be don Francisco de Mascarenhas . the ship wherein we be embark for goa belong to the captain , and carry one hundred twenty and four horse in it . all merchandise carry to goa in a ship wherein be horse pay no custom in goa . the horse pay custom , the good pay nothing ; but if you come in a ship which bring no horse , you be then to pay eight in the hundred for your good . the first city of India that we arrive at upon the five of November , after we have pass the coast of Zindi , be call diu , which stand in a hand in the kingdom Diu. of Cambaia , and be the strong town that the Portugal have in those part . it be but little , but well store with merchandise ; for here they lade many great ship with diverse commodity for the streit of Mecca , for ormus , and other place , and these be ship of the moor and of Christians . but the moor can pass , except they have a passport from the Portugal . Cambaietta be the chief city of that province , which be great and very populous , and fair build for a town of the gentile : but if there happen any famine , the people will sell their child for very little . the last king of Cambaia be sultan Badu , which be kill at the siege of diu , and short after his city be take by the great Mogor , which be the king of Agra and of delli , which be forty day journey from the country of Cambaia . here the woman wear upon their arm infinite number of ring make of elephant tooth , wherein they take so much delight , that they have rather be without their meat then without their bracelet . go from diu we come to Daman the second town of the Portugal in the country Daman . of Cambaia which be distant from diu forty league . here be no trade but of corn and rice . they have many village under they which they quiet possess in time of peace , but in time of war the enemy be master of 469 basaim . they . from thence we pass by basaim , and from Tana . Basaim to Tana , at both which place be small trade but only of corn and rice . the ten of November our Chaul . arrive at Chaul which stand in the firm land . there be two town , the one belong to the Portugal , and the other to the moor . that of the Portugal be near to the sea , and command the bay , and be wall round about . a little above that be the town of the moor which be govern by a moor king call xa-maluco . here be great traffic for all sort of spice and drug , silk , and cloth of silk , sandal , elephant tooth , and much china work , and much sugar which be make of the nut call Gagara : the tree be call the palmer : which be the profitable tree in the world : it do always bear fruit , and do yield wine , oil , sugar , vinegar , cord , coal , of the leaf be make thatch for the house , sail for ship , mat to sit or lie on : of the branch they make their house , and broom to sweep , of the tree wood for ship . the wine do issue out of the top of the tree . they cut a branch of a bow and bind it hard , and hang a earthen pot upon it , which they empty every morning and every evening , and still it and put in certain dry raisin , and it becomes very strong wine in short time . hither many ship come from all part of India , ormus , and many from Mecca : here be many moor and gentile . they have a very strange order among they , they worship a cow , and esteem much of the cow dung to paint the wall of their house . they will kill nothing not so much as a louse : for they hold it a sin to kill any thing . they eat no flesh , but live by root , and rice , and milk . and when the husband die his wife be burn with he , if she be alive : if she will not , her [ ii i . 253 ] head be shave , and then be never any account make of she after . they say if they shall be bury , it be a great sin , for of their body there will come many worm and other vermin , and when their body be consume , those worm will lack sustenance , which 470 1583-9 ! • be a sin , therefore they will be burn . in Cambaia they will kill nothing , nor have any thing kill : in the town they have hospital to keep lame dog and cat , and for bird . they will give meat to the Ants. goa be the most principal city which the Portugal goa . have in • India , wherein the viceroy remain with his court . it stand in a hand , which may be 25. or 30. mile about . it be a fine city , and for a indian town very fair . the hand be very fair , full of orchard and garden , and many palmer tree , and have some village . here be many merchant of all nation . and the fleet which come every year from Portugal , which be four , five , or six great ship , come first hither . and they come for the most part in September , and remain there forty or fifty day ; and then go to Cochin , where they lade their pepper for Portugal . oftentimes they lade one in goa , the rest go to Cochin which be from goa a hundred league southward . goa stand in the country of Hidalcan , who lie in the country six or seven day journey . his chief city be call bisapor . at our come we be cast into they be th* prison , and examine before the justice and demand for letter , and be charge to be spy , but they can ’ prove nothing by we . we continue in prison until the two and twenty of December , and then we be set at liberty , put in surety for two thousand ducat not to depart the town ; which surety father Stevens a english Jesuite which we find there , 8c another religious man a friend of his procure for we . our surety name be Andreas taborer , to who we pay 2150. ducat , and still he demand more : whereupon we make suit to the viceroy and justice to have our money again , consider that they have have it in their hand near five month and can prove nothing against we . the viceroy make we a very sharp answer , and say we shall be better sift before it be long , and that they have further matter against we . whereupon we present determine rather to seek our liberty , than 471 to be in danger for ever to be slave in the country , for it be tell we we shall have you strapado . whereupon present , the five day of April 1585. in the morning we run from thence . And be set over the river , we go two day on foot not without fear , not know the way nor have any guide , for we dare trust none . one of the first town which we come unto , be call Bellergan a Bellergan , where there be a great market keep of town . diamond , ruby , saphire , and many other soft stone . Bitapor . from Bellergan we go to bisapor which be a very great town where the king do keep his court . he have many Gentiles in his court and they be great idolater . and they have their idol stand in the wood , which they fall Pagodes . some be like a cow , some like a monkey , some like buffle , some like peacock , and some like the devil . here be very many elephant which they go to war withal . here they have good store of gold and silver : their house be of stone very Gulconda . fair and high . from hence we go for Gulconda , the king whereof be call cutup de lashach . here and in the kingdom of Hidalcan , and in the country of the king of Decan be the diamond find of the old water . it be a very fair town , pleasant , with fair house of brick and timber , it abound with great store of fruit and fresh water . here the man and the woman do go with a cloth bind about their middle without any more apparel . we find it here very hot . the winter begin here about the last of may . in Masulipatan . these part be a port or haven call Masulipatan , which stand eight day journey from hence towards the gulf of Bengala , whether come many ship out of India , pegu , and Sumatra , very rich lade with pepper , spice , and other commodity . the country be very Servidore . good and fruitful . from thence i go to Servidore which be a fine country , and the king be call , the king of bread . the house here be all thatch and make of loom . here be many moor and gentile , but there be small religion among they . from thence i go to 472 Bellapore , and so to barrampore , which be in the country Bellapore . of Zelabdim echebar . in this place their money be make of a kind of silver round and thick , to the value of twenty penny , which be very good silver . it be marvellous great and a , populous country . in their winter which be in June , July , and August , there be no pass in the street but with horse , the water be so high . the house be make of loom and thatch . here be great store of cotton cloth make , and paint clothes of cotton wool : here grow great store of corn and rice . we find marriage great store both in town strange and village in many place where we pass , of boy mariases-of eight or ten year , and girl of five or six year old . they both do ride upon one horse very trim deck , and be carry through the town with great pipe and play , and so return home and eat of a banquet make of rice and fruit , and there they dance the most part of the night and so make a end of the marriage . they lie not together until they be ten year old . they say they marry their child so young , because it be a order that when the man die , the woman must be burn with he : so that if the father [ ii i . 254. ] die , yet they may have a father in law to help to bring up the child which be marry : and also that they will not leave their son without wife , nor their daughter without husband . from thence we go to Mandoway , which be a very strong town . it be Mandoway a besiege twelve year by Zelabdim echebar before he strong can win it . it stand upon a very great high rock ' as the most part of their castle do , and be of a very great circuit . from hence we go to Ugini and ugini . serringe , where we overtake the ambassador of Zelabdim echebar with a marvelous great company of man , elephant , and camel . here be great trade of cotton and cloth make of cotton , and great store of drug . from thence we go to Agra pass many river , which by reason of the rain be so swell , that we wade Agra a and . eat and swim oftentimes for our life . Agra be a very city . 473 the like be report of the city of China . the english voyage great city and populous , build with stone , have fair and large street , with a fair river run by it , which fall into the gulf of Bengala . it have a fair castle and a strong with a very fair ditch . here be many moor and gentile , the king be call Zelabdim echebar : the people for the most part call he the great Mogor . from thence we go for fatepore , which be the place where the king keep his court . the town be great than Agra , but the house and street be not so fair . here dwell many people both moor and gentile . the king have in Agra and fatepore as they do credible report 1000 elephant , thirty thousand horse , 1400. tame deer , 800. concubine : such store of ounce , tiger , Buffies , cock and hawk , that be very strange to see . he keep a great court , which they call Dericcan . Agra and fatepore be two very great city , either of they much great than London and very populous . between Agra and fatepore be 12. mile , and all the way be a market of victual and other thing , as full as though a man be still in a town , and so many people as if a man be in a market . they have many fine cart , and many of they carve and gild with gold , with two wheel which be draw with two little Buis about the bigness of our great dog in England , and they will run with any horse , and carry two or three man in one of these cart : they be cover with silk or very fine cloth , and be use here as our coach be in England . hither be great resort of merchant from Persia and out of India , and very much merchandise of silk and cloth , and of precious stone , both ruby , diamond , and pearl . the king be apparel in a white cabie make like a shirt tie with string on the one side , and a little cloth on his head colour oftentimes with red or yellow . None come into his house but his eunuch which keep his woman . here in fatepore we stay all three until the 28. of September 1585. and then master John Newberie take his journey towards the city of lahor , determine from 474 thence to go for Persia and then for Aleppo or Constantinople , whether he can get soon passage unto , and direct i to go for Bengala and for Pegu , and do promise i , if it please God , to meet i in Bengala within two year with a ship out of England . i leave William lead the jeweller in service with the king Zelabdim echebar in fatepore , who do entertain he very well , and give he a house and five slave , a horse , and every day six saint saint in money . i go from Agra to satagam in Bengala , in the company of one hundred and fourscore boat lade with salt , opium , hinge , lead , carpet , and diverse other commodity down the river Jemena . the chief merchant be moor and gentile . in these country they have many strange ceremony . the Bramanes which be their priest , come to the water and have a string about their neck make with great ceremony , and lade up water with both their hand , and turn the string first with both their hand within , and then one arm after the other out . though it be never so cold , they will wash themselves in cold water or in warm . Theise Gentiles will eat no flesh nor kill any thing . they live with rice , butter , milk , and fruit . they pray in the water naked , and dress their meat and eat it naked , and for their penance they lie flat upon the earth , and rise up and turn themselves about 30. or 40. time , and use to heave up their hand to the sun , and to kiss the earth , with their arm and leg stretch along out , and their right leg always before the left . Every time they lie down , they make a score on the ground with their finger to know when their stint be finish . the Bramanes mark themselves in the forehead , ear and throat with a kind of yellow gear which they grind , and every morning they do it . and they have some old man which go in the street with a box of yellow powder , and mark man on their head and neck as they meet they . and their wife do come by 10. 20. and 30. together to the water side sing , and there 475 A.D. 1583-91 - Wil. lead serve the king of Cambaia . the superstitious ceremony of the Bramanes . do wash themselves , and then use their ceremony , and mark themselves in their forehead and face , and carry some with they , and so depart sing . their daughter be marry , at , or before the age of io . year . the man may have 7. wife . they be a kind of crafty people , worse than the Jew . when they salute one another , they heave up their hand to their head , and say Rame , rame . from Agra i come to Prague , where the river Ganges . Jemena enter into the mighty river Ganges , and Jemena lose his name . Ganges come out of the [ ii i . 255. ] northwest , and run east into the gulf of Bengala . in those part there be many tiger and many partridge 8c turtle-dove , and much other foul . here be many beggar in these country which go naked , and the people make great account of they : they call they Schesche . here i see one which be a monster among the rest . he will have nothing upon he , his beard be very long , and with the hair of his head he cover his privity . the nail of some of his finger be two inch long , for he will cut nothing from he , neither will he speak . he be accompany with eight or ten , and they speak for he . when any man speak to he , he will lay his hand upon his breast and bow himself , but will not speak . he will not speak to the king . we go from Prague down Ganges , the which be here very broad . here be great store of fish of sundry sort , 8c of wild foul , as of swan , goose , crane , and many other thing . the country be very fruitful and populous . the man for the most part have their face shave , and their head very long , except some which bee all shave save the crown : and some of they be as though a man shall set a dish on their head , and shave they round , all but the crown . in this river of Ganges be many hand . his water be very sweet and pleasant , and the country adjoin Bannaras . very fruitful . from thence we go to Bannaras which be a great town , and great store of cloth be make there of cotton , and shash for the moor . in this place 476 i583-91-they be all Gentiles , and be the great idolater that ever i see . to this town come the gentile on pil - pilgrimage grimage out of far country . here alongst the water °fthegentiles-side be very many fair house , and in all of they , or for the most part they have their image stand , which be evil favour , make of stone and wood , some like lion , leopard , and monkei , some like man and woman , and peacock , and some like the devil with four arm and 4. hand . they sit across legged , some with one thing in their hand , and some another , and by break of day and before , there be man and woman which come out of the town and wash themselves in Ganges . and there be diverse old man which upon place of earth make for the purpose , sit pray , and they give the people three or four straw , which they take and hold they between their finger when they wash themselves : and some sit to mark they in the forehead , and they have in a cloth a little rice , barley , or money , which , when they have wash themselves , they give to the old man which sit there pray . afterwards they go to diverse of their image , and give they of their sacrifice . and when they give , the old man say certain prayer , and then be all holy . and in diverse place there stand a kind of image which in their language they call Ada . and they have diverse great stone carve , whereon they pour water , and throw thereupon some rice , wheat , barley , and some other thing . This Ada have four hand with claw . Moreover , they have a great place make of stone like to a well with step to go down ; wherein the water stand very foul and stink : for the great quantity of flower , which continual they throw into it , do make it stink . there be always many people in it : for they say when they wash themselves in it , that their sin be forgive they , because God , as they say , do wash himself in that place . they gather up the sand in the bottom of it , and say it be holy . they never pray but in the water , and they wash themselves overhead , 477 and lade up water with both their hand , and turn themselves about , and then they drink a little of the water three time , and so go to their god which stand in those house . some of they will wash a place which be their length , and then will pray upon the earth with their arm and leg at length out , and will rise up and lie down , and kiss the ground twenty or thirty time , but they will not stir their right foot . and some of they will make their ceremony with fifteen or sixteen pot little and great , and ring a little bel when they make their mixture ten or twelve time : and they make a circle of water round about their pot and pray , and diverse sit by they , and one that reach they their pot : and they say diverse thing over their pot many time , and when they have do , they go to their god , and strow their sacrifice which they think be very holy , and mark many of they which sit by , in the forehead , which they take as a great gift . there come fifty and sometime a hundred together , to wash they in this well , and to offer to these idol . they have in some of these house their idol stand , and one sit by they in warm weather with a fan to blow wind upon they . and when they see any company come , they ring a little bell which hang by they , and many give they their alm , but especial those which come out of the country . many of they be black and have claw of brass with long nail , and some ride upon peacock and other fowl which be evil favour , with long hawk bill , and some like one thing and some another , but none with a good face . among the rest there be one which they make great account of : for they say he give they all thing both food and apparel , and one sit always by he with a fan to make wind towards he . here some be burn to ash , some scorch in the fire and throw into the water , and dog and fox do present eat they . the wife here do burn 478 with their husband when they die , if they will not , their head be shave , and never any account be make of they afterward . the people go all naked save a little cloth [ ii i . 256. ] bind about their middle . their woman have their neck , arm and ear deck with ring of silver , copper , tin , and with round hoop make of ivory , adorn with amber stone , and with many agat , and they be mark with a great spot of red in their forehead , and a stroke of red up to the crown , and so it run three manner of way . in their winter , which be our may , the man be quilt gown of cotton like to our mattrace and quilt cap like to our great grocer mortar , with a slit to look out at , and so tie down beneath their ear . if a man or woman be sick and like to die , they will lay he before their idol all night , and that shall help he or make a end of he . and if he do not mend that night , his friend will come and sit with he a little and cry , and afterward will carry he to the water side and set he upon a little raft make of reed , and so let he go down the river . when they be marry the man and the woman come to the water side , and there be a old man which they call a bramane , that be , a priest , a cow , and a calf , or a cow with calf . then the man and the woman , cow and calf , and the old man go into the water together , and they give the old man a white cloth of four yard long , and a basket cross bind with diverse thing in it : the cloth he lay upon the back of the cow , and then he take the cow by the end of the tail , and say certain word : and she have a copper or a brass pot full of water , and the man do hold his hand by the old man hand , and then ? wife hand by her husband , and all have the cow by ne^ vary the tail , and they pour water out of the pot upon the folk together cow tail , and it run through all their hand , and h they lade up water with their hand , and then the old man do tie he and she together by their clothes . “ Mexican ™ which do , they go round about the cow and calf , old time . 479 and then they give somewhat to the poor which be always there , and to the bramane or priest they give the cow and calf , and afterward go to diverse of their idol and offer money , and lie down flat upon the ground and kiss it diverse time , and then go their way . their chief idol be black and evil favour , their mouth monstrous , their ear gild , and full of jewel , their tooth and eye of gold , silver , and glass , some have one thing in their hand , and some another . you may not come into the house where they stand , with your shoe on . they have continual lamp Patenaw . burn before they . from Bannaras i go to Patenaw down the river of Ganges : where in the way we pass many fair town , and a country very fruitful : and many very great river do enter into Ganges , and some of they as great as Ganges , which cause Ganges to be of a great breadth , and so broad that in the time of rain you can see from one side to the other . Theise Indians when they be scorch and throw into the water , the man swim with their face downward , the woman with their face upward , i think they tie something to they to cause they to do so : but they say no . there be very many thief in this country , which be like to the arabian : for they have no certain abode , but be sometime in one place and sometime in another . here the woman be so deck with silver and copper , that it be strange to see , they use no shoe by reason of the ring of silver and copper which they gold find , wear on their toe . here at Patanaw they find gold in this manner . they dig deep pit in the earth , and wash the earth in great boll , and therein they find the gold , and they make the pit round about with brick , that the earth fall not in . Patenaw be a very long and a great town . in time past it be a kingdom , but now it be under Zelabdim echebar the great Mogor . the man be tall and slender , and have many old folk among they : the house be simple , make of earth and cover with straw , the street be very large . 480 in this town there be a trade of cotton , and cloth of cotton , much sugar , which they carry from hence to bengala and India , very much opium and other commodity . he that be chief here under the king be call tipper-das , and j be of great account among the people . here in Patenau i see a dissemble prophet which sit upon a horse in the market place , and make as though he sleep , and many of the people come and touch his foot with their hand , and then kiss their hand . they take he for a great man , but sure he be a lazy lubber . i leave he there sleep . the people of these country be much give to such prate and dissemble hypocrite . from Patanaw i go to Tanda which be in the land Tanda in of Gouren . it have in time pass be a kingdom , but gouren-now be subdue by Zelabdim echebar . great trade and traffic be here of cotton , and of cloth of cotton . the people go naked with a little cloth bind about their waste . it stand in the country of Bengala . here be many tiger , wild buf , and great store of wild foul : they be very great idolater . Tanda stand from the river Ganges a league , because in time past the river flow over the bank , in time of rain do drown the country and many village , and so they do remain . and the old way which the river Ganges be wont to run , remain dry , which be the occasion that the city do stand so far from the water . from Agra down the river Jemena , and down the river Ganges , i be five month come to Bengala , but it may be sail in much short time . i go from Bengala into the country of couch , l11 - * • 257-j which lie 25. day journey northwards from Tanda . the king be a gentle , his name be suckel counsel : his quicheu , country be great , and lie not far from cauchin China : account by for they say they have pepper from thence . the port some among be call cacchegate . all the country be set with Bambos t , l^^inces or cane make sharp at both the end and drive into the earth , and they can let in the water and drown the five 481 2 h in Mexico they use likewise for small money the fruit Cacao , which eat like almond . huge . Porto angeli . the like cloth may be make of the long grass in Virginia . the english voyage ground above knee deep , so that man nor horse can pass . they poison all the water if any war be . here they have much silk and musk , and cloth make of cotton . the people have ear which be marvelous great of a span long , which they draw out in length by devise when they be young . here they be all Gentiles , and they will kill nothing . they have hospital for sheep , goat , dog , cat , bird , and for all other live creature . when they be old and lame , they keep they until they die . if a man catch or buy any quick thing in other place and bring it thither , they will give he money for it or other victual , and keep it in their hospital or let it go . they will give meat to the Ants. their small money be almond , which oftentimes they use to eat . from thence i return to hugeli , which be the place where the Portugal keep in the country of Bengala which stand in 23. degree of northerly latitude , and stand a league from satagan : they call it porto piqueno . we go through the wilderness , because the right way be full of thief , where we pass the country of Gouren , where we find but few village , but almost all wilderness , and see many buff , swine and dear , grass long than a man , and very many tiger . not far from Porto Piqueno southwestward , stand a haven which be call angeli , in the country of Orixa . it be a kingdom of it self , and the king be a great friend to stranger . afterwards it be take by the king of Patan which be their neighbour , but he do not enjoy it long , but be take by Zelabdim echebar , which be king of Agra , Belli , and Cambaia . Orixa stand 6. day journey from Satagan , southwestward . in this place be very much rice , and cloth make of cotton , and great store of cloth which be make of grass , which they call Yerva , it be like a silk . they make good cloth of it which they send for India 8c diverse other place . to this haven of angeli come every year many ship out of India , Negapatan , Sumatra , Malacca , and diverse other place ; 8c lade from thence great store of rice , 8c much cloth 482 i583-9i-of cotton wool , much sugar , and long pepper , great store of butter and other victual for India . Satagam be a fair Satagam . city for a city of the moor , and very plentiful of all thing . here in Bengala they have every day in one place or other a great market which they call Chandeau , and they have many great boat which they call pericose , wherewithal ! they go from place to place and buy rice and many other thing : these boat have 24. or 26. oar to row they , they be great of burden , but have no coverture . here the Gentiles have the water of Ganges in great estimation , for have good water near they , yet they will fetch the water of Ganges a great way off , and if they have not sufficient to drink , they will sprinkle a little on they , and then they think themselves well . from Satagam i travel by the country of the king of Tippara or porto grande , with who the Mogores or Mogen have almost continual war . the Mogen which be of the kingdom of Recon and Rame , be strong than the king of Tippara , so that Chatigan or porto grande be oftentimes under the king of Recon . there be a country 4. day journey from couch or quicheu before mention , which be call bottant and the city Bottia , the king be call Dermain ; the people whereof be very tall and strong , and there be merchant which come out of China , and they say out of Muscovia or Tartary . and they come to buy musk , cambal , agat , silk , pepper and saffron like the saffron of Persia . the country be very great , 3. month journey . there be very high mountain in this country , and one of they so steep that when a man be 6. day journey off it , he may see it perfect . upon these mountain be people which have ear of a span long : if their ear be not long , they call they ape . they say that when they be upon the mountain , they see ship in the sea sail to and fro ; but they know not from whence they come , nor whither they go . there be merchant which come out of the east , they say , 483 Tippara or porto Grande . bottant a greatnorthren country . merchant of China , moscovy and Tartary . Theise seem to be the mountain of Imaus call by the people Cumao . from under the sun , which be from China , which have no beard , and they say there it be something warm .. but those which come from the other side of the mountain which be from the north , say there it be very cold .. the apparel these northern merchant be apparel with woollen . of the tar - do anj hat , white hose close , and boot which be chant . °* Moscovia or tartane . they report that in their country they have very good horse , but they be little : some man have four , five , or six hundred horse and cow : they live with milk and flesh . they cut the come tail in tail of their cow , and sell they very dear , for they great request . bee jn great request anj much esteem in those part . the hair of they be a yard long , the rumpe be above a span long : they use to hang they for bravery upon the head of their elephant : they be much use in Pegu and China : they buy and sell by score upon the ground . the people be very swift on foot . Bacola . from Chatigan in Bengala , i come to Bacola ; the king whereof be a gentle , a man very well dispose and delight much to shoot in a gun . his country be very great and fruitful , and have store of rice , much , cotton cloth , and cloth of silk . the house be very fair and high build , the street large , the people naked , except a little cloth about their waste . the woman wear great store of silver hoop about their neck and arm , and their leg be ring with silver and copper , and ring make of elephant tooth . serrepore . from Bacola i go to serrepore which stand upon the river of Ganges , the king be call chondery . they be all hereabout rebel against their king zelabdim echebar : for here be so many river and hand , that they flee from one to another , whereby his horse ’ man can prevail against they . great store of cotton cloth be make here . Sinnergan . Sinnergan be a town six league from serrepore , where there be the best and fine cloth make of cotton that be in all India . the chief king of all these 484 country be call isacan , and he be chief of all the other king , and be a great friend to all Christians . the house here , as they be in the most part of India , be very little , and cover with straw , and have a few mat round about the wall , and the door to keep out the tiger and the fox . many of the people be very rich . here they will eat no flesh , nor kill no beast : they live of rice , milk , and fruit . they go with a little cloth before they , and all the rest of their body be naked . great store of cotton cloth go from hence , and much rice , wherewith they serve all India , Ceilon , pegu , Malacca , Sumatra , and many other place . i go from serrepore the 28. of November 1586. for Pegu in a small ship or foist of one Albert Caravallos , and so pass down Ganges , and pass by the island Sundiva of Sundiva , porto grande , or the country of tippera , sland-the kingdom of Recon and Mogen , leave they on our left side with a fair wind at northwest : our course be south and by east , which bring we to the bar of Negrais in Pegu : if any contrary wind have come , we have throw many of our thing overboard : for we be so pester with people and good , that there be scant place to lie in . from Bengala to Pegu be 90. league . we enter the bar of Negrais , which be a brave bar negrais . and have 4. fathom water where it have least . three day after we come to Cosmin , which be a very - pretty cosmin . town , and stand very pleasant , very well furnish with all thing . the people be very tall and well dispose ; the woman white , round face , with little eye : the house be high build , set upon great high post , and they go up to they with long ladder for fear of the ladder use tiger which be very many . the country be very fruitful of all thing . here be very great fig , orange , beastst cocoe , and other fruit . the land be very high that we fall withal , but after we be enter the bar , it be very low and full of river , for they go all too and dwell m fro in boat , which they call paroe , and keep their bmt ' house with wife and child in they . 485 Dela . Cirion . Macao . coach cart on man shoulder . Pegu. from the bar of Nigrais to the city of Pegu be ten day journey by the river . we go from cosmin to Pegu in faroes or boat , and pass up the river we come to Medon , which be a pretty town , where there be a wonderful number of paroe , for they keep their house and their market in they all upon the water . they row too and fro , and have all their merchandize in their boat with a great Sombrero or shadow over their head to keep the sun from they , which be as broad as a great cart wheel make of the leaf of the Coco tree and fig tree , and be very light . from Medon we go to Dela , which be a very fair town , and have a fair port into the sea , from whence go many ship to Malacca , Mecca , and many other place . here be 18. or 20. very great and long house , where they tame and keep many elephant of the king : for there about in the wilderness they catch the wild elephant . it be a very fruitful country . from Dela we go to Cirion , which be a good town , and have a fair port into the sea , whither come many ship from Mecca , Malacca , Sumatra , and from diverse other place . and there the ship stay and discharge , and send up their good in paroe to Pegu. from Cirion we go to Macao , which be a pretty town , where we leave our boat or paroe , and in the morning take delingege , which be a kind of coach make of cord and cloth quilt , and carry upon a stang between 3. or 4. man : we come to Pegu the same day . Pegu be a city very great , strong , and very fair , with wall of stone , and great ditch round about it . there be two town , the old town and the new . in the old town be all the merchant stranger , and very many merchant of the country . all the good be sell in the old town which be very great , and have many suburb round about it , and all the house be make of cane which they call Bambos , and be cover with straw . in your house you have a warehouse 486 which they call Godon , which be make of brick to put your good in , for oftentimes they take fire and burn in a hour four or five hundred house : so that if the Godon be not , you shall be in danger to have all burn , if any wind shall rise , at a trice . in the new town be the king , and all his nobility and gentry . it be a city very great and populous , and be make square and with very fair wall , and a great ditch round about it full of water , with many crocodile in it : it have twenty gate , and they be make [ ii i . 259. ] of stone , for every square five gate . there be also many turret for centinel to watch , make of wood , and gild with gold very fair . the street be the fair that ever i see , as straight as a line from one gate to the other , and so broad that ten or twelve man may ride a front through they . on both side of they at every man door be set a palmer tree which be the nut tree : which make a very fair show and a very commodious shadow , so that a man may walk in the shade all day . the house be make of wood , and cover with tile . the king house be in the middle of the city , and be wall and ditch round about : and the building within be make of wood very sumptuous gild , and great workmanship be upon the forefront , which be likewise very costly gild . and the house wherein his pagode or idol stand be cover with tile of silver , and all the wall be gild with gold . within the first gate of the king house be a great large room , on both side whereof be house make for the king elephant , which be marvellous great and fair , and be bring up to war and in service of the king . and among the rest he have four white white elephant , which be very strange and rare : for there be elephants-none other king which have they but he : if any other king have one , he will send unto he for it . when any of these white elephant be bring unto the king , all the merchant in the city be command to see they , and to give he a present of half a ducat , which do come to a great sum : for that there be many merchant in the city . after that you have give your present you may come and see they at your pleasure , although they stand in the king house . this king in his title be call the king of the white elephant . if any other king have one , and will not send it he , he will make war with he for it : for he have rather lose a great part of his kingdom , than not to conquer he . they do very great service unto these white elephant ; every one of they stand in a house gild with gold , and they do feed in vessel of silver and gilt . one of they when he do go to the river to be wash , as every day they do , go under a canopy of cloth of gold or of silk carry over he by six or eight man , and eight or ten man go before he play on drum , shaum , or other instrument : and when he be wash and come out of the river , there be a gentleman which do wash his foot in a silver basin : which be his office give he by the king . there be no such account make of any black elephant , be he never so great . and sure there be woonderfoll fair and great , and some be nine cubit in height . and they do report that the king have above five thousand elephant of war , beside many other which be not teach to fight . this king have a very large place wherein he take the wild elephant . it stand about a mile from Pegu , build with a fair court within , and be in a great grove or wood : and there be many huntsman , which go into the wilderness with she elephant : for without the she they be not to be take . and they be teach for that purpose : and every hunter have five or six of they : and they say that they anoint they she elephant with a certain ointment , which when the wild elephant do smell , he will not leave she . when they have bring the wild elephant near unto the place , they send word unto the town , and many horseman and footman come out and cause the she elephant to enter into a strait 488 way which do go to the palace , and the she and Jie do run in : for it be like a wood : and when they be in , the gate do shut . afterwards they get out the female : and when the male see that he be leave alone , he weep and cry , and run against the wall , which be make of so strong tree , that some of they do break their tooth with run against they . than they prick he with sharp cane , and cause he to go into a strait house , and there they put a rope about his middle and about his foot , and let he stand there three or four day without eat or drink : and then they bring a female to he , with meat and drink , and within few day he become tame . the chief force of the king be in these elephant . and when they go into the war they set a frame of wood upon their back , bind with great cord , wherein sit four or six man , which fight with gun , bow and arrow , dart and other weapon . and they say that their skin be so thick that a pellet of a harquebus will scarce pierce they , except it be in some tender place . their weapon be very bid . they have gun , but shoot very bad in they , dart and sword short without point . the king keep a very great state : when he sit abroad as he do every day twice , all his noble man which they call Shemines sit on each side , a good distance off , and a great guard without they . the court yard be very great . if any man will speak with the king , he be to kneel down , to heave up his hand to his head , and to put his head to the ground three time , when he enter , in the middle way , and when he come near to the king : and then he sit down and talk with the king : if the king like well of he , he sit near he within three or four pace : if he think not well of he , he sit further off . when he go to war , he go very strong . at my be there he go to Odia in the country of Siam with three hundred thousand man , and five thousand elephant . thirty thousand man be 489 A.D. 1583-91 . Odia a city in Siam . his guard . Theise people do eat root , herb , leaf , dog , cat , rat , serpent , and snake ; they refuse almost nothing . when the king ride abroad , he ride with a great guard , and many nobleman , oftentimes upon a elephant with a fine castle upon he very fair gild with gold ; and sometime upon a great frame like a horsliter , which have a little house upon it cover over head , but open on the side , which be all gild with gold , and set with many ruby and saphire , whereof he have infinite store in his country , and be carry upon this manner of sixteen or eighteen man shoulder . this coach in cartage on < - kp : r lanmiaorp i « rail Sprrinn . Verv oreat feastinv their language be call Serrion . very great feast and triumph be many time before the king both of man and woman . this king have little force by sea , man shoulder be sue in Peru , and in Florida . because he have but very few ship . he have house full of gold and silver , and bring in often , but spend very little , and have the mine of ruby and saphire , and spinely . near unto the palace of the king , there be a treasure wonder rich ; the which because it be so near , he do not account of it : and it stand open for all man to see in a great wall court with two gate , which be always open . there be four house gild very rich , and cover with lead : in every one of they be pagoda or image of huge stature and great value . in the first be the picture of a king in gold with a crown of gold on his head full of great ruby and saphire , and about he there stand four child of gold . in the second house be the picture of a man in silver wonder great , as high as a house ; his foot be as long as a man , and he be make sit , with in crown on his head very rich with stone . in the three house be the picture of a man great than the other , make of brass , with a rich crown on his head . in the four and last house do stand another , make of brass , great than the other , with a crown also on his head very rich with stone . in another court not far from this stand four other pagoda or idol , marvellous great , of copper , make in 49° the same place where they do stand ; for they be so great that they be not to be remove : they stand in four house gild very fair , and . be themselves gild all over save their head , and they show like a black morian . their expense in gild of their image be wonderful . the king have one wife and above three hundred concubine , by which they say he have fourscore or fourscore and ten child . he sit in judgement almost every day . they use no speech , but give up their supplication write in the leaf of a tree the with the point of a iron big than a bodkin . Theise leave be a ell long , and about two inch broad ; they ‘ be also double . he which give in his supplication , do stand in a place a little distance off with a present . if his matter be like of , the king accept of his present , and grant his request : if his suit be not like of , he return with his present ; for the king will not take it . in India there be few commodity which serve for Pegu , except opium of Cambaia , paint cloth of saint Thome , or of Masulipatan , and white cloth of Bengala , which be spend there in great quantity . they bring thither also much cottont yarn red colour with a root a excellent colour with a root call which they call Saia , which will never lose his colour : Saia . it be very well sell here , and very much of it come yearly to Pegu. by your money you lose much . the ship which come from Bengala , saint Thome , and Masulipatan , come to the bar of Nigrais and to cosmin . to Martavan a port of the sea in the kingdom of Pegu come many ship from Malacca lade with Sandall , porcelains , and other ware of China , and with Camphora of Borneo , and pepper from Achen in Sumatra . to Cirion a port of Pegu come ship from Mecca with in Pesu woollen cloth , scarlet , velvet , opium , and such like . there be in Pegu eight broker , who they call tareghe , which be bind to sell your good at the price which they be worth , and you give they for their labour two in the hundred : and they be bind to make 491 the several ! merchandise of Pegu. the form of their temple or varellaes . [ ii i . 261. ] the tallipay or priest of Pegu. the english voyage your debt good , because you sell your merchandise upon their word . if the broker pay you not at his day , you may take he home , and keep he in your house : which be a great shame for he . and if he pay you not present , you may take his wife and child and his slave , and bind they at your door , and set they in the sun ; for that be the law of the country . their current money in these part be a kind of brass which they call Gansa , wherewith you may buy gold , silver , ruby , musk , and all other thing . the gold and silver be merchandise , and be worth sometime more , and sometime less , as other ware be . this brazen money do go by a weight which they call a biza ; and common this biza after our account be worth about half a crown or somewhat less . the merchandise which be in Pegu , be gold , silver , ruby , saphire , spinelle , musk , benjamin or frankincense , long pepper , tin , lead , copper , lacca whereof they make hard wax , rice , and wine make of rice , and some sugar . the elephant do eat the sugar cane , or else they will make very much . and they consume many cane likewise in make of their varellaes or idol temple , which be in great number both great and small . they be make round like a sugar loaf , some be as high as a church , very broad beneath , some a quarter of a mile in compass : within they be all earth do about with stone . they consume in these varellaes great quantity of gold ; for that they be all gild aloft : and many of they from the top to the bottom : and every ten or twelve year they must be new gild , because the rain consume off the gold : for they stand open abroad . if they do not consume their gold in these vanity , it will be very plentiful and good cheap in Pegu. about two day journey from Pegu there be a Varelle or Pagode , which be the pilgrimage of the Pegues : it be call dogonne , and be of a wonder bigness , and all gild from the foot to the top . and there be a house by it wherein the tallipoy which be their priest do 492 preach . this house be five and fifty pace in length , and have three pawn or walk in it , and forty great pillar gild , which stand between the walk ; and it be open on all side with a number of small pillar , which be likewise gild : it be gild with gold within and without . there be house very fair round about for the pilgrim to lie in : and many goodly house for the tallipoy to preach in , which be full of image both of man and woman , which be all gild over with gold . it be the fair place , as i suppose , that be in the world : it stand very high , and there be four way to it , which all along be set with tree of fruit , in such wise that a man may go in the shade above two mile in length . and when their feast day be , a man can hardly pass by water or by land for the great press of people ; for they come from all place of the kingdom of Pegu thither at their feast . in Pegu they have many tallipoy or priest , which preach against all abuse . many man resort unto they . when they enter into their kiack , that be to say , their holy place or temple , at the door there be a great jar of water with a cock or a ladle in it , and there they wash their foot ; and than they enter in , and lift up their hand to their head first to their preacher , and then to the sun , and so sit down . the tallipoy go very strange apparel with the apparel one camboline or thin cloth next to their body of a °ft } ie'trfnests-browne colour , another of yellow double many time upon their shoulder : and those two be gird to they with a broad girdle : and they have a skin of leather hang on a string about their neck , whereupon they sit , bare head 8c bear footed : for none of they wear shoe ; with their right arm bare and a great broad sombrero or shadow in their hand to defend they in the summer from the sun , and in the winter from the rain . when the tallipoy or priest take their order , first they go to school until they be twenty year old or more , and then they come before a tallipoie appoint for that purpose , who they call Rowli : 493 he be of the chief and most learned , and he oppose they , and afterward examine they many time , whether they will leave their friend , and the company of all woman , and take upon they the habit of a tallipoie . if any be content , than he ride upon a horse about the street very rich apparel , with drum and pipe , to show that he leave the riches of the world to be a tallipoie . in few day after , he be carry upon a thing like a horsliter , which they call a serion , upon ten or twelve man shoulder in the apparel of a tallipoie , with pipe and drum , and many tallipoy with he , and all his friend , and so they go with he to his house which stand without the town , and there they leave he . every one of they have his house , which be very little , set upon six or eight post , and they go up to they with a ladder of twelve or fourteen staff . their house be for the most part by the high way side , and among the tree , and in the wood . and they go with a great pot make of wood or fine earth , and cover , tie with a broad girdle upon their shoulder , which come under their arm , wherewith they go to beg their victual which they eat , which be rice , fish , and herb . they demand nothing , but come to the door , and the people present do give they , some one thing , and some another : and they put all together in their pot : for they say they must eat of their alm , observation of and therewith content themselves . they keep their new moon . feasf by the moon : and when it be new moon they keep their great feast : and then the people send rice and other thing to that kiack or church of which they be ; and there all the tallipoy do meet which be of that church , and eat the victual which be send they . when the tallipoy do preach , many of the people carry they gift into the pulpit where they sit and preach . and there be one which sit by they to take that which the people bring . it be divide among they . they have none other ceremony nor service that i can see , but only preach . 494 i go from Pegu to Jamahey , which be in the Jamahey five country of the langeianne , who we call jangome ; it be five and twenty day journey Northeast from Pegu. in which journey i pass many fruitful and pleasant wardfrom country . the country be very low , and have many Pegu. fair river . the house be very bad , make of cane , and cover with straw . here be many wild buff and elephant . Jamahey be a very fair and great town , with fair house of stone , well people , the street be very - large , the man very well set and strong , with a cloth about they , bear head and bear footed : for in all these country they wear no shoe . the woman be much fair than those of Pegu. here in all these country they have no wheat . they make some cake of rice . hither to Jamahey come many merchant out of China , and bring great store of musk , gold , silver , and many other thing of China work . here be great store of victual : they have such plenty that they will not milk the buffle , as they do in all other place . [ ii i . 262. ] here be great store of copper and benjamin . in these country when the people be sick they make a vow to offer meat unto the devil , if they escape : and when they be recover they make a banquet with many pipe and drum and other instrument , and dance all the night , and their friend come and bring gift , coco , fig , arrecae , and other fruit , and with great dance and . rejoice they offer to the devil , and say , they give the devil to eat , and drive he out . when they be dance and play they will cry and hallow very loud ; and in this sort they say they drive he away . and when they be sick a tallipoy or two every night do sit by they and sing , to please the devil that he shall not hurt they . and if any die he be carry upon a they bune great frame make like a tower , with a cover all gild thetr dead-with gold make of cane carry with fourteen or sixteen man , with drum and pipe and other instrument play before he to a place out of the town and there be burn . he be accompany with all his 495 Caplan be the place where the ruby and other precious stone be find . Anthony gal-vano write of these ball . the english voyage friend and neighbour , all man : and they give to the tallipoy or priest many mat and cloth : and then they return to the house and there make a feast for two day : and then the wife with all the neighbour wife and her friend go to the place where he be burn , and there they sit a certain time and cry and gather the piece of bone which be leave unburn and bury they , and then return to their house and make a end of all mourning . and the man and woman which be near of kin do shave their head , which they do not use except it be for the death of a friend : for they much esteem of their hair . Caplan be the place where they find the ruby , saphire , and spinelle : it stand six day journey from Ava in the kingdom of Pegu. there be many great high hill out of which they dig they . none may go to the pit but only those which dig they . in Pegu , and in all the country of Ava , Langeiannes , Siam , and the Bramas , the man wear bunch or little round ball in their privy member : some of they wear two and some three . they cut the skin and so put they in , one into one side and another into the other side ; which they do when they be 25 or 30 year old , and at their pleasure they take one or more of they out as they think good . when they be marry the husband be for every child which his wife have , to put in one until he come to three and then no more : for they say the woman do desire they . they be invent because they shall not abuse the male sex . for in time past all those country be so give to that villainy , that they be very scarce of people . it be also ordain that the woman shall not have pass three cubit of cloth in their nether clothes , which they bind about they ; which be so strait , that when they go in the street , they show one side of the leg bear above the knee . the bunch aforesaid be of diverse sort : the least be as big as a little walnut , and very round : the great be as big as a little hen egg : 496 1583-91 ' some be of brass and some of silver : but those of silver be for the king and his noble man . these be gild and make with great cunning , and ring like a little bell . there be some make of lead , which they call selwy because they ring but little : and these be of lesser price for the poor sort . the king sometime take his out , and give they to his nobleman as a great gift : and because he have use they , they esteem they great . they will put one in , and heal up the place in seven or eight day . the Bramas which be of the king country ( for the king be a brama ) have their leg or belly , or some part of their body , as they think good themselves , make black with certain thing which they have : they use to prick the skin , and to put on it a kind of anile or black , which do continue always . and this be count a honour among they : but none may have it but the Bramas which be of the king kindred . Theise people wear no beard : they pull out the the people of hair on their face with little pinson make for that pegu wear no purpose . some of they will let 16 or 20 hair grow together , some in one place of his face and some in another , and pull out all the rest : for he carry his pinson always with he to pull the hair out assoon as they appear . if they see a man with a beard they wonder at he . they have their tooth black both man and woman , for they say a dog have his tooth white , therefore they will black they . the Pegues if they have a suit in the law which be so doubtful that they can well determine it , put two long cane into the water where it be very deep : and both the party go into the water by the pole , and there sit man to judge , and they both do dive under the water , and he which remain long under the water do win the suit . the 10 of January i go from Pegu to Malacca , pass by many of the port of Pegu , as Martavan , the hand of Tavi , from whence come great store of five 497 21 tin which serve all India , the hand of tanaseri , Junsalaon , and many other ; and so come to Malacca the 8 of February , where the Portugal have a castle which stand near the sea . and the country fast without the town belong to the Malayos , which be a kind of proud people . they go naked with a cloth about their middle , and a little roll of cloth about their head . hither come many ship from China and from the Malucos , Banda ; timor , and from many other hand [ ii i . 263. ] of the Javas , which bring great store of spice and drug , and diamond and other jewel . the voyage into many of these hand belong unto the captain of Malacca : so that none may go thither without his licence : which yield he great sum of money every year . the Portugal here have often time war with the king of Achem which stand in the hand of Sumatra : from whence come great store of pepper and other spice every year to Pegu and Mecca within the red sea , and other place . the voyage to when the Portugal go from Macao in China to Jafan ' Japan , they carry much white silk , gold , musk , and porcelain : and they bring from thence nothing but silver . they have a great carrack which go thither . every year , and she bring from thence every year ab°ve ®ixe hundred thousand crusado : and all this sadoe^indher s’lver of JaPan , and two hundred thousand crusado imply more in silver which they bring yearly out of India , yearly by they they employ to their great advantage in China : and they ^ch^a^ m bring from thence gold , musk , silk , copper , porcelain , ’ and many other thing very costly and gild . when the Portugal come to canton in China to traffic , they must remain there but certain day : and when they come in at the gate of the city , they must enter their name in a book , and when they go out at night they must put out their name . they may not lie in the town all night , but must lie in their boat without the town . and their day be expire , if any man remain there , they be evil use and imprison . the 498 chinians be very suspicious , and do not trust stranger . it be think that the king do not know that any stranger come into his country . and further it be credible report that the common people see their king very seidome or not at all , nor may not look up to that place where he sit . and when he ride abroad he be carry upon a great chair or serrion gild very fair , wherein there be make a little house with a latise to look out at : so that he may see they , but they may not look up at he : and all the time that he pass by they , they heave up their hand to their head , and lie their head on the ground , and look not up until he be pass . the order of China be when they mourn , that they be white thread shoe , and hat of straw . the man do mourn for his wife two year , the wife for her husband three year : the son for his father a year , and for his mother two year . and all the time which they mourn they keep the dead in the house , the bowel be take out and fill with chownam or lime , and coffin : and when the time be expire they carry they out play and pipe , and burn they . and when they return they pull off their mourn weed , and marry at their pleasure . a man may keep as many concubine as he will , but one wife only . all the chineans , japonians , and cauchin writing chineans do write right downward , and they do write with a fine pencil make of dog or cat hair . ’ Laban be a hand among the Javas from whence come Laban . the diamond of the new water . and they find they diamond . in the river : for the king will not suffer they to dig the rock . Jamba be a hand among the Javas also , from whence come diamond . and the king have a mass of earth which be gold ; it grow in the middle of a river : and when the king do lack gold , they cut part of the earth and melt it , whereof come gold . this mass of earth do appear but once in a year ; which be when the water be low : and this be in the month of April . 499 Bima . Bima be another hand among the Javas , where the woman travel and labour as our man do in England , and the man keep house and go where they will . he return the 29 of march 1588 , i return from Malacca to from Malacca . Martavan , and so to Pegu , where i remain the second time until the 17 of September , and then i go to Cosmin , and there take ship ; and pass many danger by reason of contrary wind , it please God Bengala . that we arrive in Bengala in November follow : where i stay for want of passage until the three of February 1589 , and then i ship my self for Cochin . in which voyage we endure great extremity for lack of fresh water : for the weather be extreme hot , and we be many merchant and passenger , and we have very many calm , and hot weather . yet it ceyhn . please God that we arrive in Ceylon the six of march , where we stay five day to water , and to furnish our self with other necessary provision . This Ceylon be a brave hand , very fruitful and fair ; but by reason of continual war with the king thereof , all thing be very dear : for he will not suffer any thing to be bring to the castle where the Portugal be : wherefore often time they have great want of victual . their provision of victual come out of Bengala every year . the king be call Raia , and be of great force : for he come to Columbo , which be the place where the Portugal have their fort , with a hundred thousand man , and many elephant . but they be naked people all of they ; yet many of they be good with their piece which be musket . when the king talk with any man , he stand upon one leg , and set the other foot upon his knee with his sword in his hand : it be not their order for the king to sit but to stand . his apparel be a fine paint cloth make of cotton wool about his middle : his hair be long and bind • up with a little fine cloth about his head : all [ ii i . 264. ] the rest of his body be naked . his guard be a thousand man , which stand round about he , and he in the 500 middle ; and when he march , many of they go before he , and the rest come after he . they be of the race of the chingalaye , which they say be the best kind of all the malabar . their ear be very large ; for the great they be , the more honourable they be account . some of they be a span long . the wood which they burn be cinamom wood , and it smell very sweet . there be great store of ruby , saphire , and spinely in this hand : the best kind of all be here ; but the king will not suffer the inhabitant to dig for they , lest his enemy shall know of they , and make war against he , and so drive he out of his country for they . they have no horse in all the country . the elephant be not so great as those of Pegu , which be monstrous huge : but they say all other elephant do fear they , and none dare fight with they , though they be very small . their woman have a cloth bind about they from their middle to their knee : and all the rest be bare . all of they be black and but little , both man and blanch people . woman . their house be very little , make of the branch of the palmer or cocoa-tree , and cover with the leaf of the same tree . the eleven of march we sail from Ceylon , and so double the cape of Comori . not far from thence , cape de between Ceylon and the main land of Negapatan , Comori . they fish for pearl . and there be fish every year very much ; which do serve all India , Cambaia , and Bengala , it be not so orient as the pearl of baharim in the gulf of Persia . from cape de Comori we pass by Coulam , which be a fort of the Portugal : from coulam . whence come great store of pepper , which come for Portugal : for oftentimes there lade one of the carrack of Portugal . thus pass the coast we arrive in Cochin the 22 of march , where we find the Cochin . weather warm , but scarcity of victual : for here grow neither corn nor rice : and the great part come from Bengala . they have here very bad water , 5O1 people with swell leg mention also by i oh . Huygen . how pepper grow . black people y or calicut , or Cananor . the english voyage for the river be far off . this bad water cause many of the people to be like leper , and many of they have their leg swell as big as a man in the waste , and many of they be scant able to go . Theise people here be malabar , ,and of the race of the naire of Calicut : and they differ much from the other malabar . Theise have their head very full of hair , and bind up with a string : and there do appear a bush without the band wherewith it be bind . the man be tall and strong , and good archer with a long bow and a long arrow , which be their best weapon : yet there be some caliver among they , but they handle they bad . here grow the pepper ; and it spring up by a tree or a pole , and be like our ivy berry , but something long like the wheat ear : and at the first the bunch be green , and as they wax ripe they cut they off and dry they . the leaf be much lesser than the ivy leaf and thin . all the inhabitant here have very little house cover with the leaf of the coco-tree . the man be of a reasonable stature ; the woman little ; all black , with a cloth bind about their middle hang down to their ham ; all the rest of their body be naked : they have horrible great ear with many ring set with pearl and stone in they . the king go incach , as they do all ; he do not remain in a place above five or six day : he have many house , but they be but little : he guard be but small : he remove from one house to another accord to their order . all the pepper of Calicut and course cinamom grow here in this country . the best cinamom do come from Ceylon , and be peel from fine young tree . here be very many palmer or coco tree , which be their chief food : for it be their meat and drink : and yield many other necessary thing , as i have declare before . the naire which be under the king of two Samorin , which be malabar , have always war with the Portugal . the king have always peace with they ; but his 502 people go to the sea to rob and steal . their chief captain be call Cogi Alli ; he have three castle under he . when the Portugal complain to the king , he say he do not send they out : but he consent that they go . they range all the coast from Ceylon to goa , and go by four or five parowe or boat together ; and have in every one of they fifty or threescore man , and board present . they do much harm on that coast , and take every year many foist and boat of the Portugal . many of these people be moor . this king country begin twelve league from Cochin , and reach near unto goa . i remain in Cochin until the second of November , which be eight month ; for that there be no passage that go away in all that time : if i have come two day soon i have find a passage present . from Cochin i go to goa , where i remain three day . from Cochin to goa be a hundred league . from goa i go to Chaul , which be threescore league , where i remain three and twenty day : and there make my provision of thing necessary for the ship , from thence i depart to ormus ; where i stay for a passage to Balsara fifty day . from goa to ormus be four hundred league . here i think good , before i make a end of this my book , to declare some thing which India and the country far eastward do bring forth . the pepper grow in many part of India , especial about Cochin : and much of it do grow in the field among the bush without any labour : and when it be ripe they go and gather it . the shrub be like unto our ivy tree : and if it do not run about some tree or pole , it will fall down and rot . when they first gather it , it be green ; and than they lie it in the sun , and it become black . the ginger grow like unto our garlic , and the root be the ginger : it be to be find in many part of India . A.D. i583-9i . goa . Chaul . ormus . [ ii i . 265. ] the pepper tree . Ginger . 503 clove . the dove do come from the isle of the moluccoes , which be diverse hand : their tree be like to our bay tree . nutmeg in the nutmeg and mace grow together , and come mace . from the he of Banda : the tree be like to our walnut tree , but somewhat lesser . the white sandol be wood very sweet and in great request among the Indians ; for they grind it with a little water , and anoint their body therewith : it come from the isle of timor . Camphora . Camphora be a precious thing among the Indians , and be sell dear than gold . i think none of it come for Christendom . that which be compound come from China : but that which grow in cane and be the best , come from the great isle of Borneo . lignum aloe . lignum aloe come from Cauchinchina . the benjamin come out of the country of Siam and Jangomes . the long pepper grow in Bengala , in Pegu , and in the hand of the Javas . the musk come out of Tartary , and be make after this order , by report of the merchant which bring it to Pegu to sell ; in Tartary there be a little beast like unto a young roe , which they take in snare , and beat he to death with the blood : after that they cut out the bone , and beat the flesh with the blood very small , and fill the skin with it : and hereof come the musk . of the amber they hold diverse opinion ; but most man say it come out of the sea , and that they find it upon the shore side . the ruby , saphire , and spinelle be find in Pegu. the diamond be find in diverse place , as in Bisnagar , in Agra , in delli , and in the hand of the Javas . the best pearl come from the hand of baharim in the persian sea , the worse from the piscaria near the isle of Ceylon , and from Aynam a great hand on the southermost coast of China . 504 amber . ruby , saphire and spinel . diamond . Spodium and many other kind of drug come from podium . Cambaia . now to return to my voyage ; from ormus i go to Balsara or Basora , and from Basora to Babylon : and Basora . we pass the most part of the way by the strength of ba ° ” ' man by hail the boat up the river with a long cord . from Babylon i come by land to mosul , which stand mosul . never to Ninive , which be all ruinate and destroy ; it stand fast by the river of Tigris . from mosul i go to Merdin , which be in the country of the Merdin . Armenians ; but now there dwell in that place a people which they call Cordies , or Curdi . from Merdin i go to Orfa , which be a very fair town , and it have a goodly Orfa . fountain full of fish ; where the moor hold many great ceremony and opinion concern Abraham : for they say he do once dwell there . from thence i go to by|our , and so pass the river of Euphrates . from by|our i Bir. go to Aleppo , where i stay certain month for Aleppo . company ; and than i go to Tripoli ; where find Tripoli . English ship , i come with a prosperous voyage to London , where by God assistance i safe arrive the 29 of April 1591 , have be eight year out of my native country . the report of John Huighen van Linschoten concern m. newberry and m. fitch imprisonment , and of their escape , which happen while he be in goa . n the month of December , anno 1583 , there arrive in the town and island of ormus four english man , which come from Aleppo in the country of Syria , have sail out of England , and pass through the straight of Gibraltar to Tripoli a town and haven lie on the coast of Syria , where all the ship discharge their ware and merchandise , and from thence be carry by land unto 505 