the second voyage of m. Laurence Aldersey , to the city of Alexandria , and Cayro in Aegypt . anno 1586. embark my self at Bristol , in the Hercules , a good ship of London , and set sail the 21 day of February , about ten of the clock in the morning , have a merry wind : but the 23 day , there arise a very great storm , and in the mid of it we descry a small boat of the burden of ten ton , with four man in she , in very great danger , who call a main for our help . whereupon our master make towards they , and take they into our ship , and let the boat , which be lade with timber , and appertain to Chepstow , to run a drift . the same night about midnight arise another great storm , but the wind be large with we , until the 27 of the same month , which then grow somewhat contrary : yet notwithstanding we hold on our course , and the ten day of march , we descry a sail about cape Sprat , which be a little on this side the straight of gibraltare , but we speak not with she . the next day we descry twelve sail more , with who we think to have speak , to have learn what they be , but they make very fast away , and we give they over . Thursday the 16 of march , we have sight of the strait , and of the coast of Barbary . the 18 day we pass they , and sail towards Patras . upon the 23 of march , we meet with the centurion of London which come from Genoa , by who we send letter to England , and the four man also which we take in , upon the coast of England , beforemention . the 29 of march we come to Goleta a small hand , Goleta . and have sight of two ship , which we judge to be of England . Tuesday the four of April , we be before Malta , Malta . 39 and be there becalm , our master cause the two ship boat to be have out , and they tow the ship , till we be out of sight of the castle of Malta . the Zante . 9 day of April we come to Zante , and be before the town , William Aldridge , servant to master Thomas cordall of London , come aboard we , with who our master and twelve more of our company , think to have go on shore , but they can not be permit : Patras . so we all come aboard again , and go to Patras , where we arrive upon good Friday , and lie there with good entertainment at the english house , where be the Consuli master Grimes , Ralph Ashley , and John Doddington , who very kind go with we , and show we the pleasure of the town . they bring we to the house of the Cady , who be [ il i . 283. ] make then to understand of the 20 turk that we have aboard , which be to go to Constantinople , be redeem out of captivi tie , by sir Francis drake in the west Indies , and bring with he into England , and by order of the queen majesty send now into their country . whereupon the Cady command they to be bring before he , that he may see they : and when he have talk with they , and understand how strange they be deliver , he marveil much , and admire the queen majesty of England , who be but a woman , be notwithstanding of such power and renown among all the prince of Christendom , with many other honourable word of commend her majesty . so he take the name of those 20. Turk , and record they in their great book , to remain in perpetuali memory . after this , our foresay countryman bring i to the chapel of S. Andrew where his tomb or sepulchre be , and the board upon which he be behead , which board be now so rot , that if any man offer to cut it , it fall to powder , yet i bring some of it away with i . upon Tuesday in Easter week , we set out towards Zante again , and the 24. of April with much ado , we 40 •were all permit to come on shore , and i be carry to the english house in Zante , where i be very well entertain . the commodity of Zante be currant and oil : the situation of the town be under a very great hill , upon which stand a very strong castle , which command the town . at Zante we take in a captain and 16. soldier , with other passenger . we depart from Zante upon Tuesday the 15. of April , and the next day we anchor at a small island , call Strivalia , which be desolate of people , save a few religious man , who entertain we well , without take any money : but of courtesy we bestow somewhat upon they for their maintenance , and then they give we a couple of lean sheep , which we carry aboard . the last day of April , we arrive at Candie , at a castle , call sowday , where we set the captain , soldier , and mariner ashore , which we take in at Zante , with all their carriage . the second day of may we set sail again , and the four day come to the island of Milo , where we anchor , and find the people there very courteous , and take in such necessary as we want . the island be in my judgement a hundred in number , and all within the compass of a hundred mile . the 11. day , the Chaus , which be the great man there in authority , for certain offence do in a little chapel by the water side , which they say one of our ship have do , and impute it to i , because i be see go into it three day before , come to we , and make much a do , so that we be fain to come out of our ship arm : but by three piece of gold the brabble be end , and we come to our ship . this day we also set sail , and the next day pass by the castle of Serpeto , which be a old ruinate thing , and stand under a hill side . the 13. day we pass by the island of Paris , and the island of the bank of Helicon , and the island call Ditter , where be many boar , and the woman be 41 A.D. 1586. Strivalia . Candie . May . the island of Milo , in old time call Sporades . the english voyage witch . the same day also we pass by the castle of Tino , stand upon a very high mountain , and near unto it be the island of Diana . the 15. of may , we come to Sio , where i stay thirty and three day . in it be a very proper town , after the build of that country , and the people be civil : and while we be here , there come in six galley , which have be at Alexandria , and one of they which be the admiral , have a prince of the moor prisoner , who they take about Alexandria , and they mean to present he to the Turk . the town stand in a valley , and a long the water side pleasant . there be about 26. windmill about it , and the commodity of it be cotton wool , cotton yarn , mastike , and some other drug . as we remain at Sio , there grow a great controversy between the mariner of the Hercules , and the greek of the town of Sio , about the bring home of the Turk , which the greek take in ill part , and the boy cry out , vive el re Philippe : whereupon our man beat the boy , and throw stone , and so a broil begin , and some of our man be hurt : but the greek be fetch out of their house , and manacle together with iron , and threaten to the galley : about fourty of they be send to the prison , and what become of they , when we be go , we know not , for we go thence within two day after , which be the 19 of June . the 20. day we pass by the island of Singonina , . a island rise by the cast of stone in that place : the substance of the ground there be brimstone , and burn sometime so much that it blow up the rock . the 24. of June we come to Cyprus , and have sight in the way of the aforesaid six galley , that come from Alexandria , one whereof come unto we , and require a present for himself , and for two of the other galley , which we for quietness sake give they . the 27. of June , we come to Tripoli , where i stay [ ii i . 284. ] till the five of July , and then take passage in a small bark call a Caramusalin , which be a passage boat , and be bind for Bichieri , thirteen mile on this side Alexandria , which boat be freight with Turk , moor , and Jew . the 20. day of July , this bark which i pass in run upon a rock , and be in very great danger , so that we all begin some to be ready to swim , some to leap into the ship boat , but it please God to set we quick off the rock , and without much harm . the 28. of July i come to Bichieri , where i be well Bichieri . entertain of a Jewe which be the customer there , give i muskadine , and drink water himself : have break my fast with he , he provide i a Carnell for my carriage , and a mule for i to ride upon , and a moor to run by i to the city of Alexandria , English who have charge to see i safe in the english house , whither i come , but find no Englishman there : but then my guide bring i aboard a ship of Aiderman Martins , call the tiger of London , where i be well receive of the master of the say ship , who name be Thomas Rickman , and of all the company . the say master have make i good cheer , and make i also to drink of the water of Nilus , have the key of the english house , go thither with i himself , and appoint i a fair chamber , and leave a man with i to provide i all thing that i need , and every day come himself to i , and carry i into the city , and show i the monument thereof , which be these . he bring i first to Pompey his pillar , which be T& a mighty thing of grey marble , and all of one stone , ex in height by estimation above 52. yard , and the compass about six fathom . the city have three gate , one call the gate of Barbaria , the other of Merina , and the third of Rossetto . he bring i to a stone in the street of the city , whereupon saint mark be behead : to the place where saint Katherine die , have there hide herself , because she will not marry : also to the bath of S. Katherine . i see there also pharaos needle , which be a thing in height almost equal with Pompey pillar , and be in compass five fathom , and a half , and all of one stone . i be bring also to a most brave and dainty bath , where we wash our self : the bath be of marble , and of very curious workmanship . the city stand upon great arch , or vault , like unto church , with mighty pillar of marble , to hold up the foundation : which arch be build to receive the water of the river of Nilus , which be for the use of the city . it have three castle , and a hundred church : but the part that be destroy of it , be six time more than that part which stand . the last day of July , i depart from Alexandria towards Cayro in a passage boat , wherein first i go Rossetti . to Rossetto , stand by the river side , have 13. or 14. great church in it , their build there be of stone and brick , but as for lodging , there be little , except we bring it with we . from Rossetto we pass along the river of Nilus , which be so famous in the world , twice as broad as the Thames at London : on both side grow date tree in great abundance . the people be rude , insomuch that a man can travel without a janizary to conduct he . the Turk the time that i stay in jEgypt be the Turk Lent‘ and Moores lend , in all which time they burn lamp in their church , as many as may hang in they : their lent endure 40. day , and they have three Lents in the year : during which time they neither eat nor drink in the day time , but all the night they do nothing else . betwixt Rossetto and Cayro there be along the water side three hundred city and town , and the length of the way be not above three hundred mile . to this famous city of Cayro i come the five day of Cayro . August , where i find m. William Alday , and William Caesar , who entertain i in very good sort . m. Caesar bring i to see the pyramid which be three in number , one whereof king Pharaoh make for his own tomb , the tomb it self be almost in the top of it : the monument be high and in form 4. square , and every of the square be as long as a man may shoot a rove arrow , and as high as a church , i see also the ruin of the city of Memphis hard by those pyramid . the house of Joseph be yet stand in Cayro , which be a sumptuous thing , have a place to walk in of 56. mighty pillar , all gilt with gold , but i see it not , be then lame . the 11. day of August the land be cut at Cayro , to let in the water of the river of Nilus , which be do with great joy and triumph . the 12. of August i set from Cayro towards Alexandria again , and come thither the 14. of August . the 26. day there be keep a great feast of the Turk and moor , which last two day , and for a day they never cease shoot off of great ordinance . from Alexandria i sail to Argier , where i lie with the english m. Typton Consuli of the english nation , who use £°n ™ 1at i most kind , and at his own charge . he bring i to the king court , and into the presence of the [ ii i . 285. ] king , to see he , and the manner of the court : the king do only bear the name of a king , but the great government be in the hand of the soldier . the king of Potanca be prisoner in Argier , who come to Constantinople , to acknowledge a duty to the great Turk , be betray by his own nephew , who write to the Turk , that he go only as a spy , by that mean to get his kingdom . i hear at Argier of seven galley that be at that time cast away at a town call Formentera : three of they be of Argier , the other four be the Christians . we find here also 13. Englishmen , which be by force of weather put into the bay of Tunis , where they be very ill use by the moor , who force they to leave their bark : whereupon they go to the council of Argier , to require a redress and remedy for the injury . they be all belong to the ship , call the golden noble of London , whereof master bird be owner . the master be Stephen Haselwood , and the captain Edmond hence . the third day of December , the pinnace call the moonshine of London , come to Argier with a prize , which they take upon the coast of Spain , lade with sugar , hide , and ginger : the pinnace also belong to the golden noble : and at Argier they make sale both of ship and good , where we leave they at our come away , which be the seven day of Januarie , and the first day of February , i land at Dartmouth , and the seven day come to London , with humble thanks to almighty God , for my safe arrival . a true report of a worthy fight , perform in the voyage from turkic , by five ship of London , against 11. galley , and two frigate of the king of Spain , at Pantalarea within the strait , anno , 1586. write by Philip Jones . he merchant of London , be of the incorporation of the Turkey trade , have receive intelligence , and advertisement , from time to time , that the king of Spain grudge at the prosperity of this kingdom , have not only of late arrest all english ship , body , and good , in Spain , but also malign the quiet traffic which they use to and in the dominion , and province , under the obedience of the great Turk have give order to the captain of his galley in the 46 