prince of MOLDAVIA’S privilege a.d. 1588. sundry sort of their best wine and fresh fish , every of they with a long discourse , congratulate , in the name of their whole senate , her majesty victory over the Spaniard , and my safe return , conclude with offer of their ready service to her future dispose . yet the dantzik after my departure thence cause the merchant to pay custom for the good they bring with they in my company , which none other town neither infidel nor Christians on the way ever demand . and notwithstanding the premise , i be most certain inform of sundry of our nation there resident that most of the [ ii i . 290. ] hanse-town upon the sea coast , especial Dantzik , Lubeck , and Hamborough have lade and be ship for Spain , great provision of corn , cable , rope , powder , saltpeter , hargubuss , armour , iron , lead , copper , and all other munition serve for the war . whereupon i gather their feign courtesy proceed rather for fear then of any good affection unto her majesty service , Elbing and stoad only except , which of duty for their commodity i esteem well affect . the privilege of Peter the prince of Moldavia grant to the english merchant . Etrus dei gratia princeps Valachiae and Moldaviae ; significamus praesentibus , universis and singulis quorum interest ac intererit , quod cum magnifico domino Guilielmo hareborne oratore serenissimae ac potentissimae dominae , dominae eliza-bethae dei gratia angliae , francia , ac hiberniae reginae apud serenissimum ac potentissimum turearum imperatorem hanc constitutionem fecerimus : Nimirum ut dehinc svae serenitatis subditis , omnibusque mercatoribus integrum sit hic in provincia nostra commorandi , conversandi , ( nercandi , vendendi , contrahendique , imo omnia exercendi , quae mercaturae ac vitae humanae societa ususque requirit , sine ulla alicujus contradiction , aut inhibition : salvo ac integro tamen jure telonii nostri ; hoc est , ut a singulis rebus centum ducatorum pretii , tres numerent . quod ratum ac firmum constitution nostra haberi volumus . in cujus rei firmius testimonium , sigillum nostrum appressum est . Actum in castris nostris die 27. mensis Augusti , anno domini 1588. the same in english . PEter by the grace of God prince of Valachia and Moldavia ; we signify by these present to all and singular person , who it do or shall concern , that we have make this agreement with the worthy gentleman William hareborne ambassador of the right high and mighty prince , the lady Elizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , France and Ireland , with the most puissant and mighty emperor of the Turk : to wit , that from henceforth it shall|be lawful for her highness subject and all her merchant , to remain , converse , buy , sei , bargain and exercise all such thing , as the trade of merchandise , and humane society and use require , without any hindrance or let : the right of our custom always reserve ; that be , that they pay three ducat upon all such thing as amount to the price of one hundred ducat . which by this our ordinance we command to be sure and firm observe ; for the more assure testimony whereof , our seal be hereunto annex . give in our camp the 27. of the month of August in the year of our lord 1588. 60 