displeasure conceive by Mahumet than viceroy , it be reduce to six crown the day , beside the provision of his esquire of his stable . the ambassador of Poland , and for the state of Venice be not Ligiers as these two abovesaid . the say polack be allow 12. French crown the day during his abode , which may be for a month . very seidome do the state of Venice send any ambassador otherwise , then enforce of urgent necessity : but in stead thereof keep their agent , precedent over other merchant , of they term a bailiff , who have none allowance of the grand signior , although his port and state be in manner as magnifical as the other aforesaid ambassador . the spanish ambassador be equal with other in janissary : but for so much as he will not accord to custom follow the list of other ambassador in make present to you grand signior , he have none allowance . his abode there be 3. year , at the end whereof , have conclude a truce for 6. year , take place from his first come in November last past 1580. he be not admit to the presence of the grand signior . the letter of Sinan bassa chief counsellor to sultan Murad can the grand signior , to the sacred majesty of Elizabeth queen of England , show that upon her request , and for her sake especial , he grant peace unto the king and kingdom of Poland . loriosissima and splendore fulgidissima foeminarum , selectissima princeps magnanimorum jesum sectantium , regni inclyti angliae regina serenissimus Elizabetha , moderatrix rerum and negotiorum omnium plebis and familiae Nazarenorum sapientis-sima ; origo splendoris and gloriae dulcis sima ; nubes pluviarum gratissima , heres and domina beatitudinis and gloriae regni inclyti angliae ; ad quam 69 omnes supplices confugiunt , incrementum omnium rerum and actionum serenitatis vestras beatissimum , exitusque felicissimos a creatore omnipotent optante , mutuique and perpetua familiaritate nostra digna vota and laudes sempiternas offerente : Significamus Ser. vestrae amicissime ; quia sunt anni aliquot , a quibus annis potentissima Caesarea celsitudo bella ineffabilia cum casul-bas , principe nempe Persarum gessit ; ratione quorum bellorum in part alias bellum movere noluit , ob eamque causam in partibus poloniae latrones quidam Cosaci nuncupati , and alii facinorosi in partibus illis existentes , subdito caesaris potentissimi turbare and infestare non desierunt . nunc autem partibus persicis compositis and absolutis , in partibus poloniae and aliis partibus exurgentes facinoroso punire constituens , beglerbego graeciae exercitu aliquo adjuncto , and principi tartarorum mandato caesaris misso , anno proxime praeterito pars aliqua Regni poloniae infestata , turbata and devastata fuit , and Cosaci aliique facinorosi juxta merita sva puniti fuerunt . quo rex poloniae viso duos legatos ad Caesaream celsitudinem mittens , quod facinoroso exquirere , and poena perfecta punire , and ab annis multis ad portam Caesareae celsitudinis missum munus augere vellet , significavit . Caesarea autem celsitudo ( cvi creator omnipotens tantam suppeditavit potentiam , and quae omnes supplices exaudire dignata est ) supplication Regis poloniae non accepta , iterum in regem poloniae exercitum suum mittere , and Creatoris omnipotentis auxilio regnum ejus subvertere constituerat . verum Legato serenitatis vestrae in porta beata and fulgida Caesareae celsitudinis resident seize interponente , et quod serenitati vestrae ex partibus poloniae , fruge , pulvis , arbores navium , tormenta , and alia necessaria suppeditarentur significante , and pacem pro regno and rege poloniae petente , nev^ regnum poloniae ex parte Caesareae celsitudinis turbaretur vel infestaretur intercedente , serenitatisque vestrae hanc singularem esse voluntatem exponente , legati serenitatis vestrae significatio and intercessio cum Caesareae celsitudini significata fuisset , in favorem sereni - tatis vestrae , cvi omnis honos and gratia debetur , juxta modum praedictum , ut Cosaci facinorosi exquirantur and poena perfecta puniantur , aut ratione muneris aliquantuli eorum delicta condonentur , hac inquam condition literae Caesareae celsitudinis ad regem poloniae sunt datae . si autem ex parte serenitatis vestrae foedus and pax sollicitata non fuisset , nulla ratione Caesarea celsitudo foedus cum regno poloniae injisset . in favorem autem serenitatis vestrae regno and regi poloniae singularem gratiam Caesarea celsitudo exhibuit . quod time serenitas vestra , quim etiam rex and regnum poloniae sibi certd persuadere debent . serenitatem vestram ben^ foelicissim^que valere cupimus . Datum Constantinopoli in fine mensis Sabaum nuncupati , anno prophetae nostri sacrati mahumedi nongentesimo , nonagesimo , octavo . Jesus vero anno millesimo quingentesimo nonagesimo , die duodecimo mensis Junii . the same in english . [ two . i . 295. i most glorious , and the most resplendent of woman , most select princess , most gracious Elizabeth queen of the valiant follower of Jesus in the famous kingdom of England , most wise governess of all the affair and business of the people and family of the Nazarens , most sweet fountain of brightness and glory , most acceptable cloud of rain , inheritress and lady of the blessedness and glory of the renown kingdom of England , to who in humble wise all man offer their petition : wish of the almighty creator most happy increase and prosperous success unto all your majesty affair and action , and offer up mutual and perpetuali vow worthy of our familiarity , with eternal praise : in most friendly manner we signify unto your princely highness , that certain year past the most mighty cesarlike majesty of the grand signior wage unspeakable war with casul-bas the prince of the persian , in regard of which war he will not go in battle against any other place ; and for that cause certain thief in the part of Polonia call Cosacks , and other notorious person live in the same part cease not to trouble and molest the subject of our most mighty emperor . but now have finish and bring to some good issue his affair in Persia , determine to punish the say malefactor of Poland , and for that purpose commit a army unto the Beglerbeg of Grecia , and the year last pass , send his imperiali commandment unto the prince of the Tartar , he have forage , molest , and lay waste some part of the kingdom of Poland , and the cosack and other notorious offender have receive condign punishment . which the king of Poland perceive scent two ambassador to his imperiali highness signify , that he will hunt out the say malefactor , and inflict most severe punishment upon they , and also that he will better his gift , which he have for many year heretofore ordinary send unto the porch of he imperiali highness . howbeit his imperiali majesty ( upon who the almighty creator have bestow so great power , and who vouchsafe to give ear unto all humble suppliant ) reject the supplication of the king of Poland , determine again to send his army against the say king , and by the help of the almighty creator , utter to subvert and overthrow his kingdom . by your majesty ambassador resident in the bless and glorious porch of he imperiali highness interpose himself as a mediator , signify that from the part of Poland you be furnish with corn , gunpowder , mast of ship , gun , and other necessary , and crave peace on the behalf of the kingdom and king of Poland , and make intercession , that the say king may not be molest nor trouble by the mean of the grand signior , and declare that this be your majesty most earnest desire ; so soon as the report and intercession of your majesty ambassador be signify unto the grand signior , for your sake , unto who all honour and favourable regard be due , upon the condition aforesaid , namely , that the wicked cosack may be seek out and grievous punish , or that their offence may be remit for the value of some small gift , upon this condition ( i say ) the letter of he imperiali highness be send unto the king of Poland . howbeit have not this conclusion of league and amity be solicit on the behalf of your majesty , his imperiali highness will never have vouchsafe the same unto the kingdom of Poland . but for your majesty sake his imperiali highness have exhibit this so singular a favour unto the say king and kingdom of Poland . and hereof your majesty and the king of Poland ought certain to be persuade . we wish your majesty most happy and well to fare . give at Constantinople in the end of the month call Sabaum , in the year of our sacred prophet Mahomet 998 , and in the year of Jesus 1590 , the 12 of June . the second letter patent grant by the queen majesty to the right worshipful company of the english merchant for the Levant , the seven of Januarie 1592. Lizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , France , and Ireland , defender of the faith etc to all our officer , minister and subject , and to all other people aswell within this our realm of England , as else where under our obeisance and jurisdiction or otherwise unto who these our letter shall|be see , show , or read , greeting . where our well-beloved subject Edward Osborne knight Aiderman of our city of London , William hareborne esquire , and Richard staper of our say city Marchant , have by great adventure and industry with their great cost and charge by the space of sundry late [ ii i . 296. ] year travel , and cause travel to be take aswell by secret and good mean , as by dangerous way 73 