this note follow , concern the aid and assistance of the english merchant , give to king John the first of Portugal , for the win of Ceuta in Barbary , which be the first occasion of all the Portugal discovery , be take out of Thomas Walsingham his latin chronicle . anno 1415. Oc anno Joannes primus rex portugalliae fretus auxilio mercatorum angliae quim maxim , and Alemannorum , vicit Agarenos in terra regis Betinarinorum , multis eorum millibus ad generum cereris destinatis : cepitque civitatem eorum quam amplissimam supra mare sitam , vocatam ceut eorum lingua . the same in english . [ ii two . 2. ] this year John the first king of Portugal , be principal assist by the help of the english merchant , and alman , overcome the moor in the dominion of the king of Barbary , put many thousand of they to the sword , and he take their city which be very mighty , seat upon the sea , which be call Ceuta in their language . [ Confirmatio 121 confirmatio treugarum inter regem anglia ? eduardum quartum , and joannem secundum regem portugalliae , datarum in oppido montis majoris 8 Februarii , and apud westmonasterium 12 septembris , 1482 , anno regni 22 regis eduardi quarti , lingua Lusitanica ex opere sequenti excerpta . libro das obras de Garcia de resend , que tracta da vida e feitos dei Rey dom Joham secundo . Embaixada que el Rey mandov a el Rey d’inglaterra , cap . 33. dam qui de monte mor mandov el Rey por embaixadore a el rey dom Duarte de inglaterra Ruy de Sousa pessoa principal e de muyto bon saber k credito , de que el Rey muyto confiava , e ho doutor Joam d’Elvas , e fernam de Pina por secretario . e foram por mar muy | | these write be in the tower . honradamente come muy boam companhia : hos quaes foram en nome del Rey confirmar as ligas antiquas come inglaterra , que polia condisan delta ho novo Rey de humh reyno 6 do outro era obrigado a mandar confirmar : 6 tambien pera mostrarem ho titolo que el rey tinha no senhorio de Guinee , pera que depois de visto el rey d’inglaterra defendesse they todo seus reynos , que nin-guen armasse nem podesse mandar a guinee : e assi mandasse desfazer huna armada , que pera laa faziam , per mandado do Duque de Medina Sidonia , humh joam tintam e humh guilherme Fabiam Ingreses . Com ha qual embaixada el rey d’inglaterra mostrov receber grande contentamento , £ for dell come muyta honra recebida , 6 they tudo fez inteiramente ho que pello embaixadore Ihe for requerido . de que elles trouxeran | | autentica escrituras das diligencias que con pubricos pregones fizeram : e assi as provisone das aprovasone que eran 122 necessarias : 6 come tudo muyto ben acabado , e ha vontade del rey se vieram . the ambassage which king John the second , king of Portugal , send to Edward the four king of England , which in part be to stay one John Tintam , and one William Fabian english man , from proceed in a voyage which they be prepare for Guinea , 1481 , take out of the book of the work of Gracias do resend , which intreat of the life and act of don John the second , king of Portugal . Chap. 33. nd afterward the king send as ambassadors from the town of monte major to king Edward the four of England , Ruy de Sousa , a principali person , and a man of great wisdom and estimation , and in who the king repose great trust , with doctor John d’Elvas , and fer - dinand de Pina , as secretary . and they make their voyage by sea very honourable , be very well accompany . Theise man be send on the behalf of their king , to confirm the ancient league with England , wherein it be condition that the new king of the one and of the other kingdom , shall be bind to send to confirm the old league . and likewise they have order to show and make he acquaint with the title which the king hold in the segneury of ginnee , to the intent that after the king of England have see the same , he shall give charge through all his kingdom , that no man shall arm or set forth ship to ginnee : and also to request he , that it will please he to give commandment to dissolve a certain fleet , which one John Tintam and one William Fabian , english man , be make , by commandment of the duke of Medina Sidonia , to go to the aforesaid part of ginnee . with 123 the first cause of this ambassage . the second cause . the three cause . 