the second voyage make by master William towrson to the coast of Guinea , and the castle of Mina , in the year 1556. with the tiger of London , a ship of 120 ton , the hart of London of 60 ton , and a pinnace of sixteen ton . November . December . Sierra Leona . he fourteenth day of September , the year abovesaid , we depart from Harwich , and direct our course for the isle of silly , to meet there with the hart and pinnace , which be rig and victual at Bristol , but arrive there the eight and twenty day we find they not , and therefore after long lie at hull to tarry for they , but not espy they , we turn back to Plymouth the 12 day of October , and be there , the hart and the pinnace come to we , so that the 15 of November we all depart together from Plymouth at one of the clock in the after noon , and the 28 day we have sight of the isle of Porto Santo , and the next day in the morning of Madera . the three day of December we fall with the he of Palma , and the 9 we be thwart of cape blank , and find there certain caravel fish for pargoe . the 19 we find our self in the height of Sierra Leona , and all this day we run thwart of certain currant , which do set to the west sou that westward so fast as if it have be the overfall of a sand , make a great noise like unto a stream or tide-gate when the water be shoal : and to prove whither we can find ground in this place , we sound and have 150 fathom , and no ground , and so depart . the 30 of December we fall with the coast of Guinea , and have first sight of it about 4 league off . the best mark that we can take of the place to know it be three hill , which lie Northeast and by east from we : 212 betwixt the nothermost two hill there be two high and great tree stand in sight as it be a sail breadth one from another , and a little more to the northwestwards be certain hommock . Having sail somewhat into the shore we take our self to be shoot somewhat past the river de Sestos , so that we keep about to fetch it . and a little after we have sight of three sail of ship and two pinnace which be in the weather of we , and have sight of they we make our self ready to meet they , and hail off our ship to fetch the wind as near as we can : and have sail about a hour or two , they also go about , and go as we go to make themselves ready , and when we have they in chase , they go away from we : but when they have make themselves ready , they keep about again , and come with we very fine appoint with their streamer , and pendant and ensign , and noise of trum - [ ii two . 37. ] pet very brave : so when we meet , they have the weather of we , and we be determine to fight , if they have be Portugal , wave they to come under our lee , which they deny stout : than we demand of they whence they be , and they say of France , we tell they again that we be of London in England . they ask of we what Portugal we have see , we answer , none but fisherman : then they tell we that there be certain Portugal ship go to the Mina to defend it , and that they meet with another at the river de Sestos , the river of which be a ship of two hundred which they have burn , sestos-and have save none but the master and two or three negro , and certain other which be sore burn which they leave a shore there . than they desire to come aboard of we with their boat to talk with we , and we give they leave . then the captain of the admiral and diverse other come aboard very friendly , desire we to keep they company because of the Portugal , and to go to the Mina with they : we tell they that we have not water , and that we be but now fall with the coast , and they show we that 213 they admit certain Frenchman into their company . the english voyage we be fifty league past the river de Sestos : notwithstanding there be water enough to be have , and they will help we to water with their own boat because they will have our company . And tell we further , that they have be six week upon the coast , and have get but three ton of grain among they all : and when we have hear they , we make our reckon that although the Mina be clear , yet if they do go before we , they will mar our market ; and if it be not clear , then if the Portugal be there and do take they , they will understand that we be behind , and so will wait for we . and further we make account that if we go with they we shall do as well as they , if the coast be clear : if it be not clear , then by they we be assure to be the strong . therefore have consider thus much of their gentle offer , we tell they that the next day we will confer more large of the matter . whereupon they desire i to come the next day to dinner to they , and to bring the master of our ship with i , and such merchant as i think good , promise to give we water out of their own ship if we will take it , or else to tarry with we and help we to water with their own boat and pinnaces . the 31 day in the morning the admiral send his boat aboard for i , and i take our master and certain of our merchant and go to he , who have provide a notable banquet for we , and entreat we very friendly , desire we still to keep his company , promise that what victual be in his ship , or other thing that may do we pleasure until the end , we shall have the one half of it , offer we if we will to forle his flag , and to be at our commandment in all thing . in the end we agree to come to a anchor , and to send our boat on shore with the admiral boat , and one of his pinnace , and a almain which they have bring out of France , to seek water , as for our pinnace she 214 i557-came to a anchor to seaward of we all , and will not come at we . all this night the boat continue on shore . the first day of January our boat come to we again and have find no river . whereupon we weigh and set sail , and anchor again at another river . the 2 day we go into the river and bargain , and take 5 small elephant tooth . the 3 day we take 5 more . the four day the french admiral and we take - a assault fifteen small tooth . this day we take thirty man with we and go to seek elephant , our man be ' all well arm with harquebuss , pike , long bow , crossbow , partisan , long sword , and sword and buckler : we find two elephant which we strike diverse time with harquebuss and long bow , but they go away from we and hurt one of our man . the five day we set sail and run along the coast . the 6 day we fall with the river de saint Andre , at Rio at saint which place the land be somewhat high to the westward Andre . of the river , and a fair bay also to the westward of it : but to the eastward of it it be low land . the 7 day we go into the river and find no village , but certain wild negro not accustom to trade . it be a very great river and 7 fathom water in some place at the enter . here we fill water , and after set sail . the 8 day we sail along the shore and come to the red cliff , and go forward in sail the 9 day also . the 10 day we come together to confer with captain Blundel admiral of the french ship , Jerom Baudet his vice admiral , and John de Orleans master of a ship of 70 ton , and with their merchant , and agree that when God shall send we to any place where we may make sale , that we shall be of one accord and not one of we hurt the market of the other , but certain of our boat to make the price for all the rest , and then captain Blundel the french admiral . 215 the castle of Mina . Cape de tres puntas . the english voyage one boat to make sale for every ship . this night our boat go to the shore meet with certain negro , who say that they have gold , and therefore we here cast anchor . the two day all the day we take but one half angel weight of 4 grain , which we take by hand , for the people of this place have no weight : the negro call this place allow . the 12 day we run along the coast and find but one town , but no boat will come out to we , and therefore we go our course . the 13 day i take my boat and go along the shore , and pass by diverse small town , and be wave to come on shore at 3 place , but the sea go so high upon the shore , that it be not possible for we to land , neither can they come to we if they have have boat , as i can see none but at one place , where there be one that will have come unto we , but the land-wash go so sore that it overthrow his boat , and one of the man be drown , which the people lament , and cry so sore , that we may easy hear they , and they get his body out of the sea , and carry it among they to their town . the 14 day we come within saker-shot of the castle , and straightway they set forth a almade to descry we , and when they perceive that we be no Portugal , they run within the town again : for there be a great town by the castle which be call by the negro Dondou . without this there lie two great rock like hand , and the castle stand upon a point which show almost like a hand . before we come at this castle , we find the land for five or six league to be high land , and about seven league before we come to the castle , low land , until we come at the castle , and then we find the land high again . this castle stand about five league to the east of cape de tres puntas . here i take the boat with our negro and run alongst the shore till i come to the cape 216 1557-and find two small town , but no boat at they , neither any traffic to be have . at these place our negro do understand they well , and one of they go a shore at all the place and be well receive of they . this night we anchor at the cape de tres puntas . the 15 day i take our boat and go along the shore , and about 3 league beyond the eastermost part of the cape we find a fair bay where we run in , and find a small town and certain boat which belong to the same town , but the negro in a long time will not come to we , but at the last by the persuasion of our own negro , one boat come to we , and with he we send George our negro a shore , and after he have talk with they , they come aboard our boat without fear , and i give to their captain a basin , and two string of Margaret , and they show we about 5 ducat weight of gold , but they require so much for it that we will not take it , because the Frenchman and we have agree to make price of our good all in one boat , and the price be make then every man to sell in his own boat , and no man to give more than the price which shall be set by we all this place be call Bulle , and here the negro be very glad of Bulle . our negro , and show they all the friendship they can , when they have tell they that they be the man that be take away be now again bring by we . the negro here show we that a month since there be 3 ship that fight together , and the two ship put the other to flight : and before that at the castle of Mina there be 4 ship of the Portugal which meet with one Frenchman , which Frenchman cause they all to flee , which ship we take to be the roebarge : for the Frenchman of our company judge she to be thereabouts that time with her pinnace also . and further , that after she go a ship of twelve score name the Shaudet all alone , and after she a ship of fourscore , and both for the Mina . and there be two other also 217 shamma . the english voyage which they leave , one at cape Verde call the leuriere of diepe , and another at the river de Sestos , beside these 3 which all this time be in our company , who name be these : the espoier of Hableneff which be the admiral , who captain be Denis Blundell . the leuriere of Roan vice-admiral , who master be Jerome Baudet . the other be of Hunfleur who master be call John de Orleans . the sixteenth day i go along the shore with two pinnace of the Frenchman , and find a bay and a fresh river , and after that go to a town call Hanta , twelve league beyond the cape . at this town our negro be well know , and the man of the town weep for joy when they see they , and demand of they where Anthony and be have be : and they tell they that they have be at London in England , and shall be bring home the next voyage . so after this , our negro come aboard with other negro which bring a weight with they , which be so small that we can not give they the half of that which they demanded for it . the negro here tell we that there be five Portugal ship at the castle and one pinnace , and that the Portugal do much harm to their country , and that they live in fear of they , and we tell they again , that we will defend they from the Portugal whereof they be very glad . the 17 day we go a shore and the Frenchman with we , but do no great good , the negro be so unreasonable , we sell 80 manellio for one ounce of gold . than we depart and go to Shamma , and go into the river with five boat well appoint with man and ordinance , and with our noise of trumpet and drum , for we think here to have find some Portugal but there be none : so we send our negro on shore , and after they go diverse of we , and be 218 very well receive , and the people be very glad of our negro , special one of their brother wife , and one of their aunt , which receive they with much joy , and so do all the rest of the people , as if they have be their naturali brother : we comfort the captain and tell he that he shall not fear the Portugal , for we will defend he from they : whereupon we cause our boat to shoot off their base and harquebuss , and cause our man to come on shore with their long bow , and they shoot before the captain , which he , with all the rest of the people , wonder much at , special to see they shoot so far as they do , and assay to draw their bow but can not . when it grow to be late , we depart to our ship , for we look every hour for the Portugal . * and here the negro show we that there be a english ship at the Mina , which have bring one of the negro again , which Robert gaynsh take away . the 18 day we go into the river with no less strength than before , and conclude with the negro to give they for every fuffe two yard and three nail of cloth , and to take for it one angel-duckat : so that we take in all 70 ducat , whereof the Frenchman have forty , and we thirty . the nineteenth day we go a shore every man for himself , and take a good quantity of gold , and i for my part take four pound and two ounce and a half of gold , and our heart boat take one and twenty ounce . at night the negro show we that the next day the Portugal will be with we by land or by sea : and when we be ready to depart , we hear diverse harquebuss shoot off in the wood by we which we know to be Portugal , which dare come no near to we , but shoot off in the wood to see if they can fear we and so make we to leave our traffic . the 20 day we man our five boat , and also a great boat of the frenchmens with our man and the admiral , 12 of they in their morion and corslet , and the negro bring home by our man . * note . Robert Gaynsh . 219 five sail of Portugal descry . the english voyage the rest all well appoint , with four trumpet , a drum and a fife , and the boat all hang with streamer of silk and pendant very fair , and go into the river and traffic , our man of war lie off and on in the river to waft we , but we hear no more of the Portugal . this day the negro tell we that there be certain ship come into Hanta , which town be about 2 league to the westward of this place . this 21 day we man our boat again and go to a place a league from this to the westwards , and there find many negro with another captain , and sell at the same rate that we have do with the other . the 22 day we go a shore again and traffic in like sort quiet , and i take 4 pound and six ounce of gold . the 23 day about night the negro with their captain come to we and tell we that the king of Portugal ship be depart from the castle , mean the next day to ply to the windward to come to we , give we warning to take heed to our self : we tell they again that we be very glad of their come , and will be ready at all time to meet they , and to assure they that we be glad of it , we sound our trumpet , and shoot off certain base whereof the negro be very glad , and request we that if the Portugal seek to hinder our traffic , to show they all the extremity that we can , promise we that if they come by land , they will advertise we thereof . the 24 we go a shore with our trumpet and drum , and traffic , and i bid the captain of the town to dinner . the 2 5 day we be a shore , our ship have descry five sail of the king of Portugal , and our ship shoot off ordinance to call we away , and we throw every man his cask a shore for water , and go to our ship , and by that time we have weigh and give order one to another what to do , it be night , so y‘ that night nothing be do . we set sail and lay close all night to get the 220 wind if we can : we be near some of they , and one shoot off a piece which we judge to be the admiral of the Portugal , to cause the rest to come and speak with he : so all this night we make our self ready for fight . the 26 we come in with the shore and have sight of the Portugal where they ride at anchor , and we bear with they , and we give all our man white scarffe , to the end that the Frenchman may know one the other if we come [ ii two . 40. ] to board : but the night come upon we that we can not fetch they , but we anchor within demie-culvering shot of they . the 27 day we weigh and so do the Portugal , and about eleven of the clock we have the wind of they , and then we go room with they , which when they perceive , they keep about to the shore again , and we after they , and when they be so near the shore that they can not well run any further on that board , they keep about again , and lie to the seaward , and then we keep about with they , and be a head of they , and take in our topsail and tarry for they : and the first that come up be a small bark which sail so well that she care not for any of we , and carry good ordinance : and assoon as she come up , she shoot at we , and overshoot we , and then she shoot at the admiral of the Frenchman , and shoot he through in two or three place , the fight with and go forth a head of we , because we be in our then portu5als-fighting sail : then come up another caravel under our lee in like case which shoot at we and at the Frenchman , and hurt two of his man and shoot he through the main mast . and after they come up the admiral under our lee also , but he be not able to do we so much harm as the small ship , because he carry ordinance high than they , neither be we able to make a good shot at any of they , because our ship be so weak in the side , that she lay all her ordinance in the sea : wherefore we think to lay the great ship aboard , and as soon as the french admiral go room with 221 he , he fall a stern and can not fetch he , and after he fall a stern of two caravel more and can fetch none of they , but fall to leeward of they all : and when he be to leeward , he keep about to the shoreward , and leave we , and then we put out our topsail and give they chase , and both the other Frenchmen keep the wind , and will not come near we , and our own ship be a stern so that she can not come to we : and after we have follow they about two hour to the seaward , they keep about again towards the shore , think to pay we as they go along by , and to have the wind of the french admiral which before run in towards the shore , and we keep about with they , and keep still the wind of they think that our viceadmiral and the other will have follow we as we will they to do : but after that the Portugal be pass by they , and every one have shoot at we and our vice-admiral , both our vice-admiral and the two Frenchman , and our own pinnace leave we in the lap , and run to seaward , and we run still along , and keep the wind of they to succour the french admiral , who be under all of their lees , and when they meet with he , every one go room with he , and give he the broad side , and after they cast about again , and dare not board he , because they see we in the weather of they , or else without doubt they have take or sink they , for three of they which be the small , go so fast that it be not possible for a ship to board they , and carry such ordinance that if they have have the weather of we , they will have trouble 3 of the best ship that we have , and as for their admiral and vice-admiral they be both notable appoint . when the Frenchman be clear of they , he lie as near the wind as he can , and we follow they still towards the shore , and then the admiral run to sea after the rest , and leave we all alone : and when the Portugal perceive that we be alone , and give they chase , they keep about with we and we with they , to keep the wind of they , and we run still within base 222 shot of they , but they shoot not at we , because we have the weather of they , and see that they can do we no hurt : and thus we follow one another until night , and in the night we lose they , but as for all the rest of our ship , they pack on all the sail that they can and run to sea , and as they themselves confess , they pray for we , but as for help at their hand we can have none . the 28 day we meet with our vice-admiral , our pinnace , and two of the Frenchman , and the three be flee which be a ship of fourscore ton , and belong to roan : and when i have the sight of the rest of our ship , i take our skiff and go to they to know why they lose we in such a case , and John kire make i answer that his ship will neither rear nor steer , and as for the pinnace , John Davis make i answer that she will do nothing , and that he can carry she no further , for her rudder be break , so that the hart be glad to tow she . than i go to the french admiral , and find himself to be a man of good stomach , but the one half of his man be sick and dead : and then i talk with the small Frenchman , and he make i answer that he can do nothing , say , that his ship will bear no sail , and have 16 of his man dead and sick , so he make we plain answer that he be able to do nothing . after this the Frenchman dare not anchor for fear of the Portugal . the 29 day the master of the pinnace come to we and say that they be not able to keep she any long , and then we view she and see there be no remedy , her rudder with all the iron work be break both aloft and below , we agree to break she up and to put the man into the hart so we take out of her four base , one anchor , and certain fire wood , and set she on fire , and afterward run along the coast . the thirty day we go in to the shore , and speak with certain negro , who tell we that some French 223 [ ii two . +I . i ship have be there , but we can not bargain with they they be so unreasonable . the 31 day i go to shore but do not traffic . February . the i day of February we weigh , see we can not bring the negro to any reason , and come to another place which stand upon a hill . the three day i go to a town four league from we , and shoot off two piece , and the captain come to we , and i send Thomas Rippen a land who know the captain , and assoon as he come on shore the captain know he and diverse of the negro who then begin to ask for i , and have tell the captain that i be in the boat , he make no long tarry but by and by cause two boat to be put to the sea , and come to i himself , and when he see i , he cry to i before he come to the boat and seem to be the glad man alive , and so do all the company that know i , and i give he a reward as the manner of the country be , and cause the Frenchman to give another , promise the next day to give he wine : and that night because it be late , he will not talk of any price , but leave i a pledge , and take another of i and so depart . the 4 day go on shore , i find that the ship of France which have be there , have do much hurt to our market , but yet i take five ounce and a half of gold . the five day i take eight ounce and one eight part of gold : but i see that the negro perceive the difference in cloth betwixt we and that which the Frenchman have , which be better , and broad than we : and then i tell captain Blundel that i will go to the leeward , because i perceive that be there where his cloth be sell , i shall do no good , whereof he be sorry . the 6 day there come a almade and negro aboard i , request i to come to their town for they have much gold and many merchant : and so i go and find their old captain go , and another in his place : but this night we do not good , because the merchant 224 1557-were not come down : so he require a pledge which i let he have , and take another of he . the 7 day George our negro come to we , who have George °ur follow we at the least 30 league in a small boat , and negro-when he come , the negro and we soon conclude of price . i take this day five pound and one ounce , and 3 quarter of gold . this negro we have leave at Shamma at the time of the fight , who say that he see the fight be on shore , and that when we be go from the Portugal , the Portugal come into their river , and tell they that the Englishman have slay two Portugal with ^•oPo^tu^s a piece , which be in deed out of our ship , and they ' require harbour there , but the captain of Shamma will not suffer they . the 8 day we take nineteen pound three ounce and a half . the 9 day we take two half . pound six ounce and a the 10 day three pound . the 11 day come to we Jerome Bawdet the viceadmiral of the Frenchman and his pinnace , and he show we that where we leave they there be no good to be do , and say he will go to the eastward , but we tell he he shall not : and thereupon commanded he to go to his company which he be appoint to be with , which he refuse to do until we have shoot three or four piece at their pinnace , and when the ship see that , she keep about , and run to seaward , and dare come no near to we , so the pinnace go after she . we take this day one pound five the Frenchman bridle by the english . ounce . the 12 day there come one of the frenchmens pinnaces to we lade with cloth , and will have make sale , but i will not suffer he , and therefore take he and send he aboard of our ship , and cause he to ride there all day . we take five pound six ounce and a half . the 14 day we take of some negro 4 ounce of gold . vi 225 p the offer of the king to the english to build a fort a town in circuit as big as London . the english voyage the 16 we come to another town . the 17 day i go a shore and understand that 3 of the Portugal ship be at the castle , and the other two at Shamma . the captain of this town be go to the principali town , to speak with their king , and will return short as they tell i , and so he do , and bring i a weight and measure , and i send a man to see that principali town , and their king . the Portugal ship rid so near we , that within 3 hour they may be with we , yet be all content to tarry for sale . the 18 day certain of the king servant come to we , and we take one pound two ounce , and one eight part of gold . the 10 day we take five pound one ounce . the 20 day one pound and four ounce . the 21 i take four pound and one ounce , and the negro inquire for fine cloth , and i open two piece which be not fine enough , as they say , but see that we have no other , they buy of they . at night i provide a gift , or present , and send one merchant and a mariner with it to the king , to certify he of our want of victual , by reason whereof we can not stay long : for in deed we search our ship , and the most part of our beer be leak out of all our barrel . the 22 day we take three ounce and a half . the 23 our man come from the king Abaan , and tell we , that he have receive they very friendly , but he have little gold , but promise , if we will tarry , to send into all his country for gold for we , and he will our man at their come home to speak to our king to send man and provision into his country , to build a castle , and to bring tailor with they , to make they apparel , and good ware , and they shall be sure to sell they : but for that present the Frenchman have fill they full of cloth . this town stand about four league up in the land , and be , by the estimation of our man , as big in circuit as London , but the building be like to the rest of 226 the country . they have about this town great store of the wheat of the country , and they judge , that on one side of the town there be one thousand rike of wheat , and another sort of corn which be call mill , which be much use in Spain . about this town they keep good watch every night , and have to warn the watchman certain cord make fast over their way , which lead into the town , and certain bell upon they , preAe so that if any man touch the cord , the bell ring , and then the watchman run forth of their watch house to see what they be : and if they be enemy , if they pass the cord , they have provision with certain net hang over the way , where they must pass , to let fall upon they , and so take they , and otherwise then by the way it be not possible to enter the town , by reason of the thicket and bush which be about the same , and the town be also wall round abqut with long cord , and bind together with sedge and certain bark of tree . when our man come to the town , it be about five of the clock in the morning , for there they travel always in the night by reason of the heat of the day : and about nine of the clock , the king send for they , for there may no man come to he before he be send for , and then they will have carry their present with they : but the negro tell they , that they must be three time bring before he , before they may offer their gift : and when they come to he , he talk with they , and receive they very friendly , and keep they about half a hour , and then they depart , and after that send for they again three time , and last of all , they bring he their present , which he receive thankful , and then cause a pot of wine of palm to be bring forth , and make they drink : and before they drink , both here and in all the country , they use certain ceremony . first , they bring forth their pot of drink , and then they make a hole in the ground , and put some of the drink into it , and they cast the earth upon it , which the king friendly entertainment of our man . their ceremony in drink . 227 they dig forth before , and then they set the pot upon the same , than they take a little thing make of a gourd , and with that they take out of the same drink , and put it upon the ground in three place , and in diverse place they have certain bunch of the pill of palm tree set in the ground before they , and there they put in some drink , do great reverence in all place to the same palm tree . all these ceremony first do , the king take a cup of gold , and they put he in wine , and he drink of it , and when he drink , the people cry all with one voice , Abaan , Abaan , with certain other word , like as they cry common in Flanders , upon the twelve night , the kinning drink : and when he have drink , than they give drink to every one , and that do , the king license they to depart , and every one that depart from he bow 3 time towards he , and wave with both hand together , as they bow , and then do depart . the king have common sit by he 8 or 10 ancient man with grey beard . this day we take one pound and 10 ounce of gold . the 24 day we take 3 pound and 7 ounce . the 25 we take 3 ounce and 3 quarter . the 26 we take 2 pound and 10 ounce . the 27 two pound and five ounce . the 28 four pound , and then see that there be no more gold to be have , we weigh and go forth . the first day of march we come to a town call mowre . mowre , but we find no boat nor people there : but be ready to depart , there come two almade to we [ ii two . 43. ] from another town , of who we take two ounce and a half of gold : and they tell we that the negro that dwell at mowre be go to dwell Lagova . at Lagova . they return . the second day we come thwart of the castle , and about two league off , and there see all the five Portugal ship at anchor , and this day by night we fetch Shamma . 228 the three day we have sight of one tall ship , of about two hundred ton , in the weather of we , and within less than two league of our ship , and then we see two moor a stern of she , the one a ship of five hundred or moor , and the other a pinnace : and these be a new fleet at that present arrive out of Portugal . whereupon we weigh , and make shift to double out of the land , and then the wind come to the southsouthwest , the hart go room with they fall three league to the leeward of we . these Portugal give we the chase from nine of the clock in the morning , till five at night , but do no good against we . at last , we perceive the admiral to be far a stern of his company , because his main topmast be spend , determine to cast about with they again , because we be sure to weather they , and the wind be as it be , it be our best course : but the hart be so far to the leeward , that we can not do it , except we will lose her company , so that we take in some of our sail , and go room with he : which when he perceive , he looff to , and be able to lie as near as he do before . at night , when we come to he , he will not speak to we : than we ask of his company why he go so room ; and they make excuse that they be able to bear no sail by , for fear of bear their foretopmast over board : but this be a simple excuse . the four day , be put from our water place we begin to seethe our meat in salt water , and to rebate our allowance of drink , to make it endure the long : and so conclude to set our course thence , for our own country . the 12 of march i find my self thwart of cape das palmas . the 16 day we fall with the land , which we judge to be the cape Mensurado , about which place be very much high land . the 18 day we lose sight of the hart , and i think the wilful master run in with the shore of purpose 229 ship of Portugal . cape Mensurado . a french bravado . the english voyage to lose we , be offend that i tell he of his own folly . the 27 day we fall in sight of two small land , which lie by our reckon six league off the headland of Sierra Leona : and before we come in sight of the same land , we make our reckon to be forty or thirty league at the least offend they . therefore all they that sail this way be to regard the current which set northnorthwest , or else they may be much deceive . the 14 of April we meet with two great ship of Portugal , which although they be in the weather of we , yet come not room with we , whereby we judge that they be bind for Calicut . the 18 day we be in the heighth of cape verde . the 24 we be direct under the tropic of cancer . the first day of May Henry Wilson our steward die : and the next day die John Underwood . the five day we be in the heighth of saint Michael . the 23 we have sight of a ship in the weather of we , which be a Frenchman of 90 ton , who come with we as stout and as desperate as may be , and come near we perceive that we have be upon a long voyage , and judge we to be weak , as in deed we be , come near we , and think to have lay we aboard , and there step up some of his man in armour , and command we to strike sail : whereupon we send they some of our stuff , crossebarre , and chainshot , and arrow , so thick , that it make the upper work of their ship fly about their ear , and we spoil he with all his man , and tear his ship miserable with our great ordinance , and then he begin to fall a stern of we , and to pack on his sail , and get away : and we see that , give he four or five good piece more for his farewell ; and thus we be rid of this french man , who do we not harm at all . we have aboard we a french man a trumpeter , who be sick , and lie in his bed , take his trumpet notwithstanding , and sound till he can sound no more , and so die . 230 the 28 we confer together , and agree to go into Severne , and so to Bristol , but the same night we have sight of the lizard , and by reason of the wind , we be not able to double the land end to go into Severne , but be force to bear in with the lizard . the 29 day , about nine of the clock in the morning , we arrive safe in Plymouth , and praise God for our good arrival . the three and last voyage of m. William [ H. two . 44 - ] towrson to the coast of guinie , and the castle de Mina , in the year 1577. he thirty day of January , the year abovesaid , we depart out of the sound of Plymouth , with three ship , and a pinnace , whereof the name be these : 1 the minion admiral of the fleet . 2 than Christopher vice-admiral . 3 the tiger . 4 a pinnace call the unicorn : be all bind for the canary , and from thence , by the grace of God , to the coast of guinie . the next day , be the last of this month , we meet with two hulk of Dantzick , the one call the rose , a ship of four hundred ton , and the other call the unicorn , of a hundred and fifty ton , the master it be to be understand , that at this time there be war betwixt of the rose be call Nicholas mass , and the master England and of the unicorn Melchior white , both lade at bour - france-deaux , and for the most part with wine . when we come to they , we cause they to hoist forth their boat , and to come and speak with we , and we examine every one of they apart , what french man good they have in their ship , and they say they have none : but by the contrariety of their tale , and by the suspicion which we gather of their false chartar-party , we perceive that they have french man good in they : we therefore cause one of they to fetch up his bill of 231 