a voyage make out of England unto Guinea and Benin in Africa , at the charge of certain merchant adventurer of the city of London , in the year of our lord 1553. be desire by certain of my friend to make some mention of this voyage , that some memory thereof may remain to our posterity , if either iniquity of time consume all thing , or ignorance creep in by barbarousness and contempt of knowledge shall hereafter bury in obli vion so worthy attempt , so much the greatly to be esteem , as before never enterprise by Englishman , or at the least so frequent , as at this present they be , , and may be , to the great commodity of our merchant , if the same be not hinder by the ambition of such , as for the conquer of forty or fifty mile here and there , and erect of certain fortress , think to be lord of half the world , envy that other shall enjoy the commodity , which they themselves can whole possess . and although such as have be at charge in the discover and conquer of such land ought by good reason to have certain privilege , preeminence , and tribute for the same , yet ( to speak under correction ) it may seem somewhat rigorous , and against good reason and conscience , or rather against the charity that ought to be among Christian man , that such as invade the dominion of other shall not permit other friendly to use the trade of merchandise in place near , or seidome frequent of they , whereby their trade be not hinder in such place , where they themselves have at their own election appoint the mart of their traffic . but forasmuch as at this present it be not my intent to accuse or defend , approve or improve , i will cease to speak any further hereof , and proceed to the description of the first voyage , as brief and faithful as i 141 Tunis . Buga . Tripoli . Numidia . be advertise of the same , by the information of such credible person , as make diligent inquisition to know the truth thereof , as much as shall be requisite , omit to speak of many particular thing , not great necessary to be know : which nevertheless , with also the exact course of the navigation , shall be more full declare in the second voyage . and if herein favour or friendship shall perhaps cause some to think that some have be sharp touch , let they lay apart favour and friendship , and give place to truth , that honest man may receive praise for well do , and lewd person reproach , as the just stipend of their evil desert , whereby other may be deter to do the like , and virtuous man encourage to proceed in honest attempt . but that these voyage may be more plain understand of all man , i have think good for this purpose , before i entreat hereof , to make a brief description of Africa , be that great part of the world , on who west side begin the coast of Guinea at Cabo Verde , about twelve degree in latitude , on this side the equinoctial line , and two degree in longitude from the measure line , so run from the north to the south , and by east in some place , within 5 , 4 , and 3 degree and a half unto the equinoctial , and so forth in manner direct east and by north , for the space of 36 degree or thereabouts , in longitude from the west to the east , as shall more plain appear in the description of the second voyage . a brief description of Africa gather by Richard Eden . n Africa the less be these kingdom : the kingdom of Tunis and Constantina , which be at this day under Tunis , and also the region of Bugia , Tripoli , and Ezzah . this part of Africa be very barren by reason of the great desert , as the desert of Numidia and Barca . the principali port 142 of the kingdom of Tunis be these : Goletta , Bizerta , Potofarnia , bona , and Stora . the chief city of Tunis be Constantina and bona , with diverse other . under this kingdom be many hand , as Zerbi , Lam - Hand* of padola , Pantalarea , Limoso , beit , Gamelaro , and Malta , where at this present be the great master of the ' Rhodes . under the south of this kingdom be the great desert of Lybia . all the nation in this Africa the desert of the less be of the sect of Mahomet , and a rustical people , live scatter in village . the best of this part of Africa be Barbaria lie on the coast of the sea Barbary . Mediterraneum . Mauritania ( now call Barbaria ) be divide into two Mauritania . part , as Mauritania Tingitana , and Caesariensis . Mauritania Tingitana be now call the kingdom of fe , and 2% kingdom the kingdom of Morocco . the principali city of fe be call Fessa : and the chief city of Morocco be name ’ Morocco . Mauritania Caesariensis be at this day call the kingdom of Tremisen , with also the city call Tremisen or tremisen . Telensin . this region be full of desert , and reach to the sea Mediterraneum , to the city of Oram , with the Oram . port of Mersalquiber . the kingdom of fe reach Mersalquiber . unto the ocean sea , from the west to the city of Argilla : and the port of the say kingdom be call Sala . Sala . the kingdom of Morocco be also extend above the ocean sea , unto the city of Azamor and Azafi , which Azamor . be upon the ocean sea , towards the west of the say kingdom . near Mauritania Tingitana ( that be to say , by the two kingdom of fe , and Morocco ) be in the sea , the hand of Canarie , call in old time , the fortunate hand of hand . towards the south of this region be the kingdom canana-of Guinea , with Senega , Jalofo , Gambra , and many other guinea . region of the black moor , call aethiopian or aethiopian . Negros , all which be water with the river negro call in old time Niger . in the say region be no city , but only certain low cottage make of bough ’43 of tree , plaster with chalk , and cover with straw . in these region be also very great desert . Marot continue . the kingdom of Morocco have under it these seven kingdom : hea , sus , guzula , the territory of Marrocco , fe . Duccala , Hazchora , and tedle . the kingdom of fe have as many : as fe , temesne , azgar , Elabath , Errif , Tremisen . Garet , and elcair . the kingdom of Tremisen have these region : Tremisen , Tenez , and elgazair , all which be guinea . Machometists . but all the region of Guinea be pure gentile , and idolatrous , without profession of any religion , or other knowledge of God , then by the law of nature . Africa the Africa the great be one of the three part of the world , and eat - know in old time , and sever from Asia , on the east by the river Nilus , on the west from Europe by the pillar of Hercules . the hither part be now call Barbary , and the people Moores . the inner part be Africa the call Lybia and Aethiopia . Africa the less be in this k ™ ' wise bound . on the west it have Numidia ; on the east Cyrenaica : on the north , the sea call Mediterraneum . in this country be the noble city of Carthage . Carthage . in the east side of Africa beneath the red sea , dwell the great and mighty emperor and christian king Prester John. Prester John , well know to the Portugal in their voyage to Calicut . his dominion reach very far on every side : and have under he many other king both Christian and heathen that pay he tribute . this mighty prince be call David the emperor of Aethiopia . some write that the king of Portugal send he yearly eight ship lade with merchandise . his kingdom con-fineth with the red sea , and reach far into Africa towards Aegypt and Barbary . southward it confine cape de bona with the sea towards the cape de bona Speranza : and on Speranda . the other side with the sea of sand , call mare de sabione , a very dangerous sea lie between you great alcair . city of alcair , or Cairo in Aegypt , and the country of [ il two . two . ] Aethiopia : in the which way be many unhabitable 144 desert , continue for the space of five day journey . and they affirm , that if the say christian emperor be not hinder by those desert ( in the which be great lack of victual , and especial of water ) he will or now have invade the kingdom of Egypt , and the city of alcair . the chief city of Ethiopia , where this great emperor be resident , be call amacaiz , be a fair city , Amacaiz . who inhabitant be of the colour of a olive . there be also many other city , as the city of Sava upon the river of Nilus , where the emperor be accustom to remain in the summer season . there be likewise a great city name barbaregaf , and ascon , from whence from whence it be say that the queen of Saba come to Jerusalem to hear the wisdom of Salomon . this city be but ' little , yet very fair , and one of the chief city in Ethiope . in this province be many exceed high mountain , upon the which be say to be the earthly paradise : and some the say that there be the tree of the sun and moon , ^ ! ad*se ' . ; r i .... , .. 1 he tree oj whereof the antiquity make mention : yet that none sun and can pass thither by reason of great desert of a hundred the moon . day journey . also beyond these mountain be the cape of Bona Speranza . and to have say thus much of Africa it may suffice . the first voyage to Guinea and Benin . n the year of our lord 1553. the twelve day of August , sail from Portsmouth two goodly ship , the primerose and the lion , with a pinnace call the moon , be all well furnish aswell with man of the lusty sort , to the number of seven score , as also with ordinance and Pinteado . victual requisite to such a voyage : have also two captain , the one a stranger call Anthony anes pinteado , a Portugal ! , bear in a town name the port of Portugal ! , a wise , discreet , and sober man , who for vi 145 the castle of Mina . the english voyage the king of Portugal , and to who the coast of Brasile and Guinea be commit to be keep from the Frenchman , to who he be a terror on the sea in those part , and be furthermore a gentleman of the king his master house . but as fortune in manner never favour but flatter , never promise but deceive , never raise but cast down again : and as great wealth and favour have always companion , emulation and envy , he be after many adversity and quarrel make against he , inforce to come into England : where in this golden voyage he be evil match with a unequal companion , and unlike match of most sundry quality and condition , with virtue few or none adorn . thus depart these noble ship under sail on their voyage : but first captain Windam put forth of his ship at Portsmouth a kinsman of one of the head merchant , and show herein a muster of the tragical part he have conceive in his brain , and with such small beginning nourish so monstrous a birth , that more happy , yea and bless be that young man be leave behind , then if he have be take with they , as some do wish he have do the like by they . thus sail they on their voyage , until they come to the hand of Madera , where they take in certain wine for the store of their ship , and pay for they as they agree of the price . ■ at these hand they meet with a great Galion of the king of Portugal , full of man and ordinance : yet such as can not have prevail if it have attempt to withstand or resist our ship , for the which cause it be set forth , not only to let and interrupt these our ship of their purpose voyage , but all other that shall attempt the like : yet chief to frustrate our voyage . for the king of Portugal be sinister inform , that our ship be arm to his castle of Mina in those party , whereas nothing less be mean . after that our ship depart from the hand of Madera forward on their voyage , begin this worthy captain Pinteados sorrow , as a man torment with the 146 company of a terrible Hydra , who hitherto flatter with he , and make he a fair countenance and show of love . then do he take upon he to command all alone , set nought both by captain Pinteado , and the rest of the merchant factor , sometime with opprobrious word , and sometime with threaten most shameful abuse they , take from Pinteado the service of the boy and certain mariner that be assign he by the order and direction of the worshipful merchant , and leave he as a common mariner , which be the great despite and grief that can be to a Portugal or Spaniard , to be diminish of their honour , which they esteem above all riches . thus sail forward on their voyage , they come to the hand of Canarie , continue their course hand of from thence until they arrive at the hand of S. Nicholas , of where they victual themselves with fresh meat , of s the flesh of wild goat , whereof be great plenty in that hand , and in manner of nothing else . from hence follow on their course and tarry here and there at the desert hand in the way , because they will not come too timely to the country of Guinea for the heat , and tarry somewhat too long ( for what can be well minister in a common wealth , where inequality with tyrannic will rule alone ) they come at the length to the first land of the country of Guinea , where they fall with the great river of the river of Sesto , where they may for their merchandize have lade their ship with the grain of that country , which be a very hot fruit , and much like unto a fig as it grow on the tree . for as the fig be full of small seed , so be the say fruit full of grain , which be loose within the cod , have in the mid thereof a hole on every side . this kind of spice be much use in cold country , and may there be sell for great advantage , for exchange of other ware . but our man , by the persuasion or rather enforcement of this tragical captain , not regard and set light by that commodity , in comparison of the fine gold the thirst of they thirst , sail a hundred league further , until they come to the golden land : where not attempt to 147 fury admiti-eth no counsel . the Rossia . rot heat . Benin . Francisco . Nich. Lambart . the english voyage come near the castle pertain to the king of Portugal , which be within the river of Mina , they make sale of their ware only on this side and beyond it , for the gold of that country , to the quantity of a hundred and fifty pound weight , there be in case that they may have dispatch all their ware for gold , if the untame brain of Windam have , or can have give ear to the counsel and experience of Pinteado . for when that Windam not satisfy with the gold which he have , and more may have have if he have tarry about the Mina , command the say Pinteado ( for so he take upon he ) to lead the ship to Benin , be under the equinoctial line , and a hundred and fifty league beyond the Mina , where he look to have their ship lade with pepper : and be counsel of the say Pinteado , consider the late time of the year , for that time to go no further , but to make sale of their ware such as they have for gold , whereby they may have be great gainer : Windam not assent hereunto , fall into a sudden rage , revile the say Pinteado , call he Jew , with other opprobrious word , say , this whoreson Jew have promise to bring we to such place as be not , or as he can bring we unto : but if he do not , i will cut off his ear and nail they to the mast . Pinteado give the foresay counsel to go no further for the safeguard of the man and their life , which they shall put in danger if they come too late , for the rossia which be their winter , not for cold , but for smother heat , with close and cloudy air and storm weather , of such putrify quality , that it rot the coat of their back : or else for come to soon for the scorch heat of the sun , which cause they to linger in the way . but of force and not of will bring he the ship before the river of Benin , where ride at a anchor , they send their pinnace up into the river 50 or 60 league , from whence certain of the merchant with captain Pinteado , Francisco a Portugal , Nicholas Lambart gentleman , and other merchant be conduct to the court where the king remain , ten league from the 148 river side , whither when they come , they be bring with a great company to the presence of the king , who the king of be a black moor ( although not so black as the rest ) Bentn be sit in a great huge hall , long and wide , the wall make of nurt ' earth without window , the roof of thin board , open in sundry place , like unto lover to let in the air . and here to speak of the great reverence they give to ' reverence to-their king , it be such , that if we will give as much to ward the king . our saviour Christ , we shall remove from our head many plague which we daily deserve for our contempt and impiety . so it be therefore , that when his noble man be in his presence , they never look he in the face , but sit cower , as we upon our knee , so they upon their buttock , with their elbow upon their knee , and their hand before their face , not look up until the king command they . and when they be come towards the king , as far as they do see he , they do show such reverence , sit on the ground with their face cover as before . likewise when they depart from he , they turn not their back towards he , but go creep backward with like reverence . and now to speak somewhat of the communication that be between the king and our man , you shall first understand that he himself can speak the Portugal tongue , which he have learn of a child . therefore after the communi-he have command our man to stand up , and demand cati ™ ketween or they the cause or their come into that country , Benin and our they answer by Pinteado , that they be merchant man . travel into those party for the commodity of his country , for exchange of ware which they have bring from their country , be such as shall be no less commodious for he and his people . the king then have of old lie in a certain store-house 30 or 40 kintal of pepper ( every kintail be a hundred weight ) pepper . will they to look upon the same , and again to bring he a sight of such merchandize as they have bring with they . and thereupon send with the captain and 149 the merchant certain of his man to conduct they to the water side , with other to bring the ware from the pinnace the king gen - to the court . who when they be return and the tlenes towards ware seenj the king grow to this end with the merchant our man . provide in 30 day the lade of all their ship with pepper . and in case their merchandize will not extend to the value of so much pepper , he promise to credit they to their next return , and thereupon send the country round about to gather pepper , cause the same to be bring to the court : so that within the space of 30 day they have gather fourscore ton of pepper . in the mean season our man partly have no rule of [ ii two . 13. ] themselves , but eat without measure of the fruit of the country , and drink the wine of the palm tree that drop in the night from the cut of the branch of the same , and in such extreme heat run continual into the water , not use before to such sudden and vehement alteration ( than the which nothing be more dangerous ) be thereby bring into swell and ague : insomuch that the late time of the year coming on , cause they to die sometime three and sometime 4 or 5 in a day . then Windam perceive the time of the 30 day to be expire , and his man die so fast , send to the court in post to captain Pinteado , and the rest to come away , and to tarry no long . but Pinteado with the rest , write back to he again , certify he of the great quantity of pepper they have already gather and look daily for much more : desire he furthermore to remember the great praise and name they shall win , if they come home prosperous , and what shame of the contrary . with which answer Windam not satisfy , and many of their man die daily , will and command they again either to come away forthwith , or else threaten to leave they behind . when Pinteado hear this answer , think to persuade he with reason , he take his way from the court towards the ship , be conduct thither with man by the king commandment . i5° in the mean season Windam all rage , break up Pinteados cabin , break open his chest , spoil such provision of cold still water and sucket as he have provide for his health , and leave he nothing , neither of his instrument to sail by , nor yet of his apparel : and in the mean time fall sick , himself die also . sleaik of who death Pinteado come aboard , lament as wintiam-much as if he have be the dear friend he have in the world . but certain of the mariner and other officer Pinteado evil do spit in his face , some call he Jewe , say that he usetiofthe have bring they thither to kill they : and some draw their sword at he , make a show to slay he . than he perceive that they will needs away , desire they to tarry that he may fetch the rest or the merchant that be leave at the court , but they will not grant this request . then desire he they to give he the ship-boat , with as much of a old sail as may serve for the same , promise they therewith to bring Nicholas this Lambert Lambert and the rest into England , but all be in vain . then write he a letter to the court to the merchant , who father inform they of all the matter , and promise they have be lord if God will lend he life to return with all haste to mayor rf fetch they . and thus be Pinteado keep ashipboord against his will , thrust among the boy of the ship , not use like a man , nor yet like a honest boy , but glad to find favour at the cook hand . then depart they , leave one of their ship behind - they , which they sink for lack of man to carry she . after this , within 6 or 7 day sail , die also Pinteado for very pensiveness the death of and think that strike he to the heart . a man worthy pinteacio-to serve any prince , and most vile use . and of sevenscore man come home to Plymouth scarce forty , and of they many die . and that no man shall suspect these word which i have say in commendation of Pinteado , to be speak upon favour otherwise then truth , 1 have think good to add hereunto the copy of the letter which the king of Portugal and the infant his brother write unto he to reconcile he , at such 151 time as upon the king his master displeasure ( and not for any other crime or offence , as may appear by the say letter ) he be only for poverty enforce to come Pinteado first into England , where he first persuade our merchant to ^ ™ adldwir - attempt they say voyage to Guinea . but as the king age of Guinea . of Portugal too late repent he that he have so punish Pinteado , upon malicious information of such as envy the man good fortune : even so may it hereby appear that in some case even lion themselves may either be hinder by the contempt , or aid by the help of the poor mouse , accord unto the fable of Aesop . the copy of Anthony anes Pinteado his letter patent , whereby the king of Portugal make he knight of his house , after all his trouble and imprisonment , which , by wrong information make to the king , he have sustain of long time , be at the last deliver , his cause know and manifest to the king by a grey friar the king confessor . i the king do give you to understand lord Francis Desseaso , one of my counsel and overseer of my house , that in consideration of the good service which Anthony anes Pinteado , the son of John anes , dwell in the town call the port , have do unto i , my will and pleasure be , to make he knight of my Seven hun - house , allow to he in pension seven hundred reis dfen sWinl monthly » and every day one alcayre of barley , as long as Alca^u he keep a horse , and to be pay accord to the halfea bushel , ordinance of my house . provide always that he shall receive but one marriage gift . and this also in such condition , that the time which be accept in our ordinance , forbid such man to marry for get such child as may succeed they in this allowance , which be 6 year after the make of this patent , shall first expire before he do marry . 1 therefore command you to cause this to be enter in the book call the J52 matricula of our household , under the title of knight . and when it be so enter , let the clarke of the matricula , [ ii two . 14. ] for the certainty thereof , write on the backside of this Alvala , or patent , the number of the leaf wherein this our grant be enter . which do , let he return this writing unto the say Anthony anes Pinteado for his warrant . i Diego Henriques have write this in Almarin the two and twenty day of September , in the year of our lord 1551. and this benevolence the king give unto Anthony anes Pinteado , the five and twenty day of July this present year . Rey. the secretary declaration write under the king grant . your majesty have vouchsafe , in respect and consideration of the good service of Anthony anes Pinteado , dwell in the port , and son of John anes , to make he knight of your house , with ordinary allowance , of seven hundred reis pension by the month , and one alcaire of barley by the day , as Jong as he keep a horse : and to be pay accord to the ordinance of your house , with condition that he shall have but one marriage gift : and that not within the space of six year after the make of these letter patent . the secretary note . enter in the book of the matricula . fol. 683. Francisco de Siquera . the copy of the letter of don Lewes the infant , and brother to the king of Portugal , send into England to Anthony anes Pinteado . ANthony anes Pinteado , i the infant brother to the king , have i hearty commend unto you . Peter Gonsalves be go to seek you , desire to bring you home again into your country . and for that purpose he have with he a safe conduct for you , grant by the 153 king , that thereby you may free and without all fear come home . and although the weather be foul and stormy , yet fade not to come : for in the time that his majesty have give you , you may do many thing to your contentation and gratify the king , whereof i will be right glad : and to bring the same to pass , i will do all that lie in i for your profit . but forasmuch as Peter Gonsalves will make further declaration hereof unto you , i say no more at this present . write in Lisbon , the eight day of December . anno 1552. the infant don Lewes . a li these foresay write i see under seal , in the house of my friend Nicholas Liese , with who Pinteado leave they , at his unfortunate depart to Guinea . but , notwithstanding all these friendly letter and fair promise , Pinteado dare not attempt to go home , neither to keep company with the Portugal his country man , without the - presence of other : forasmuch as he have secret admonition that they intend to slay he , if time and place may have serve their wicked intent . the second voyage to Guinea set out by sir George bairn , sir John York , Thomas Lok , Anthony Hickman and Edward Castelin , in the year 1554. the captain whereof be m. John Lok . s in the first voyage i have declare rather the order of the history , than the course of the navigation , whereof at that time i can have no perfect information : so in the description of this second voyage , my chief intent have be to show the course of the same , accord to the observation and ordinary custom of the mariner , and as i receive it at the hand of a expert pilot , be one of the chief in this voyage , who also with his own * 54 