which ambassage the king of England seem to be very well please , and they be receive of he with very great honour , and he condescend unto all that the ambassador require of he , at who hand they receive authentical write of the diligence which they have perform , with publication thereof by the herald : and also proviso of those confirmation which be necessary . and have dispatch all thing well , and with the king good will , they return home into their country . [ il two . 3. ] a brief note concern a ancient trade of the english merchant to the canary-land , gather out of a old ligier book of m. Nicolas Thorne the elder a worshipful merchant of the city of Bristol . RF3 | | 1t appear evident out of a certain note or ■ si letter °f remembrance , in the custody of i ™ ■ " ! Richard Hakluyt , write by m. Nicolas Thorne the elder a principali merchant of Bristol , to his friend and factor Thomas midnail and his own servant William Ballard at that time resident at saint Lucar in Andaluzia ; that in the year of our lord 1526 ( and ary trade to ' circumstance and probability long before ) cer-the canary take english merchant , and among the rest himself 1526. with one Thomas Spacheford exercise usual and ordi - nary trade of merchandise unto the canary hand . for by the say letter notice be give to Thomas midnail and William Ballard aforesaid , that a certain ship call the Christopher of Cadiz bind for the west Indies have take in certain fardel of cloth both course and fine , broad and narrow of diverse sort and colour , some arova of packthreed , six ceron or bag of soap with other good of m. Nicolas Thorne , to be deliver at Santa Cruz the chief town in Tenerifa one of the seven canary-land . all which commodity the say Thomas and William be authorise by the owner in the letter 124 before mention to barter and sell away at Santa Cruz. and in lieu of such money as shall arise of the sale of those good they be appoint to return back into England good store of Orchell ( which be a certain kind of moss grow upon high rock , in those day much use to die withal ) some quantity of sugar , and certain hundred of kid-skinne . for the procure of which and of other commodity at the best and first hand the say Thomas and William be to make their abode at Santa Cruz , and to remain there as factor for the abovesaid m. Nicolas Thorne . and here also i think good to signify , that in the say letter mention be make of one Thomas Tison a english man , who before the foresay year 1526 have find the way to the west Indies , and be there resident , unto who the say m. Nicolas Thorne send certain armour and other commodity specify in the letter , aforesaid . A.D. c . 1550. a description of the fortunate hand , otherwise call the hand of Canaria , with their strange fruit and commodity : compose by Thomas Nicols english man , who remain there the space of seven year together . ine intent be particular to speak of the Canaria hand , which be seven in number , wherein i dwell the space of seven year and more , because i find such variety in sundry writer , and especial great untruth , in a book call the new find world antarctike , set out by a french man call Andrew Thevet , the which his book he dedicate to the Cardinali of Sens , keeper of the great seal of France . it appear by the say book that he have read the work . of sundry philosopher , astronomer , and cosmographers , who opinion he gather together . but 125 