before mention to barter and sell away at Santa Cruz. and in lieu of such money as shall arise of the sale of those good they be appoint to return back into England good store of Orchell ( which be a certain kind of moss grow upon high rock , in those day much use to die withal ) some quantity of sugar , and certain hundred of kid-skinne . for the procure of which and of other commodity at the best and first hand the say Thomas and William be to make their abode at Santa Cruz , and to remain there as factor for the abovesaid m. Nicolas Thorne . and here also i think good to signify , that in the say letter mention be make of one Thomas Tison a english man , who before the foresay year 1526 have find the way to the west Indies , and be there resident , unto who the say m. Nicolas Thorne send certain armour and other commodity specify in the letter , aforesaid . a description of the fortunate hand , otherwise call the hand of Canaria , with their strange fruit and commodity : compose by Thomas Nicols english man , who remain there the space of seven year together . ine intent be particular to speak of the Canaria hand , which be seven in number , wherein i dwell the space of seven year and more , because i find such variety in sundry writer , and especial great untruth , in a book call the new find world antarctike , set out by a french man call Andrew Thevet , the which his book he dedicate to the Cardinali of Sens , keeper of the great seal of France . it appear by the say book that he have read the work . of sundry philosopher , astronomer , and cosmographers , who opinion he gather together . but 125 touch his own travel , which he affirm , i refer to the judgement of the expert in our day , and therefore for my own part 1 write of these Canaria hand , as time have teach i in many year . the hand of Canaria . the hand of Canaria be almost equal in length and breadth , contain 12 league in length , touch they which as principali and the residue , the Spaniard hold opinion , that they discover the same in their navigation towards America , but the Portugal say , that their nation first find the say hand in their navigation towards Aethiopia and the east Indies . English man but truth it be that the Spaniard first conquer these at the first conquest of the hand , with diverse english gentleman in their company , canary . who posterity this present day enjoy they . some write that this hand be name Canaria by mean of the number of dog which there be find : as for example , Andrew Thevet say , that one Juba carry two dog from thence : but that opinion can i never learn by any of the naturali people of the country , although i have talk with many in my time , and with many of their child . for truth it be , that there be dog , but such as be in all the northwest land , and some part of the west India , which serve the people in stead of sheep for victuali . but of some of the conqueror of those hand i have hear say that the reason why they be call the Canaria Islands be , because there grow general in they all foursquare cane in great multitude together , which be touch will cast out a liquor as [ ii two . 4. ] white as milk , which liquor be rank poison , and at the first entry into these hand some of the discoverer be therewith poison : for many year after that conquest the inhabitant begin to plant both wine and sugar , so that Canaria be not so call by sugar cane . the people which first inhabit this land be call canary by the conqueror , they be clothe in goat skin make like unto a loose cassock , they dwell in 126 cave in the rock , in great amity and brotherly love . they speak all one language : their chief feed be geld dog , goat , and goat milk , their bread be make of barley meal and goat milk , call gofia , which they use at this day , and thereof i have eat diverse time , for it be account exceed wholesome . touch the originali of these people some hold opinion , that the roman which dwell in Africa exile they thither , aswell man as woman , their tongue be cut out of their head , for blasphemy against the roman god . but howsoever it be , their language be speciali , and not mix with roman speech or arabian . this hand be now the principall of all the rest , not in fertility , but by reason it be the seat of justice and government of all the residue . this hand have a speciali governor for the hand only , yet notwithstanding there be three judge call Audi tour , who be superior judge , and all in one joint proceed as the lord Chanceller of any realm . to this city from all the other hand come all such by appeal , as have sustain any wrong , and these good judge do remedy the same . the city be call Civitas palmarum , it have a beautiful cathedral church , with all dignity thereunto pertain . for the public weal of the hand there be sundry aiderman of great authority , who have a council house by themselves . the city be not only beautiful , but the citizen curious and gallant in apparel . and after any rain or foul weather a man may go clean in velvet slipper , because the ground be sandy , the air very temperate , without extreme heat or cold . they reap wheat in February , and again in may , which be excellent good , and make bread as white as snow . this hand have in it other three town , the one call telde , the second Galder , and the three Guia . it have also twelve sugar house call ingenios , in which they make great quantity of good sugar . 127 Civitas palmarum , the plant the manner of the growth of sugar be in this sort , a and growth of good ground give forth fruit nine time in 18 year : sugar cane .. g first be pianta > which be lay along in a furrow , so that the water of a sluice may come over every root be cover with earth : this root bring forth sundry cane , and so consequent all the rest . it grow two year before the yield of profit , and not six month , as Andrew Thevet the french man write . the make then be they cut even with the ground , and the top of sugar . and ieave call coholia cut off , and the cane bind into bundle like faggot , and so be carry to the sugar house call ingenio , where they be grind in a mill , and the juice thereof convey by a conduct to a great vessel make for the purpose , where it be boil till it wax thick , and then be it put into a furnace of earthen pot of the mould of a sugar loaf , and then be it carry to another house , call a purge house where it be place to purge the blackness with a certain clay that be lay thereon . of the remainder in the cauldron be make a second sort call Escumas , and of the purge liquor that drop from the white sugar be make a three sort , and the remainder be call Panela or Netas , the refuse of all the purge be call Remiel or malass : and thereof be make another sort call refinado . when this first fruit be in this sort gather , call Planta , than the cane-field where it grow be burn over with sugar straw to the stump of the first cane , and be husband , water and trim , at the end of other two year it yield the second fruit call Zoea . the three fruit be call tertia Zoea , the four Quarta Zoea , and so orderly the rest , till age cause the old cane to be plant again . wine . this hand have singular good wine , especial in the town of telde , and sundry sort of good fruit , as batatas , melon , pear , apple , orange , lemon , pomgranate , fig , peach of diverse sort , and many other fruit : but especial the Plantano which grow 128 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv c . 1550. near brook side , it be a tree that have no timber in it , but grow direct upward with the body , have marvelous thick leaf , and every leaf at the top of two yard long and almost half a yard broad . the tree never yield fruit but once , and then be cut down ; in who place spring another , and so still continue . the fruit grow on a branch , and every tree yield two or three of those branch , which bear some more and some less , as some forty and some thirty , the fruit be like a Cucumber , and when it be ripe it be black , and in eat more delicate than any conserve . this hand be sufficient provide of ox , cow , camel , goat , sheep , capon , hen , duck , and pigeon , and great partridge . wood be the thing that most want : and because i have particular to [ ii two . 5. ] entreat of the other six hand , i leave further enlarge of Canaria , which stand in 27 degree distant from the equator . the he of tenerif . the hand of tenerif stand in 27 degree and a half from the equator , and be distant from Canaria 12 league northward . this hand contain 17 league in length , and the land lie high in form of a ridge of sow land in some part of England , and in the midst of the say place stand a round hill call Pico Deteithe , situate in this sort . the top of this pike contain of heighth direct upward 15 league and more , which be 45 English mile , out of the which often time proceed fire and brimstone , and it may be about half a mile in compass : the say top be in form or likeness of a caldron . but within two mile of the top be nothing but ash and pumish stone : yet beneath that two mile be the cold region cover all the year with snow , and somewhat lower be mighty huge tree grow , call Vinatico , which be exceed heavy , and will not rot in any water , although they lie a thousand vi 129 1 year therein . also there be a wood call Barbusano , of like virtue , with many savin tree and pine tree . and beneath these sort of tree be wood of bay tree of 10 and 12 mile long , which be a pleasant thing to travel through , among the which be great number of small bird , which sing exceed sweet , but especial one sort that be very title , and of colour in all respect like a swallow , save that he have a little black spot on his breast as broad as a penny . he sing more sweet than all the rest , but if he be take and imprison in a cage , he live but a small while . this hand bring forth all sort of fruit , as Canaria do : and also all the other hand in generali bring forth shrub or bush , out of the which issue a juice as white as milk , which after a while that it have come out lime . wax thick , and be exceed good birdlime , the bush be call Taybayba . this hand also bring forth another tree call dragon , which grow on high among rock , and by incision at the foot of the tree issue out a liquor like blood , which be a common drug among apothecary . of the wood of this tree be make target great esteem , because if any sword or dagger hit thereon , they stick so fast that it be hard pluck they out . this be the most fruitful hand of all the rest for corn , and in that respect be a mother or nurse to all the other in time of need . there grow also a Orchel good certain moss upon the high rock call Orchel , for die . which be buy for dyer to die withal . there be 12 sugar house call ingenios , which make great quantity of sugar . there be also one league of ground which stand between two town , the one call Larotava , and the other Rialeio , and it be think that the like plot of ground be not in all the world . the reason be , that this one league of ground produce sweet water out of the cliff or rocky mountain , corn of all sort , fruit of all sort , and excellent good silk , flax , wax , and honey , and very good wine in abundance , with great 130 a description of the canary a.d. c . 1550. store of sugar and firewood . out of this hand be lade great quantity of wine for the west India , and other country . the best grow on a hill side call the Ramble . there be in that hand a fair city , stand three league from the sea , near unto a lake call Laguna , wherein be two fair parish church , there dwell the governor who rule all that hand with justice . there be also aiderman for the public weal , who buy their office of the king : the most of the whole inhabitant of this city be gentleman , merchant , and husband man . there be other four town call Santa Cruz , Santa Cruz. Larotava , Rialeio , and Garachico . in this hand before the conquest dwell seven king , who with all their people dwell in cave , and be clothe in goat skin , as the Canaria people be , and use such like order of diet as they have . their order of burial be , that when any die , he be carry naked to a great cave , where he be prop up against the wall stand on his foot . but if he be of any authority among they , then have he a staff in his hand , and a vessel of milk stand by he . i have see cave of 300 of these corpse together , the flesh be dry up , the body remain as light as parchment . Theise people be call guanche , natural they speak another language clean contrary to the canarians , and so consequent every hand speak a several language . note ( gentle reader ) that the hand of Canaria , than he of tenerif , and the he of Palma appertain to the king of Spain , unto who they pay fifty thousand ducat yearly for custom and other profit . all these hand joint be one bishopric , which pay to the bishop twelve thousand ducat yearly . and thus i conclude of they he of tenerif , which stand in 27 degree and a half , as i have before declare . [ Gomera 131 the hand of Gomera stand westward from tenerif , in distance six league : this be but a small hand contain eight league in length . it be a [ ii two . 6. ] earldom , and the lord thereof be call the earl of Gomera . but in case of any controversy the vassal may appeal to the king superior judge which reside in Canaria . this hand have one proper town call Gomera , which have a excellent good port or harbour for ship , where often time the indian fleet take refresh for their voyage . there be also sufficient grain and fruit for the maintenance of themselves . there be one ingenio or Sugar-house , with great plenty of wine and other sort of fruit , as Canaria and tenerif have . this hand yield no other commodity but only orchell ; it stand in 27 degree distant from the equator towards the pole arcticke . the he of Palma . the he of Palma stand twelve league distant from the lie of Gomera northwestward . this hand be fruitful of wine and sugar : it have a proper city call the city of Palma , where be great contraction for wine , which be lade for the west India and other place . this city have one fair church , and a govern our , and aiderman to maintain and execute justice . it have also another pretty town , call S. Andrew . it have also four ingenios which make excellent sugar , two of the which be call zauze , and the other two , Tassacort . this hand yield but little breadcorn ; but rather be thereof provide from tenerif and other place . their best wine grow in a soil call the Brenia , where yearly be gather twelve thousand butt of wine 132 like unto malmsy . this hand stand round , and contain in circuit near five and twenty league . it have plenty of all sort of fruit , as Canaria and tenerif have , it stand in twenty seven degree and a half . the hand of iron , call Hierro . this hand stand ten league distant from the hand of Palma westward : it be but a little hand , which contain six league in circuit , and have but small extension . it appertain to the earl of Gomera . the chief commodity of this hand be goat flesh and orchell . there be no wine in all that hand , but only one vineyard that a english man of Taunton in the west country plant among rock , his name be John hill this hand have no kind of fresh water , but only in the middle of the hand grow a great tree with leaf like a olive tree , which have a great cistern at the foot of the say tree . this tree continual be cover with cloud , and by mean thereof the leaf of the say tree continual drop water , very sweet , into the say cistern , which come to the say tree from the cloud by attraction . and this water suffice the hand for all necessity , aswell for the cattle , as for the inhabitant . it stand in 27 degree . the only vineyard in Hierro plant by Joh. hill of Taunton . the hand of Lanzarota . the hand of Lanzarota stand eighteen league distant from grand Canaria southeastward . the only commodity of this hand be goat flesh and orchell . it be a earldom , and do appertain to don Augustine de Herrera , with title of earl of Fortaventura and Lanzarota . but the vassal of these earldom may in any cause of wrong appeal to the king judge , which reside in Canaria , as i have say before : because although the king have reserve to himself but only the three fruitful hand , call Canaria , tenerif , and Palma , yet he also reserve the rod of justice to him-133 self , because otherwise the vassal may be evil entreat of their lord . from this hand do weekly resort to Canaria , Tenerifj and Palma , boat lade with dry goat flesh , call Tussmetta , which serve in stead of bacon , and be very good meat . this hand stand in 26 degree , and be in length twelve league . the lie of Forteventura . the he of Forteventura stand fifty league from the promontory of Cabo de Guer , in the firm land of Africa , and four and twenty league distant from Canaria eastward . this hand do appertain to the lord of Lanzarota . it be reasonable fruitful of wheat and barley , and also of kine , goat , and orchel : this he be fifteen league long and ten league broad . on the north side it have a little hand about one league distant from the main hand , between both of the which it be navigable for any ship , and be call Graciosa . both Forteventura and Lanzarota have very little wine of the growth of those hand . it stand in 27 degree . [ ii two . 7. ] thus much have i write of these seven hand by experience , because i be a dweller there , as i have say before , the space of seven year in the affair of master Thomas lock , master Anthony Hickman , and master Edward Castelin , who in those day be worthy merchant , and of great credit in the city of London . a description of the hand of Madera . the hand of Madera stand in 32 degree distant from the equinoctinall line , and seventie league from the he of tenerif northeastward and southwest from Hercules pillar . this hand be first discover by one Macham a Englishman , and be after conquer and inhabit by the Portugal nation . it be first call the hand of Madera , by reason of the great wilderness of sundry sort of tree that there do 134 grow , and yet do , as cedar , cypress , Vinatico , bar-buzano , pine tree , and diverse other , and therefore the say hand continue still with the same name . howbeit they hold opinion , that between the say hand and the he of Palma be a hand not yet discover , which be the true hand Madera call saint Brandon . this hand yield a great sum of money to the king of Portugal yearly : it have one fair city call Fouchall , which have one fair port or harbour for ship , and a strong bulwark , and a fair cathedral church , with a bishop and other dignity thereunto appertain . there be also justice and government accord to the Portugal use . but cause of appellation be remit to the city of Lisbon in Portugal to the king superior judge there . this hand have another town call Machico , which have likewise a good road for ship , which town and road be so call after the name of Macham the Englishman , who first discover the same . there be also sixteen sugar house call ingenios , which make excellent good sugar . there be beside the goodly timber before declare , great store of diverse sort of fruit , as pear , apple , plum , wild date , peach of diverse sort , melon , batatas , orange , lemon , pomgranate , citron , fig , and all manner of garden herb . there be many dragon tree , such as grow in the canary hand , but chief this land produce great quantity of singular good wine which be lade for many place . on the north side of this land three league distant from the main hand stand another little hand call porto santo : the people thereof live by husbandry , for the hand of Madera yield but little corn , but rather be thereof provide out of France and from the hand of tenerif . on the east side of the he of Madera six league distant stand another little hand call the desert , which produce only Orchell , and nourish a great number of goat , for the provision of the main hand , which may be thirty league in circuit : and the land be of great 135 A.D. c . 1550. heighth where the foresay tree grow . it be wonder to see the conveyance of the water to the ingenios by mine through the mountain . in the mid way between tenerif and the hand of Madera stand a little solitary hand call the savage , which may be about one league in compass , which have neither tree nor fruit , but be only food for goat . the originali of the first voyage for traffic into the kingdom of Morocco in Barbary , begin in the year 1551. with a tall ship call the lion of London , whereof go as captain master Thomas Windam , as appear by this extract of a letter of James Aldaie , to the worshipful master Michael lock , which Aldaie profess himself to have be the first inventer of this trade . late bene ac - orshipful sir , have quaint with your intent to prosecute the old intermit discovery for Catai , if therein with my knowledge , travel or industry i may do you service , i be ready to do it , and therein to adventure my life to the uttermost point . truth it be , that i have be by some man ( not my friend ) evil speak of at London , say that although i be a man of knowledge in the art of navigation and cosmography , and that i have be the inventer of some voyage that be now grow to great effect ; yet say they malicious and without just cause , that i have not be willing at any season to proceed in those voyage that i have take in hand , take example especial of two voyage . the one be when i be master in the great bark Aucher for the Levant , in which voyage i go not , but the cause they do not know of my let from the same , nor of the other . but first the very 136 