certain report of the province of China learn through the Portugal there imprison , and chief by the relation of Galeotto Perera , a gentleman of good credit , that lie prisoner in that country many year . Done out of italian into english by Richard will . his land of China be part into 13. shire , the which sometime be each one a kingdom by it self , but these many year they have be all subject unto one king . fuquien be make by the fuquien . Portugal the first shire , because there their trouble begin , and they have occasion thereby to know the rest . in this shire be 8. city , but one principal more famous than other call Fuquieo , the other seven be reasonable great , the best know whereof unto the Portugal be Cinceo , in respect of a Cinceo . certain haven join thereunto , whither in time past they be wont for merchandise to resort . Cantan be the second shire , not so great in quantity , cantan . as well account of , both by the king thereof , and also by the Portugal , for that it lie near unto Malacca then any other part of China , and be first descry by the Portugal before any other shire in that province : this shire have in it seven city . chequeam be the three shire , the chief city therein chequeam . be donchion , therein also stand Liampo , with other 13. or 14. borough : country town therein be too too many to be speak of . the four shire be call Xutiamfu , the principali Xutiamfu . city thereof be great Pachin , where the king be always resident . in it be fifteen other very great city : of other town therein , and borough well wall and trench about , i will say nothing . the five shire have name Chelim : the great city Chelim . Nanquin chief of other fifteen city be herein of 295 [ ii two . 69. ] the english voyage ancient time the royal seat of the chinish king . from this shire , and from the aforesaid chequeam forward bear rule the other king , until the whole region become one kingdom . the 6. shire bear the name Quianci , as also the principal city thereof , wherein the fine clay to make vessel be wrought . the Portugal be ignorant of this country , and find great abundance of that fine clay to be sell at Liampo , and that very good cheap , think at the first that it have be make there , howbeit in fine they perceive that the stand of Quinzi more near unto Liampo then to Cinceo or Cantan be the cause of so much fine clay at Liampo : within the compass of Quinci shire be other 12. city . the 7. shire be quicin , the 8. quansi , the 9 Confu , the 10. Urnan , the 11. Sichiva . in the first hereof there be 16. city , in the next 15 : how many town the other 3. have , we be ignorant as yet , as also of the proper name of the 12. and 13. shire , and the town therein . This final may be general say hereof , that the great shire in China province may be compare with mighty kingdom . in each one of these shire be set Ponchiassini and Anchiassini , before who be handle the matter of other city . there be also place in each one a Tutan , as you will say , a governor , and a chian , that be a visitor , as it be : who office be to go in circuit , and to see justice exact do . by these mean so upright thing be order there , that it may be worthy account one of the best govern province in all the world . the king make always his abode in the great city Pachin , as much to say in our language , as by the name thereof i be advertise , the town of the kingdom . this kingdom be so large , that under five month you be not able to travail from the town by the sea side to the court , and back again , no not under three 296 month in post at your urgent business . the posthorse in this country be little of body , but swift of foot . Many do travel the great part of this journey by water in certain light bark , for the multitude of river commodious for passage from one city to another . the king , notwithstanding the hugeness of his king - theirmoneth . dome , have such a care thereof , that every moon ( for by the moon they reckon their month ) he be advertise full of whatsoever thing happen therein , by these mean follow . the whole province be divide into shire , and each shire have in it one chief and principali city , whereunto the matter of all the other city , town and borough , be bring , there be draw in every chief city aforesaid intelligence of such thing as do monthly fall out , and be send in write to the court . if happy in one month every post be not able to go so long a way , yet do their notwithstanding once every month arrive one post out of the shire . who so come before the new moon stay for the delivery of his letter until the moon be change . then likewise be dispatch other post back into all the 13. shire again . before that we do come to Cinceo we have to pass through many place , and some of great importance . for this country be so well inhabit near the sea side , that you can go one mile but you shall see some town , borough or hostry , the which be so abundant provide of all thing , that in the city and town they live civil . nevertheless such as dwell abroad be very poor , for the multitude of they every where be so great , that out of a tree you shall see many time swarm a number of child , where a man will not have think to have find any one at all . from these place in number infinite , you shall come unto two city very populous , and , be compare with Cinceo , not possible to be discern which be the great 297 of they . Theise city be as well wall as any city in all the world . as you come in to either of they , there stand so great and mighty a bridge , that the like thereof i have never see in Portugal nor else where . i hear one of my fellow say , that he tell in one bridge 40. arch . the occasion wherefore these bridge be make so great be , for that the country be towards the sea very plain and low , and overflow ever as the sea water increase . the breadth of the bridge , although it be well proportion unto the length thereof , yet be they equal build , no high in the middle then at either end , in such wise that you may see direct from the one end to the other : the side be wonderful well engrave after the manner of rome-worke . but that we do most marveile at be therewithal ! the hugeness of the stone , the like whereof , as we come in to the city , we do . see many set up in place dis-habited by the way , to no small charge of they , howbeit to little purpose , whereas no body see they but such as do come by . the arch be not make after our fashion , vaunt with sundry stone set together : but pave , as it be , whole stone reach from one pillar to a other , in such wise that they lie both for the arch head , and gallant serve also for the high way . i have be astonish to behold the hugeness of the aforesaid stone : some of they be twelve . pase long and upward , the least 11. good pase long , and a half . the way echwhere be gallant pave with foursquare stone , except it be where for want of stone they use to lay brick : in this voyage we travail over certain hill , where the way be pitch , and in many place no worse pave then in the plain ground . This cause we to think , that in all the world there be no better workman for building , than the inhabitant of China . the country be so well inhabit , that no one foot of ground be leave until : small store of cattle have we see this day , we see only certain ox wherewithal ! the countryman do blow their ground . 298 one ox draw the plough alone , not only in this shire , but in other place also , wherein be great store of cattle . Theise countryman by art do that in tillage , which we be constrain to do by force . here be sell the voiding of close stool , although there want not the dung of beast : and the excrement of man be good merchandise throughout all china . the dungfermer seek in every street by exchange to buy this dirty ware for herb and wood . the custom be very good for keep the city clean . there be great abundance of hen , goose , duck , swine , and goat , wether have they none : the hen be sell by weight , and so be all other thing . two pound of hen flesh , goose , or duck , be worth two foy of their money , that be , d . ob.sterling . swine flesh be sell at a penny the pound . beef bear the same price , for the scarcity thereof , howbeit northward from Fuquieo and far off from the seacoast , there be beef more plenty and sell better cheap ; we have have in all the city we pass through , great abundance of all these victual , beef only except . and if this country be like unto India , the inhabitant whereof eat neither hen , beef , nor pork , but keep that only for the Portugal and moor , they [ ii two . 70. ] will be sell here for nothing . but it so fall out , that the chineans be the great eater in all the world , they do feed upon all thing , special on pork , which , the fat it be , be unto they the less loathsome . the high price of these thing aforesaid 1 have set down , better cheap shall you sometime buy they for the great plenty thereof in this country . frog be sell at the same price that be make of hen , and be good meat among they , as also dog , cat , rat , snake , and all other unclean meat . the city be very gallant , special near unto the gate , the which be marvellous great , and cover with iron . the gatehouse be build on high with tower , and the low part thereof be make of brick and stone , proportional with the wall , from the wall upward the 299 building be of timber , and many story in it one above the other . the strength of their town be in the mighty wall and ditch , artillery have they none . the street in Cinceo , and in all the rest of the city we have see be very fair , so large and so straight , that it be wonderful to behold . their house be build with timber , the foundation only except , the which be lay with stone : in each side of the street be pentise or continual ! porch for the merchant to walk under : the breadth of the street be nevertheless such , that in they 15. man may ride commodious side by side . as they ride they must needs pass under many high arch of triumph that cross over the street make of timber , and carve diverse , cover with tile of fine clay : under these arch the mercer do utter their small ware , and such as listen to stand there be defend from rain and the heat of the sun . the great gentleman have these arch at their door : although some of they be not so mighty build as the rest . i shall have occasion to speak of a certain order of gentleman that be call Louteas . 1 will first therefore Loutea . expound what this word signify . Loutea be as much to say in our language as sir , and when any of they call his name , he answer sir : and as we do say , that the king have make some gentleman , so say they , that there be make a Loutea . and for that among they the degree be diverse both in name and office , i will tell you only of some principal , be not able to advertise you of all . the manner how gentleman be create Louteas , and do come to that honour and title , be by the give of a broad girdle , not like to the rest , and a cap , at the commandment of the king . the name Loutea be more generali and common unto more , than the equality of honour thereby signify agree withal . such Louteas as doe serve their prince in weighty matter for justice , be create after trial make of their learning : but the other which serve in small affair , as captain , constable , 3 00 hundred 1565. sergeant by land and sea , receiver and such like , whereof there be in every city , as also in this , very many , be make for favour : the chief Louteas be serve kneel . the whole province of China be divide , as i have say , into 13. shire , in every shire at the least be one governor call there Tutan , in some shire there be two . chief in office next unto they be certain other name chians , that be , high commissioner as you will say , or chian , or , visiter , with full authority in such wise , that they do chaen-call unto a account the tutans themselves , but their authority last not in any shire long than one year . nevertheless in every shire be at the least 7. city , yea , in some of they 15. or 16. beside other borough and town not well to be nurrtbr , these visiter where they come be so honour and fear , as though they be some great prince . at the year end , their circuit do , they come unto that ci tie which be chief of other in the shire , to do justice there : final busy themselves in the search out of such as be to receive the order of Louteas , whereof more shall|be say in another place . over and beside these officer , in the chief city of each one of these aforesaid 13. province , be resident one Ponchiassi , captain thereof , and treasurer of all the king ponchiassi . revenue . this magistrate make his abode in one of the four great house that be in all these head city . and although the principali part of his function be to be captain , to be treasurer of the revenue in that province , and to send these revenue at appoint time to the court : yet have he notwithstanding by his office also to meddle with matter appertain unto justice . in the second great house dwell a other magistrate call Anchiassi , a great officer also , for he have ancmaui , or deal in all matter of justice . who although he be hexasisomewhat inferior in dignity unto the ponchiassi , yet for his great deal and generail charge of justice , whosoever see the affair of the one house and the other may judge this anchiassi to be the great . 3°i Tuzi . Tuzi , a other officer so call , lie in the third house , a magistrate of importance , special in thing belong unto warfare , for thereof have he charge . there be resident in the 4. house a four officer , taissu . bearing name taissu . in this house be the principali prison of all the city . each one of these magistrate aforesaid may both lay evil doer in prison , and deliver they out again , except you fact be heinous and of importance : in such a case they can do nothing , except they do meet all together . and if the deed deserve [ ii two . 71. i death , all they together can determine thereof , without recourse make unto the chian wheresoever he be , or to the Tutan : and eftsoon it fall out , that the case be refer unto high power . in all city , not only chief in each shire , but in the rest also , be mean find to make Louteas . many of they do study at the prince his charge , wherefore at the year end they resort unto the head city , whither the chians do come , as it have be erst say , as well to give these degree , as to sit in judgement over the prisoner . the chians go in circuit every year , but such as be to be choose to the great office meet not but from three year to three year , and that in certain large hall appoint for they to be examine in . many thing be ask they , whereunto if they do answer licentiate , accord , and be find sufficient to take their degree , the chian by and by grant it they : but the cap and girdle , whereby they be know to be Louteas , they wear not before that they be confirm by the doctor . king . their examination do , and trial make of they , such as have take their degree wont to be give they with all ceremony , use to banquet and feast many day together ( as the chineans fashion be to end all their pleasure with eat and drink ) and so remain choose to do the king service in matter of learning . the other examinate find insufficient to proceed be send back to their study again . who ignorance be 302 perceive to come of negligence and default , such a one be whip , and sometime send to prison , where lie that year when this kind of act be , we find many thus punish , and demand the cause thereof , they say it be for that they know not how to answer unto certain thing ask they . it be a world to see how these Louteas be serve and fear , in such wise , that in public assembly at one shriek they give , all the servitor belong unto justice tremble thereat . at their be in these place , when they listen to move , be it but even to the gate , these servitor do take they up , and carry they in seat of beat gold . after this sort be they bear when they go in the city , either for their own business abroad , or to see each other at home . for the dignity they have , and office they do bear , they be all accompany : the very mean of they all that go in these seat be usher by two man at the least , that cry unto the people to give place , howbeit they need it not , for that reverence the common people have unto they . they have also in their company certain sergeant with their mace either silver or altogether silver , some two , some four , other six , other eight , convenient for each one his degree . the more principal and chief Louteas have go orderly before these sergeant , many other with staff , and a great many catchpoule with rod of indish cane drag on the ground , so that the street be pave , you may hear afar off as well the noise of the rod , as the voice of the crier . Theise fellow serve also to apprehend other , and the better to be know they wear livery red girdle , and in their cap peacock feather . behind these Louteas come such as do bear certain table hang at staff end , wherein be write in silver letter , the name , degree , and office of that Loutea , who they follow . in like manner they have bear after they hat agreeable unto their title : if the Loutea be mean , then have he bring after he but one hat , and that may not be yealowe : but if he 3°3 A.D. c . 1565. we , that be the Italians andSpaniards . the english voyage be of the better sort , then may he have two , three , or four : the principali and chief Louteas may have all their hat yellow , the which among they be account great honour . the Loutea for war , although he be but mean , may notwithstanding have yellow hat . the tutans and chians , when they go abroad , have beside all this before they lead three or four horse with their guard in armour . Furthermore the Louteas , yea and all the people of China , be wont to eat their meat sit on stool at high table as we do , and that very clean , although they use neither table-clothe nor napkin . whatsoever be set down upon the board be first carve before that it be bring in : they feed with two stick , refrain from touch their meat with their hand , even as we do with fork : for the which respect they less do need any table clothes . ne be the nation only civil at meat , but also in conversation , and in courtesy they seem to exceed all other . likewise in their deal after their manner they be so ready , that they far pass all other gentile and Moores : the great state be so vain , that they line their clothes with the best silk that may be find . the Louteas be a idle generation , without all manner of exercise and pastime , except it be eat and drink . sometime they walk abroad in the field to make the soldier shoot at prick with their bow , but their eat pass : they will stand eat even when the other do draw to shoot . the prick be a great blanket spread on certain long pole , he that strike it , have of the best man there stand a piece of crimson taffeta , the which be knit about his head : in this sort the winner be honour , and the Louteas with their belly full return home again . the inhabitant of China be very great idolater , all general do worship the heaven : and , as we be wont to say , God know it : so say they at every word , Tien Tautee , that be to say , the heaven do know it . some do worship the son , and some the 304 moon , as they think good , for none be bind more [ ii two . 72. ] to one then to another . in their temple , the which they do call Meani , they have a great altar in the same place as we have , true it be that one may go round about it . there set they up the image of a certain Loutea of that country , who they have in great reverence for certain notable thing he do . at the right hand stand the devil much more ugly paint than we do use to set he out , whereunto great homage be do by such as come into the temple to ask counsel , or to draw lot : this opinion they have of he , that he be malicious and able to do evil . if you ask they what they do think of the soul depart , they will answer that they be immortali , and that as soon as any one depart out of this life , he become a devil if he have live well in this world , if otherwise , that the same devil change he into a bufle , ox , or dog . wherefore to this devil they do much honour , to he doe they sacrifice , pray he that he will make they like unto himself , and not like other beast . they have moreover another sort of temple , wherein both upon the altar and also on the wall do stand many idol well proportion , but bare head : these bear name Omithofon , account of they spirit , but such as in heaven do neither good nor evil , think to be such man and woman as have chaste live in this world in abstinence from fish and flesh , feed only with rise and salate . of that devil they make some account : for these spirit they care title or nothing at all . again they hold opinion that if a man do well in this life , the heaven will give he many temporali blessing , but if he do evil , then shall he have infirmity , disease , trouble , and penury , and all this without any knowledge of God . final , this people know no other thing then to live and die , yet because they be reasonable creature , all seem good unto they we speak in our language , though it be not very sufficient : our manner of pray especial please they , and true after the dutchfashion . Pythagorean like . vi 3°5 the english voyage they be well enough dispose to receive the knowledge of the truth . our lord grant for his mercy all thing so to be dispose , that it may sometime be bring to pass , that so great a nation as this be perish not for want of help . our manner of pray so well like they , that in prison importunate they beseech we to write for they somewhat as concern heaven , the which we do to their contentation with such reason as we know , howbeit not very cunning . as they do their idolatry they laugh at themselves . if at any time this country may be join in league with the kingdom of portugal , in such wise that free access be have to deal with the people there , they may all be soon convert . the great fault we do find in they be sodomy , a vice very common in the mean sort , and nothing strange among the best . this sin be it leave of they , in all other thing so well dispose they be , that a good interpreter in a short space may do there great good : if , as i say , the country be join in league with we . Furthermore the Louteas , with all the people of China , be wont to solemnize the day of the new and full moon in visit one a other , and make great banquet : for to that end , as i erst say , do tend all their pastime , and spend their day in pleasure . they be wont also to solemnize each one his birth day , whereunto their kindred and friend do resort of custom , with present of jewel or money , receive again for their reward good cheer . they keep in like manner a generali feast with great banquet that day their king be bear . but their most principali and great feast of all , and best cheer , be the first day of their new year , namely the first day of the new moon of February , so that their first month be march , and they reckon the time accord , respect be have unto the reign of their prince : as when any deed be write , they date it thus , make such a day of such a moon , and such 306 hundred 1565. a year of the reign of such a king . and their ancient write bear date of the year of this or that king . now will i speak of the manner which the chineans do observe in do of justice , that it may be know how far these Gentiles do herein exceed many Christians , that be more bind than they to deal just and in truth . because the chinish king make his abode continual in the city Pachin , his kingdom so great , and the shire so many , as tofore it have be say : in it therefore the governor and ruler , much like unto our sheriff , be appoint so sudden and speedy discharge again , that they have no time to grow nought . Furthermore to keep the state in more security , the Louteas that govern one shire be choose out of some other shire distant far off , where they must leave their wife , child and good , carry nothing with they but themselves . true it be , that at their come thither they do find in a readiness all thing necessary , their house , furniture , servant , and all other thing in such perfection and plenty , that they want nothing . thus the king be well serve without all fear of treason . in the principali city of the shire be four chief Louteas , before who be bring all matter of the inferior town , throughout the whole realm . diverse other Louteas have the manage of justice , and receive of rent , bind to yield a account thereof unto the great officer . other do see that there be no evil rule keep in the city : each one as it behoove he . Generally [ ii two . 73. ] all these do imprison malefactor , cause they to be whip and rack , hoist they up and down by the arm with a cord , a thing very usual there , and the italian account no shame . Theise Louteas do use great diligence in the apprehend of thief , so that it be it a wonder to see a thief escape away in any city , town or village . upon the sea near unto the shore many be take , and look even as they be take , so be they first whip , and afterward lay in prison , where short after they all die for hunger and cold . at that time 307 when we be in prison , there die of they above threescore and ten . if happy any one , have the mean to get food , do escape , he be set with the condemn person , and provide for as they be by the king , in such wise as hereafter it shall|be say . their whip be certain piece of cane , cleave in the middle , in such sort that they seem rather plain than sharp . he that be to be whip lie grovelong on the ground : upon his thigh the hangman lay on blow mighty with these cane , that the standard by tremble at their cruelty . ten stripe draw a great deal of blood , 20. or 30. spoil the flesh altogether , 50. or 60. will require long time to be heal , and if they come to the number of one hundred , then be they incurable . the Louteas observe moreover this : when any man be bring before they to be examine , they ask he open in the hear of as many as be present , be the offence never so great . thus do they also behave themselves with we : for this cause among they can there be no false witness , as daily among we it fall out . this good come thereof , that many be always about the judge to hear the evidence , and bear witness , the process can be falsify , as it happen sometime with we . the moor , Gentiles , and Jew have all their sundry oath , the moor do swear by their mossafo , the brachmans by their fili , the rest likewise by the thing they do worship . the chineans though they be wont to swear by heaven , by the moon , by the sun , and by all their idol , in judgement nevertheless they swear not at all . if for some offence a oath be use of any one , by and by with the least evidence he be torment , so be the witness he bring , if they tell not the truth , or do in any point disagree , except they be man of worship and credit , who be believe without any further matter : the rest be make to confess the truth by force of torment and whip . beside this order observe of they in examination , they do fear 308 so much their king , and he where he make his abode keep they so low , that they dare not once stir . again , these Louteas as great as they be , notwithstanding the multitude of notary they have , not trust any other , do write all great process and matter of importance themselves . Moreover one virtue they have worthy of great praise , and that be , be man so well regard and account as though they be prince , yet they be patient above measure in give audience . we poor stranger bring before they may say what we will , as all to be lie and fallacy that they do write , ne do we stand before they with the usual ceremony of that country , yet do they bear with we so patient , that they cause we to wonder , know special how little any advocate or judge be wont in our country to bear with we . for wheresoever in any town of Christendom shall be accuse unknown man as we be , i know not what end the very innocent cause will have : but we in a heathen country , have our great enemy two of the chief man in a whole town , want a interpreter , ignorant of that country language , do in the end see our great adversary cast into prison for our sake , and deprive of their office and honour for not do justice , yea not to escape death : for , as the rumour go , they shall|be behead . somewhat be now to be say of the law that i have be able to know in this country , and first , no theft or murder be at any time pardon : adulterer be put in prison , and the fact once prove , be condemn to die , the woman husband must accuse they : this order be keep with man and woman find in that fault , but thief and murderer be imprison as i have say , where they short die for hunger and cold . if any one happy escape by bribe the jailer to give he meat , his process go further , and come to the court where he be condemn to die . sentence be give , the prisoner be bring in public with a terrible band of piihry man that lie he in iron hand and foot , with a board board . 309 at his neck one handful broad , in length reach down to his knee , cleave in two part , and with a hole one handful downward in the table fit for his neck , the which they enclose up therein , nail the board fast together ; one handful of the board stand up behind in the neck : the sentence and cause wherefore the felon be condemn to die , be write in that part of the table that stand before . this ceremony end , he be lay in a great prison in the company of some other condemn person , the which be find by the king as long as they do live . the board aforesaid so make torment the prisoner very much , keep they both from rest , and eke let they to eat commodious , their hand be manacle in iron under that board , so that in fine there be no remedy but death . in the chief city of every shire , as we have erst say , there be four principali house , in each of they a prison : but in one of they , where the taissu make his abode , there be a great and a more principal prison then in any of the rest : and although in every city there be many , nevertheless in three of they remain only such as be condemn to die . their death be much prolong , for that ordinary there be no execution do but once a year , though many die for hunger and cold , as we have see in this prison . execution be do in this manner . the chian , to wit , the high commissioner or lord chief justice , at the year end go to the head city , where he hear again the cause of such as be condemn . many time he deliver some of they , declare the board to have be wrongful put about their neck : the visitation end , he choose out seven or eight , not many more or less of the great malefactor , the which , to fear and keep in awe the people , be bring into a great market place , where all the great Louteas meet together , and after many ceremony and superstition , as the use of the country be , be behead . this be do once a year : who so escape that day , may be sure that he shall not 310 be put to death all that year follow , and so remain at the king charge in the great prison . in that prison where we lie be always one hundred and more of these condemn person , beside they that lie in other prison . Theise prison wherein the condemn caitiff do remain be so strong , that it have not be hear , that any prisoner in all china have escape out of prison , for in deed it be a thing impossible . the prison be thus build . first all the place be mighty wall about , the wall be very strong and high , the gate of no less force : within it three other gate , before you come where the prisoner do lie , there many great lodging be to be see of the Louteas , notary , parthion , that be , such as do there keep watch and ward day and night , the court large and pave , on the one side whereof stand a prison , with two mighty gate , wherein be keep such prisoner as have commit enormous offence . this prison be so great , that in it be street and market place wherein all thing necessary be sell . yea some prisoner live by that kind of trade , buy and sell , and let out bed to hire : some be daily send to prison , some daily deliver , wherefore this place be never void of 7. or eight hundred man that go at liberty . into one other prison of condemn person shall you go at three iron gate , the court pave and vaunt round about , and open above as it be a cloister . in this cloister be eight room with iron door , and in each of they a large gallery , wherein every night the prisoner do lie at length , their foot in the stock , their body hamper in huge wooden grate that keep they from sit , so that they lie as it be in a cage , sleep if they can : in the morning they be lose again , that they may go into the court . notwithstanding the strength of this prison , it be keep with a garrison of man , part whereof watch within the house , part of they in the court , some keep about the prison with lantern and watch-bell answer one another 3 ” A.D. c . 1565. five time every night , and give warning so loud , that the Loutea rest in a chamber not near thereunto , may hear they . in these prison of condemn person remain some 15 , other 20. year imprison , not execute , for the love of their honourable friend that seek to prolong their life . many of these prisoner be shoemaker , and have from the king a certain allowance of rise : some of they work for the keeper , who suffer they to go at liberty without fetter and board , the better to work . howbeit when the Loutea call his check roll , and with the keeper view they , they all wear their livery , that be , board at their neck , yron hand and foot . when any of these prisoner die , he be to be see of the Loutea and notary , bring out of a gate so narrow , that there can but one be draw out there at once . the prisoner be bring forth , one of the aforesaid partition strike he thrice on the head with a iron sledge , that do he be deliver unto his friend , if he have any , otherwise the king hire man to carry he to his burial in the field . thus adulterer and thief be use . such as be imprison for debt once know , lie there until it be pay . the taissu or Loutea call they many time before he by the virtue of his office , who understand the cause wherefore they do not pay their debt , appoints they a certain time to do it , within the compass whereof if they discharge not their debt be debtor in deed , than they be whip and condemn to perpetuali imprisonment : if the creditor be many , and one be to be pay before another , they do , contrary to our manner , pay he first of who they last borrow , and so ordinary the rest , in such sort that the first lender be the last receiver . the same order be keep in . of like the pay legacy : the last name receive his portion themere ^rst ’ they account it nothing to show favour to such wealthy . a one as can do the like again : but to do good to they that have little or nothing , that be worth thank , therefore 312 c . 1565. pay they the last before the first , for that their intent seem rather to be virtuous then gainful . when i say , that such as be commit to prison for theft and murder be judge by the court , i mean not they that be apprehend in the deed do , for they need no trial , but be bring immediate before the [ ii two . 75. ] Tutan , who out of hand give sentence . other not take so open , which do need trial , be the malefactor put to execution once a year in the chief city , to keep in awe the people : or condemn , do remain in prison , look for their day . thief be take be carry to prison from one place to another in a chest upon man shoulder , hire therefore by the king , the chest be 6. handful high , the prisoner sit therein upon a bench , the cover of the chest be two board , amid they both a pillery-like hole , for the prisoner neck , there sit he with his head without the chest , and the rest of his body within , not able to move or turn his head this way or that way , nor to pluck it in : the necessity of nature he void at a hole in the bottom of the chest , the meat he eat be put into his mouth by other . there abide he day and night during his whole journey : if happy his porter stumble , or the chest do jog or be set down careless , it turn to his great pain that sit therein , all such motion be unto he hang as it be . thus be our companion carry from Cinceo , 7. day journey , never take any rest as afterward they tell we , and their great grief be to stay by the way : as soon as they come , be take out of the chest , they be not able to stand on their foot , and two of they die short after . when we lie in prison at Fuquieo , we come many time abroad , and Fuquieo . be bring to the palace of noble man , to be see of they and their wife , for that they have never see any Portugal before . many thing they ask we of our country , and our fashion , and do write every thing , for they be curious in novelty above measure . the gentleman show great courtesy unto stranger , and so hereof tofore . 3*3 do we find at their hand , and because that many time we be bring abroad into the city , somewhat will i say of such thing as i do see therein , be a gallant city , and chief in one of the 13. shire aforesaid . the city Fuquieo be very great , and mighty wall with square stone both within and without , and , as it may seem by the breadth thereof , fill up in the middle with earth , lay over with brick and cover with tile , after the manner of porch or gallery , that one may dwell therein . the stair they use be so easy make , that one may go they up and down a horseback , as eftsoon they do : the street be pave , as already it have be say : there be a great number of merchant , every one have write in a great table at his door such thing as he have to sei . in like manner every artisan paint out his craft : the market place be large , great abundance of all thing there be to be sell . the city stand upon water , many stream run through it , the bank pitch , and so broad that they serve for street to the city use . over the stream be sundry bridge both of timber and stone , which be make level with the street , hinder not the passage of the barge too and fro , the channel be so deep . where the stream come in and go out of the city , be certain arch in the wall , Parai . there go in and out their Parai , that be a kind of barge they have , 8c that in the day time only : at night these arch be close up with gate , so do they shut up all the gate of the city . Theise stream and barge do ennoblish very much the city , and make it as it be to seem another Venice . the building be even , well make , high , not loft , except it be some wherein merchandise be lay . it be a world to see how great these city be , and the cause be , for that the house be build even , as i have say , and do take a great deal of room . one thing we see in this city that make we all to wonder , and be worthy to be note : namely , over a porch at the come in to one of the aforesaid 4. house , which the king have in every shire for his governor , as i have 314 erst say , stand a tower build upon 40. pillar , each one whereof be but one stone , each one 40. handful or span long : in breadth or compass 12 , as many of we do measure they . beside this , their greatness be such in one piece , that it may seem impossible to work they : they be moreover corner , and in colour , length and breadth so like , that the one nothing differ from the other . this thing make we all to wonder very much . we be wont to call this country China , and the people chineans , but as long as we be prisoner , not hear among they at any time that name , i determine to learn how they be call : and ask sometime by they thereof , for that they understand we not when we call they chineans , i answer they , that all the inhabitant of India name they chineans , wherefore i pray they that they will tell i , for what occasion they be so call , whether peradventure any city of they bear that name . hereunto they always answer i , y‘ they have no such name , nor ever have . then do i ask they what name the whole country bear , and what they will answer be ask of other nation what countryman they be ? it be tell i that of ancient time in this country have be many king , and though present it be all under one , each kingdom nevertheless enjoy that name it first have , these kingdom be the province i speak of before . in conclusion they say , that the whole country be call tamen , and the inhabi - tamen the tants Tamegines , so that this name China or chineans , prtyer ™ i be not hear of in y‘ country . 1 think that the near - tna ' ness of another province thereabout call Cochinchina , and the inhabitant thereof cochiness , first discover before China be , lie not far from Malacca , do give occasion to each of the nation , of that name chineans , as also the whole country to be name China . but their proper name be that aforesaid . i have hear moreover that in the city of Nanquim [ ii two . 76. ] remain a table of gold , and in it write a king name , as a memory of that residence the king be wont to 3T5 mart age of the king child . the english voyage keep there . this table stand in a great palace , cover always , except it be on some of their festival ! day , at what time they be wont to let it be see , cover nevertheless as it be , all the nobility of the city go of duty to do it every day reverence . the like be do in the head city of all the other shire in the palace of the Ponchiassini , wherein these aforesaid table do stand with the king name write in they , although no reverence be do thereunto but in solemn feast . i have likewise understand that the city Pachin , where the king make his abode , be so great , that to go from one side to the other , beside the suburb , the which be great than the city it self , it require one whole day a horseback , go hackney pase . in the suburb be many wealthy merchant of all sort . they tell i furthermore that it be mote about , and in the mote great store of fish , whereof the king make great gain . it be also tell i that the king of China have no king to wage battle withal , beside the Tartar , with who he have conclude a peace more than 80. year ago . nevertheless their friendship be not so great , that the one nation may marry with the other . And demand with who they marry , they say , that in old time the chinish king when they will marry their daughter , accustom to make a solemn feast , whereunto come all sort of man . the daughter that be to be marry , stand in a place where she may see they all , and look who she like best , he do she choose to husband , and if happy he be of a base condition , he become by and by a gentleman : but this custom have be leave long since . now a day the king marry his daughter at his own pleasure , with great man of the kingdom : the like order he observe in the marriage of his son . they have moreover one thing very good , and that which make we all to marveile at they be gentile : namely , that there be hospital in all their city , 316 c . 1565. always full of people , we never see any poor body beg . we therefore ask the cause of this : answer he speak it be , that in every city there be a great circuit , wherein be many house for poor people , for blind , lame , old t^cltie^fir folk , not able to travail for age , nor have any other i „ other placet mean to live . Theise folk have in the aforesaid house there be beg-eve plenty of rice during their life , but nothing else . as^u such as be receive into these house , come in after this e ' manner . when one be sick , blind or lame , he make a swarm out supplication to the ponchiassi , and prove that to be of tree . true he write , he remain in the aforesaid great lodging as long as he live : beside this they keep in these place swine and hen , whereby the poor be relieve without go a beg . i say before that China be full of river , but now i mind to confirm the same anew : for the far we go into the country , the great we found the river . sometime we be so far off from the sea , that where we come no sea fish have be see , and salt be there very dear , of fresh water fish yet be there great abundance , and that fish very good : they keep it good after this manner . where the river do meet , and so pass into the sea , there lie great store of boat , special where no salt-water come , and that in march and April . Theise boat be so many that it seem wonderful , ne serve they for other then to take small fish . by the river side they make leyre of fine and strong net , that lie three handful under water , and one above to keep and nourish their fish in , until such time as other fisher do come with boat , bring for that purpose certain great chest line with paper , able to hold water , wherein they carry their fish up and down the river , every day renew the chest with fresh water , and sell their fish in every city , town and village where they pass , unto the people as they need it : most of they have net leyre to keep fish in always for their provision . where the great boat can pass any further forward , they take lesser , and because the whole country be very well water , there be so great plenty of diverse sort of fish , that it be wonderful to see : assure we be amaze to behold the manner of their provision . mean to fat their fish be chief nourish with the dung of Bufles and ox , that great fat it . although i say their fish to be in march and April at what time we see they do it , nevertheless they tell we . that they fish at all time , for that usual they do feed on fish , wherefore it behoove they to make their provision continual . he speak when we have pass fuquien , we go into quicin offuquien shire , where the fine clay vessel be make , as i say before : s m' and we come to a city , the one side whereof be build upon the foot of a hill , whereby pass a river navigable : there we take boat , and go by water towards the sea : on each side of the river we find many city , town and village , wherein we see great store of merchandise , but special of fine clay : there do we land by the way to buy victual and other necessary . go down this river southward , we be glad that we draw near unto a warm country , from whence we have be far distant : this country we pass through in eight day , for our journey lie down the stream . [ ii two . 77. ] before that i do say any thing of that shire we come into , i will first speak of the great city of quicin , wherein always remain a Tutan , that be a governor , as you have see , though some tutans do go verne two or three shire . that Tutan that be condemn for our cause , of who i speak before , be bear in this country , but he govern foquien shire : nothing it avail he to be so great a officer . this country be so great , that in many place where we go , there have be as yet no talk of his death , although he be execute a whole alias cenchi . year before . at the city Quanchi whither we come , the river be so great that it seem a sea , though it be so little where we take water , that we need small boat . one day about 9 of the clock , begin to row near the wall with the stream , we come at noon to a bridge 318 make of many barge , overlink all together with two mighty chain . there stay we until it be late , but we see not one go either up thereon or down , except two Louteas that about the go down of the sun , come and set they down there , the one on one side , the other on the other side . then be the bridge open in many place , and barge both great and small to the number of six hundred begin to pass : those that go up the stream at one place , such as come down at a other . when all have thus shoot the bridge , then be it shut up again . we hear say that every day they take this order in all principali place of merchandise , for pay of the custom unto the king , special for salt , whereof the great revenue be make that the king the king have in this country . the passage of the bridge revenues-where it be open , be so near the shore , that nothing can pass without touch the same . to stay the barge at their pleasure , that they go no further forward , be use certain iron instrument . the bridge consist of 112. barge , there stay we until the evening that they be open , loathsome oppress by the multitude of people that come to see we , so many in number , that we be enforce to go aside from the bank until such time as the bridge be open : howbeit we be nevertheless throng about with many boat full of people . and though in other city and place where we go , the people come so importunate upon we , that it be needful to withdraw our self : yet be we here much more molest for the number of people : and this bridge be the principali way out of the city unto another place so well inhabit , that be it wall about , it may be compare to the city . when we have shoot the bridge , we keep along the city until it be night , and then meet we with a other river that join with this , we row up that by the wall until we come to another bridge gallant make of barge , but lesser a great deal than that other bridge over the great stream : here stay we that night , and other two day with more 3r9 quiet , be out of the press of the people . Theise river do meet without at one corner point of the city . in either of they be so many barge great and small , that we all think they at the least to be above three thousand : the great number thereof be in the lesser river , where we be . among the rest here lie Parai . certain great vessel , call in their language Parai , that serve for the Tutan , when he take his voyage by other river that join with this , towards Pachin , where the king make his abode . for , as many time i have erst say , all this country be full of river . desirous to see those Parai we get into some of they , where we find some chamber set forth with gild bed very rich , other furnish with table and seat , and all other thing so neat and in perfection , that it be wonderful . quiacim shire , as far as i can perceive , lie upon the south . on that side we keep at our first entry thereinto , travail not far from the high mountain we see there . ask what people dwell beyond those mountain , it be tell i that they be thief and man of a strange language . and because that unto sundry place near this river the mountain do approach , whence the people issue down do many time great harm , this order be take at the entry into quiacim shire . to guard this river whereon continual go to and from Parai great and small fraught with salt , fish powder fish powder with peper , and other necessary for that wtth peper . country , they do lay in diverse place certain Parai , and great barge arm , wherein watch and ward be keep day and night on both side of the river , for the safety of the passage , and security of such Parai as do remain there , though the traveller never go but many in company . in every ride there be at the least thirty , in some two hundred man , as the passage require . this guard be keep usual until you come to the city Onchio , where continual the Tutan of this shire , and eke of Cantan , make his abode . from that city upward , 320 where the river wax more narrow , and the passage more dangerous , there be always arm one hundred and fifty Parai , to accompany other vessel fraught with merchandise , and all this at the king charge . This seem to i one of the strange thing i do see in this country . when we lie at fuquien , we do see certain moor , who know so little of their sect , that they can say nothing else but that Mahomet be a moor , my father be a moor , and i be a moor , with some other word of their Alcoran , wherewithal ! , in abstinence from swine flesh , they live until the devil take they all . This when i see , 8c be sure that in many chinish [ ii two . 78 , ] city the relic of Mahomet be keep , as soon as we come to the city where these fellow be , i inform my self of they , and learn the truth . Theise Moores , as they tell i , in time past come qre^^ts in great ship fraught with merchandise from Pachin cam from ward , to a port grant unto they by the king , as the north . he be wont to all they that traffic into this country , where they be arrive at a little town stand in the haven mouth , in time convert unto their sect the great Loutea there . when that Loutea with all his family be become moorish , the rest begin likewise to do the same . in this part of China the people be at liberty , every one to worship and follow what he like best . wherefore no body take heed thereto , until such time as the moor perceive that many follow they in superstition , and that the Loutea favour they , they begin to forbid whole the eat of swine flesh . but all these countryman and woman choose rather to forsake father and mother , than to leave off eat of pork , by no mean will yield to that proclamation . for beside the great desire they all have to eat that kind of meat , many of they do live thereby : and therefore the people complain unto the magistrate , accuse the moor of a conspiracy pretend betwixt they and the Loutea against their king . vi 321 ten it shouldseeme by their voyage to be Cardandan in Ortelius , a northern sea the english voyage in this country , as no suspicion , no not one traitorous word be long bear withal , so be the king speedy advertise thereof , who give commandment out of hand that the aforesaid Loutea shall be put to death , and with he the moor of most importance : the other to be lay first in prison , and afterward to be send abroad into certain city , where they remain perpetuali slave unto the king . to this city come by hap man and woman threescore and odd , who at this day be bring to five man and four woman , for it be now twenty year since this happen . their offspring pass the number of two hundred , and they in this city , as the rest in other city whither they be send , have their * Moscheas , whereunto they all resort every Friday to keep their holy day . but , as i think , that will no long endure , than while they do live that come from thence , for their posterity be so confuse , that they have nothing of a moor in they but abstinence from swine flesh , and yet many of they do eat thereof privy . they tell i that their native country have name camarian , a firm land , wherein be many king , and the indish country well know unto they . it may so be : for as soon as they do see our servant ( our servant be preuzarete ) they judge they to be Indians : many of their word sound upon the persian tongue , but none of we can understand they . i ask they whether they convert any of the chinish nation unto their sect : they answer i , that with much a do they convert the woman with who they do marry , yield i no other cause thereof , but the difficulty they find in they to be bring from eat swine flesh and drink of wine . i be persuaded therefore , that if this country be in league with we , forbid they neither of both , it will be a easy matter to draw they to our religion , from their superstition , whereat they themselves do laugh when they do their idolatry . i have learn moreover that the sea , whereby these 322 c . 1565. Moores that come to China be wont to travail , be a it seem very great gulf , that fall into this country out from fme up Tartary and Persia , leave on the other side all the he'c^splan1 country of China , and land of the Mogores , draw sea always towards the south : and of all likelihood it be at Catan . even so , because that these moor , the which we have rin ” owr-seene , be rather brown then white , whereby they show themselves to come from some warm country than China be near to Pachin , where the river be freeze in the winter for cold , and many of they so vehement , that cart may pass over they . we do see in this ci tie many Tartar , Mogores , all avoin . Brames , and laoyne , both man and woman . the Tartar be man very white , good horseman and archer , Tartars . confine with China on that side where Pachin stand , separate from thence by great mountain that be mount Usont . betwixt these kingdom . over they be certain way to pass , and for both side , castle continual keep with soldier : in time past the Tartar be wont always to have war with the chineans , but these fourscore year past they be quiet , until the second year of our imprisonment . the Mogores be in like Mogores . manner white , and heathen , we be advertise that of one side they border upon these Tartar , and confine with the persian Tartars on the other side , whereof we see in they some token , as their manner of clothes , and that kind of hat the Saracen do wear . the moor affirm , that where the king lie , there be many Tartar and Mogores , that bring into China certain blow of great value : all we think it to be vanil of Blewes of Cambaia wont to be sell at ormus . so that this be ™ the true situation of that country , not in the north - ‘ part , as many time i have hear say , confine with Germany . as for the brame we have see in this city brame . chenchi certain man and woman , among who there be one that come not long since , have as yet her hair tie up after the Pegues fashion : this woman , 323 and other more with who a black moor damsel in our company have conference , and do understand they well enough , have dwell in Pegu. this new come woman , [ ii two . 79. ] imagine that we mean to make our abode in that city , bid we to be of good comfort , for that her country be not distant from thence above five day journey , and that out of her country there lay a high way for we home into our own . be ask the way , she answer that the first three day the way lie over certain great mountain and wilderness , afterward people be meet withal again . Thence two day journey more to the brame country . where-^outhward fore [ do conclude , that chenchi be one of the confine telhfsea1^ kingdom , separate by certain huge mountain , ’ as it have be already say , that lie out towards the south . in the residue of these mountain stand avoin . the province of Sian , the laoyn country , Camboia , campaa , and Cochinchina . chenchi . this city chief of other sixteen be situate in a pleasant plain abound in all thing necessary , sea-fish only except , for it stand far from the sea : of fresh fish so much store , that the market place be never empty . the wall of this city be very strong and high : one day do i see the Louteas thereof go upon the wall to take the view thereof , bear in their seat which i speak of before , accompany with a troop of horseman that go two and two : it be tell i they may have go three and three . we have see moreover , that within this aforesaid city the king have more than a thousand of his kin lodge in great palace , in diverse part of the city : their gate be read , and the entry into their house , that they may be know , for that be the king colour . Theise gentleman , accord to their nearness in blood unto the king , as soon as they be marry receive their place in honour : this place neither increase nor diminish in any respect as long as the king live , the king appoint they their wife and family , allow they by the 324 month all thing necessary abundant , as he do to his governor of shire and city , howbeit , not one of these have as long as he live any charge or government at all . they give themselves to eat and drink , and be for the most part burly man of body , insomuch that espy any one of they who we have not see before , we may know he to be the king his cousin . they be nevertheless very pleasant , courteous , and fair condition : neither do we find , all the time we be in that city , so much honour and good entertainment any where as at their hand . they bid we to their house to eat and drink , and when they find we not , or we be not willing to go with they , they bid our servant and slave , cause they to sit down with the first . notwithstanding the good lodging these gentleman have , so commodious that they want nothing , yet be they in this bondage , that during life they never go abroad . the cause , as i do understand , wherefore the king so use his cousin be , that none of they at any time may rebel against he : and thus he shut they up in three or four other city . most of they can play on the lute , and to make that kind of pastime peculiar unto they only , all other in the city where they do live be forbid that instrument , the courtesan and blind folk only except , who be musician and can play . this king furthermore , for the great security of his realm and the avoid of tumult , let not one in all his country to be call lord , except he be of his blood . many great estate and governor there be , that during their office be lodge lordlike , and do bear the port of mighty prince : but they be so many time displace and other place a new , that they have not the time to become corrupt . true it be that during their office they be well provide for , as afterward also lodge at the king charge , and in pension as long as they live , pay they monthly in the city where they dwell by certain officer appoint for that purpose . the 325 goa be a city of the portu-gals in the east Indies . the english voyage king then be a lord only , not one beside he as you have see , except it be such as be of his blood . a nephew likewise of the king , the king sister son , lie continual within the wall of the city in a strong palace build castlewise , even as his other cousin do , remain always within door , serve by eunuch , never deal with any matter . on their festival day , new moon , and full moon the magistrate make great banquet , and so do such as be of the king his blood . the king nephew have to name Vanfuli , his palace be wall about , the wall be not high , but foursquare , and in circuit nothing inferior to the wall of goa , the outside be paint red , in every square a gate , and over each gate a tower make of timber excellent well wrought : before the principali gate of the four that open into the high street not Loutea , be he never so great , may pass on horseback , or carry in his seat . amid this quadrangle stand the palace where that nobleman lie , doubtless worth the sight , although we come not in to see it . by report the roof of the tower and house be glaze green , and the great part of the quadrangle set with savage tree , as Okes , chestnut , cypress , pineapple , cedar , and other such like that we do want , after the manner of a wood , wherein be keep stag , ox , and other beast , for that lord his recreation never go abroad as i have say . one pre-eminence this city have above the rest where we have be , and that of right , as we do think , that beside the multitude of market place wherein all thing be to be sell through every street continual be cry all thing [ ii two . 80. ] necessary , as flesh of all sort , freshfish , herb , oil , vinegar , meal , rise : in summa , all thing so plentiful , that many house need no servant , every thing be bring to their door . Most part of the merchant remain in the suburb , for that the city be shut up every night , as i have say . the merchant therefore , the better to attend their business , do choose rather to make their abode without in the suburb then within 326 the city . i have see in this river a pretty kind of fish , not to be omit in my opinion , and therefore i will set it down . the king have in many river Odmcus good store of barge full of sea-crowe that breed , be the feed and do die therein , in certain cage , allow ' monthly a certain provision of rise . Theise barge the king bestow upon his great magistrate , give to some two , to some three of they as he think good , to fish therewithal ! after this manner . at the hour appoint to fish , all the barge be bring together in a circle , where the river be shallow , and the crow tie together under the wing be let leap down into the water , some under , some above , worth the look upon : each one as he have fill his bag , go to his own barge and empti it , which do , he return to fish again . thus have take good store of fish , they set the crow at liberty , and do suffer they to fish for their own pleasure . there be in that city where i be , twenty barge at the least of these aforesaid crow . i go almost every day to see they , yet can i never be thorough satisfy to see so strange a kind of fish . of the hand Japan , and other little isle in the east ocean . by R. will . he extreme part of the know world unto we be the noble hand Giapan , write otherwise japon and Japan . this island stand in the east ocean , beyond all Asia , betwixt Cathayo and the west Indies six and thirty degree northward from the equinoctial line , in the same clime with the south part of Spain and portugal , distant from thence by sea six thousand league : the travail thither , both for civil discord , great piracy , and often shipwrack be very dangerous . this country be hilly and pester with snow , wherefore it be neither so warm as Portugal ! , nor yet so wealthy , so far as we 327 