the ambassage of master Henry Roberts , one of the swear esquire of her majesty person , from her highness to mulai Hamet emperor of Morocco and the king of Fesse , and sus , in the year 1585 : who remain there as Liger for the space of 3. year . write brief by himself . Pon a incorporation grant to the company of Barbary merchant resident in London , i Henry Roberts one of her majesty swear esquire of her person , be appoint her highness messenger , and agent unto the aforesaid mulai Hamet emperor of Morocco , king of Fesse , and Sus. and after i have receive my commission , instruction , and her majesty letter , i depart from London the 14. of August in the year 1585. in a tall ship call the ascension , in the company of the minion and Hopewell , and we all arrive in safety at Azafi a port of Barbary , the 14. of September next follow . the Alcaide of the town ( be the king officer there , and as it be mayor of the place ) receive i with all humanity and honour , accord to the custom of the country , lodge i in the chief house of the town , from whence i dispatch a messenger ( which in their language they call a Trottero ) to advertise the emperor of my arrival : who immediately give order , and send certain soldier for my guard and conduct , and horse for my self , and mule for my own and my company carriage . thus be accompany with m. Richard Evans , Edward Salcot , and other english merchant resident there in the country , with my train of moor and carriage , i come at length to the river of tensist , which be within four mile of Morocco : and there by the water side i pitch my tent under the olive tree : where i meet 426 with all the english merchant by themselves , and the french and flemish , and diverse other Christians , which attend my come . and after we have dine , and spend out the heat of the day , about four of the clock in the afternoon we all set forward towards the city of Morocco , where we arrive the say day , be the 14. of September , and i be lodge by the emperor appointment in a fair house in the Judaria or jury , which be the place where the Jew have their abode , and be the fair place , and quiet lodging in all the city . after i have repose my self 3. day , i have access to the king presence , deliver my message and her majesty letter , and be receive with all humanity , and have favourable audience from time to time for three year : during which space i abide there in his court , as her majesty agent and Ligier : and whensoever i have occasion of business i be admit either to his majesty himself , or to his vice Roy , who name be alcay Breme Saphiana , a very wise and discreet person , and the chief about his majesty . the particular of my service , for diverse good and reasonable cause , i forbear here to put down in writing . after leave obtain , and a honourable reward bestow by the emperor upon i , i depart from his court at Morocco the 18. of August 1588. towards a garden of he , which be call shersbonare , where he promise i i shall stay but one day for his letter : howbeit , upon some occasion i be stay until the 14. of September at the king charge , with 40. or 50. shot attend upon i for my guard and safety . from thence at length i be conduct with all thing necessary to the port of Santa Cruz , be six day journey from Morocco , and the place where our ship do common take in their lade , where i arrive the 21. of the same month . in this port i stay 43. day , and at length the second of November i embarked my self , and one Marshok reiz a captain and 427 a gentleman , which the emperor send with i upon a ambassage to her majesty : and after much torment and foul weather at sea , yet newyear day i come on land at saint Ives in Cornwall , from whence passing by land both together up towards London , we be meet [ ii two . 118. i without the city with the chief merchant of the Barbary company , well mount all on horseback , to the number of 40. or 50. horse , and so the ambassador and my self be both in coach , enter the city by torchlight , on Sunday at night the 12. of January 1589. Este es un traslado bien y fielmente sacado da una carta real deal Rey Muley Harriet de fe y Emperador de Marruecos , cuyo tenor es este , que Segue . on el nombre de dios piadoso y miseri-cordioso , etc el siervo de dios soberano , el conquistador per sum causa , el successor en sal^ado por dios , Emperador de los Moros , hijo del Emperador de los Moros , jariffe , Haceni , el que perpetue sum honra , y ensalge sum estado . se pone este nuestro real mandado en manos de los criados de nuestras altas puertas los mercadore yngleses ; para que por el sepan todo los que la present vieren , come nuestro alto Conseio les anpara con el favour de dios de todo aquello , que les enpeciere y dannare en qualquiera manera , que fueren offendidos , y en qualquiera viaie , que fueren , ninguno les captivari en estos nuestros reynos , y puertos , y lugare , que a nos pertenescen : viceroy ? iue les cubre el anporo de nuestro podor de qualquiera atiga ; y ningun los impida con mano de enemistad , ni se dara causa , de que se agravien en qualquiera manera con el favour de dios y de sum amparo . y mandamo si los alcayde de los nuestros puertos y fortalezas , y a los que en estos nuestros reynos tienen cargo , y a toda la gente common , que no les alleguen en ninguna manera , 428 