. .... with civil war , which the moor have against the gentile : for the king here be up in arm all the country over . here be a indian which be count a prophuie prophet , which have prophesy that there will a dragon arise in a strange country , which will do great hurt to a&ams ? mn ' Spain . how it will fall out , only God do know . and thus i rest : from this monastery of Cochin the 28 of December , 1589. your good cousin and assure friend friar Peter of Lisbon . a voyage with three tall ship , the Penelope admiral , the merchant royal vice-admiral , and the Edward Bonaventure rearadmiral , to the east Indies , by the cape of Buona Speransa , to Quitangone near Mosambique , to the isle of Comoro and Zanzibar on the backside of Africa , and beyond cape Comori in India , to the isle of Nicubar and of Gomes Polo within two league of Sumatra , to the hand of Pulo pinaom , and thence to the main land of Malacca , begin by m. George Raymond , in the year 1591 , and perform by m. James Lancaster , and write from the mouth of Edmund Barker of Ipswich , his lieutenant in the say voyage , by m. Richard Hakluyt . ur fleet of the three tall ship abovenamed depart from Plymouth the 10 of April 1591 , and arrive at the canary-land the 25 of the same , from whence we depart the 29 of April . the second of may we be in the height of cape Blanco . the five we pass the tropic of cancer . the eight we be in the height of cape Verde . all this time we go with a fair wind 387 three occasion of slcknes near the line . the english voyage at Northeast , always before the wind until ! the 13 of the same month , when we come within 8 degree of the equinoctial ! line , where we meet with a contrary wind . here we lay off and on in the sea until the sixth of June , on which day we pass the say line . Wliile we lay thus off and on , we take a Portugal caravel lade by merchant of Lisbon for Brasile , in which caravel we have some 60 ton of wine , 1200 jar of oil , about 100 jarte of olive , certain barrel of caper , three fat of peason , with diverse other necessary fit for our voyage : which wine , oil , olive and caper be better to we then gold . we have two man die before we pass the line , and diverse sick , which take their sickness in those hot climate : for they be wonderful unwholesome from 8 degree of northerly latitude unto the line , at that time of the year : for we have nothing but ternado , with such thunder , lightning , and rain , that we can not keep our man dry 3 hour together , which be a occasion of the infection among they , and their eat of salt victual , with lack of clothes to shift they . after we pass the line , we have the wind still at eastsoutheast , which carry we along the coast of Brasil 100 league from the main , till we come in 26 degree to the southward of the line , where the wind come up to the north , at which time we do account , that the cape of Buona esperansa do bear off we east and by south , betwixt 900 and 1000 league . pass this gulf from the coast of Brasil unto the cape we have the wind often variable as it be upon our coast , but for the most part so , that we may lie our course . the 28 of July we have sight of the foresay cape of Buona esperansa : until the 31 we lay off and on with the wind contrary to double the cape , hope to double it , and so to have go seventie league further to a place call Agoada de s. brass , before we will have seek to have put into any harbour . but our man be weak and sick in all our ship , we think good to seek some place to refresh they . with which consent we bear up with 388 the land to the northward of the cape , and go along the shore , we espy a goodly bay with a hand lie to seaward of it , into which we do bear , and find it very commodious for our ship to ride in . this bay be call Agoada de Saldanha , lie 15 league northward on the hither side of the cape . the first of August be Sunday we come to a anchor in the bay , send our man on land , and there come unto they certain black savage very brutish which will not stay , but retire from they . for the space of 15 or 20 day we can find no relief but only fowl which we kill with our piece , which be crane and goose : there be no fish but muscle and other shellfish , which we gather on the rock . after 15 or 20 day be here , our admiral go with his pinnace unto the hand which lie off this bay , where he find great store of penguine and seal , whereof he bring good plenty with he . and twice after that we send certain of our man , which at both time bring their bot lade unto our ship . after we have be here some time , we get here a negro , who we compel to march into the country with we , make sign to bring we some cattle ; but at this time we can come to the sight of none , so we let the negro go with some trifle . within 8 day after , he with 30 or 40 other negro , bring we down some 40 bullock and ox , with as many sheep : at bullock , ox , which time we buy but few of they . but within 8 and keep , day after they come down with as many more , and then we buy some 24 ox with as many sheep . we buy a ox for two knife , a stirke for a knife , and a sheep for a knife , and some we buy for less value than a knife . the ox be very large and well flesh , but not fat . the sheep be very big and very good meat , they have no will on their back but hair , and have great tail like the sheep in Syria . there be diverse sort of wild beast , as the antilope , ( whereof m. Lancaster kill one of the bigness of a young colt ) the red and fallow deer , with other great beast unknow unto 389 great store of penguin and seal . case de Buona speransa double . Cape do Corrientes . here they be sever from the Penelope . four man slay with a clap of thunder . [ ii two . 104. ] the english voyage we . here be also great store of overgrown monkei . as touch our proceed upon our voyage , it be think good rather to proceed with two ship well man , then with three evil man : for here we have of sound and whole man but 198 , of which there go in the Penelope with the admiral 101 , and in the Edward with the worshipful m. captain Lancaster 97. we leave behind 50 man with the royal merchant , whereof there be many pretty well recover , of which ship be master and governor Abraham Kendal , which for many reason we think good to send home . The . disease that have consume our man have be the skurvie . our soldier which have not be use to the sea , have best hold out , but our mariner drop away , which ( in my judgement ) proceed of their evil diet at home . six day after our send back for England of the merchant royal from Agoada de Saldanha , our admiral m. captain Raimond in the Penelope , and m. James Lancaster in the Edward Bonaventure , set forward to double the cape of Buona esperansa , which they do very speedy . but be pass as far as cape do Corrientes , the 14 of September we be encounter with a mighty storm and extreme gust of wind , wherein we lose our general company , and can never hear of he nor his ship any more , though we do our best endeavour to seek he up and down a long while , and stay for he certain day at the hand of Comoro , where we appoint to stay one for another . four day after this uncomfortable separation in the morning towards ten of the clock we have a terrible clap of thunder , which slay four of our man outright , their neck be wring in sunder without speak any word , and of 94 man there be not . one untouched , whereof some be strike blind , other be bruise in their leg and arm , and other in their breast , so that they void blood two day after , other be draw out at length as though they have be rack . but ( God be thank ) they all recover save 39° ... I591 , only the four which be slay out right . also with the same thunder our main mast be tear very grievous from the head to the deck , and some of the spike that be ten inch into the timber , be melt with the extreme heat theereof . from thence we shape our course to the north-east , and not long after we fall upon the northwest end of the mighty hand of S. Laurence : which one of our man espy by god ' shouldt of good blessing late in the evening by moon light , who saint - lienee . see afar off the break of the sea , and call to certain of his fellow , ask they what it be : which eftsoon tell he that it be the break of the sea upon the should . whereupon in very good time we cast about to avoid the danger which we be like to have incur . thus pass on forward , it be our luck to overshoot Mozambique , and to fall with a place call Quitangone two league to the northward quitangpne of it , and we take three or four bark of Moores , n^r^qzam-which bark in their language they call Pangaias , lade ’ with Millio , hen , and duck , with one Portugal ! boy , go for the provision of Mozambique . within few day follow we come to a hand a hundred league to the north-east of Mozambique call Comoro , which I|will °f we find exceed full of people , which be moor of tawny colour and good stature , but they be very treacherous and diligent to be take heed of . here we desire to store our self with water , whereof we stand in great need , and send sixteen of our man well arm on shore in our boat : who the people suffer quiet to land and water , and diverse of they with their king come aboard our ship in a gown of crimosine satin pink after the moorish fashion down to the knee , who we entertain in the best manner , and have some conference with he of the state of the place and merchandises , use our Portugal ! boy which we have take before for our interpreter , and in the end license the king and his company to depart , and send our man again for more water , who then also dispatch their business , and 39 » return quiet : the three time likewise we send they for more , which also return without any harm . and though we think our self furnish , yet our master William mace of Radcliffe pretend that it may be long before we shall find any good water place , will needs go himself on shore with thirty man , 32 oj our man much against the will of our captain , and he and 16 betray at they be company , together with one boat which be all we of Comoro . we anj l6 that be a wash over - against our ship , be betray of the perfidious moor , and in our sight for the most part slay , we be not able for want of a boat to yield they any succour . from hence with heavy heart we shape our course for Zanzibar Zanzibar the 7 of November , where short after we hand . arrive and make we a new boat of such board as we have within board , and rid in the road until the 15 of February , where , during our abode , we see diverse Pangaias or boat , which be pin with wooden pin , and sow together with Palmito cord , and calk with the husk of cocos shell beat , whereof they make Occam . at length a Portugal Pangaia coming out of the harbour of Zanzibar , where they have a Portugal a small factory , send a Canoa with a moor which have Zanzibar ene christen , who bring we a letter wherein they ’ desire to know what we be , and what we seek . we send they word we be Englishmen come from don Antonio upon business to his friend in the Indies : with which answer they return , and will not any more come at we . whereupon not long after we man out our boat and take a Pangaia of the moor , which have a priest of they in it , which in their language they call a sheriff : who we use very courteous : which the king take in very good part , have his priest in great estimation , and for his deliverance furnish we with two month victual , during all which the Portugal } time we detain with we . Theise Moores inform towards } the we the false and spiteful deal of the Portugal engluh . towards we , which make they believe that we be cruel 392 people and men-eater , and will they if they love their safety in no case to come near we . which they do only to cut we off from all knowledge of the state and traffic of the country . while we ride from the end of November until the middle of February in this harbour , which be sufficient for a ship of 500 tun to ride in , we set upon a Portugal Pangaia with our boat , but because it be very little , and our man not able to stir in it , we be not able to take the say Pangaia , which be arm with 10 good shot like our long foul piece . this place for the goodness of the harbour excellent and water , and plentiful refresh with fish , whereof re~ we take great store with our net , and for sundry sort i of fruit of the country , as Cocos and other , which be bring we by the moor , as also for ox and hen , be careful to be seek for by such of our ship , as shall hereafter pass that way . but our man have need to take good heed of the Portugal : for while we lie here the Portugal admiral of the coast from melinde to Mozambique , come to view and to betray our boat if he can have take at any time advantage , in a galley frigate of ten ton with 8 or 9 oar on a side . of the strength of which frigate and their treacherous meaning we be advertise by a arabian moor which come from the king of Zanzibar diverse time unto we about the delivery of the priest aforesaid , and afterward by another which we carry thence along with we : for wheresoever we come , our care be to get into our hand some one or two of the country to learn the language and state of those part where we touch . Moreover , here again we have another clap of thunder which do shake our foremast very much , which we fish and repair with timber from the shore , whereof there be good store thereabouts of a kind of tree some forty foot high , which be a red and tough wood , and as i suppose , a kind of cedar . here our surgeon Arnold negligent catch a great heat in his head be on heat in the land with the master to seek ox , fall sick and short head dcadh - 393 a galley frigate . [ ii two . 105. ] another thunderclap . a Junco lade with pepper and drug . the current set to the northward . Zocotora . the english voyage die , which may have be cure by let of blood before it have be settle . before our departure we have in this place some thousand weight of pitch , or rather a kind of grey and white gum like unto frankincense , as clammy as turpentine , which in melt grow as black as pitch , and be very brittle of it self , but we mingle it with oil , whereof we have 30° jar in the prize which we take to the northward of the equinoctial , not far from guinie , bind for Brasil . six day before we depart hence , the cape merchant of the factory write a letter unto our captain in the way of friendship , as he pretend , request a jar of wine , and a jar of oil , and two or three pound of gunpowder , which letter he send by a negro his man , and moor in a Canoa : we send he his demand by the moor , but take the negro along with we because we understand he have be in the east Indies and know somewhat of the country . by this negro we be advertise of a small bark of some thirty ton ( which the moor call a Junco ) which be come from goa thither lade with pepper for the factory and service of that kingdom . thus have trim our ship as we lay in this road , in the end we set forward for the coast of the east India , the 15 of February aforesaid , intend if we can to have reach to cape Comori , which be the headland or promontory of the main of Malavar , and there to have lie off and on for such ship as shall have pass from Zeilan , Sant Tome , Bengala , pegu , Malacca , the moluccos , the coast of China , and the he of Japan , which ship be of exceed wealth and riches . but in our course we be very much deceive by the current that set into the gulf of the red sea along the coast of melinde . and the wind shorten upon we to the north-east and Easterly , keep we that we can not get off , and so with the put in of the current from the westward , set we in further unto the northward within fourscore league of the he of Zocotora , far from our 394 determine course and expectation . but here we never want abundance of dolphin , bonito and fly fish . now while we find our self thus far to the northward , and the time be so far spend , we determine to go for the red sea , or for the hand of Zocotora , both to refresh our self , and also for some purchase . but while we be in this consultation , the wind very lucky come about to the northwest and carry we direct towards cape Comori . before we shall have double this cape , we be determine to touch at the hand of mamale , of which we have ad ver - isle of tisement , that one have victual , stand in the northerly mamale-latitude of twelve degree . howbeit it be not our good luck to find it , which fall out partly by the obstinacy of our master : for the day before we fall with part of the hand the wind come about to the southwest , and then shift our course we miss it . So the wind increase southerly , we fear we shall not have be able to have double the cape , which will have great hazard our cast away upon the coast of India , the winter season and western Monsons already be come in , which Monsons continue on that coast until August . nevertheless it please God to bring the wind more westerly , and so in the month of May 1592. we happy double cape Comori without cape Comori sight of the coast of India . from hence thus have < * « i592-doubled this cape , we direct our course for the hand the ue of of Nicubar , which lie north and south with the western n^ar . part of Sumatra , and in the latitude of 7 degree to the northward of the equinoctial . from which cape of Comori unto the aforesaid hand we run in six day with a very large wind though the weather be foul with extreme rain and gust of wind . Theise hand be miss through our master default for want of due observation of the south star . and we fall to the southward of they within the sight of the hand the isle of of Gomes Polo , which lie hard upon the great hand of Gomes Pol°-Sumatra the first of June , and at the north-east side of 395 they we lay two or three day becalm , hope to Sumatra . have have a pilot from Sumatra , within two league whereof we lie off and on . now the winter come upon we with much contagious weather , we direct our then isle of course from hence with the hand of Pulo Pinaou , pulopinaou . ( where by the way be to be note that Pulo in the malaian tongue signify a hand ) at which hand we arrive about the begin of June , where we come to a anchor in a very good harbour between three hand : at which time our man be very sick and many fall . here we determine to stay until the [ ii two . 106. i winter be overpast . this place be in 6 degree and a half to the northward , and some five league from the main between Malacca and Pegu. here we continue until the end of August . Oure refresh in this place be very small , only of oyster grow on rock , great wilk , and some few fish which we take with our hook . here we land our sick man on these uninhabited hand for their health , nevertheless 26 of they die in this place , whereof John hall our master be one , and m. Rainold Golding another , a merchant of great honesty and much discretion . in tree fit for these island be abundance of tree of white wood , so mast . right and tall , that a man may make mast of they be a hundred foot long . the winter pass and have water our ship and fit she to go to sea , we have leave we but 33 man and one boy , of which not pass 22 be sound for labour and help , and of they not past a three part sailor : thence we make sail to seek some place of refresh , and go over Malacca . to the main of Malacca . the next day we come to a anchor in a bay in six fathom water some two league from the shore . then master James Lancaster our captain , and m. Edmund Barker his lieutenant , and other of the company man the boat , go on shore to see what inhabitant may be find . And come on land we find the track of some barefooted people which be depart thence not long before : for we 396 see their fire still burn , but people we see none , nor any other live creature , save a certain kind of foul call ox bird , which be a grey kind of seafowl , like a snite in colour , but not in beak . of these we kill some eight dozen with hailshot be very tame , and spend the day in search , return towards night aboard . the next day about two of the clock in the afternoon we espy a Canoa which come near unto we , but will not come aboard we , have in it some sixteen naked Indians , with who nevertheless go afterward on land , we have friendly conference and promise of victual . the next day in the morning we espy three ship , be all of burden 60 or 70 ton , three ship of one of which we make to strike with our very boat : . * with pcppct , and understand that they be of the town of Mar - Martabam ' . tabam , which be the chief haven town for the great city of Pegu , and the good belong to certain Portugal Jesuit and a biscuit baker a Portugal , we take that ship and do not force the other two , because they be lade for merchant of Pegu , but have this one at our command , we come together to a anchor . the night follow all the man except twelve , which we take into our ship , be most of they bear in Pegu , flee away in their boat , leave their ship and good with we . the next day we weigh our anchor and go to the leeward of a hand hard by , and take in her lade be pepper , which she and the other two have lade at Pera , which be a place on the main 30 league Pera. to the south . beside the aforesaid three ship , we take another ship of Pegu lade with pepper , and perceive she to be lade with merchant good of Pegu only , we dismiss she without touch any thing . thus have stay here 10 day and discharge her good into the Edward , which be about the begin of September , our sick man be somewhat refresh and lusty , with such relief as we have find in this ship , we weigh anchor , determine to run into the Pulo strait of Malacca to the hand call Pulo Sambilam , Sambilam . 397 the galeon of Malacca of 700 take . the english voyage which be some five and forty league northward of the city of Malacca , to which hand the Portugal must need come from goa or s. some , for the Malucos , China , and Japan . and when we be there arrive , we lay too and again for such ship as shall come that way . thus have spend some five day , upon a Sunday we espy a sail which be a Portugal ship that come from Negapatan a town on the main of India over-against the north-east part of the lie of Zeilan ; and that night we take she be of 250 ton : she be lade with rice for Malacca . captain Lancaster command their captain and master aboard our ship , and send Edmund Barker his lieutenant and seven more to keep this prize , who be aboard the same , come to a anchor in thirty fathom water : for in that channel three or four league from the shore you shall find good ankorage . be thus at a anchor and keep out a light for the Edward , another Portugal ship of Sant Thome of four hundred ton , come and anchor hard by we . the Edward be put to leeward for lack of help of man to handle her sail , be not able the next morning to fetch she up , until we which be in the prize with our boat , go to help to man our ship . then come aboard we go towards the ship of Sant Thome , but our ship be so foul that she escape we . after we have take out of our Portugal prize what we think good , we turn she and all her man away except a pilot and four moor . we continue here until the sixth of October , at which time we meet with the ship of the captain of Malacca of seven hundred ton which come from goa : we shoot at her many shot , and at last shoot her mainyard through , she come to a anchor and yield . we command she captain , master , pilot and Purser to come aboard we . but the captain accompany with one soldier only come , and after certain conference with he , he make excuse to fetch the master and Purser , which he say will not come 398 unless he go for they : but be get from we in the edge of the evening , he with all the people which pl. two . 107. ] be to the number of about three hundred man , woman and child , goat a shore with two great boat and quite abandon the ship . at our come aboard we find in her sixteen piece of brass , and three hundred butt of canary wine , and nipar wine , which be make of the palm tree , and raisin wine which be also very strong : as also all kind of haberdasher ware , as hat , ware fit to red cap knit of spanish wool , worsted stocking knit , shoe , velvet , taffeta , chamlet , and silk , abundance ’ of sucket , rice , Venice glass , certain paper full of false and counterfeit stone which a italian bring from Venice to deceive the rude Indians withal , abundance of play card , two or three pack of french paper . whatsoever become of the treasure which usual be bring in royal of plate in this gallion , we can not find it . after that the mariner have disordered peel this rich ship , the captain because they will not follow his commandment to unlade those excellent wine into the Edward , abandon she and let she drive at sea , take out of she the choice thing that she have . And doubt the force of Malaca , we depart thence to a bay in the kingdom of junsalaom , which be between kingdom Malacca and Pegu eight degree to the northward , to °f^unsalaom-seeke for pitch to trim our ship . here we send our soldier , which the captain of the aforesaid galion have leave behind he with we , because he have the malaian language , to deal with the people for pitch , which he do faithful , and procure we some two or three quintal with promise of more , and certain of the people come unto we . we send commodity to their king to barter for amber-griese , and for the home of Abath , whereof ambergreese . the king only have the traffic in his hand . now the horn this Abath be a beast which have one horn only in she of Abath . forehead , and be think to be the female unicorn , and the female be high esteem of all the moor in those part as unicorn . a most sovereign remedy against poison . we have 399 some small quantity hereof may be cart to pleasure those king . they arrive at the isle of Nicubar , which be inhabit by Moores . they return homeward . they arrive at " ieuan . tanaseri in the kingdom of Siam . commodity of Bengala . the english voyage only two or three of these home which be of the colour of a brown grey , and some reasonable quantity of amber-griese . at last the king go about to betray our Portugal with our merchandise : but he to get aboard we , tell he that we have gild armour , shirt of mail and halberd , which thing they great desire : for hope whereof he let he return aboard , and so he escape the danger . thus we leave this coast and go back again in sight of Sumatra , and thence to the hand of Nicubar , where we arrive and find they inhabit with Moores , and after we come to a anchor , the people daily come aboard we in their canoas , with hen , coco , plantans and other fruit : and within two day they bring unto we royal of plate , give we they for Calicut cloth : which royal they find by dive for they in the sea , which be lose not long before in two Portugal ship which be bind for China and be cast away there . they call in their language the Coco calambe , the plantaine Pison , a hen jam , a fish Iccan , a hog Babee . from thence we return the 21 of November to go for the hand of Zeilan , and arrive there about the three of December 1592. and anchor upon the southside in six fathom water , where we lose our anchor , the place be rocky and foul ground . than we run along the southwest part of the say hand , to a place call Punta deal gall , where we anchor , determine there to have remain until the come of the Bengala fleet of seven or eight ship , and the fleet of pegu of two or three sail , and the Portugal ship of tanaseri be a great bay to the southward of Martabam in the kingdom of Siam : which ship , by diverse intelligence which we have , be to come that way within fourteen day to bring commodity to serve the carack , which common depart from Cochin for Portugal by the midst of Januarie . the commodity of the ship which come from Bengala be fine pavilion for bed , wrought quilt , fine Calicut cloth , pintado and other fine work , and rice , and they make this voyage twice 400 in the year . those of Pegu bring the chief stone , commodity as ruby and diamond , but their chief fraught be rice and certain cloth . those of tanaseri be chief commodity freight with rice and Nipar wine , which be very strong , °f^anasm-and in colour like unto rock water somewhat whitish , and very hot in taste like unto aqua vitae . be shoot up to the place aforesaid , call Punta deal gall , we come to a anchor in foul ground and lose the same , and lie all that night a drift , because we have now but two anchor leave we , which be unstock and in hold . whereupon our man take occasion to come home , our captain at that time lie very sick moor like to die then to live . in the morning we set our foresail determine to lie up to the northward and there to keep our self to and again out of the current , which great cur-otherwise will have set we off to the southward from all * ° know land . thus have set our foresail , and in out war ’ hand to set all our other sail to accomplish our aforesaid determination , our man make answer that they will take their direct course for England and will stay there no long . now see they can not be persuade by any mean possible , the captain be constrain to give his consent to return , leave all hope of so great possibility . thus the eight of December 1592. we set sail for the cape of Buona Speransa , pass by the hand of Maldiva , and leave the mighty hand of S. Laurence on the starreboord [ ii two . 108. ] or northward in the latitude of 26 degree to the south . in our passage over from saint Laurence to the main we have exceed great store of bonito and albocore , a notable re-which be a great kind of fish : of which our captain , be now recover of his sickness , take with a hook as many in two or three hour as will serve forty person a whole day . and this skole of fish continue with our ship for the space of five or six week , . all which while we take to the quantity aforesaid , which be no small refresh to we . in February 1593. we fall with the eastermost land of vi 401 2c they double the cape of Buona Speransa . S. Helena . John Segar a Englishman leave 18 month alone in the he of santa Helena . a miraculous effect of extreme fear or extreme joy . the description of the commodity of the isle of santa Helena . the english voyage Africa at a place call Baia de Agoa some 100 league to the north-east of the cape of good hope : and find the wind contrary , we spend a month or five week before we can double the cape . after we have double it in march follow , we direct our course for the hand of Santa Helena , and arrive there the three day of April , where we stay to our great comfort nineteen day : in which mean space some one man of we take thirty goodly Congers in one day , and other rocky fish and some bonito . after our arrival at Santa Helena , i Edmund Barker go on shore with four or five peguin or man of Pegu which we have take , and our surgeon , where in a house by the chapel i find a Englishman one John Segar of bury in sufiblke , who be leave there eighteen month before by Abraham Kendal , who put in there with the royal merchant , and leave he there to refresh he on the hand , be otherwise like to have perish on shipboard : and at our come we find he as fresh in colour and in as good plight of body to our seem as may be , but craze in mind and half out of his wit , as afterward we perceive : for whether he be put in fright of we , not know at first what we be , whether friend or foe , or of sudden joy when he understand we be his old consort and countryman , he become idle-headed , and for eight day space neither night nor day take any naturali rest , and so at length die for lack of sleep . here two of our man , whereof the one be disease with the skurvie , and the other have be nine month sick of the flux , in short time while they be on the hand , recover their perfect health . we find in this place great store of very wholesome and excellent good green fig , orange , and lemon very fair , abundance of goat and hog , and great plenty of partridge , guiniecock , and other wild fowl . our mariner somewhat discontent be now water and hay some provision of fish , contrary to the will of the capitaine , will strait home . the capitaine because 402 he be desirous to go for Phernambuc in Brasil , grant their request . and about the 12 of April 1593. we depart from saint Helena , and direct our course for the place aforesaid . the next day our capitaine calling upon the sailor to finish a foresail which they have in hand , some of they answer that unless they may go direct home , they will lay their hand to nothing ; whereupon he be constrain to follow their humour . and from thenceforth we direct our course for our country , which we keep until we come 8 degree to the northward of the equinoctial , between which 8 degree and the line , we spend some six week , with many calm and contrary wind at north , and sometime to the eastward , and sometime to the westward : which loss of time and expense of our victual , whereof we have very small store , make we doubt to keep our course : and some of our man grow into a mutiny threaten to break up other man chest , to the overthrow of our victual and all our self , for every man have his share of his victual before in his own custody , that they may be sure what to trust to , and husband it more thrifty . Oure capitaine seek to prevent this mischief , be advertise by one of our company which have be at the he of Trinidada in m. Chidleis voyage , that there we shall be sure to have refresh , hereupon direct his course to that hand , and not know the current , we be put past it in the night into the gulf of Paria in the begin of June , wherein we be 8 day , find the current continual set in , and oftentimes we be in 3 fathom water , and can find no go out until the current have put we over to the Westernside under the main land , where we find no current at all , and more deep water ; and so keep by the shore , the wind off the shore every night do help we out to the northward . be clear , within four or five day after we fall with the he of Mona where we anchor and ride some eighteen day . in which time the Indians of Mona give we some refresh . 403 the gulf of Paria , or bocca del Dragpne pass . a good note . the he of Mona . the I|will of Savona environ with flat . Cape de Ttberon . [ ii two . 109. ] the old chanel pass . the english voyage and in the mean space there arrive a french ship of cane in which be capitaine one monsieur de barbaterre , of who we buy some two butt of wine and bread , and other victual . than we water and fit our ship , and stop a great leak which break on we as we be beat out of the gulf of Paria . and have thus make ready our ship to go to sea , we determine to go direct for newfoundland . but before we depart , there arise a storm the wind be northerly , which put we from a anchor and force we to the southward of Santo Domingo . this night we be in danger of shipwreck upon a hand call Savona , which be environ with flat lie 4 or 5 mile off : yet it please God to clear we of they , and so we direct our course westward along the hand of Santo Domingo , and double cape Tiberon , and pass through the old channel between saint Domingo and Cuba for the cape of Florida : and here we meet again with the french ship of Caen , who captain can spare we no more victual , as he say , but only hide which he have take by traffic upon those hand , wherewith we be content and give he for they to his good satisfaction . after this , pass the cape of Florida , and clear of the channel of Bahama , we direct our course for the bank of newfoundland . thus run to the height of 36 degree , and as far to the east as the isle of Bermuda the 17 of September find the wind there very variable , contrary to our expectation and all man write , we lay there a day or two the wind be northerly , and increase continual more and more , it grow to be a storm and a great frete of wind : which continue with we some 24 hour , with such extremity , as it carry not only our sail away be furl , but also make much water in our ship , so that we have six foot water in hold , and have free our ship thereof with bal , the wind shift to the northwest and become dullerd : but present upon it the extremity of the storm be such that with 404 the labour of the ship we lose our foremaste , and our ship grow as full of water as before . the storm once cease , and the wind contrary to go our course , we fall to consultation which may be our best way to save our life . our victual now be utter spend , and have eat hide 6 or 7 day , we think it best to bear back again for Dominica , and the island adjoin , know that there we may have some relief , whereupon we turn back for the say island . but before we they return can get thither the wind scant upon we , which do great endanger we for lack of fresh water and victual : ' so that we be constrain to bear up to the westward to certain other island call the Nuebias or cloudy hand , towards the he of saint Juan de porto Rico , where at our arrival we find land-crab and fresh water , and tortoise , which come most on land about the full of the moon . here have refresh our self some 17 or 18 day , and have get some small store of victual into our ship , we resolve to return again for Mona : upon which our determination five of our man five english leave we , remain still on the isle of Nuebias for all persuasion that we can use to the contrary , which ' afterward come home in a english ship . from these isle we depart and arrive at Mona about the twenty of November 1593 , and there come to a anchor towards two or three of the clock in the morning , the captain , and Edmund Barker his lieutenant with some few other go on land to the house of the old indian and his three son , think to have get some food , our victual be all spend , and we not able to proceed any further until we have obtain some new supply . we spend two or three day in seek provision to carry aboard to relieve the whole company . And come down to go aboard , the wind then be northerly and the sea somewhat grow , they can not come on shore with the boat , which be a thing of small succour and not able to row in any rough sea , whereupon we stay until the next morning , think - 4°s ing to have have less wind and safe passage . but in the ship lose the night about twelve of the clock our ship do drive by drive away the five man and a boy only in it , our carpenter awa^ ' secret cut their own cable , leave nineteen of we on land without boat or any thing , to our great discomfort . in the midst of these misery repose our trust in the goodness of God , which many time before have succour we in our great extremity , we content our self with our poor estate , and seek mean to preserve our life . and because one place be not able to . sustain we , we take our leaf one of another , divide our self into several company . the great famine , great relief that we six which be with the captain can find for the space of nine and twenty day be the stalk off purselaine boil in water , and now and then a pompion , which we find in the garden of the old indian , who upon this our second arrival with his three son steal from we , and keep himself continual aloft in the mountain . after the end of nine and twenty day we espy a french ship , which afterward we understand to be of diepe , call the Luisa , who captain be one mounsieur Felix , unto who we make a fire , at sight whereof he take in his topsail , bear in with the land , and show we his flag , whereby we judge he French : so come along to the western end of the island there be anchor , we make down with all speed unto he . at this time the indian and his three son come do to our captain master James Lancaster , and go along with two ship of he to the ship . this night he go aboard the dupe - french man , who give he good entertainment , and the next day fetch eleven more of we aboard entreat we all very courteous . this day come another french ship of the same town of diepe which remain there until night expect our other seven man come down : who , albeit we cause certain piece of ordinance to be shoot off to call they , yet come not down . whereupon we depart thence , be divide six into 406 one ship , and six into another , and leave this island , depart for the northside of saint Domingo , where we remain until April follow 1594 , and spend some two month in traffic with the inhabitant by permission for hide and other merchandise of the country . in this mean while there come a ship of New-haven to the place where we be , whereby we have intelligence of our seven man which we leave behind we at the isle of Mona : which be , that two of they break their neck with venture to take fowl upon the cliff , other three be slay by the Spaniard , which come from saint Domingo , upon knowledge give by our man which go away in the Edward , the other two this man of New-haven have with he in his ship , which escape the Spaniard bloody hand . from this place captain Lancaster and his lieutenant master Edmund Barker , ship themselves in another ship of diepe , the captain whereof be one John la Noe , which be ready first to come away , and leave the rest of their company in other ship , where they be well entreat , to come after he , on Sunday the seven of April 1594 they set homeward , and disbock through the cajico from thence arrive safe in diepe within two and forty day after , on the 19 of may , where after we have stay two day to refresh our self , and give humble thanks unto God , and unto our friendly neighbour , we take passage for rye and land there on Friday the 24 of May 1594 , have spend in this voyage three year , six week and two day , which the Portugal perform in half the time , chief because we lose our fit time and season to set forth in the begin of our voyage . we understand in the east Indies by certain Portugal which we take , that they have late discover the coast of China to the latitude of nine and fifty degree , find the sea still open to the northward : give great hope of the north-east or northwest passage . witness master James Lancaster . 407 A.D. 1594. the french trajike to saint Domingo . [ ii two . no . ] m. Lancaster return to diepe , and so to England . 