part , go naked , save a apron of a span long , and as much in breadth before they , and a lace two finger broad before they , gird about with a string and no more : and thus they think they as well as we with all our trim . of the fruit and tree that be here i can now speak , for i shall make another letter as long as this . for hitherto i have not see a tree here , who like i have see in EurOpe ? the vine except , which nevertheless here be to no purpose , so that all the wine be bring out of Portugal . the drink of this country be good water , or wine of the palm tree , or of a fruit call Cocos . and this shall suffice for this time . if God send i my health , i shall have opportunity to write to you once again . now the length of my letter compel i to take my leave : and thus i wish your most prosperous health . from goa the ten of November , 1579. - five 1 • t’l ’ J'7 encage our love son Thomas Stevens . A.D. 1589. a brief relation of the great magnificence and [ ii two . 102. ] rich traffic of the kingdom of Pegu beyond the east India , write by Frey Peter of Lisbon , to his cousin Frey Diego of Lisbon , from Cochin . receive your letter in the harbour of Damaon by a caravel of advice that come from Malacca , which bring shot , powder , and other provision for the furnish of four galley and a great gallion , which be now in building , to keep our coast for fear of great store of man of war , be moor , which trouble we very sore . at that instant when i receive your letter i be new come from the kingdom of Pegu , where i have remain one year and a half , and from thence i depart to the city of Cochin in October 1587. the news which i can certify you of concern these vi 385 2 b the coast of India great trouble with Moores . country be : that this king of Pegu be the mighty king of man , and the rich that be in these part of the world : for he bring into the field at any time , when he have war with other prince , above a million of fight man : howbeit they be very lean and small people , and be bring unto the field without good abundant of order . he be lord of the elephant , and of all the gold gold , silver , ancj si | ver mine , and of all the pearl and precious ppredous^tones stone : so that he have the great store of treasure in Pegu. that ever be hear of in these part . the country people call he the god of truth and of justice . i have great conference with this king , and with the head captain of the Portugal , which be one of the country . they demand of i many question as touch the law and faith of Jesus Christ , and as touch the ten commandment . and the king give his consent that our order shall build a church in his country , which be half build ; but our perverse and malicious Portugal pluck it down again : for whereas it be a country wherein our nation gain very much by their commodity , they fear that by the build of this church there will be great resort thither , and so tie great their trade shall be impair , if their great gain gain of they shall be know unto other then those which find PeguSa 5 wonderful this country out first , therefore they be so unwilling ' that the build of this church shall go forward . our Portugal which be here in this realm be worse people than the gentile . i preach diverse time among those heathen people ; but be obstinate they say , that as their father believe so they will believe : for if their forefather go to the devil so they will . whereupon i return back again to our monastery to certify our father provinciali of the estate of this new find Pegu the best country . it be the best and rich country in all this tun ? iSin all eat ind ; isthought to be rich than china . theEastlndia . / be atrayd that the war which his majesty have with England will be the utter undo and spoil of Spain : for these country likewise be almost spoil 386 r . .... with civil war , which the moor have against the gentile : for the king here be up in arm all the country over . here be a indian which be count a prophuie prophet , which have prophesy that there will a dragon arise in a strange country , which will do great hurt to a&ams ? mn ' Spain . how it will fall out , only God do know . and thus i rest : from this monastery of Cochin the 28 of December , 1589. your good cousin and assure friend friar Peter of Lisbon . a voyage with three tall ship , the Penelope admiral , the merchant royal vice-admiral , and the Edward Bonaventure rearadmiral , to the east Indies , by the cape of Buona Speransa , to Quitangone near Mosambique , to the isle of Comoro and Zanzibar on the backside of Africa , and beyond cape Comori in India , to the isle of Nicubar and of Gomes Polo within two league of Sumatra , to the hand of Pulo pinaom , and thence to the main land of Malacca , begin by m. George Raymond , in the year 1591 , and perform by m. James Lancaster , and write from the mouth of Edmund Barker of Ipswich , his lieutenant in the say voyage , by m. Richard Hakluyt . ur fleet of the three tall ship abovenamed depart from Plymouth the 10 of April 1591 , and arrive at the canary-land the 25 of the same , from whence we depart the 29 of April . the second of may we be in the height of cape Blanco . the five we pass the tropic of cancer . the eight we be in the height of cape Verde . all this time we go with a fair wind 387 