the escape of the ‘ primrose ’ a.d. 1585 - commission , by which he be authorize to do all that he do : the copy whereof follow , be translate out of spanish . the spanish king commission for the generali [ ii two . 114. ] imbargment or arrest of the english , etc licentiate de Escober , my corregidor of my signory of Biskay , i have cause a great fleet to be put in readiness in the haven of Lisbon , and the river of Seville . there be require for the soldier , armour , victual , and munition , that be to be employ in the same great store of ship of all sort against the time of service , and to the end there may be choice make of the best , upon knowledge of their burden and goodness ; i do therefore require you , that present upon the arrival of this carrier , and with as much dissimulation as may be ( that the matter may not be know until it be put in execution ) you take order for the stay and arrest ( with great foresight ) of all the ship that may be find upon the coast , and in the port of the say signory , except none of Holland , Zealand , Easterland , Germany , England , and other province that be in rebellion against i , save those of France which be little , and of small burden and weak , be think unfit to serve the turn . and the stay be thus make , you shall have a speciali care that such merchandise as the say ship or hulk have bring , whether they be all or part unlade , may be take out , and that the armour , munition , tackle , sail , and victual may be safe bestow , as also that it may be well foresee , that none of the ship or man may escape away . which thing be thus execute , you shall advertise i by a express messenger , of your proceed therein : and send i a plain and distinct declaration of the number of ship that you shall have so stay in that coast and part , whence every one of they be , which belong to my rebel , what burden 8c good there be , and what number of man vi 417 2d be in every of they , and what quantity they have of armour , ordinance , munition , victual , tackle and other necessary , to the end that upon sight hereof , have make choice of such as shall be fit for the service , we may further direct you what you shall do . in the mean time you shall present see this my commandment put in execution , and if there come thither any more ship , you shall also cause they to be stay and arrest after the same order , use therein such care and diligence , as may answer the trust that i repose in you , wherein you shall do i great service . Dated at Barcelona the 29 of May . 1585. and thus have you hear the truth and manner thereof , wherein be to be note the great courage of the master , and the love heart of the servant to save their master from the danger of death : yea , and the care which the master have to save so much of the owner good as he may , although by the same the great be his own loss in that he may never travel to those part any more without the loss of his own life , nor yet any of his servant : for if hereafter they shall , be know they be like to taste of the sharp torment which be there accustom in their holy-house . and as for their term english ship to be in rebellion against they , it be sufficient know by themselves , and their own conscience can not deny it , but that with love , unity , and concord , our ship have ever be favourable unto they , and as willing to pleasure their king , as his subject any way willing to pleasure english passenger . 418 