their last letter , they have even now lay the foundation of their first build , and have also write that they be like to live much more peaceable and convenient for the propagate of Christian religion . Theise be the first beginning of Christianity in China , where , even as in other place of the christian commonwealth , the seed be to be sow with , great labour and tear , that acceptable fruit may be reap with gladness . Leo . it be even as you have say ( Michael ) and now for this your pleasant and eloquent discourse we do acknowledge our self much bind unto you . a letter write from goa , the principali city [ ii two . 99 ] of all the east Indies , by one Thomas Stevens a english man , and send to his father , m. Thomas Stevens : anno 1579. Fter most humble commendation : these shall be to crave your daily blessing , with like commendation unto my mother ; and withal , to certify you of my be : accord to your will and my duty . i write unto you take my journey from Italy to Portugal , which letter i think be come to your hand , so that presume thereupon , i think i have the less need at this time to tell you the cause of my depart , which nevertheless in one word i may conclude , if i do but name obedience . i come to Lisbon towards the end of march , eight day before the departure of the ship , so late that if they have not be stay about some weighty matter , they have be long go before our come : insomuch that there be other ordain to go in our place , that the king provision and we also may not be in vain . nevertheless our sudden come take place , and the four of April five ship depart for goa , wherein beside shipman 377 and soldier , there be a great number of child which in the sea bear out better than man , and no marvel , when that many woman also pass very well . the set forth from the port i need not to tell how solemn it be with trumpet , and shoot of ordinance , you may easy imagine it , consider that they go in the manner of war . the ten of the foresay month we come to the sight of Porto Santo near unto Madera , where a english ship set upon we ( which be then also alone ) with a few shot , which do no harm , but after that our ship have lay out her great ordinance , they straight depart as they come . the english ship be very fair and great , which i be sorry to see so ill occupy , for she go rove about , so that we see she again at the canarian isle , unto the which we come the thirteenth of the say month , and good leisure we have to wonder at the high mountain of the hand tenerif , for we wander between that and great Canaria four day by reason of contrary wind : and brief , such evil weather we have until the fourteen of May , that they despair , to compass the cape of good hope that year . nevertheless , take our voyage between Guinea and the hand of Capo Verde , without see of any land at all , we arrive at length unto the coast of guinie , which the Portugal so call , chief that part of the burn zone , which be from the sixth degree unto the equinoctial ! , in which part they suffer so many inconvenience of heat , and lack of wind , that they think themselves happy when they have pass it : for sometime the ship stand there almost by the space of many day , sometime she go , but in such order that it be almost as good to stand still . and the great part of this coast not clear , but thick and cloudy , full of thunder and lightning , and rain so unwholesome , that if the water stand a little while , all be full of worm , and fall on the meat which be hang up , it make 378 .. I579 , it straight full of worm . along all that coast we often time see a thing swim upon the water like a cock comb ( which they call a ship of Guinea ) but the colour much fair ; which comb stand upon a thing almost like the swimmer of a fish in colour and bigness , and bear underneath in the water , string , which save it from turn over . this thing be so poisonous , that a man can touch it without great peril . in this coast , that be to say , from the sixth degree unto the equinoctial , we spend no less than thirty day , partly with contrary wind , partly with calm . the thirty of May we pass the equinoctial with contentation , direct our course aswell as we can to pass the promontory , but in all that gulf , and in all the way beside , we find so often calm , that the expert mariner wonder at it . and in place where be always wont to be most horrible tempest , we find most quiet calm which be very troublesome to those ship which be the great of all other , and can go without good wind . insomuch , that when it be tempest almost intolerable for other ship , and make they main all their sail , these hoist up , and sail excellent well , unless the water be too too furious , which seidome happen in our navigation . you shall understand , that be pass the line , they can straightway go the next way to the promontory : but accord to the wind , they draw always as near south as they can to put themselves in the latitude of the point , which be 35 degree and a half , and then they take their course towards the east , and so compass the point . but the wind serve we so , that at 33 degree we do direct our course towards the point or promontory of good hope . you know that it be hard to sail from east to west , or contrary , because there be no fix point in all the sky , whereby they may direct their course , wherefore i shall tell you what help God provide for these man . there be not a foul that appear , or 379 sign about the cape of Bona Speransa . the english voyage sign in the air , or in the sea , which they have not write , which have make the voyage heretofore . wherfote , partly by their own experience , and ponder withal what space the ship be able to make with such a wind , and such direction , and partly by the experience of other , who book and navigation they have , they guess whereabout they be , touch degree of longitude , for of latitude they be always sure : but the great and best industry of all be to mark the variation of the needle or compass , which in the meridian of the hand of S. Michael , which be one of the azore in the latitude of Lisbon , be just north , and thence swarve towards the east so much , that betwixt the meridian aforesaid , and the point of Africa it carry three or four quarter of 32. and again in the point of Africa , a little beyond the point that be call Cape das Agulias ( in english the needle ) it return again unto the north , and that place pass , it swarve again towards the west , as it do before proportional . as touch our first sign , the near we come to the people of Africa , the more strange kind of fowl appear , insomuch that when we come within no less than thirty league ( almost a hundred mile ) and six hundred mile as we think from any hand , as good as three thousand fowl of sundry kind follow our ship : some of they so great that their wing be open from one point to the other , contain seven span , as the mariner say . a marvellous thing to see how God provide , so that in so wide a sea these fowl be all fat , and nothing want they . the Portugal have name they all accord to some propriety which they have : some they call rushtaile , because their tail be not proportionable to their body , but long and small like a rush , some fork tail because they be very broad and fork , some velvet sleeve , because they have wing of the colour of velvet , and bow they as a man bow his elbow . this bird be always welcome , for he appear 380 near the cape . i shall never make a end if i shall tell all particular : but it shall suffice brief to touch a few , which yet shall be sufficient , if you mark they , to give occasion to glorify almighty God in his wonderful work , and such variety in his creature . and to speak somewhat of fish in all place of calrne , especial in the burn zone , near the line ( for with - sej^ast out we never see any ) there wait on our ship fish as ' long as a man , which they call Tuberones , they come to eat such thing as from the ship fall into the sea , not refuse man themselves if they light upon they . and if they find any meat tie in the sea , they take it for they . Theise have wait on they six or seven small fish ( which never depart ) with guard blue and green round about their body , like comely serve man : and they go two or three before he , and some on every side . Moreover , they have other fish which cleave always unto their body , and seem to take such superfluity as grow about they , and they be say to enter into their body also to purge they if they need . the mariner in time pass have eat of they , but since they have see they eat man their stomach abhor they . nevertheless , they draw they up with great hook , and kill of they as many as they can , think that they have make a great revenge . there be another kind of fish as big almost as a herring , which have wing and fly , and they be together in great number . Theise have two enemy , the one in the sea , the other in the air . in the sea the fish which be call albocore , as big as a salmon , follow they with great swiftness to take they . this poor fish not be able swim fast , for he have no fin , but swim with move of his tail , shut his wing , lift himself above the water , and fly not very high : the albocore see that , although he have no wing , yet he give a great leap out of the water , and sometime catch he , or else he keep himself under the water go that way on as fast as he fly . and when the fish be weary of 381 the air , or think himself out of danger , return into the water , the albocore meet with he : but sometime his other enemy the sea-crow , catch he note . before he fall . with these and like sight , but always make our supplication to God for good weather and salvation of the ship , we come at length unto the point , so famous and fear of all man : but we find there no tempest , only great wave , where our pilot be a little oversee : for whereas common all other never come within sight of land , but see sign ordinary , and find bottom , go their way sure and safe , he think himself to have wind at will , shoot so nigh , the land that the wind turn into the south , and the wave be exceed great , roll we so near the land , that the ship stand in less than 14 fathom of water , no more than six mile from the cape , which be call Das Agulias , and there we stand as utter cast away : for under we be rock of main stone so sharp , and cut , that no anchor can hold the ship , the shore so evil , that nothing can take land , and the land itself so full of tiger , and people that be savage , and killer of all stranger , that we have no hope of life nor comfort , but only in God and a good conscience . notwithstanding , after we have lose ancres , hoist up the sail for to get the ship a coast in some safe place or when it shall please God , it please his mercy sudden , where no man look for help , to fill our sail with wind from the land , and so we escape , thank be to God . and the day follow , be in the place where they be always wont to catch fish , we also fall a fish , and so many they take , that they serve , all the ship for that day , and part of the next . and one of they pull coral . up a coral of great bigness and price . for there they [ ii n . 101. ] say ( as we see by experience ) that the coral do grow in the manner of stalk upon the rock in the bottom , and two way wax hard and red ’ the da7 of Peri11 be the nine and beyond the cape twenty of July . and you shall understand that , then of good hope . Cape pass , there be two way to India : one within 382 the lie of saint Laurence , which they take willing , because they refresh themselves at Mosambique a fortnight or a month , not without great need , and thence in a month more land in goa . the other be without the he of saint Laurence , which they take when they set forth so late , and come so late to the point , that they have no time to take the foresay Mosambique^ and then they go heavy , because in this way they take no port . and by reason of the long navigation , and want of food and water , they fall into sundry disease , their gum wax great , and swell , and they be fain to cut they away , their leg swell , and all the body become sore , and so benumb , that they can not stir hand nor foot , and so they die for weakness , other fall into flux and ague , and die thereby . and this way it be our chance to make : yet though we have more than one hundred and fifty sick , there die not past seven and twenty ; which loss they esteem not much in respect of other time . though some of we be disease in this sort , yet , thank be to God , i have my health all the way , contrary to the expectation of many : God send i my health so well in the land , if it may be to his honour and service . this way be full of privy rock and quicksand , so that sometime we dare not sail by night , but by the providence of God we see nothing , nor never find bottom until we come to the coast of India . when we have pass again the line , and be come to the three degree or somewhat more , we see crab swim on the water that be red as though they have be sodden : but this be no sign of land . after , about the eleven degree , the space of many day , more than ten thousand fish by estimation follow round about our ship , whereof we catch so many , that for fifteen day we do eat nothing else , and they serve our turn very well : for at this time we have neither meat nor almost any thing else to eat , our navigation grow so long that it draw near to seven month , where as common they go it 3^3 A.D. x579-they common sail from Lisbon to goa in 5 month . run sea very dangerous . certain sign of land . they arrive at goa the 24 of October . the english voyage in five , i mean when they sail the inner way . but these fish be not sign of land , but rather of deep sea . at length we take a couple of bird , which be a kind of hawk , whereof they joy much , think that they have be of India , but indeed they be of Arabia , as we find afterward . and we that thought we have be near India , be in the same latitude near zocotoro , an he in the mouth of the red sea . but there God send we great wind from the north-east or Northnortheast , whereupon unwilling they bear up towards the east , and thus we go ten day without see sign of land , whereby they perceive their error : for they have direct their course before always Northeast , covet to multiply degree of latitude , but partly the difference of the needle , and most of all the run sea , which at that time run northwest , have draw we to this other danger , have not God send we this wind , which at length wax large , and restore we to our right course . Theise run sea be so perilous that they deceive the most part of the governor , and some be so little curious , content themselves with ordinary experience , that they care not to seek out any mean to know when they swerve , neither by the compass , nor by any other trial ! . the first sign of land be certain fowl which they know to be of India : the second , bough of palm and sedge : the three , snake swim on the water , and a substance which they call by the name of a coin of money , as broad and as round as a groat , wonderful print and stamp of nature , like unto some coin . and these two last sign be so certain , that the next day after , if the wind serve , they see land , which we do to our great joy , when all our water ( for you know they make no beer in those part ) and victual begin to fail we . and to goa we come the four and twenty day of October , there be receive with pass great charity . the people be tawny , but not disfigure in their lip 8c nose , as the moor and caffe of Ethiopia . they that be not of reputation , or at least the most 384 