that our will and pleasure be , that the say trade and traffic shall cease , and be no long continue into the say coast and part of Guinea before limit : then immediate from and after the end of six month [ ii two . 126. ] next ensue , after such signification and notification so to be give to any of the say company and society , as be aforesaid , or otherwise to our officer in our port of Exeter or Plymouth , by they to be notify to such as shall have interest in this speciali privilege , these our present letter patent , and our grant therein contain shall be utter void , and of none effect , ne validity in the law , to all intent and purpose : any thing before mention to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding . witness our self at Westminster , the third day of May , in the thirty year of our reign 1588. a voyage to Benin beyond the country of Guinea , set forth by master bird and master Newton merchant of London , with a ship call the Richard of Arundel , and a pinesse ; write by James welsh , who be chief master of the say voyage , begin in the year 1588. Pon the twelve of October we weigh our anchor at Ratcliff and go to Blackwall . and the next day sail from thence , by reason of contrary wind and weather , we make it the 25. of October before we be able to reach Plymouth , and there we stay ( to our great expense of victual ) for lack of wind and weather unto the 14. of December . on Saturday the say 14. of December we put from thence , and about midnight be thwart of the Lizart . Rio deal on be Thursday the second of January we have sight of they in 22 . degree , land near Rio del oro , God be thank , and there have a 47. mm. 22 > jegree of latitude , and 47. minute . 45° the third of January we have sight of cavo de las barbas , and it bear southeast five league off . the 4. we have sight of the crosier in the morning . Tuesday the 7. day we have sight of Cavo verde , and i find this place to be in latitude 14. degree , and 43. minute , be 4. league from the shore . Friday the 17. Cavo de monte bear off we north Northeast , we sound and have 50. fathom black oase , and at 2. of the clock it bear north northwest 8. league off . and Cavo Mensurado bear of we east and by south , and we go Northeast with the main : here the currant set to the east southeast alongst the shore , and at midnight we sound and have 26. fathom black oase . the 18. in the morning we be thwart of a land much like cavo verde , and it be as i judge 9 league from cavo Mensurado ; it be a hill sadlebacked , and there be 4. or 5. one after another : and 7. league to the southward of that , we see a row of hill sadleback also , and from cavo Mensurado be many mountain . the 19 we be thwart Rio de Sestos , and the 20. Cavo do Baixos be north and by west 4. league off the shore , and at afternoon there come a boat from the shore with 3. negro , from a place ( as they say ) call tabanoo . and towards evening we be thwart of a island , and a great many of small island or rock to the southward , and the currant come out of the souther-boord : we sound and have 3 5 fathom . the 21. we have a flat hill that bear north Northeast off we , and we be from the shore 4. league , and at 2. a clock in the afternoon we speak with a Frenchman ride near a place call ratire , and another place hard by call Crua . This Frenchman carry a letter from we to m. Newton : we lay it on hull while we be write of our letter ; and the current set we to the southward a good pace alongst the shore south southeast . the 25. we be in the bite of the bay that be to the westward of Capo de tres puntas : the currant do set east Northeast . A.D. 1589. Cavo de las barbas . crosier . Cavo Verde , in 14. deg . 43. m . Cavo de monte . Cavo Mensurado . Rio de Sestos . Cavo do Baixos . Tabanoo . a french ship at ratire . Crua . a currant to the southeastward . 451 the 28. we lay six glass a hull tarry for the pinesse . Cavo de tres the last of January the middle part of cape de tres funtas . puntas be thwart of we three league at seven of the clock in the morning : and at eight the pinesse come to a anchor : and we prove that the current set to the eastward : and at six at night the uttermost land bear east and by south 5. league , and we go Southwest , and Southwest and by south . Saturday the first of February 1588. we be thwart of a round foreland , which i take to be the eastermost part of Capo de tres puntas : and within the say round foreland be a great bay with a island in the say bay . the castle of the second of February we be thwart of the castle Mtna - of Mina , and when the third glass of our lookout be spend , we spy under our larboard-quarter one of their boat with certain negro , and one Portugal in [ ii two . 127. ] the boat , we will have have he to come aboard , but he will not . and over the castle upon the high rock two white we do see as it may be two watch-house , and they do watch-house . show very white : and we go eastnortheast . the 4 in the morning we be thwart a great high hill , and up into the land be more high ragged hill , monte re - and those i reckon to be but little short of monte dondo . Redondo . than i reckon that we be 20 league southeastward from the Mina , and at 11 of the clock i see two hill within the land , these hill i take to be 7 league from the first hill . and to seaward of these hill be a bay , and at the east end of the bay another hill , and from the hill the land lie very low . we go Eastnortheast , and east and by north 22 league , and then east along the shore . villa long . the 6 we be short of villa long , and there we meet with a Portugal caravel . the 7 a fair temperate day , and all this day we ride before villa long . the 8 at noon we set sail from villa long , and 452 1589-ten league from thence we anchor again and stay all that night in ten fathom water . the 9 we set sail , and all alongst the shore be very thick wood , and in the afternoon we be thwart a river , and to the eastward of the river a little way off Rio de Lagos , be a great high bush-tree as though it have no leaf , and at night we anchor with fair and temperate weather . the 10 we set sail and go east , and east and by south 14 league along the shore , which be so full of thick wood , that in my judgement a man shall have much to do to pass through they , and towards night we anchor in 7 fathom with fair weather . the both we sail east and by south , and three league from the shore we have but 5 fathom water , and all the wood upon the land be as even as if it have be cut with a pair of gardener shears , and in run of two league we discern a high tuft of tree upon the brow of a land , which show like a porpose head , and when we come at it , it be but part of the land , and a league further we see a headland very low and full of tree , and a great way from the land we have very shallow water , very shallow then we lay south into the sea , because of the sand for water-to get into the deep water , and when we find it deep , we anchor in five fathom thwart the river of Jaya , in the river mouth . the 12 in the morning we ride still in the river mouth . this day we send the pinnace and the boat on land with the merchant , but they come not again until the next morning . the shallow part of this river be towards the west , where there be but 4 fathom and a half , and it be very broad . the next morning come the boat aboard , and they also say it be Rio the Jaya . Rio de Jaya . here the currant set westward , and the eastermost land be high than the westermost . Thursday the 13 we set sail , and lie south southeast along the shore , where the tree be wonderful even , and the east shore be high than the west shore , and when we have sail 18 league we have sight of a great river , 453 then we anchor in three fathom and a half , and the Rio Benin . currant go westward . this river be the river of Benin , and two league from the main it be very shallow . the 15 we send the boat and pinnace into the river with the merchant , and after that we set sail , because we ride in shallow water , and go southsoutheast , and the starboard tack aboard until we come to five fathom a currant water , where we ride with the currant to the westward : westward . then come our boat out of the harbour and go aboard the pinnace . the west part of the land be high browed much like the head of a Gurnard , and the eastermost land be low , and have on it three tuft of tree like stack of wheat or corn , and the next day in the morning we see but two of those tree , by reason that we go more to the eastward . and here we ride still from the 14 of February until the 14 of April , with the wind at Southwest . the 16 of February we ride still in 5 fathom , and the currant run still to the westward , the wind at Southwest , and the boat and pinnace come to we again tenfoote out of the river , and tell we that there be but ten foot t^b^tof water upon the bar . all that night be drowsy , and Rio de Benin . reasonable temperate . the 17 a close day the wind at Southwest . our merchant weigh their good and put they aboard the pinnace to go into the river , and there come a great currant out of the river and set to the westward . the 18 the merchant go with the boat and pinnace into the river with their commodity . this day be close and drowsy , with thunder , rain and lightning . the 24 a close morning and temperate , and in they . afternoon the boat come to we out of the river from our merchant . Tuesday the 4 of march , a close sultry hot morning , the currant go to the westward , and much trouble water come out of the river . the 16 our pinnace come a board and Anthony Ingram in she , and she bring in her 94 bag of pepper , 454 and 28 elephant tooth , and the master of she and all his company be sick . this be a temperate day and the wind at Southwest . the 17. 18. and 19 be fair temperate weather and the wind at Southwest . this day the pinnace go into the river again , and carry the purser and the surgeon . the 25 of the say month 1589 we send the boat into the river . the 30 our pinnace come from Benin , and bring sorrowful news , that Thomas Hemsted be dead and our captain also , and she bring with her 159 ceron or sack of pepper and elephant tooth . note that in all the time of our abide here , in the mouth of the river of Benin , and in all the coast hereabout it be fair temperate weather , when the wind be at Southwest . and when the wind be at north-east and northerly , than it rain , with lightning and thunder , and be very intemperate weather . the 13 of April 1589 we set sail homeward in the name of Jesus . in the morning we sail with the wind at Southwest , and lie west and by north , but it prove calm all that night , and the currant southeast . the 14 the river of Benin be Northeast 7 league from the shore , and there be little wind and towards night calm . the 17 a fair temperate day the wind variable , and we have of latitude four degree and 20 minute . the 25 a fair temperate day the wind variable , and here we have three degree and 29 minute of latitude . the 8 of may we have sight of the shore , which be part of cavo de monte , but we do not think we have be so far , but it come so to pass by reason of the currant . in this place m. Towrson be in like manner deceive with the currant . the 9 we have sight of cavo de monte . the 17 a dark drowsy day , this be the first night that i take the north star . 455 A.D. 1589. [ ii two . 128. ] sickness among our man . the death of the captain . Pepper and elephant tooth . a good note . a deceitpfull currant . the 26 a temperate day with little wind , and we be in 12 degree and 13 minute of latitude . the 30 we meet a great sea out of they northwest . the 6 of June we find it as temperate as if we have be in England , and yet we be within the height of the sun , for it be decline 23 degree , and 26 minute to the northward , and we have 15 degree of latitude . the 8 fair and temperate as in England , here we meet with a counter sea , out of the southborde . the 15a fair temperate day , the wind variable , here we have 18 degree and fifty nine minute . Rockweed or the 12 of July in 30 degree of latitude we meet with Sa^aSa^°al1 great store of rockwee , which do stick together like a hang t e sea . cjusjers o£ grapesj and this continue with we until the 17 of the say month , and then we see no more , at which 17 day we be in two and thirty degree six and forty minute of latitude . the 25 at six of the clock in the morning , we have sight of the isle of pike , it bear north and by east from we , we be 15 league off . the 27 we speak with the post of London and she tell we good news of England . the nine and twenty we have sight of the island of Cuervo , and the 30 we see the island of Flores . the 27 of August in 41 degree of latitude we see 9 sail of Briton , and three of they follow we until noon , and then give we over . the 30 we have sight of cape Finisterre . the eight of September at night we put into plymouth sound , and ride in Causon bay all night . the 9 we put into Catwater and there stay until the 28 of September , by reason of want of man and sickness . the nine and twenty we set sail from Plymouth , and arrive at London the second of October 1589. the commodity that we carry in this voyage be cloth both linen and woollen , iron work of sundry sort , 456 ... 15891 manillio or bracelet of copper , glass bead , and coral . the commodity that we bring home be pepper and elephant tooth , oil of palm , cloth make of cotton wool very curious weave , and cloth make of the bark of palm tree . their money be pretty white [ ii two . 129. ] shell , for gold and silver we see none . they have also great store of cotton grow : their bread be a kind of root , they call it Inamia , and when it be well sodden Inamla , akind i will leave our bread to eat of it , it be pleasant in °fbrfa < lin eat , and light or digestion , the root thereof be as big as a man arm . our man upon fish-day have rather eat the root with oil and vinegar , than to eat good stockfish . there be great store of palm tree , out of the which they gather great store of wine , wine °f which wine be white and very pleasant , and we shall buy tiee it two gallon of it for 20 shell . they have good store of soap , and it smell like beat violet . also many pretty fine mat and basket that they make , and spoon of elephant tooth very curious wrought with diverse proportion of fowl and beast make upon they . there be upon the coast wonderful great lightning and thunder , in so much as i never hear the like in no country , for it will make the deck or hatch tremble under our foot , and before we be well acquaint with it , we be fearful , but God be thank we have no harm . the people be very gentle and love , and they go naked both man and woman until they be marry , and then they go cover from the middle down to the abundance of knee . they will bring our man earthen pot of honey . the quantity of two gallon , full of honey and honey thispreser-combe for 100 shell . they will also bring great va11 ™ 6 ™ store of orange and plantan which be a fruit that cast into a grow upon a tree , and be very like unto a Cucumber hogshead of but very pleasant in eat . it have please God of water an his merceifull goodness to give i the knowledge how to preserve fresh water with little cost , which do serve the author tell we six month at the sea , and when we come into Plim - i . 457 the english voyage mouth it be much wonder at , of the principal man of the town , who say that there be not sweet water in any spring in Plymouth . thus do God provide for his creature , unto who be praise now and for evermore , amen . the voyage set forth by m. John Newton , and m. John bird merchant of London to the kingdom and city of Benin in Africa , with a ship call the Richard of Arundel , and a pinnace , in the year 1588. brief set down in this letter follow , write by the chief factor in the voyage to the foresay merchant at the time of the ship first arrival at Plymouth . orshipful sir , the discourse of our whole proceed in this voyage will ask more time and a person in better health than i be at this present , so that i trust you will pardon i , till my come up to you : in the mean time let this suffice . whereas we depart in the month of December from the coast of England with your good ship the Richard of Arundel and the pinnace , we hold on our direct course towards our appoint port , and the 14 day of February follow our arrive in the haven of Benin , where we find not water enough to carry the ship over the bar , so that we leave she without in the road , and with the pinnace and ship boat , into which we have put the chief of our merchandise , we go up the river to a place call Goto , where we arrive the 20 of February , the foresay Goto be the near place that we can come to by water , to go for Benin . from thence we present send negro to the king , to certify he of our arrival , and of the cause of our come thither : who return to we again the 22 day with a noble man in their 458 