the english voyage mouth it be much wonder at , of the principal man of the town , who say that there be not sweet water in any spring in Plymouth . thus do God provide for his creature , unto who be praise now and for evermore , amen . the voyage set forth by m. John Newton , and m. John bird merchant of London to the kingdom and city of Benin in Africa , with a ship call the Richard of Arundel , and a pinnace , in the year 1588. brief set down in this letter follow , write by the chief factor in the voyage to the foresay merchant at the time of the ship first arrival at Plymouth . orshipful sir , the discourse of our whole proceed in this voyage will ask more time and a person in better health than i be at this present , so that i trust you will pardon i , till my come up to you : in the mean time let this suffice . whereas we depart in the month of December from the coast of England with your good ship the Richard of Arundel and the pinnace , we hold on our direct course towards our appoint port , and the 14 day of February follow our arrive in the haven of Benin , where we find not water enough to carry the ship over the bar , so that we leave she without in the road , and with the pinnace and ship boat , into which we have put the chief of our merchandise , we go up the river to a place call Goto , where we arrive the 20 of February , the foresay Goto be the near place that we can come to by water , to go for Benin . from thence we present send negro to the king , to certify he of our arrival , and of the cause of our come thither : who return to we again the 22 day with a noble man in their 458 .. i589‘ company to bring we up to the city , and with 200 negro to carry our commodity : hereupon the 23 day we deliver our merchandise to the king factor , and the 25 day we come to the great city of Benin , the great where we be well entertain : the six and twenty cttte °fbentn-day we go to the court to have speak with the king , which ( by reason of a solemn feast then keep among they ) we can not do : but yet we speak with his veadore , or chief man , that have the deal with the Christians : and we confer with he concern our trade , who answer we , that we shall have all thing to our desire , both in pepper and elephant tooth . the first of march we be admit to the king presence , and he make we the like courteous answer for our traffic : the next day we go again to the court , where the foresay Veadore show we one basket of green pepper , and another of dry in the stalk : we desire to have it pluck from the stalk and make clean , who answer , that it will ask time , but yet it shall be do : and that against ■ another year it shall be in better readiness , and the reason why we find it so unprepared be , because in this king time no Christians have ever resort thither , to lade pepper . the next day there be send we 12 basket , and so a little every day until the 9 of march at which time we have make upon 64 seron of pepper , and 28 elephant tooth . in this time of our be at Benin ( our nature at this first time not so well acquaint with that climate ) we fall all of we into the disease of the fever , whereupon the captain send i down with those good which we already have receive , to the rest of our man at Goto : where be arrive , i find all the man of our pinnace sick also , and by reason of their weakness not able to convey the pinnace and good down to the place where our ship [ ii two . 150. ] road : but by good hap within two hour after my come to Goto , the boat come up from the ship , 459 to see how all thing stand with we , so that i put the good into the boat , and go down towards the sister ip• but by that time i be come aboard , many of our man die : namely , master Benson , the Cooper , the carpenter , and 3 or 4 more , and my self be also in such a weak state that i be not able to return again to Benin . whereupon i send up Samuel Dunne , and the chirurgeon with he to our man , that be about to let they blood , if it be think needful ! : who at their come to Benin , find the captain and your son William bird dead , and Thomas hempsteede very weak , who also die within two day after their come thither . this sorrowful accident cause they with such pepper and tooth , as they can then find , speedy to return to the ship , as by the cargason will appear : at their come away the veadore tell they , that if they can or will stay any long time , he will use all possible expedition to bring in more commodity : but the common sickness so increase and continue among we all , that by the time our man which remain be come aboard , we have so many sick and dead of our company , that we look all for the same hap , and so think to loose both our ship , life , country and all . very hardly and with much ado can we get up our anchor , but yet at the last by the mercy of God have get they up , but leave our pinnace behind we , we get to sea , and set sail , which be upon the 13 of April . after which by little and little our man begin to gather up their crumb and to recover some better strength : and so sail betwixt the island of cape Verde , and the main we come to the island of the azore upon the 25 of July , where our man begin a fresh to grow ill , and diverse die , among who Samuel Dun be one , and as many as remain living be in a hard case : but in the midst of our distress , it fall so well out , by God good providence , that we meet with your ship the bark burr , on this side the north cape , 460 1590. which do not only keep we good company , but also send we six fresh man aboard , without who help , we shall sure have taste of many inconvenience . but by this good mean we be now at the last arrive in Plymouth , this 9 day of September : and for want of better health at this time , i refer the further knowledge of more particularity , till my coming to London . you to command Anthony Ingram . the second voyage to Benin , set forth by master John Newton , and master John bird merchant of London in the year 1590 with a ship call the Richard of Arundel of the burden of one hundred ton , and a small pinnace , in which voyage master James welsh be chief master . he three of September 1590 we set sail from Ratcliff , and the 18 of the say month we come into Plymouth sound , and the two and twenty we put to sea again , and at midnight we be off the lisart , and so pass on our voyage until the 14 of October , on which day we have sight of Forteventura one of the canary island , which appear very ragged as we sail by it . the 16 of October , in the latitude of 24 degree and nine minute we meet with a great hollow sea , the like whereof i never see on this coast , and this day there come to the ship side a monstrous great fish ( i think it be a Gobarto ) which put up his head to the steep tub where you cook be in shift the victual , who i think the fish will have carry away . the 21 in this latitude of 18 degree we meet with a countersea out of the north board , and the last 461 