king to his desert . and so our lord keep you in his safeguard . write at our royal court in Morocco , which God maintain , the 20. day of the month Remodan , anno | | 996. ^ / / 2^1587 . 77 the queen majesty letter to the emperor of Morocco . the queen letter to the emperor . Uy alto , y muy poderoso signior , aviendo entendido de part de nuestro agent la mucha aficion , y volontad , que nos teney , y quanta honra , y favour le hazey por amor nuestro , para dar nos tanto mayor testimonio de vuestra amistad , hemos recebido de lo uno y de lo otro muy grande contento , y satisfaction : in assy no podemo dexar de agradesceroslo , como mereceys . vues-tras cartas hemos tambien recibido , y con ellas holga-donos infinitamente , por venir de part de un principe , a quien tenemos tanta obligation . Nuestro agent nos ha escripto sober ciertas cosas , que desseay ser os embiada de aqui : y , aunque queriamo poder os en ello puntualmente complazer , como pidiz , ha succedido , que las guerras , en que stamo all present occupada , no nos lo consienten deal todo : hemo perd mandado , que se os satisfaga en parte , y conform a lo que por agora la necessitad nos permit , common mass particularment os lo declarara nuestro agent : esperando , que lo reciberreys en bvena parte y conform all animo , con que os lo concedemos . y porque nos ha sido referido , que avey prometido de proceder contra un Juan Herman vassallo nuestro , ( el qual nos ha gravemente offendido ) de la manera , que os lo demandaremos , avemos dado orden a nuestro dicho agent de deziros mass parcularmente lo que desseamo ser hecho a cerca deste negocio , rogando os , que lo mandey assi com-plir : y que seays servido de favorescer siempre all dicho agent , y tener lo en buen credito , como hasta agora avey hecho , sin permiter , que nadie os haga mudar 43 2 1587-de parece a cerca de las calumnias , que le podran levantar , ny dudar , que no complamo muy por entero todo , lo que de nuestra parte os prometiere . Nuestro signior guard vostra muy alta y muy poderosa persona . Hecha en nuestra corte real de Grenewich a 20. de Julio 1587. the same in english . ight high and mighty prince , have understand from our agent the great affection and good will which you bear we , and how great honour and favour you show he for our sake , to the end to give we more ample testimony of your friendship , we have receive very great contentment and satisfaction , aswell of the one as of the other : and withal we can not omit to magnify you , accord to your desert . we have also receive your letter , and do not a little rejoice thereof , because they come from a prince unto who we be so much behold . our agent have write unto we concern certain thing which you desire to be send unto you from hence . and albeit we wish that we can particular satisfy you , as you desire , yet it be fall out , that the war , wherein at this present we be busy , will not suffer we full to do the same : nevertheless , we have command to satisfy you in part , and [ il two . 120. ] accord as the present necessity do permit we , as our agent will declare unto you more particular , hope you will receive it in good part , and accord to the good will wherewith we grant the same . and because it have be signify unto we that you have promise to proceed in justice against one John Herman John Herman our subject , which have grievous offend we , in such a ” be sort as we have send word unto you , we have give * order to our say agent to inform you more particular in that which we desire to be do in this business , pray you also to command the same to be vi 433 2 e the governor of . Michael take prisoner . the english voyage put in execution : and that it will please you always to favour our say agent and to hold he jn good credit , as you have do hitherto , not suffer your self to be change in your opinion , for all the false report which they may raise against he , nor to doubt that we will not accomplish at large all that he shall promise you on our behalf . our lord keep and preserve your right high and mighty person . write in our royal court at Greenwich the 20. of July 1587. a voyage to the azore with two pinnace , the one call the serpent , and the other the mary spark of Plymouth , both of they belong to sir Walter Ralegh , write by John Evesham gentleman , wherein be take the governor , of the isle of saint Michael , and Pedro Sarmiento governor of the strait of magalane , in the year 1586. he 10. of June 1586. we depart from Plymouth with two pinnace , the one name the serpent , of the burden of 35. ton , and the other the mary spark of Plymouth of the burden of 50. tun , both of they belong to sir Walter Ralegh knight ; and direct our course towards the coast of Spain , and from thence towards the isle of the azore , we take a small bark lade with sumacke and other commodity , wherein be the governor of saint Michael island , be a Portugal , have other Portugal and Spaniard with he . and from thence we sail to the island of Graciosa , to the westward of the island of Tercera , where we descry a sail , and bear with she we find she to be a Spaniard : but at the first not great respect who we take , so that we may have enrich our self , which be the cause of this our travail , and for that we will not be know of 434 