114 Portugal : slay in Angola . Amasanguano the Portugal ; abode in Angola . a advertisement send to fillip the second king of Spain from Angola by one Baltazar Almeida de Sousa , touch the state of the foresay country , write the 21 of may , 1591. he 26 of July i certify your majestic by John Frere de Bendanha your majesty paymaster and commissioner , with the governor Paulo Dias , which be late decease , of all thing that happen the 28 of December in the year last past 1590. now 1 thought it con - venient to advertise your majesty what have fall out since that time , which be as follow . the governor Luis Serrano encamp himself eight league from Cabasa , where the negro king dwell , with 350 Portugal soldier : and afterward be there encamp , it happen that the king of Matamba send a strong and mighty army , and in warlike manner , with strange invention for the say purpose . So the king of Angola give this other king battle , and the governor send 114 soldier Portugal to - help they say king of Angola : in which battle it be the will of God that our army be overthrow and all slay , as well our Portugal as the moor which take part with they . so with this overthrow it happen that this realm the second time have rebel against your majesty . hereupon the governor assemble the rest of his Portugal soldier , to the number of 250 altogether , go to Amasanguano , which be now his place of abode . Moreover , beside the manifold loss which have befall the Portugal in this realm , your majesty have sustain other great misfortune both in your land and good . and because i can personal come to certify your majesty thereof , i think it good to write some part of the same whereby your majesty may understand the estate of this country . this realm , for the most 468 part thereof have twice be win , and twice lose for want of good government . for here have be many governor which have pretend to do justice , but have pitiful neglect the same , and practise the clean contrary . and this i know to be most true . but the only way to recover this realm , and to augment your majesty land , good and treasure , must be by send some noble and mighty man to rule here , which must bring authority from your majesty , and by take strait order that every captain which do conquer here may be reward accord to his desert . likewise your majesty must send hither 2000 good soldier , with munition and sufficient store of provision for they . and by this mean your highness shall know what yearly revenue Angola will yield unto your coffer , and what profit will grow thereof . otherwise your majesty shall reap but little benefit here . if with my presence i may do your majesty any service in give information of the state of this realm , as one which have have experience thereof , and have see the order of it , upon the understanding of your majesty pleasure herein , i will do my best endeavour . and the cause wherefore i have not do this heretofore have be , by reason that the governor of this realm will suffer none of the captain which have conquer this country to inform your majesty of that which be needful for your service , and the augment of this conquest . our lord preserve your catholic person with increase of many kingdom , and the augmentation of your crown . write in the conquest of the realm of Angola the 21 of May 1591. your majesty most loyal subject , Baltazar Almeida de Souza . 469 A.D. 1591. the only way to reduce a rebellious kingdom unto obedience . a usual trick of lewd governor . [ A true 