1590. which do not only keep we good company , but also send we six fresh man aboard , without who help , we shall sure have taste of many inconvenience . but by this good mean we be now at the last arrive in Plymouth , this 9 day of September : and for want of better health at this time , i refer the further knowledge of more particularity , till my coming to London . you to command Anthony Ingram . the second voyage to Benin , set forth by master John Newton , and master John bird merchant of London in the year 1590 with a ship call the Richard of Arundel of the burden of one hundred ton , and a small pinnace , in which voyage master James welsh be chief master . he three of September 1590 we set sail from Ratcliff , and the 18 of the say month we come into Plymouth sound , and the two and twenty we put to sea again , and at midnight we be off the lisart , and so pass on our voyage until the 14 of October , on which day we have sight of Forteventura one of the canary island , which appear very ragged as we sail by it . the 16 of October , in the latitude of 24 degree and nine minute we meet with a great hollow sea , the like whereof i never see on this coast , and this day there come to the ship side a monstrous great fish ( i think it be a Gobarto ) which put up his head to the steep tub where you cook be in shift the victual , who i think the fish will have carry away . the 21 in this latitude of 18 degree we meet with a countersea out of the north board , and the last 461 voyage in this very place we have the countersea out of the south , be very calm weather as now it be also . the 24 we have sight of Cavo Verde , and the 25 we meet with a great hollow sea out of the north , which a take of a be a common sign that the wind will be northerly , northerly and so prove . wtnde ' the 15 of November we meet with three currant out of the west and northwest , one after another , with a hour time between each currant . this be in the latitude of 6 degree and 42 minute . great cur - then jg jay we meet with two other great currant rant it out of the southwest , and the 20 we see another current out of the north-east , and the 24 we have a great current out of the southsouthwest , and at 6 of the clock towards night we have 3 current more . the 27 we think that we have go at the least 2 league and a half every watch , and it fall out that we sail but one league every watch for the space of 24 hour , by mean of a great billow and current that come still out of the south . [ ii two . 131. ] the 5 of December in set the watch we cast about and lay east Northeast , and Northeast , and here in 5 degree and a half our pinnace lose we wilful . the 7 at the go down of the sun we see a great black spot in the sun , and the 8. day both at rise and set we see the like , which spot to our seem be about the bigness of a shilling , be in 5 degree of latitude , and still there come a great billow out of the southerboord . the 14 we sound and have 15 fathom water and gross red sand , and 2 league from the shore the currant set southeast along the shore with a billow still out of the southerboord . the 15 we be thwart a rock somewhat like the Mewstone in England , it be 2 league from we , here we sound and have 27 fathom , but the rock be not two rock . above a mile from the shore , and a mile far we see another rock , and between they both break 462 1590. ground ; here we sound and have but 20 fathom and black sand , and we may see plain that the rock go not along the shore , but from the land to the seaward , and about 5 league to the southward we see a great bay , here we have 4 degree and 27 minute . the 16 we meet with a french ship of Hunfleur , a french ship who rob our pin ness , we send a letter by he , and Hunfleur . this night we see another spot in the sun at his go down . and towards evening we be thwart of a river , and right over the river be a high tuft of tree . the 17 we anchor in the river mouth , and then we find the land to be cavo de las Palmas , and give between we and the cape be a great ledge of rock , palmas-one league and a half into the sea , and they bear to the west of the cape , we see also a island off the point of the foreland , thus it wax night that we can perceive no more of the land , but only that it trend in like a bay , where there run a stream as if it be in the river of Thames , and this be the change day of the moon . the 19 a fair temperate day , and the wind south , we go east , and the land a stern of we west , and it show low by the water side like island , this be the east of cavo de las Palmas , and it trend in with a great sound , and we go east all night , and in the morning we be but 3 or 4 league from the shore . the 20 we be thwart of a river call Rio de los barbos . barbos - the 21 we go along the shore east , and 3 or 4 league to the west of cavo de tres puntas , i find the bay to be set deep than it be by 4 league , and at 4 of the clock the land begin to show high , and the first part of it full of palm tree . the 24 still go by the shore , the land be very low and full of tree by the water side , and at 12 of the clock we anchor thwart of the river call , Rio de Rio de boila Boilas . here we send our boat a shore with the mar - 463 Januarie . villa long . Rio de Lagoa . the english voyage chant , but they dare not put into the river because of a great billow that continual break at the entrance upon the bar . the 28 we sail alongst the shore , and anchor at night in seven fathom because a great current will have put we back , which come from the east southeast from Papuas . the 29 at noon we be thwart of Arda , and there we take a caravel but the man be flee on land , than we go aboard she , but she have nothing in she but only a little oil of palm tree , and a few root . the next morning our captain and merchant go to meet Portugal , that come in a boat to speak with we , where they commune about the buy of the caravel of our man again , and the Portugal promise that we shall have for the caravel , certain bullock and elephant tooth , and they give we one tooth and one bullock present , and say they will bring we the rest the next day . the first of Januarie our captain go on land to speak with the Portugal , but when he see they do dissemble , he come aboard again , and present we unrig the caravel , and set she on fire before the town . than we set sail and go along the coast , where we see a date tree , the like whereof be not in all that coast upon the water side , also we fall on ground a little in one place : thus we go to villa long , and there anchor . the three we be as far shoot as Rio de Lagoa , where our merchant go a shore and upon the bar they find 3 fathom flat , but they go not in because it be late . there be also to the eastward of this river a date tree high than all the rest of the other tree thereabouts . thus we go along the coast , and every night anchor , and all the shore as we go be full of tree and thick wood . the 6 day in the morning it be very foggy , so that we can not see the land , and at three of the clock in the afternoon it clear up , and then we find our 464 1591. self thwart of the river of Jaya , and when we find the river of the shallow water , we bear into the sea south , as we do the voyage before , and come to a anchor in five fathom water . the next day we set sail again , and towards noon we be thwart of the river of Benin in the river of four fathom water . Benin . the 10 day our captain go on land with the shall - [ ii two . 132. ] lop at 2 a clock in the afternoon . all this week it be very foggy every day until ten a clock , and all this time hitherto have be as temperate as our summer in England . this day we go into the road and anchor , and the west point of the road bare east north-east off we , we ride in four fathom water . the 21 a fair temperate day , this day m. Hassald go to the town of Goto , to hear news of the Goto . captain . the 23 come the caravel , and Samuell in she , and the caravel she bring 63 elephant tooth , and three bullock . aboord^ the 28 a fair temperate day , and towards night there ' fell much rain , lightning , and thunder , this day our boat come aboard from Goto . the 24 of February , we take in 298 ceron or z98 - smh of sack of pepper , and 4 elephant tooth , and the wind be at southeast . and the 26 we put the rest of our good into the caravel , and m. Hassald go with she to Goto . the 5 of march you caravel come again and bring 21 ceron of pepper , and 4 elephant tooth . the 9 of April our caravel come aboard with water for our provision for the sea , and this day also we lose our shallope . the 17a drowsy rainy day , and in the afternoon three spout . we see 3 great spout of rain , two on our larboard side , and one right with the ship head , but God be thank , they come not at we , and this day we take in the last of our water for the sea , and the 26 we victual our caravel to go with we to the sea . they return the 27 we set sail to go homeward with the wind homeward . vi 465 2 g we depart in company of a prize . Corvo . the english voyage at Southwest , and at two a clock in the afternoon , the river of Benin be Northeast 8 league from we . the 3 of may we have such a terrible gust with rain , lightning and thunder , that it tear and split our fore sail , and also the caravel foresail and maine-sail , with the wind at southeast . the 12 a fair temperate day , much like our summer morning in England , be but one degree and a half from the line , but at midnight we have a cruel gust of rain , and the wind at north-east . the 24 we be south from cavo de las Palmas 37 league . the first of July we have sight of the island of Brava , and it bear east 7 league off , and this island be one of the island of Cavo Verde . the 13 of August we speak with the queen ship , the lord Thomas Howard be admiral , and sir Richard greenevill vice-admiral . they keep we in their company until the 15 day at night , themselves lie a hull , in weight for purchase 30 league to the southwest of the island of Flores . the 15 we have leave to depart with a flyboat lade with sugar that come from Sant Thome , which be take by the queen ship , whereof my lord admiral give i great charge , not to leave she until she be harbour in England . the three and twenty the north-east part of the island of Corvo bear off we east and by south six league off . the 17 of September we meet with a ship of Plymouth that come out of the west Indies , but she can tell we no news . the next day we have sight of another sail , this day also one of our company name m. wood die . the 23 we speak with the dragon of my lord of Cumberland , whereof master ivy be master . the second of October we meet with a ship of Newcastle which come from Newfoundland , and out of she we have 300 couple of Newland fish . the 6 we have sight of silly , and with rain and wind 466 .. i591-we be force to put into saint Mary sound , where we stay all night , and 4 day after . the both we set sail again , and come out have three fathom upon the bar at a high water , than we lay out southeast , through crow-sand , and short after we have sight of the land end , and at ten of the clock we be thwart of the Lysart . the 13 we be put into Dartmouth , and there we stay until the 12 of December . from thence we put out with the wind at west , and the 18 of December , God be praise , we anchor at limehouse in the Thames , where we discharge 589 sack of pepper , 150 elephant tooth , and 32 barrel of oil of palm tree . the commodity that we carry out this second voyage be broad cloth , kersey , bay , linen cloth , iron unwrought , bracelet of copper , coral , hawk bell , horsetaile , hat , and such like . this voyage be more comfortable unto we then the first , because we have good store of fresh water , and that very sweet : for as yet we have very good water in the ship which we bring out of the river of Benin the [ ii two . 133. ] first day of April 1591. and it be at this day ( be the 7 of June 1592. ) to be see aboard the ship as clear and as sweet as any fountain can yield . in this voyage we sail 350 league within half of it be more degree of the equinoctial line , and there we find it « « ' more temperate , then where we ride . and under the line we do kill great store of small Delphines , and on the ’coast of many other good fish , and so do we all the way , guinie and which be a very great refresh unto we , and the fish benin-neve forsake we , until we be to the northward of the hand of azore , and then we can see no more fish , but God be thank we meet with good company of our country ship which be great comfort unto we , be five month before at sea without any company . by i James Welsh master of the Richard of Arundel , in both these voyage to the river of Benin . 467 