[ 11. two . 134. ] a true discourse write ( as be think ) by colonel Antony Winkfield employ in the voyage to Spain and Portugal , 1589. send to his particular friend , and by he publish for the better satisfaction of all such as have be seduce by particular report , have enter into conceit tend to the discredit of the enterprise and actor of the same . Lthough the desire of advance my reputation cause i to withstand the many persuasion you use to hold i at home , and the pursuit of honourable action draw i ( contrary to your expectation ) to neglect that advise , which in love i know you give i : yet in respect of the many assurance you have yield i of your kind friendship , i can suspect that you will either love or esteem i the less , at this my return : and therefore i will not omit any occasion which may make i appear thankful , or discharge any part of that duty i owe you ; which now be none other then to offer you a true discourse how these war of Spain and Portugal have pass since our go out of England the 18 of April , till our return which be the first of July . wherein i will ( under your favourable pardon ) for your further satisfaction , as well make relation of those reason which confirm i in my purpose of go abroad , as of these accident which have happen during our abode there ; thereby hope to persuade you that no light fancy do draw i from the fruition of your dear friendship , but a earnest desire , by follow the war to make my self more worthy of the same . have therefore determinate purpose to put on this habit of a soldier , 1 grow doubtful whether to employ my time in you war of the low country , which 470 be in auxiliary manner maintain by her majesty , or to follow the fortune of this voyage , which be a adventure of she and many honourable personage , in revenge of un supportable wrong offer unto the estate of our country by the castilian king : in argue whereof , i find that by how much the challenger be repute before the defendant , by so much be the journey to be prefer before those defensive war . for have the duke of Parma his turn be to defend , as it be his good fortune to invade : from whence can have proceed that glorious honour which these late war have lay upon he , or what can have be say more of he , then of a respondent ( though never so valiant ) in a private duel ? Even , that he have do no more than by his honour he be tie unto . for the gain of one town or any small defeat give more renown to the assailant , than the defence of a country , or the withstand of twenty encounter can yield any man who be bind by his place to guard the same : whereof as well the particular of our age , especial in the Spaniard , as the report of former history may assure we , which have still lay the fame of all war upon the invader . and do not we in these day live obscure in Flanders , either not have wherewithal ! to manage any war , or not put on arm , but to defend themselves when the enemy shall procure they ? whereas in this short time of our adventure , we have win a town by escalade , batter and assault another , overthrow a mighty prince power in the field , land our army in 3 several place of his kingdom , march 7 day in the heart of his country , lie three night in the suburb of he principali city , beat his force into the gate thereof , and possess two of his frontier fort , as shall in discourse thereof more particular appear : whereby i conclude , that go with a invader , and in such a action as every day give new experience , i have much to vaunt of , that my fortune do rather carry i thither then into the war of Flanders . 471 notwithstanding the vehement persuasion you use with i to the contrary , the ground whereof since you receive they from other , you must give i leave to acquaint you with the error you be lead into , by they , who labour to bring the world into a opinion that it stand more with the safety of our estate to bend all our force against the prince of Parma , than to follow this action by look into the true effect of this journey , will judicial convince themselves of mistake the matter . for , may the conquest of these country against the prince of Parma be think more easy for we alone now , than the defence of they be 11 year ago , with the man and money of the queen of England ? the power of the monsieur of France ? the assistance of the principal state of Germany ? and the nobility of their own country ? can not a army of more than 20000 horse , and almost 30000 foot , beat don John de Austria out of the country , who be possess of a very few frontier town ? and shall it now be lay upon her majesty shoulder to remove so mighty a enemy , who have leave we but 3 whole part of 17 unconquered ? it be not a journey of a few month , nor a auxiliary war of few year that can damnify the king of Spain in those place where we shall meet at every 8 or 10 mile end with a town , which will cost more the win then will yearly pay 4 or 5 thousand man wage , where all the country be quarter by river which have no passage unfortified , and where [ ii two . 135. ] most of the best soldier of Christendom that be on our adverse party be in pension . but our army , which have not cost her majesty much above the three part of one year expense in the low country , have already spoil a great part of the provision he have make at the groin of all sort , for a new voyage into England ; burn 3 of his ship , whereof one be the second in the last year expedition call S. Juan de Colorado , take from he above 150 piece of good artillery ; cut off more than 60 hulk and 20 french ship well man fit and 472 ready to serve he for man of war against we , lade for his store with corn , victual , mast , cable and other merchandize ; slay and take the principal man of war he have in galitia ; make don Pedro Enriques de Gusman , Conde de Fuentes , generali of his force in Portugal , shameful run at Peniche ; lay along of his best commander in Lisbon ; and by these few adventure discover how easy her majesty may without any great adventure in short time pull the tyrant of the world upon his knee , as well by the disquiet his usurpation of Portugal as without difficulty in keep the commodity of his Indies from he , by send a army so accomplish , as may not be subject to those extremity which we have endure : except he draw , for those defence , his force out of the low country and disfurnish his garrison of Naples and Milan , which with safety of those place he may not do . and yet by this mean he shall rather be enforce thereunto , then by any force that can be use there against he : wherefore i direct conclude that this proceed be the most safe and necessary way to be hold against he , and therefore more import than the war in the low country . yet have the journey ( i know ) be much mislike by some , who either think too worthy of the Spaniard valour , too indifferent of his purpose against we , or too unworthy of they that undertake this journey against he , do think it a thing dangerous to encounter the Spaniard at his own home , a thing ' needless to proceed by invasion against he , a thing of too great moment for two subject of their quality to undertake : and therefore do not so advance the beginning as though they hope for any good success thereof . the chance of war be thing most uncertain : for what people soever undertake they , they be in deed as chastisement appoint by God for the one side or the other . for which purpose it have please he to give some victory to the Spaniard of late year against some who he have in purpose to ruin . but if we con - 473 sider what war they be that have make their name so terrible , we shall find they to have be none other then against the barbarous moor , the naked Indians , and the unarm netherlander , who yield rather to the name then act of the Spaniard , have put they into such a conceit of their mightiness , as they have considerate undertake the conquest of our monarchic , consist of a people unite and always hold sufficient warlike : against who what success their invincible army have the last year , as our very child can witness , so i doubt not but this voyage have sufficient make know what they be even upon their own dunghill , which , have it be set out in such sort as it be agree upon by their first demand , it may have make our nation the most glorious people of the world . for have not the want of 8 of the 12 piece of artillery , which be promise unto the adventure , lose her majesty the possession of the groin and many other place , as hereafter shall appear , who defensible rampire be great than our battery ( such as it be ) can force : and therefore be leave unattempted ? it be also resolve to have send 600 english horse of the low country , whereof we have not one , notwithstanding the great charge expend in their transportation hither : and that may the army assemble at Puente de Burgos thank God of , as well as the force of Portugal , who foreran we 6 day together : do we not want 7 of the 13 old company , which we shall have have from thence ; four of the 10 dutch company ; and 6 of their man of war for the sea , from the Hollander : which i may just say we want , in that we may have have so many good soldier , so many good ship , and so many able body more than we have ? do there not upon the first think of the journey diverse gallant courtier put in their name for adventurer to the sum of 10000 livre . who see it go forward in good earnest , advise themselves better , and lay the want of so much money upon the journey ? 474 was there not moreover a round sum of the adventure spend in levy , furnish , and maintain 3 month 1500 man for the service of Berghen , with which company the mutiny of Ostend be suppress , a service of no small moment ? what misery the detract of the time of our set out , which shall have be the 1 of February , do lay upon we , too many can witness : and what extremity the want of that month victual which we do eat , during the month we lie at Plymouth for a wind , may have drive we unto , no man can doubt of , that know what man do live by , have not God give we in the end a more prosperous wind and short passage into galitia then have be often see , where our own force and fortune revictual we large : of which cross wind , that hold we two day after our go out , the general be weary , thrust to sea in the same , wise choose rather to attend the change thereof there , then by be in harbour to lose any part of the better , when it shall [ ii two . 136. ] come by have their man on shore : in which two day 25 of our company ship in part of the fleet be scatter from we , either not be able or willing to double Ushant . Theise burden lay upon our general before their go out , they have patient endure , and i think they have thereby much enlarge their honour : for have do thus ' much with the want of our artillery , 600 horse , 3000 foot , 20000 livre . of their adventure , and one month victual of their proportion , what may be conjecture they will have do with their full compliment ? for the loss of our man at sea , since we can lay it on none but the will of God , what can be say more , than that it be his pleasure to turn all those impediment to the honour of they against who they be intend : and he will still show himself the lord of host in do great thing by they , who many have seek to obscure : who if they have let the action fall at the height thereof in respect of those defect , which be such 475 especial for the service at land , as will have make a mighty subject stoop under they , i do not see how any man can just have lay any reproach upon he who command the same , but rather have lament the iniquity of this time , wherein man who foreign country have for their conduct in service worthy esteem of , shall not only in their own country not be second in their honourable endeavour , but mighty hinder , even to the impair of their own estate , which most willing they have adventure for the good of their country : who ' worth i will not value by my report , lest i shall seem guilty of flattery ( which my soul abhor ) and yet come short in the true measure of their praise . only for your instruction against they who have almost seduce you from the true opinion you hold of such man , you shall understand that general Norris from his book be train up in the war of the admiral of France , and in very young year have charge of man under the earl of Essex in Ireland : which with what commendation he then discharge , i leave to the report of they who observe those service . upon the breach betwixt don John and the state , he be make colonel generali of all you english force there present , or to come , which he continue 2 year : he be then make martial of the field under Conte Hohenlo : and after that , general of the army in Frisland : at his coming home in the time of monsieurs government in Flanders , he be make lord precedent of Munster in Ireland , which he yet hold , from whence within one year he be send for , and send generali of the english force which her majesty then lend to the low country , which he hold till the earl of leicester go over . and he be make martial of the field in England , the enemy be upon our coast , and when it be expect the crown of England shall have be try by battle . all which place of commandment which never any Englishman successive attain unto in foreign war , and the high place her majesty have think he 476 the Portugal voyage worthy of , may suffice to persuade you , that he be not altogether unlikely to discharge that which he undertook . what fame general drake have get by his journey about the world , by his adventure to the west Indies , and the scourge he have lay upon the spanish nation , i leave to the southern part to speak of , and refer you to the book extant in our own language treat of you same , and beseech you consider the weighty matter they have in all the course of their life with wonderful reputation manage , that you will esteem they not well inform of their proceed , that think they insufficient to pass through that which they undertake , especial have go thus far in the view of the world , through so many encumbrance , and disappoint of those agreement which lead they the rather to undertake the service . but it may be you will think i herein either to much opinionate of the voyage , or conceit of the commander , y‘ labour thus earnest to advance the opinion of they both , have not so much as touch any part of the misorder , weakness and want that have be among we , whereof they that return do plentiful report . true it be , i have conceive a great opinion of the journey , and do think honorable of the commander : for we find in great antiquity , that many commander have be receive home with triumph for less merit , and that our own country have honour man heretofore with admiration for adventure unequal to this : it may therefore in those day have seem superfluous to extend any man commendation by particular remembrance , for that then all man be ready to give every man his due . but i hold it most necessary in these day , sithence every virtue find her direct opposite , and action worthy of all memory be in danger to be envious obscure , to denounce the praise of the action , and actor to the full , but yet no further than with sincerity of truth , and not without grieve at the injury of this time , wherein be enforce 477 a necessity of apology for those man and matter , which all former time be accustom to entertain with the great applause that may be . but to answer the report which have be give out in reproach of the actor and action by such as be in the same : let no man think otherwise , but that they , who fear the casuali accident of war have any purpose of return , do first advise of some occasion that shall move they [ ii two . 137. ] thereunto : and have find any whatsoever do think it sufficient just , in respect of the earnest desire they have to seek out matter that may colour their coming home . of these there be some , who have note the late flemish war do find that many young man have go over and safe return soldier within few month , in have learn some word of art use in the war , and think after that good example to spend like time among we : which be expire they begin to quarrel at the great mortali tie that be among we . the neglect of discipline in the army , for that man be suffer to be drink with the plenty of wine . the scarcity of surgeon . the want of carriage for the hurt and sick : and the penury of victual in the camp : thereupon divine that there will be no good do : and that therefore they can be content to lose their time , and adventure to return home again . Theise man have either conceive well of their own wit ( who by observe the passage of the war be become sufficient soldier in these few week , and do long to be at home , where their discourse may be wonder at ) or miss of their portague and milraye which they dream on in Portugal , will rather return to their former manner of life , then attend the end of the journey . for see that one hazard bring another ; and that though one escape the bullet this day it may light upon he to morrow , the next day , or any day ; and that the war be not confine to 478 1589. any one place , but y* every place bring forth new enemy , they be glad to see some of the poor soldier fall sick , y‘ fear to be infect by they they may just desire to go home . the sickness i confess be great , because any be answer to too much . but have it be great then be ordinary thefirst-amongst Englishman at their first entrance into the war , whithersoever they go to want the fullness of their flesh pot ? have not we decay at all time in France , with eat young fruit and drink new wine ? have they not abundant perish in the low country with cold , and rawness of the air , even in their garrison ? have there not more die in London in six month of the plague , then double our army be at the strong ? and can the spanish army the last year ( who have all provision that can be think on for a army , and take the fit season in the year for our climate ) avoid sickness among their soldier ? may it then be think that we can escape there , where they find inordinate heat of weather , and hot wine to distemper they withal ? but can it be , that we have lose so many as the common sort persuade themselves we have ? it have be prove by strict examination of our muster , that we be never in our fullness before our go from Plymouth 11000. soldier , nor above 2500. mariner . it be also evident that there return above 6000. of all sort , as appear by the several payment make to they since our come home . and i have true show you that of these number very near 3000. forsake the army at the sea , whereof some pass into France and the rest return home . so as we never be 13000. in all , and have bring home above 6000. with we , you may see how the world have be seduce , in believe that we have lose i6oot > . man by sickness . to they that have make question of the government answer to of the war ( little know what appertain thereunto the 479 the english voyage in that there be so many drunkard among we ) i answer , that in their government of shire and parish , yea in their very household , themselves can hardly bridle their vassal from that vice . for we see it be a thing almost impossible , at any your fair or public assembly to find any quarter thereof sober , or in your town any alepole unfrequented : and we observe that though any man have any disorder person in their house , do lock up their drink and set butler upon it , that they will yet either by indirect mean steal themselves drink from their master table , or run abroad to seek it . if then at home in the eye of your justice , major , preacher , and master , and where they pay for every pot they take , they can be keep from their liquor : do they think that those base disorder person who themselves send unto we , as live at home without rule , who hear of wine do long for it as a dainty that their purse can never reach to in England , and have it there without money even in their house where they lie and hold their guard , can be keep from be drink ; and once drink , hold in any order or tune , except we have for every drunkard a officer to attend he ? but who be they that have run into these disorder ? Even our new man , our young man , and our idele man , and for the most part our slovenly press man , who the justice , ( who have always think unworthy of any war ) have send out as the scum and dregs of their country . and those be they , who distemper themselves with these hot wine , have bring in that sickness , which have infect honest man then themselves . but i hope , as in other place the recovery of their disease do acquaint their body with the air of the country where they be , so the remainder of these which have either recover , or pass without sickness will prove most fit for Martiali service . if we have want surgeon , may not this rather be lay upon the captain ( who be to provide for their 480 several company ) then upon the general , who care have be moor generali . and how may it be think that every captain , upon who most of the charge of raise their company be lay as a adventure , can provide themselves of all thing expedient for a war , which be always wont to be maintain by the purse of the prince . but admit every captain have his surgeon : yet be the want of cure never the less : for our english surgeon ( for the most part ) be unexperienced in hurt that come by shot ; because England have not know war but of late , from who ignorance proceed this discomfort , which i hope will warn those y‘ hereafter go to the war to make preparation of such as may better preserve man life by their skill . from whence the want of carriage do proceed , you may conjecture in y‘ we march through a country neither plentiful of such provision , nor willing to part from any thing : yet this i can assure you , that no man of worth be leave either hurt or sick in any place unprovide for . and that the general command all the mule and ass that be lade with any baggage to be unburden and take to that use : and the earl of Essex and he for money hire man to carry man upon pike . and the earl ( who true virtue and nobility , as it do in all other his action appear , so do it very much in this ) throw down his own stuff , i mean apparel and necessary which he have there , from his own carriage ; and let they be leave by the way , to put hurt and sick man upon they . of who honourable deserve i shall not need here to make any particular discourse , for that many of his action do hereafter give i occasion to observe the same . answer to the four . and the great complaint that these man make for the answer to want of victual may well proceed from their not know - the fift-ing the want of the war ; for if to feed upon good bieve , mutton and goat , be to want , they have endure great scarcity at land , whereunto they never want , two day together , wine to mix with their water , nor bread to eat vi 481 2 h with their meat ( in some quantity ) except it be such as have vow rather to starve then to stir out of their place for food : of who we have too many , who if their time have serve for it , may have see in many camp in the most plentiful country of the world for victual , man daily die with want of bread and drink in not have money to buy , nor the country yield any good or healthful water in any place ; whereas both Spain and Portugal do in every place afford the best water that may be , and much more healthful than any wine for our drink . and although some have most injurious exclaim against the small provision of victual for the sea , rather ground the same upon a evil that may have fall , than any that do light upon we : yet know you this , that there be no man so forgetful ! , that will say they want before they come to the groin , that whosoever make not very large provision for himself and his company at the groin , be very improvident , where be plentiful store of wine , beef and fish , and no man of place prohibit to lay in the same into their ship , wherewith some do so furnish themselves , as they do not only in the journey supply the want of such as be less provident than they , but in their return home make a round commodity of the remainder thereof . and that at Cascais there come in such store of provision into the fleet out of England , as no man that will have use his diligence can have want his due proportion thereof , as may appear by the remainder that be return to Plymouth , and the plentiful sale thereof make out of the merchant ship after their come into the Thames . but least encage shall seem unto you too studious in confute idle opinion , or answer frivolous question , i will address i to the true report of those action that have pass therein : wherein i protest , i will neither hide any thing that have happen against we , nor attribute more to any man or matter , than the just occasion thereof lead i unto : wherein it shall appear that there have be 482 nothing leave undo by the general which be before our go out undertake by they , but that there have be much more do then be at the first require by don Antonio , who shall have reap the fruit of our adventure . after 6 day sail from the coast of England , and our man land the 5 after we have the wind good be the 20 of April w^n in the evening , we land in a bate more than a english 2o oj mile from the groin , in our long boat and pinnace i / ril . without any impeachment : from whence we present march towards the town , within one half mile we be encounter by the enemy who be charge by we , retire into their gate . for that night our army lie in the village , house and mill next adjoin , and very near round about the town , into the which the Galeon name S. John ( which be the second of the last year fleet against England ) one hulk , two small ship and two galley which be find in the road , do beat upon we and upon our company as they pass too and fro that night and the next morning . generali Norris have that morning before day view the town , find the same defend on the land side ( for it stand upon the neck of a hand ) with a wall upon a dry ditch : whereupon he resolve to try in two place what may be do against it by escalade , and in the mean time advise [ ii two . 139. ] for the land of some artillery to beat upon the ship and galley , that they may not annoy we : which be put in execution , upon the plant of the first piece the galley abandon the road , and betake they to feroll , not far from thence : and the armada be beat with the artillery and musketeer that be place upon the next shore , leave she play upon we . the rest of the day be spend in prepare the company , and other provision ready for the surprise of the base town , which be effect in this sort . there be appoint to be land 1200 man under the conduct of colonel Huntley , and captain Fenner the vice-admiral , on that side next front we by water 483 in long boat and pinnace , wherein be place many piece of artillery to beat upon the town in their approach : at the corner of the wall which defend the other water side , be appoint captain Richard Wingfield lieutenant colonel to generali Norris , and captain Samson lieutenant colonel to generali drake to enter at low water with 500 man if they find it passable , but if not , to betake they to the escalade , for they have also ladder with they : at the other corner of the wall which join to that side that be attempt by water , be appoint colonel Umpton , and colonel bret with 300 man to enter by escalade . all the company which shall enter by boat be embark before the low water , and have give the alarm , captain Wingfield and captain Samson betake they to the escalade , for they have in commandment to charge all at one instant . the boat land without any great difficulty : yet have they some man hurt in the land . colonel Bret and colonel Umpton enter their quarter without encounter , not find any defence make against they : for captain hinder be one of they that enter by water , at his first entry , with some of his own company who he trust well , betake himself to that part of the wall , which he clear before that they offer to enter , and so still scour the wall till he come on the back of they who maintained the fight against captain Wingfield and captain Samson ; who be twice beat from their ladder , and find very good resistance , till the enemy perceive we enter in two place at their back , be drive to abandon the same . the reason why that place be long defend than the other , be ( as don Juan de Luna who command the same affirm ) that the enemy that day have resolve in council how to make their defence , if they be approach : and therein conclude , that , if we attempt it by water , it be not able to be hold , and therefore upon the discovery of our boat , they of the high town shall make a signail by fire from thence , that all the low town may make their retreat thither : 484 but they ( whether trouble with the sudden terror we bring upon they , or forget their decree ) omit the fire , which make they guard that place till we be enter on every side . then the town be enter in three several place with a huge cry , the inhabitant betake they to the high town : which they may with less peril do , for that we be stranger there , know not the way to cut they off . the rest that be not put to the sword in fury , flee to the rock in the hand , and other hide themselves in chamber and seller , which be every day find out in great number . among those don Juan de luna , a man of very good commandment , have hide himself in a house , do the next morning yield himself . there be also take that night a commissary of victual call Juan de vera , who confess that there be in the groin at our entry 500 soldier be in seven company which return very weak ( as appear by the small number of they ) from the journey of England , namely : ’ do diego Barran , a bastard son of the mark of Santa Cruz ; his company be that night in the Galeon . don Antonio de Herera then at Madrid . under don Juan de < luna . don Pedro de Manriques brother to the earl of Paxides . don Jeronimo de Mourray of the order of saint Juan , with some of the town be in the fort . don Gomez de Caramasal then at Madrid . captain man^o Caucaso de Socas . also there come in that day of our land from Retanzas the company of don Juan de Mosalle , and don Pedro pour the Leon . also he say that there be order give for bake of 300000 of biscuit , some in Batansas , some in Ribadeo , and the rest there . 485 there be then in the town 2000 pipe of wine , and 150 in the ship . that there be late come unto the mark of Seralba 300000 ducat .. that there be 1000 jar of oil . a great quantity of bean , pease , wheat , and fish . that there be 3000 quintal of beef . and that not twenty day before , there come in three bark lade with match and harquebuss . some other also find favour to be take prisoner , but the rest fall into the hand of the common soldier , have their throat cut , to the number of 500 , as i conjecture , first and last , after we have enter the town ; and in the entry thereof there be find every cellar full of wine , whereon our man , by inordinate drink , both grow themselves for the present senseless of the danger of the shot of the town , which hurt many of they be drink , and take the first ground of their sickness ; for of such be our first and chief mortality . there be also abundant store of victual , salt , and all kind of provision for ship and the war : which be confess by the say commissary of victual take there , to be the beginning of a magasin of all sort of provision for a new voyage into England : whereby you may conjecture what the spoil thereof have advantage we , and prejudice the king of Spain . the next morning about eight of the clock the enemy abandon their ship . and have overcharge the artillery of the gallion , leave she on fire , which burn in terrible sort two day together , the fire and overcharge of the piece be so great , as of fifty that be in she , there be not above sixteen take out whole ; the rest with overcharge of the powder be break , and melt with heat of the fire , be take out in break piece into diverse ship . the same day be the cloister on the south side of the town enter by we , which join very near to the wall of the town , 486 out of the chamber and other place whereof we beat into the same with our musketeer . the next day in the afternoon there come down some 2000 man , gather together out of the country , even to the gate of the town , as resolute ( lead by what spirit i know not ) as though they will have enter the same : but at the first defence make by we that have the guard there , wherein be slay about eighteen of they , they take they to their heal in the same disorder they make their approach , and with great speed than we be able to follow : notwithstanding we follow after they more than a mile . the second day colonel Huntley be send into the country with three or four hundred man , who bring home very great store of cow and sheep for our relief . the three day in the night the Gener all have in purpose to take a long munition-house build upon their wall , open towards we , which will have give we great advantage against they ; but they know the commodity thereof for we , burn it in the begin of the evening ; which put he to a new council : for he have likewise bring some artillery to that side of the town . during this time there happen a very great fire in the low end of the town ; which , have it not be by the care of the general heedily see unto , and the fury thereof prevent by pull down many house which be most in danger , as next unto they , have burn all the provision we find there , to our wonder hindrance . the four day be plant under the guard of the cloister two demy-canon , and two colvering against the town , defend or gabbion with a cross wall , through the which our battery lie ; the first and second tire whereof shake all the wall down , so as all the ordinance lie open to the enemy , by reason whereof some of the canonier be shoot and some slay . the lieutenant also of the ordinance , m. Spencer , be slay fast by sir Edward Norris , master thereof : who valour be 487 accompany with a honourable care of defend that trust commit unto he , never leave that place , till he receive direction from the generali he brother to cease the battery , which he present do , leave a guard upon the same for that day ; and in the night follow make so good defence for the place of the battery , as after there be very few or none annoy therein . that day captain Goodwin have in commandment from the generali , that when the assault shall be give to the town , he shall make a proffer of a escalade on the other side , where he hold his guard : but he ( mistake the signal that shall have be give ) attempt the same long before the assault , and be shoot in the mouth . the same day the generali have plant his ordinance ready to batter , cause the town to be summon ; in which summons they of the town shoot at our drum : immediate after that there be one hang over the wall , and a parley desire ; wherein they give we to understand , that the man hang be he that shoot at the drum before : wherein also they entreat to have fair war , with promise of the same on their part . the rest of the parley be spend in talk of don Juan de luna , and some other prisoner , and somewhat of the render of the town , but not much , for they listen not great thereunto . generali Norris have by his skilful view of the town ( which be almost all seat upon a rock ) find one place thereof mineable , do present set workman in hand withal ; who after three day labour ( and the seven after we be enter the base town ) have bed their powder , but indeed not far enough into the wall . [ ii two . 141. ] against which time the breach make by the canon be think assaultable , and company appoint as well to enter the same , as that which be expect shall be blow up by the mine : namely , to that of the canon , captain Richard Wingfield , and captain Philpot , who lead the general foot-company , with who also captain York go , who principali commandment be over 488 the horseman . and to that of the i , captain John Samson , and captain Anthony Wingfield lieutenant colonel to the master of the ordinance , with certain select out of diverse regiment . all these company be in arm , and the assault intend to be give in all place at a instant , fire be put to the train of the i ; but by reason the powder break out backwards in a place where the cave be make too high , there can be nothing do in either place for that day . during this time captain hinder be send with some choose out of every company into the country for provision , whereof he bring in good store , and return without loss . the next day captain Anthony Samson be send out with some 500 to fetch in provision for the army , who be encounter by they of the country , but he put they to flight , and return with good spoil . the same night the miner be set to work again , who by the second day after have wrought very well into the foundation of the wall . against which time the company aforesaid be in readiness for both place ( generali drake on the other side , with two or three hundred man in pinnace , make proffer to attempt a strong fort upon a hand before the town , where he leave more than thirty man ) fire be give to the train of the mine , which blow up half the tower under which the powder be plant . the assailant have in charge upon the effect of the mine present to give the assault , perform it accord : but too soon : for have enter the top of the breach , the other half of the tower , which with the first force of the powder be only shake and make loose , fall upon our man : under which be bury about twenty or thirty , then be under that part of the tower . This so amaze our man that stand in the breach , not know from whence that terror carty , as they forsake their commander , and leave they among the ruin of the mine . the two ensign of generali drake and captain Anthony Wingfield 489 be shoot in the breach , but their colour be rescue : the general by captain sampsons lieutenant , and captain Wingfields by himself . among they that the wall fall upon , be captain Sydenham pitiful lose ; who have three or four great stone upon his low part , be hold so fast , as neither himself can stir , nor any reasonable company recover he . notwithstanding the next day be find to be alive , there be ten or twelve lose in attempt to relieve he . the breach make by the canon be woonderfiil well assault by they that have the charge thereof , who bring their man to the push of the pike at the top of the breach . And be ready to enter , the loose earth ( which be indeed but the rubbish of the outside of the wall ) with the weight of they that be thereon slip outward from under their foot . whereby do appear half the wall unbattered . for let no man think that culverin or demy-canon can sufficient batter a defensible rampire : and of those piece which we have ; the better of the demy-canon at the second shot break in her carriage , so as the battery be of less force , be but of three piece . in our retreat ( which be from both breach through a narrow lane ) be many of our man hurt : and captain dolphin , who serve very well that day , be hurt in the very breach . the fail of this attempt , in the opinion of all the beholder , and of such as be of best judgement , be the fall of the i ; which have doubtless succeed , the rather , because the approach be unlooked for by the enemy in that place , and therefore not so much defence make there as in the other ; which make the generali grow to a new resolution : for find that two day battery have so little beat their wall , and that he have no better preparation to batter withal : he know in his experience , there be no good to be do that way ; which i think he first put in proof , to try if by that terror he can get the upper town , have no other 490 way to put it in hazard so speedy , and which in my conscience have obtain the town , have not the defendant be in as great peril of their life by the displeasure of their king in give it up , as by the bullet or sword in defend the same . for that day before the assault , in the view of our army , they burn a cloister within the town , and many other house adjoining to the castle , to make it more defensible : whereby it appear how little opinion themselves have of hold it against we , have not God ( who will not have we sudden make proud ) lay that misfortune upon we . hereby it may appear , that the four canon , and other piece of battery promise to the journey , and not perform , may have make her majesty mistress of the groin : for though the mine be infortunate , yet if the other breach have be such as the earth will have hold our man thereon , i do not think but they have enter it thorough at the first assault give : which have be more than i have hear of in our age . And be as it be , be no more than the prince of Parma have in win of all his town [ ii two . 142. ] endure , who never enter any place at the first assault , nor above three by assault . the next day the generali hear by a prisoner that be bring in , that the conde de Andrada have assemble a army of eight thousand at Puente de Burgos , six mile from thence in the way to petance , which be but the begin of a army ; in that there be a great leavy ready to come thither under the conde de Altemira , either in purpose to relieve the groin , or to encamp themselves near the place of our embark , there to hinder the same ; for to that purpose have the marquess of Seralba write to they both the first night of our land , as the commissary take than confess , or at the least to stop our further entrance into the country , ( for during this time , there be many incursion make of three or four hundred at a time , who burn , spoil , and 491 bring in victual plentiful ) the generali , i say , hear of this army , have in purpose the next day follow to visit they , against who he carry but nine regiment : in the vanguard be the regiment of sir Roger Williams , sir Edward Norris , and colonel Sidney : in the battle , that of the generali , of colonel lane , and colonel medkerk : and in the rearward , sir Henry Norris , colonel Huntley , and colonel bret regiment ; leave the other five regiment with generali drake , for the guard of the cloister and artillery . about ten of the clock the next day , be the sixth of May , half a mile from the camp , we discover the enemy , sir Edward Norris , who command the vanguard in chief , appoint his lieutenant colonel captain Anthony Wingfield to command the shot of the same , who divide they into three troop ; the one he appoint to captain Middleton to be conduct in a way on the left hand : another to captain Erington to take the way on the right hand , and the body of they ( which be musketeer ) captain Wingfield take himself , keep the direct way of the march . but the way take by captain Middleton meet a little before with the way hold by captain Wingfield , so as he give the first charge upon the enemy , be in the instant second by captain Wingfield , who beat they from place to place ( they have very good place of defence , and cross wall which they may have hold long ) till they betake they to their bridge , which be over a creek come out of the sea , bud of stone upon arch . on the foot of the further side whereof , lie the camp of the enemy very strong entrench , who with our shot beat to the further end of the bridge , sir Edward Norris march in the point of the pike , without stay pass to the bridge , accompany with colonel Sidney , captain hinder , captain Fulford , and diverse other , who find the way clear over the same , but through a incredible volley of shot ; for that the shot of their army flank 492 upon both side of the bridge , the further end whereof be barricade with barrel : but they who shall have guard the same , see the proud approach we make , forsake the defence of the barricade , where sir Edward enter , and charge the first defendant with his pike , with very earnestness in overthrust , fall , and be grievous hurt at the sword in the head , but be most honourable rescue by the generali he brother , accompany with colonel Sidney , and some other gentleman : captain hinder also have his cask shoot oflf , have five wound in the head and face at the sword : and captain Fulford be shoot into the left arm at the same encounter : yet be they so thorough second by the generali , who thrust himself so near to give encouragement to the attempt ( which be of wondered difficulty ) as their brave man that defend that place be overthrdwen , their whole army fall present notable into rout , of who our man have the chase three mile in four sundry way , which they betake themselves ards ' at unto . there be take the standard with the king Puente de arm , and bear before the generali . how many two Burgos . thousand man ( for of so many consist our vanguard ) may kill in pursuit of four sundry party , so many you may imagine fell before we that day . and to make the number more great , our man have give over the execution , and return to their stand , find many hide in the vineyard and hedge , which they dispatch . also colonel Medkerk be send with his regiment three mile further to a cloister , which he burn and spoil , wherein he find two hundred more , and put they to the sword . there be slay in this fight on our side only captain Cooper , and one private soldier ; captain Barton be also hurt upon the bridge in the eye . but have you see the strong baricade they have make on either side of the bridge , and how strong they lie encamp thereabouts , you will have think it a rare resolution of we to give so brave a charge upon a army so strong lodge . after the 493 fury of the execution , the generali send the vanguard one way , and the battle another , to burn and spoil ; so as you may have see the country more than three mile compass on fire . there be find very good store of munition and victual in the camp , some plate and rich apparel , which the better sort leave behind , they be so hot pursue . our sailor also land in a hand next adjoin to our ship , where they burn and spoil all they find . thus we return [ ii two . 143. ] to the groin , bring small comfort to the enemy within the same , who shoot many time at we as we march out ; but not once in our come back again . the next day be spend in ship our artillery land for the battery , and of the rest take at the groin , which have it be such as may have give we any assurance of a better battery , or have there be no other purpose of our journey but that , i think the generali will have spend some more time in the siege of the place . , the two last night , there be that undertake to fire the high town in one place , where the house be build upon the wall by the water side ; but they within suspect as much , make so good defence against we , as they prevent the same . in our departure there be fire put into every house of the low town , insomuch as i may just say , there be not one house leave stand in the base town , or the cloister . the next day be the eight of may , we embark our army without loss of a man , which ( have we not beat the enemy at Puente de Burgos ) have be impossible to have do ; for that without doubt they will have attempt something against we in our embark : as appear by the report of the commissary aforesaid , who confess , that the first night of our land the mark of Seralba write to the conde de Altemira , the conde de Andrada , and to ternei de Santisso , to bring all the force against we that they 494 can possible raise , think no way so good to assure that place , as to bring a army thither , wherewithal ! they may either besiege we in their base town , if we shall get it , or to lie between we and our place of embark , to fight with we upon the advantage ; for they have above 15000 soldier under their commandments . after we have put from thence , we have the wind so contrary , as we can not under nine day recover the burling : in which passage on the thirteenth day the earl of Essex , and with he m. Walter Devereux his brother ( a gendeman of wonder great hope ) sir Roger William colonel generail of the footman , sir Philip butler , who have always be most inward with he , and sir Edward Wingfield , come into the fleet . the earl have put himself into the journey against the opinion of the world , and as it seem to the hazard of his great fortune , though to the great advancement of his reputation , ( for as the honourable carriage of himself towards all man do make he high esteem at home ; so do his exceed forwardness in all service make he to be wonder at among we ) who , i say , put oflf in the same wind from Falmouth , that we leave Plymouth in , where he lie , because he will avoid the importunity of messenger that be daily send for his return , and some other cause more secret to himself , not know ( as it seem ) what place the general purpose to land in , have be as far as Cadiz in Andaluzia , and lie up and down about the south cape , where he take some ship lade with corn , and bring they unto the fleet . also in his return from thence to meet with our fleet , he fall with the hand of Bayon ; and on that side of the river which Cannas stand upon , he , with sir Roger Williams , and those gentleman that be with he go on shore , with some man out of the ship he be in , who the enemy , that hold guard upon that coast , will not abide , but flee up into the country . 495 the english voyage the 16 day we land at Peniche in Portugal , under the shot of the castle , and above the waste in water , more than a mile from the town , wherein many be in peril of drown , by reason the wind be great , and the sea go high , which overthrow one boat , wherein five and twenty of captain dolphin man perish . the enemy be five company of Spaniards under the commandment of the conde de Fuentes , sally out of the town against we , and in our land make their approach close by the water side . but the earl of Essex with sir Roger Williams , and his brother , have land sufficient number to make two troop , leave one to hold the way by the water side , and lead the other over the sandhil ; which the enemy see , draw they likewise further into the land ; not , as we conjecture , to encounter we , but indeed to make their speedy passage away : notwithstanding , they do it in such sort , as be charge by we which be send out by the colonel generail under captain Jackson , they stand the same even to the push of the pike : in which charge and at the push , captain Robert piew be slay . the enemy be flee further than we have reason to follow they , all our company be draw to the town ; which be unfortified in any place , we find undefended by any man against we . and therefore the generali cause the castle to be summon that night ; which be abandon by he that command it , a Portugal name Antonio de Aurid , be possess thereof , desire but to be assure that don Antonio be land , whereupon he will deliver the same ; which he honest perform . there be take out of the castle some hundred shot and pike , which don Emanuel furnish his Portugal withal , and twenty barrel of powder : so as possess both the town and the castle , we rest there one day : wherein some friar and other poor man come unto their new king , promise in the name of their country next adjoin , that within two day he shall have a good supply of horse and foot for his assistance . that 496 day we remain there , the general company of horse be unship . the general there full resolve , that the army shall march over land to Lisbon under the conduct of generali Norris ; and that generali drake shall meet he in the river thereof with the fleet ; that there shall be one company of foot leave in guard of the castle , and six in the ship : also that the sick and hurt shall remain there with provision for their cure . the generali , to try the event of the matter by expedition , the next day begin to march in this sort : his own regiment , and the regiment of sir Roger Williams , sir Henry Norris , colonel lane , and colonel medkerk , in the vanguard : generali drake , colonel Devereux , sir Edward Norris , and colonel sidnei in the battle : sir James hale , sir Edward Wingfield , colonel Umptons , colonel Huntley , and colonel bret in the arrereward . by that time our army be thus marshal , generali drake , although he be to pass by sea , yet to make know the honourable desire he have of take equal part of all fortune with we , stand upon the ascent of a hill , by the which our battalion must of necessity march , and with a please kindness take his leave several of the commander of every regiment , wish we all most happy success in our journey over the land , with a constant promise that he will , if the injury of the weather do not hinder he , meet we in the river of Lisbon with our fleet . the want of carriage the first day be such , as they be enforce to carry their munition upon man back , which be the next day remedy . in this march captain crisp the provost Marshall cause one who ( contrary to the proclamation publish at our arrival in Portugal ) have break up a house for pillage , to be hang , with the cause of his death upon his breast , in the place where the act be commit : which good example provident give in the begin of our march , cause the commandment to vi 497 21 be more respective regard all the journey after , by they who fear of punishment do only hold within compass . the camp lodge that night at Lorinha : the next day we have intelligence all the way , that the enemy have make head of horse and foot against we at Torres Vedras , which we think they will have hold : but come thither the second day of our march , not two hour before our vanguard come in , they leave the town and the castle to the possession of don Antonio . there begin the great want we have of victual , especial of bread , upon a commandment give from the generali , that no man shall spoil the country , or take any thing from any Portugal : which be more respective observe , than i think will have be in our own country , among our own friend and kindred : but the country ( contrary to promise ) whole neglect the provision of victual for we , whereby we be drive for that time into a great scarcity . which move the colonel generail to call all the colonel together , and with they to advise for some better course for our people : who think it best , first to advertise the king what necessity we be in , before we shall of our self alter the first institution of abstinence . the colonel generali have acquaint the generali herewith , with his very good allowance thereof , go to the king ; who after some expostulation use , take the more careful order for our man , and after that our army be more plentiful relieve . the three day we lodge our army in three sundry village , the one battalion lie in Exarama de los caval-leros , another in Exarama do Obispo , and the three in San Sebastian . captain York who command the general horse company , in this march make trial of the valour of the horseman of the enemy ; who by one of his corporal charge with eight horse through 40 of they , and himself through more than 200 with some forty horse : who 498 will abide he no long than they can make way from he . the next day we march to Lores , and have diverse intelligence that the enemy will tarry we there : for the Cardinali have make public promise to they of Lisbon , that he will fight with we in that place , which he may have do adva tageous ; for we have a bridge to pass over in the same place : but before our come he dislodge , notwithstanding it appear unto we that he have in purpose to encamp there ; for we find the ground stake out where their trench shall have be make : and their horseman with some few shot show themselves upon a hill at our come into that village ; who sir Henry Norris ( who regiment have the point of the vanguard ) think to draw unto some fight , and therefore march without sound of drum , and somewhat fast than ordinary , thereby to get near they before he be discover , for he be shadow from they by a hill that be between he and they : but before he can draw his company any thing near , they retire . general drake regiment that night , for the commodity of good lodging , draw themselves into a village , more than one english mile from thence , and near the enemy : who not dare to do any thing against we in four day before , take that occasion , and in the next morning fall down upon that regiment , cry , viva el Rey don Antonio , which be a generail salutation through all the country as they come : who our young soldier ( though it be upon their guard , and before the watch be discharge ) begin to entertain kind , but have get within their guard , they fall to cut their throat : but the alarm be take inward , the officer of the two next company , who captain ( captain Sydnam and captain young ) be late dead at the groin , bring down their colour and pike upon they in so resolute manner , as they present drive they to retire with loss : they kill of we at their first entrance fourteen , and hurt six or seven . 499 [ ii two . 145 , ] the next day we lodge at Alvelana within three mile of Lisbon , where many of our soldier drink in two place of stand water by the way be poison , and thereon present die . some do think it come rather by eat of honey , which they find in the house plentiful . but whether it be by water or by honey , the poor man be poison . that night the earl of Essex , and sir Roger Williams go out about eleven of the clock with 1000 man to lie in ambuscade near the town , and have lay the same very near , send some to give the alarm unto the enemy : which be well perform by they that have the charge thereof , but the enemy refuse to issue after they , so as the earl return assoon as it be light without do any thing , though he have in purpose , and be ready to have give a honourable charge on they . the 25 of may in the evening we come to the suburb of Lisbon : at the very entrance whereof sir Roger William call captain Anthony Wingfield with he , take thirty shot or thereabouts , and first scour all the street till they come very near the town ; where they find none but old folk and beggar , cry , viva el Rey don Antonio , and the house shut up : for they have carry much of their wealth into the town , and have fire some house by the water side , full of corn and other provision of victual , lest we shall be benefit thereby , but yet leave behind they great riches in many house . the four regiment that have the vanguard that day , which be colonel Devereux , sir Edward Norris , colonel Sidneys , and generali drake ( who i name as they march ) the colonel generail cause to hold guard in the near street of the suburb : the battle and the arreward stand in arm all the night in the field near to Alcantara . before morning captain Wingfield , by direction from the colonel generali sir Roger Williams , hold guard with sir Edward Norris his regiment in three place very near the town wall , and 500 so hold the same till the other regiment come in the morning . about midnight they within the town burn all their house that stand upon their wall either within or without , lest we possess they , may thereby great have annoy the town . the next morning sir Roger Williams attempt ( but not without peril ) to take a church call S. Antonio , which join to the wall of the town , and will have be a very evil neighbour to the town : but the enemy have moor easy entry into it than we gain it before we . the rest of that morning be spend in quarter the battle and arrereward in the suburb call bona vista , and in place musketeer in house , to front their shot upon the wall , who from the same scour the great street very dangerous . by this time our man be thorough weary with our six day march , and the last night watch , be desirous of rest : whereof the enemy be advertise , about one or two of the clock sally out of the town , and make their approach in three several street upon we , but chief in colonel brets quarter : who ( as most of the army be ) be at rest , with as much speed as he can , draw his man into arm , and make head against they so thorough , as himself be slay in the place , captain Carsey shoot through the thigh , of which hurt he die within four day after , captain Carre slay present , and captain cave hurt ( but not mortal ) who be all of his regiment . this resistance make aswell here , as in other quarter where colonel lane and colonel medkerk command , put they to a sudden foul retreat ; insomuch , as the earl of Essex have the chase of they even to the gate of the high town , wherein they leave behind they many of their best commander : their troop of horseman also come out , but be charge by captain York , withdraw themselves again . many of they also leave the street , and betake they to house which they find open : for the sergeant major captain Wilson slay in 501 1589-one house with his own hand three or four , and cause they that be with he to kill many other . their loss i can assure you do triple we , aswell in quality as in quantity . during our march to this place , generali drake with the whole fleet be come into Cascais , and possess the town without any resistance : many of the inhabitant [ ii two . 146. ] at their discovery of our navy , flee with their baggage into the mountain , and leave the town for any man that will possess it , till generali Drake send unto they by a Portugal pilot which he have on board , to offer they all peaceable kindness , so far forth as they will accept of their king , and minister necessary to the army he have bring ; which ofler they joyful embrace , and present send two chief man of their town , to signify their loyalty to don Antonio , and their honest affection to our people . whereupon the generali land his company not far from the cloister call San Domingo , but not without peril of the shot of the castle , which be guard with 65 Spaniards , hold still against he . as our fleet be cast anchor when they come first into that road , there be a small ship of Brasil that come from thence , which bear with they , and seem by strike her sail , as though she will also have anchor : but take her fit occasion hoist again , and will have pass up the river , but the generali present discern her purpose , send out a pinnace or two after she , which force she in such sort , as she run herself upon the rock : all the man escape out of she , and the lade ( be many chest of sugar ) be make nothing worth , by the salt water . in his go thither also , he take ship of the port of Portugal , which be send from thence , with fifteen other from Pedro vermende Xantes sergeant major of the same place , lade with man and victual to Lisbon : the rest that escape put into Setuvel . the next day it please generali Norris to call all the 502 colonel together , and to advise with they , whether it be more expedient to tarry there to attend the force of the Portugal horse and foot , whereof the king have make promise , and to march some convenient number to Cascais to fetch our artillery and munition , which be all at our ship , save that which for the necessity of the service be bring along with we : whereunto , some carry away with the vain hope of don Antonio , that most part of the town stand for we , hold it best to make our abode there , and to send some 3000 for our artillery : promise to themselves , that the enemy be well beat the day before , will make no more sally : some other ( who unbelief be very strong of any hope from the Portugal ) persuade rather to march whole away , than to be any long carry away with the opinion of thing , whereof there be so little appearance . the generali not will to leave any occasion of blot to be lay upon he for his speedy go from thence , nor to lose any more time by attend the hope of don Antonio ; tell they , that though the expedition of Portugal be not the only purpose of their journey , but a adventure therein ( which if it succeed prosperous , may make they sufficient rich , and woonderfoll honourable ) and that they have do so much already in trial thereof , as what end soever happen , can nothing impair their credit : yet in regard of the king last promise , that he shall have that night 3000 man arm of his own country , he will not for that night dislodge . and if they come , thereby to make he so strong , that he may send the like number for his munition , he will resolve to try his fortune for the town . but if they come not , he find it not convenient to divide his force , by send any to Cascais , and keep a remainder behind , since he see they the day before so bold sally upon his whole army , and know that they be strong of soldier arm within the town , than he be without : and that before our return can be from Cascais , they expect more 5°3 supply from all place , of soldier : for the duke of Bragan ? a , and don Francisco de Toledo be look for with great relief . vz^hereupon his conclusion be , that if the 3000 promise come not that night , to march whole away the next morning . it may be here demand , why a matter of so great moment shall be so slender regard , as that the generali shall march with such a army against such a enemy , before he know either the fullness of his own strength , or certain mean how he shall abide the place when he shall come to it . wherein i pray you remember the decree make in the council at Peniche , and confirm by public protestation the first day of our march , that our navy shall meet we in the river of Lisbon , in the which be the store of all our provision , and so the mean of our tarriance in that place , which come not , though we continue till we have no munition leave to entertain a very small fight . we be also to consider , that the king of Portugal ( whether carry away with imagination by the advertisement he receive from the Portugal , or will by any promise to bring such a army into his country , thereby to put his fortune once more in trial ) assure the generali , that upon his first land , there will be a revolt of his subject : whereof there be some hope give at our first entry to Peniche , by the manner of die yield of that town and fort , which make the generali think it most convenient speedy to march to the principali place , thereby to give courage to the rest of the country . the friar also and the poor people that come unto he promise , that within two day the gentleman and other of the country will come plentiful in : within which two [ ii two . 147. ] day come many more priest , and some very few gentleman on horseback ; but not till we come to Torres Vedras : where they that note the course of thing how they pass , may somewhat discover the weakness of that people . there they take two day 504 moor ; and at the end thereof refer he till our come to Lisbon , with assurance , that so soon as our army shall be see there , all the inhabitant will be for the king and fall upon the Spaniard . after two night tarriance at Lisbon , the king , as you have hear , promise a supply of 3000 foot , and some horse : but all his appointment be expire , even to the last of a night , all his horse can not make a cornet of 40 , nor his foot furnish two ensign full , although they carry three or four colour : and these be altogether such as think to enrich themselves by the ruin of their neighbour : for they commit more disorder in every place where we come by spoil , than any of our own . the generali , as you see , have do more than before his come out of England be require by the king , and give credit to his many promise , even to the breach of the last , he desist not to persuade he to stay yet nine day long : in which time he may have engage himself further , than with any honour he can come out of again , by attempt a town fortify , wherein be more man arm against we , than we have to oppugn they withal , our artillery and munition be fifteen mile from we , and our man then decline ; for there be the first show of any great sickness among they . whereby it seem , that either his prelacy do much abuse he in persuade he to hope , whereof after two or three day he see no semblance : or he like a silly lover , who promise himself favour by importune a coy mistress , think by our long be before his town , that in the end take pity on he , they will let he in . what end the friar have by follow he with such devotion , i know not , but sure i be , the Laity do respite their homage till they may see which way the victory will sway ; fear to show themselves apparent unto he , lest the Spaniard shall after our departure ( if we prevail not ) call they to account : yet 5°5 send they under hand message to he of obedience , thereby to save their own , if he become king ; but indeed very well content to see the Spaniard and we try by blow , who shall carry away the crown . for they be of so base a mould , as they can very well subject themselves to any government , where they may live free from blow , and have liberty to become rich , be loath to endure hazard either of life or good . for dare they have put on any mind thorough to revolt , they have three wonder good occasion offer they during our being there . themselves do in generali confess , that there be not above 5000 Spaniard in that part of the country , of which number the half be out of the town till the last day of our march : during which time , how easy they may have prevail against the rest , any man may conceive . but upon our approach they take they all in , and combine themselves in generali to the Cardinali . the next day after our come thither , when the sally be make upon we by their most resolute Spaniards , how easy may they have keep they out , or have give we the gate which be hold for their retreat , if they have have any thought thereof ? and two day after our come to Cascais , when 6000 Spaniards and Portugal come against we as far as saint Julians by land , as you shall present hear ( all which time i think there be not many Spaniards leave in the town ) they have a more fit occasion to show their devotion to the king , than any can be offer by our tarry there . and they can not doubt , that if they have shut they out , but that we will have fight with they upon that advantage , have seek they in galitia upon disadvantage to beat they : and have take so much pain to seek they at their own house , whereof we give sufficient testimony in the same accident . but i think the fear of the Spaniard have take so deep impression within they , as they dare not attempt any thing against they upon any hazard . 506 for , what civil country have ever suffer themselves to be conquer by so few man as they be ; to be deprive of their naturali king , and to be tyrannize over thus long , but they ? and what country , live in slavery under a stranger who they natural hate , have a army in the field to fight for they and their liberty , will lie still with the yoke upon their neck , attend if any stranger will unburthen they , without so much as rouse themselves under it , but they ? they will promise much in speech , for they be great talker , who the generali have no reason to distrust without trial , and therefore march on into their country : but they perform little in action , whereof we can have have no proof without this thorough trial . wherein he have discover their weakness , and honorable perform more than can be in reason expect of he : which have he not do , will not these maligner , who seek occasion of slander , have report [ ii two . 148. ] he to be suspicious of a people , of who infidelity he have no testimony : and to be fearful without cause , if he have refuse to give credit to their promise without any adventure ? let no frivolous questionist therefore further inquire why he march so many day to Lisbon , and tarry there so small a while . the next morning , see no performance of promise keep , he give order for our march away ; himself , the earl of Essex , and sir Roger William remain with the stand that be make in the high street , till the whole army be draw into the field , and so march out of the town , appoint captain Richard Wingfield , and captain Anthony Wingfield in the arrereward of they with the shot ; think that the enemy ( as it be most likely ) will have issue out upon our rise ; but they be otherwise advise . when we be come into the field , every battalion fall into that order which by course appertain unto they , and so march that night unto Cascais . have we march through his country as enemy , our soldier have be well 5°7 supply in all their want : but have we make enemy of the suburb of Lisbon , we have be the rich army that ever go out of England : for beside the particular wealth of every house , there be many warehouse by the water side full of all sort of rich merchandize . in our march that day the galley which have somewhat , but not much , annoy we at Lisbon , ( for that our way lie along the river ) attend we till we be past saint Julians , bestow many shot among we , but do no harm at all , save that they strike off a gentleman leg , and kill the sergeant major mode under he . the horseman also follow we afar off , and cut off as many sick man as be not able to hold in march , nor we have carriage for . after we have be two day at Cascais , we have intelligence by a friar , that the enemy be march strong towards we , and then come as far as saint Julian : which news be so welcome to the earl of Essex and the general , as they offer every one of they to give the messenger a hundred crown if they find they in the place ; for the generali desire nothing more than to fight with they in field room , dispatch that night a messenger with a trumpet , by who he write a cartel to the generali of their army , wherein he give they the lie , in that it be by they report that we dislodge from Lisbon in disorder and fear of they ( which indeed be most false ) for that it be five of the clock in the morning before we fall into arm , and then go in such sort , as they have no courage to follow out upon we . also he challenge he therein , to meet he the next morning with his whole army , if he dare attend his come , and there to try out the justness of their quarrel by battle : by who also the earl of Essex ( who prefer the honour of the cause , which be his country , before his own safety ) send a particular cartel , offer himself against any of they , if they have any of his quality ; or if they will not 508 the Portugal voyage admit of that ; six , eight , or ten , or as many as they will appoint , shall meet so many of they in the head of our battle to try their fortune with they ; and that they shall have assurance of their return and honourable entreaty . the generali accord make all his army ready by three of the clock in the morning and march even to the place where they have encamp , but they be dislodge in the night in great disorder , be take with a sudden fear that we have be come upon they , as the generali be the next day certain inform : so as the trumpet follow they to Lisbon , but can not get other answer to either of his letter , but threaten to be hang , for dare to bring such a message . howbeit the generali have cause to be write upon the backside of their passport , that if they do offer any violence unto the messenger , he will hang the best prisoner he have of they : which make they to advise better of the matter , and to return they home ; but without answer . after our army come to Cascais , and the castle summon , the Castellan thereof grant , that upon five or six shot of the canon he will deliver the same , but not without sight thereof . the generali think that his distress within have be such for want of man or victual as he can not hold it many day , because he see it otherwise defensible enough , determine rather to make he yield to that necessity , than to bring the cannon , and therefore only set a guard upon the same , lest any supply of those thing which he want shall be bring unto they . but he still stand upon those condition , the generali about two day before he determine to go to sea , bring three or four piece of battery against it : upon the first tire whereof he surrender , and compound to go away with his baggage and army ; he have one canon , two culvering , one basilisk , and three or four other field piece , threescore and five soldier , very good store of munition , 5°9 and victual enough in the castle ; insomuch as he may have hold the same long than the generali have in purpose to tarry there . one company of footman be put into the guard thereof , till the artillery be take out , and our army embark ; which without have that fort , we can not without great peril have do . when we be ready to set sail ( one half of the fort be by order from the generali blow up by i ) the company be draw away . during the time we lie in the road , our fleet begin the second of June , and so continue six day after to fetch in some hulk to the number of threescore , of dansik , Stetin , Rostock , Lubeck and Hamburgh , lade with spanish good , and as it seem for the king provision , and go for Lisbon : their principali lade be corn , mast , cable , copper , and wax : among which be some of great burden wonder well bud for sail , which have no great lade in they , and therefore it be think that they be bring for the king provision , to reinforce his decay navy : whereof there be the great likelihood , in that the owner of the great of they which carry two misnes , be know to be very inward with the Cardinali , who rather than he will be take with his ship , commit himself unto his small boat , wherein he recover saint Sebastian : into the which our man , that before be in flyboat , be ship , and the flyboat send home with a offer of corn , to the value of their hire . but the wind be good for they for rochel , they choose rather to lose their corn then the wind , and so depart . the generali also send his horse with they , and from thence ship they into England . the three of June , colonel Devereux and colonel Sidney , be both very sick , depart for England , who in the whole journey have show themselves very forward to all service , and in their departure very unwilling to leave we : that day we embark all our army , but lie in the road until the eight thereof . 510 the sixth day the earl of Essex , upon receit of letter from her majesty , by they that bring in the victual , present depart towards England , with who sir Roger William be very desirous to go , but find the general very unwilling he shall do so , in that he bear the next place unto they , and if they shall miscarry , be to command the army . and the same day there come unto we two small bark that bring tiding of some other ship come out of England with victual , which be pass upward to the cape : for meet with who , the second day after we set sail for that place , in purpose after our meeting with they to go with the isle of azore , the second day , which be the nine , we meet with they come back again towards we , who provision little answer our expectation . notwithstanding we resolve to continue our course for the hand . about this time be the marchant-royall , with three or four other ship , send to Peniche , to fetch away the company that be leave there ; but captain Barton have receive letter from the general that be send overland , be depart before , not be able by reason of the enemy speedy march thither , either to bring away the artillery , or all his man , accord to the direction those letter give he ; for he be no soon go , than the enemy possess the town and castle , and shoot at our ship as they come into the road . at this time also be the ambassador from the emperor of Morocco , call Reys Hamet bencasamp , return , and with he m. cyprian , a gentleman of good place and desert , be send from don Antonio , and captain Ousley from the general to the emperor . the next morning the nine galley which be send not five day before out of Andaluzia for the strengthen of the river of Lisbon ( which be join with the other twelve that be there before , though we lay hard by they at saint Julians , dare never make any attempt against we ) upon our departure from thence be return - 511 king home , and in the morning be a very dead calm , in the dawn thereof , fall in the wind of our fleet , in the uttermost part whereof they assail one straggle bark of Plymouth , of the which captain Caverley be captain of the land company , with his lieutenant , the master , and some of the mariner abandon the ship , and betake they to the ship-boat , whereof one , in which the master and the captain be , be overrun with the galley , and they drown . there be also two hulk straggle far from the strength of the other ship , which be so calm , as neither they can get to we , nor we to they , though all the great ship tow with their boat to have relieve they , but can not be recover ; in one of which be captain min-shaw with his company , who fight with they to the last , yea after his ship be on fire , which whether it be fire by himself or Sy they we can not well discern , but may easy judge by his long and good fight , that the enemy can not but sustain much loss : who set also upon one other hulk wherein be but a lieutenant , and he very sick , be by the valour of the lieutenant put off , although they have first beat she with their artillery , and attempt to board she . And see also one other hulk a league off , a stern off we , they make towards she : but find that she make ready to fight with they , they dare not further attempt she : whereby it seem , their loss be great in the other fight , they be loath to proceed any further . from that day till the 19 of June , our direction from the generali be , that if the wind be northerly , we shall ply for the azore ; but if southerly , for the isle of Bayon . we lay with contrary wind about that place and the rock , till the southerly wind prevail carry we to Bayon : part of our ship to the number of 25 , in a great wind which be two day before , have lose the admiral and fleet , accord to their direction , fall in the morning of that day with Bayon , among who be sir Henry Norris in the aid ; who have in purpose 512 .... I589 " ( if the admiral have not come in ) with some 500 man out of they all to have land , and attempt the take of Vigo . the rest of the fleet hold with generali drake , who though he be two day before put upon those hand , cast off again to sea for the a$ores : but remember how provide he be for that journey and see that he have lose company of his great ship , return for Bayon , and come in there that night in the evening , where he pass up the river more than a mile above Vigo . the next morning we land as many as be able to fight , which be not in the whole above 2000 man , ( for in the 17 day we continue on board we have cast many of our man overboard ) with which number the colonel generali march to the town of Vigo , near the which when he approach , he send captain Anthony Wingfield with a troop of shot to enter one side of figo take . the same , who find upon every street end a strong barricade , but altogether abandon ; for have enter the town , he find but one man therein , but may see they make way before he to Bayon . on the other side of the town enter generali drake with captain Richard Wingfield , who approach on that side ( i think ) make they leave the place they have so artificial make for defence : there be also certain ship send with the viceadmiral to lie close before the town , to beat upon the same with their artillery . in the afternoon be send 300 under the conduct of captain Petuin and captain Henry pour , to burn another village betwixt that and Bayon , call Borsis , and as much of the country as the day will give they leave to do ; which be a very pleasant rich valley : but they burn it all , house and corn , as do other on the other side of the town , both that and the next day , so as the country be spoil seven or eight mile in length . there be find great store of wine in the town , but not any thing else : for the other day warn of vi 513 2k the ship that come first in , give they a respite to carry all away . the next morning by break of the day the colonel generali ( who in the absence of the general that be on board their ship , command that night on shore ) cause all our company to be draw out of the Vigo burn , town , and send in two troop to put fire in every house of the same : which do , we embark again . this day there be certain mariner which ( without any direction ) put themselves on shore , on the contrary side of the river from we for pillage ; who be beat by the enemy from their boat , and punish by the general for their offer , in go without allowance . the reason why we attempt nothing against Bayon be before show to be want of artillery , and may now be allege to be the small number of our man : who shall have go against so strong a place , man with very good soldier , as be show by Juan de vera take at the groin , who confess that there be six hundred old soldier in garrison there of Flanders , and the tercios of Naples , late also return out of the journey of England . Capitan Puebla , Christofero Vasques de Viralta a soldier of Flanders . under the < do Pedro Camascho , del tercio de Napoles . lead of ] do Francisco de Cespedes . Cap. Juan de Solo , del tercio de Naples . don Diego de Cassava . Cap. Sauban . also he say there be 18 piece of brass , and four of iron , late lay upon the wall of the town , beside they that be there before . the same day the general see what weak estate our army be draw into by sickness , determine to man and victuali twenty of the best ship for the hand of azore with generali drake , to see if he can meet with the indian fleet , and generali Norris to return 5t4 home with the rest : and for the shift of man and victual accord , purpose the next morning to fall down to the hand of Bayon again , and to remain there that day . but generali drake , accord to their appointment , be under sail never strike at the hand , but put straight to sea ; who all the fleet follow save three and thirty , which be in the river further than he , and at the entrance out of the same , find the wind and tide too hard against they , be enforce to cast anchor there for that night ; among who , by good fortune , be the foresight , and in her sir Edward Norris . [ ii two . 151. ] and the night follow , generali Norris be drive from the rest of the fleet by a great storm , ( for all that day be the great storm we have all the time we be out ) come again into the hand , but not without great peril , he be force to trust to a spanish fisherman ( who be take two day before at sea ) to bring he in . the next morning he call a council of as many as he find there , hold the purpose he have conclude with sir Francis Drake the day before , and direct all their course for England , tarry there all that day to water and help such with victuali , as be leave in wonderful distress by have the victual that come last , carry away the day before to sea . the next day he set sail , and the 10 day after , which their return be the 2 of July come into Plymouth , where he find 10 plmmouth-sir Francis Drake and all the queen ship , with many of the other but not all : for the fleet be disperse into other harbour , some lead by a desire of return from whence they come , and some be possess of the hulk , seek other port from their general eye , where they may make their private commodity of they , as they have do to their great advantage . present upon their arrival there , the general dissolve all the army save 8 company which be yet hold together , give every soldier five shilling in money , and the arm he bear to make money of , which 5*5 be more than can by any mean be due unto they : for they be not in service three month , in which time they have their victual , which no man will value at less than half their pay , for such be the allowance in her majesty ship to her mariner , so as there remain but 10 shilling a month more to be pay , for which there be not any private man but have apparel and furniture to his own use , so as every common soldier discharge , receive more in money , victual , apparel and furniture , than his pay do amount unto . notwithstanding , there be even in the same place where those thing have pass , that either do not or will not conceive the soldier estate , by compare their poverty and the shortness of the time together , but lie some injury upon the general and the action . where , and by the way , but especial here in London , i find there have be some false prophet go before we , tell strange tale . for as our country do bring forth many gallant man , who desirous of honour do put themselves into the action thereof , so do it many more dull spirit , who though their thought reach not so high as other , yet do they listen how other man act do pass , and either believe what any man will report unto they , be willing carry away into error , or tie to some great man faith , become secretary against a note truth . the one sort of these do take their opinion from the high way side , or at the further go no further than Pauls to inquire what have be do in this voyage : where , if they meet with any , who capacity before their go out can not make they live , nor their valour maintain their reputation , and who go only for spoil , complain on the hardness and misery thereof , they think they be bind to give credit to these honest man who be party therein , and in very charity become of their opinion . the other to make good the faction they be enter into , if they see any of those malcontent ( as every journey yield some ) do run unto they like tempt spirit 516 to confirm they in their humour , with assurance that they foresee before our go out what will become thereof . be you not therefore too credulous in believe every report : for you see there have be many more beholder of these thing that have pass , than actor in the same ; who by their experience , not have the knowledge of the ordinary want of the war , have think , that to lie hard , not to have their meat well dress , to drink sometime water , to watch much , or to see man die and be slay , be a miserable thing ; and not have so give their mind to the service , as they be any thing instruct thereby , do for want of better matter discourse ordinary of these thing : whereas the journey ( if they have with that judgement see into it , which their place require ) have give they far more honourable purpose and argument of discourse . Theise man discontentment and mislike before our come home have make i labour thus much to instruct you in the certainty of every thing , because i will not willing have you miscarry in the judgement of they , wherein you shall give i leave somewhat to dilate upon a question , which i only touch in the begin of my letter , namely , whether it be more expedient for our estate to maintain a offensive war against the king of Spain in the low country , or as in this journey , to offend he in his near territory , see the ground of argue thereof be take from the experience which the action of this journey have give a worthy question dilate . they . there be no good subject that will make question , whether it be behooveful for we to hold friendship with these neighbour of we or not , aswell in respect of the infinite proportion of their ship , which must stand either with we or against we ; as of the commodity of their harbour , especial that of Vlishing , by the favour whereof our navy may continual keep the narrow 5*7 sea , and which will harbour a great fleet against we , than the Spaniard shall need to annoy we withal , who be now distress by our common enemy , i think it [ ii two . 152. ] most expedient for our safety to defend they , and if it may be , to give they a reentry into that they have of late year lose unto he . the one without doubt her majesty may do without difficulty , and in so honourable sort as he shall never be able to dispossess she or they of any the town they now hold . but if any man think that the Spaniard may be expel from thence more speedy or convenient by keep a army there , then by send one against he into his own country : let he foresee of how many man and continual supply that army must consist , and what intolerable expense it require . and let he think by the example of the duke of Alva , when the prince of Orange have his great army against he ; and of don Juan , when the state have their mighty assembly against he , how this wise enemy , with who we be to deal , may but by prolong to fight with we , leave we occasion enough for our army within few month to mutiny and break ; or by keep he in his town leave we a spoil field : where though our provision may be such of our own as we starve not , yet be our weakness in any strange country such , as with sickness and misery we shall be dissolve . and let he not forget what a continual burden we hereby lay upon we , in that to repossess those country which have be late lose , will be a war of long continuance than we shall be able to endure . in the very action whereof , what shall hinder the king of Spain to bring his force home unto we ? for it be certain he have long since set down in council , that there be no way for he whole to recover those low country , but by bring the war upon England it self , which have always assist they against he : and that be determine , and whereunto he have be vehement urge by the last year loss he sustain 518 upon our coast , and the great dishonour this journey have lay upon he ; no doubt if we shall give he respite to do it , but he will mighty advance his purpose , for he be rich able thereunto , and wonderful desirous of revenge . to encounter wherewith , i wish even in true and honest zeal to my country , that we be all persuade that there be no such assure mean for the safety of our estate , as to busy he with a well furnish army in Spain , which have so many goodly bay open , as we may land without impeachment as many man as shall be needful for such a invasion . and have a army of 20000 royal furnish there , we shall not need to take much care for their payment : for shall not Lisbon be think able to make so few man rich , when the suburb thereof be find so abound in riches , as have we make enemy of they , they have large enrich we all ? which with what small loss it may be win , be not here to show ; but why it be not win by we , i have herein show you . or be not the spoil of Sivil sufficient to pay more than shall be needful to be send against it , who defence ( as that of Lisbon ) be only force of man , of who how many may for the present be raise , be not to be esteem , because we have discover what kind of man they be , even such as will never abide we in field , nor dare withstand any resolute attempt of we against they : for during the time we be in many place of their country , they can say that ever they make 20 of our man turn their face from they . and be there not many other place of less difficulty to spoil , able to satisfy our force ? but admit , that if upon this alarm that we have give he , he tender his naturali and near soil before his further remmoove off government , do draw his force of old soldier out of the low country for his own defence , be not the victory then win by draw and hold they from thence , for the which we shall have keep a army there at a charge by many part great than this , and not stir they ? 5r9 admit further our army be impeach from land there , yet by keep the sea , and possess his principali road , be we not in possibility to meet with his indian merchant , and very like to prevent he of his provision come out of the east country ; without the which , neither the subject of Lisbon be long able to live , nor the king able to maintain his navy ? for though the country of Portugal do some year find themselves corn , yet be they never able to victuali the least part of that city . and albeit the king of Spain be the rich prince in Christendom , yet can he neither draw cable , hew mast , nor make powder out of his metal , but be to be supply of they all from thence . of who ( some will hold opinion ) it be no reason to make prize , because they be not our enemy : and that our dis-agreeance with they will impeach the trade of our merchant , and so impoverish our country . of who mind i can hardly be draw to be : for if my enemy fight with i do break his sword , so as i thereby have the advantage against he ; what shall i think of he that put a new sword into his hand to kill i withal ? and may it not be think more fit for we in these time to loose our trade of cloth , then by suffer these mischief , to put in hazard whether we shall have a country leave to make cloth in or no ? and yet though neither Hamburgh , Embden , nor stand do receive our cloth , the necessary use thereof in all place be such , as they will find mean to take it from we with our sufficient commodity . and admit ( which be impossible ) that we damnify he neither at sea nor land ( for unless it be with a much more mighty army than we , he shall never be able to withstand we ) yet shall we by hold he at his home , free our self from the war at our own wall : the benefit whereof let they consider that best can judge , and have observe the difference of invade , and be invade ; the one give courage to the soldier , in that it do set before he commodity and reputation ; the other a 520 the Portugal voyage fearful terror to the countryman , who if by chance he play the man yet be he never the rich : and who know many hole to hide himself in , will try they all before he put his life in peril by fight : whereas the invader cast up his account before he go out , and be abroad must fight to make himself way , as not know what place or strength to trust unto . i will not say what i observe in our countryman when the enemy offer to assail we here : but i wish that all England know what terror we give to the same people that fright we , by visit they at their own house . be not Alexander fortune great against the mighty Darius , only in that his macedonian thirst after the wealth of Persia , and be bind to fight it out to the last man , because the last man know no safe way to save himself then by fight ? whereas the persian either trust to continue still master of their wealth by yielding to the invader , begin to practise against their own king : or have moor inward hope , do hide themselves even to the last , to see what course the conqueror will take in his conquest . and do not the advice of Scipio , though mighty impugn at the first , prove very , sound and honourable to his country ? who see the roman wonderful amaze at the nearness of their enemy force , and the loss they daily sustain by they , give counsel rather by way of diversion to carry a army into Africa , and there to assail , then by a defensive war at home to remain subject to the common spoil of a assail enemy . which be put in execution draw the enemy from the gate of room , and Scipio return home with triumph : albeit his beginning at the first be not so fortunate against they , as we have be in this small time against the Spaniard . the good success whereof may encourage we to take arm resolute against he . and i beseech God it may stir up all man that be particular interest therein , to bethink themselves how small a matter will assure they of their safety , by hold the Spaniard at a bay , so far off : 521 whereas , if we give he leave quiet to hatch and bring forth his preparation , it will be with danger to we all . he take not arm against we by any pretense of title to the crown of this realm , nor lead altogether with a ambitious desire to command our country , but with hatred towards our whole nation and religion . her majesty sceptre be already give by bull to another , the honour of our nobility be bestow for reward upon his attendant , our clergy , our gentleman , our lawyer , yea all man of what condition soever be offer for spoil unto the common soldier . let every man therefore , in defence of the liberty and plenty he have of long enjoy , offer a voluntary contribution of the small part of their store for the assurance of the rest . it be not much for every justice of peace , who by his blue coat protect the proper and most serviceable man at every muster from the war , to contribute the charge that one of these idle man do put he to for one year : nor for the lawyer , who rise by the dissension of his neighbour , to take but one year gift ( which they call fee ) out of his coffer . what will it hinder every officer of the exchequer , and other of her majesty court , who without check do sudden grow to great wealth , honest to bring forth the mystical commodity of one year profit ? or the clergy , who look precise for the ten of every man increase , simple to bring forth the ten of one year gather , and in thankfulness to her majesty , ( who have continue for all our safety a most chargeable war both at land and sea ) bestow the same for her honour and their own assurance , upon a army which may make this bloody enemy so to know himself and her majesty power , as he shall bethink he what it be to move a stir people ? who , though they have receive some small check by the sickness of this last journey , yet doubt i not , but if it be make know , that the like voyage be to be support by a generality , ( that may and will bear the charge of 522 .. 15891 a more ample provision ) but there will of all sort most willing put themselves into the same : some carry with a honourable desire to be in action , and some in love of such will affectionate follow their fortune ; some in thirst to revenge the death and hurt of their brethren , kindred , and friend : and some in hope of the plentiful spoil to be find in those country , have be there already and return poor , will desire to go again , with a expectation to make amends for the last : and all , in hatred of that cowardly proud nation , and in contemplation of the true honour of our own , will with courage take arm to hazard their life against they , who every good Englishman be in nature bind to hate as a implacable enemy to England , thirst after our blood , and labour to ruin our land , with hope to bring we under the yoke of perpetuali slavery . against they be true honour to be get , for that we [ ii two . 154. ] shall no soon set foot in their land , but that every step we tread will yield we new occasion of action , which i wish the gallantry of our country rather to regard then to follow those soft unprofitable pleasure wherein they now consume their time and patrimony . and in two or three town of Spain be the wealth of all Europe gather together , which be the magasin of the fruit and profit of the east and west Indies , whereunto i wish our young able man , who , ( against the liberty they be bear unto ) term themselves serve man , rather to bend their desire and affection , than to attend their double livery and 40 shilling by the year wage , and the reversion of the old copyhold , for carry a dish to their master table . but let i here reprehend my self and crave pardon for enter into a matter of such state and consequence , the care whereof be already lay upon a most grave and honourable counsel , who will in their wisdom foresee the danger that may be threaten against we . and why do i labour to disquiet the security of these happy gentleman , and the trade of those 523 honest serve man , by persuade they to the war when i see the profession thereof so slender esteem ? for though all our hope of peace be frustrate , and our quarrel determinable by the sword : though our enemy have by his own force and his pensionary industry , confine the unite province into a narrow room , and almost disunit the same : if he be now in a good way to harbour himself in the principali haven of France , from whence he may front we at pleasure : yea though we be to hope for nothing but a bloody war , nor can trust to any help but arm ; yet how far the common sort be from reverence or regard any person of conduction , be too apparent in the return of this our journey , wherein the base and common soldier have be toilerate to speak against the captain , and the soldier and captain against the general , and wherein mechanical ! and man of base condition do dare to censure the do of they , of who act they be not worthy to talk . the ancient grave degree of the prelacy be uphold , though Martin rail never so much , and the lawyer be after the old manner worship , whosoever inveigh against he . but the ancient english honour be take from our man of war , and their profession in disgrace , though never so necessary . either we commit idolatry to Neptune , and will put he alone still to fight for we as he do the last year , or we be enchant with some devilish opinion , that travel nothing more than to diminish the reputation of they , upon who shoulder the burden of our defence against the enemy must lie when occasion shall be oflr . for whensoever he shall set foot upon our land , it be neither the preach of the clergy that can turn he out again , nor the plead of any lawyer that can remove he out of possession : no , than they will honour they who now they think not on , and then must those man stand between they and their peril , who be now think unworthy of any estimation . 524 may the burn of one town ( which cost the king then be six time as much as this have do her majesty , wherein be lose seven time as many man as in any one service of this journey , and tarry not the ten part of our time in the enemy country ) be by our elder so high repute and sound out by the history of the realm ; and can our voyage be so mean esteem , wherein we burn both town and country without the loss of forty man in any such attempt ? do our king in former time reward some with the great title of honour for overthrow a number of poor Scot , who , after one battle lose , be never able to reinforce themselves against he ; and shall they in this time who have overthrow our mighty enemy in battle , and take his royal standard in the field , besiege the marquess of Saralba 15 day together , that shall have be the generali of the army against we , bring away so much of his artillery ( as i have before declare ) be unworthy esteem of ? be it possible that some in some time shall receive their reward for look upon a enemy , and we in this time not receive so much as thank for have beat a enemy at handy stroke ? but it be true that no man shall be a prophet in his country : and for my own part i will lay aside my arm till that profession shall have more reputation , and live with my friend in the country , attend either some more fortunate time to use they , or some other good occasion to make i forget they . but what ? shall the blind opinion of this monster , a beast of many head , ( for so have the generality of old be term ) cause i to neglect the profession from whence i challenge some reputation , or diminish my love to my country , which hitherto have nourish i ? no , it be for her sake i first take arm , and for her sake i will handle they so long as i shall be able to use they : not regard how some man in private con - 525 venticle do measure man estimation by their own humour ; nor how every popular person do give sentence on every man action by the worst accident . but attend the gracious aspect of our dread sovereign , who never yet leave virtue unrewarded : and depend upon the justice of her most rare and grave advisor , who by their heedy look into every man worth , do give encouragement to the virtuous to exceed other in virtue : and assure you that there shall never any thing happen more please unto i , then that i may once again be a party in some honourable journey against the Spaniard in his own country , i will cease my complaint : and with they that deserve beyond i , patient endure the unadvised censure of our malicious reprover . if i have seem in the begin hereof troublesome unto you , in the discover of those impediment , and answer the slander which by the vulgar malicious and mutinous sort be lay as blemish upon the journey , and reproach upon the general ( have indeed proceed from other head : ) let the necessity of conserve the reputation of the action in generali , and the honour of our general in particular , be my sufficient excuse : the one have by the virtue of the other make our country more dread and renown , than any act that ever England undertake before . or if you have think my perswasible discourse long in the latter end ; let the affectionate desire of my country good be therein answerable for i . and such as it be i pray you accept it , as only recommend to your self , and not to be deliver to the public view of the world , lest any man take offence thereat : which some particular man may seem just to do , in that have deserve very well , i shall not herein give they their due commendation : whereas my purpose in this private discourse have be only to gratify you with a touch of those principali matter that have pass , wherein i have only take note of those man who either command 526 every service , or be of chief mark : if therefore you shall impart the same to one , and he to another , and so it pass through my hand , i know not what construction will be make thereof to my prejudice ; for that the hare ear may happy be take for home . howbeit i hold it very necessary ( i must confess ) that there shall be some true manifestation make of these thing : but be it far from i to be the author thereof , as very unfit to deliver my censure of any matter in public , and most unwilling to have my weakness discover in private . and so i do leave you to the happy success of your accustom good exercise , earnest wish that there may be some better acceptance make of the fruit of your study , then there have be of our hazard in the war . from London the 30 of August 1589. end of volume vi . 