[ n . two , 188. ] a relation send by Melchior Petoney to Nigil de Moura at Lisbon , from the hand and castle of Arguin , stand a little to the southward of cape Blanco , in the northerly latitude of 19 degree , concern the rich and secret trade from the inland of Africa thither : anno 1591. commodity fit for Arguin . wedge of gold givenfor small trify . Scarlet wonderful fine purple cloth great accept . a good harbour before the castle of Arguin . s concern the trade to this castle and hand of Arguin , your worship be to understand , that if it will please the king majesty to send hither two or three caravel once in a year with Flanders and spanish commodity , as bracelet of glass , knife , bell , linen-cloth , looking-glass , with other kind of small ware , his highness may do great good here . for 50 league up into the land the moor have many exceed rich gold mine ; insomuch that they bring down their gold to this castle to traffic with we : and for a small trifle they will give we a great wedge of gold . and because here be no trade , the say moor carry their gold to Fez be 250 league distant from hence , and there do exchange the same for the foresay kind of commodity . by this mean also his majesty may stop that passage , and keep the king of Fez from so huge a mass of gold . scarlet-clothe , and fine purple be great accept of in these part . it be a most fertile country within the land , and yield great store of wheat , flesh of all kind , and abundance of fruit . therefore , if it be possible , you shall do well to deal with his majesty , either himself to send a couple of caravel , or to give your worship leave to traffic here : for here be a very good harbour where ship may ride at anchor hard by the castle . the country where all the gold-mine be in|the call the kingdom of Darha . in this kingdom be great store 88 of city and town ; and in every city and town a captain with certain soldier ; which captain be lord and owner of the say town . one city there be concern call Couton , another Xanigeton , as also the city of tubguer , Azegue , Amader , quaherque , and the town Africanus a of Faroo . the which town and city be very great little after they and fair build , be inhabit by rich moor , and be&nningof abound with all kind of cattle , barley and date . 00 e‘ and here be such plenty of gold find upon the sand by the river side , that the say moor usual carry the same northward to Morocco , and southward to the city of Tombuto in the land of negro , which city stand about 300 league from the kingdom of Darha ; and this kingdom be but 60 league from this hand and castle of Arguin . wherefore i beseech your worship to put his majesty in remembrance hereof ; for the say city and town be but ten day journey from hence . i hearty wish that his majesty will send two or three merchant to see the state of the country , who may travel to the aforesaid city , to understand of their rich trade . for any man may go safe and come safe from those place . and thus without trouble of your worship any further , i humble take my leave . from the hand and castle of Arguin the 20 of January 1591. your worship servant Melchior Petoney . 89 [ the voyage 