the voyage of the right honourable George earl of Cumberland to the azore , etc write by the excellent mathematician and enginier master Edward Wright . he right honourable the earl of Cumberland have at his own charge prepare his small fleet of four sail only , viz. the victory one of the queen ship royal ; the Meg and Margaret small ship , ( one of which also he be force soon after to send home again , find she not able to endure the sea ) and a small caravel , and have assemble together about 400 man ( or few ) of gentleman , soldier , and sailor , embark himself and they , and set sail from the sound of Plymouth in Devonshire , the 18 day of June 1589. be accompany with these captain and gentleman which hereafter follow . captain Christopher Lister a man of great resolution , captain Edward careless , alias wright , who in sir Francis drake west-indian voyage to saint Domingo and Carthagena , be captain of the hope . captain Boswell , m. Mervin , m. Henry long , m. partridge , m. Norton , m. William Mounson captain of the Meg , and his viceadmiral , now sir William Mounson , m. Pigeon captain of the caravel . about 3 day after our departure from Plymouth we meet with 3 french ship , whereof one be of Newhaven , another of saint Malos , and so find they to Vii i a be leaguer and lawful prize , we take they and send two of they for England with all their load , which be fish for the most part from newfoundland , save that there be part thereof distribute among our small fleet , as we can find stowage for the same : and in the three , all their man be send home into France . the same day and the day follow we meet with some other ship , who ( when after some conference have with they , we perceive plain to be of Roterodam and Emden , bind for rochel ) we dismiss . the 28 and 29 day we meet diverse of our english ship , return from the Portugal voyage which my lord relieve with victual . the 13 day of July be Sunday in the morning , we espy 11 ship without sight of you coast of Spain , in the height of 39 degree , who we present prepare for , and provide to meet they , have first set forth captain Mounson in the Meg , before we , to descry whence they be . the Meg approach near , there pass some shot betwixt they , [ ii two . 156. ] whereby , as also by their admiral and vice-admiral put forth their flag , we perceive that some fight be likely to follow . have therefore fit our self for they , we make what haste we can towards they with regard always to get the wind of they , and about 10 or 11 of the clock , we come up to they with the victory . but after some few shot and some little fight pass betwixt we , they yield themselves , and the master of they all come aboard we , show their several passport from the city of Hamburg and Lubeck , from Breme , Pomerania and Calais . they have in they certain bag of pepper and syna-mom , which they confess to be the good of a Jew in Lisbon , which shall have be carry by they into their country to his factor there , and so find it by their own confession to be lawful prize , the same be soon after take and divide among our whole company , the value whereof be esteem to be about 4500 pound , at two shilling the pound . the 17 day the foresay ship be dismiss , but 7 of their man that be willing to go along with we for sailor , we take to help we , and so hold on our course for the azore . the 1 of August be Friday in the morning , we have sight of the hand of S. Michael , be one of the eastermost of the azore towards which we sail all that day , and at night have put forth a spanish flag in our maintop , that so they may the less suspect we , we approach near to the chief town and road of that hand , where we espy 3 ship ride at anchor and some other vessel : all which we determine to take in the dark of the night , and accord attempt about 10 or 11 of the clock , send our boat well man to cut their cable and hausef , and let they drive into the sea . our man come to they , find y‘ one of those great ship be the falcon of London be there under a scottish pilot who bear the name of she as his own . but 3 other small ship that lie near under the castle there , our man let loose and tow they away unto we , most of the Spaniard that be in they leap overboard and swim to shore with loud and lamentable outcry , which they of the town hear be in a uproar , and answer with the like cry . the castle discharge some great shot at our boat , but shoot without mark by reason of the darkness they do we no hurt . the Scot likewise discharge 3 great piece into the air to make . the Spaniard think they be their friend and our enemy , and short after the scottish master , and some other with he , come aboard to my lord do their duty , and ofire their service , etc Theise 3 ship be fraught with wine and sallet-oile from Sivil . the same day our caravel chase a spanish caravel to shore at saint Michael , which carry letter thither , by which we learn that the carack be depart from Tercera 8 day before . the 7 of August we have sight of a little ship which 3 3 ship forcible tow out of harbour we chase towards Tercera with our pinnace ( the weather be calm ) and towards evening we overtake she , there be in her 30 ton of good Madera wine , certain woollen cloth , silk , taffeta , etc the 14 of August we come to the hand of Flores , where we determine to take in some fresh water and fresh victual , such as the hand do afford . so we man our boat with some 120 man and row towards the shore ; whereto when we approach the inhabitant that be assemble at the land place , put forth a flag of truce , whereupon we also do the like . when we come to they , my lord give they to understand by his Portugal interpreter , that he be a friend to their king don Antonio , and come not any way to injury they , but that he mean only to have some fresh water and fresh victual of they , by way of exchange for some provision that he have , as oil , wine , or pepper , to which they present agree willing , and send some of their company for beef and sheep , and we in the mean season march southward about a mile to Villa de Santa Cruz , from whence all the inhabitant young and old be depart , and not any thing of value leave . we demand of they what be the cause hereof , they answer , fear ; as their usuali manner be when any ship come near their coast . we find that part of the hand to be full of great rocky barren hill and mountain , little inhabit by reason that it be molest with ship of war which may partly appear by this town of Santa Cruz ( be one of their chief town ) which be all ruinous , and ( as it be ) but the relic of the ancient town which have be burn about two year before by certain english ship of war , as the inhabitant there report . at evening as we be in row towards the victory , a huge fish pursue we for the space well nigh of two mile together , distant for the most part from the boat stern not a spear length , and sometime so near that the boat strike upon he , the tip of who fin about the ghil ( appear oft time above the water ) be by estimation 4 or 5 yard asunder , and his jaw gape a yard and a half wide , which put we in fear of overturn the pinnace , but God be thank ( row as hard as we can ) we escape . when we be about Flores a little ship call the drake , bring we word that the carack be at Tercera , of which news we be very glad , and speed we thitherward with all the speed we can : and by the way we come to Fayal ride the seven and twenty day of August , [ ii two . 157. ] after sun set , where we espy certain ship ride at anchor , to who we send in our skiff with captain Lister and captain Monson in she to discover the roader : and lest any danger shall happen to our boat , we send in likewise the saucy Jacke and the small caravel ; but the wind be off the shore , the ship be not able to fetch it so nigh as the Spaniard ride , which nevertheless the boat do , and clap a ship aboard of two hundred and fifty ton , which carry in her fourteen cast piece , and continue fight alone with she for the space of one hour until the come up of other boat to the rescue of she , which be send from the ship , and then a fresh board she again one boat in the quarter , another in the house , we enter she on the one side , and all the Spaniard leap overboard on the other , save Juan de Palma the captain of she and two or three more , and thus we become possessor of she . this ship be more to the castle which shoot at we all this while : the only hurt which we receive of all this shot be this , that the master of our caravel have the calf of his leg shoot away . this ship be lade with sugar , ginger , and hide late come from saint Juan de Puerto Rico ; after we have tow she clear off the castle , we row in again with our boat , and fetch out five small ship more , one lade with hide , another with elephant tooth , grain , coconut , and goat skin come from guinie , another with woad , and two with dogfish , which two last we let drive in the jn escape of 8. Englishmen from Tercera . the english voyage sea make none account of they . the other four we send for England the 30 of August . at the take of these prize be consort with we some other small man of war , as master John Davis , with his ship , pinnace , and boat , captain Markesburie with his ship , who owner be sir Walter Ralegh , the bark of lime , which be also consort with we before . the last of August in the morning we come in sight of Tercera , be about some nine or ten league from shore , where we espy come towards we , a small boat under sail , which seem somewhat strange unto we , be so far from land , and no ship in sight , to which they may belong : but come near , they put we out of doubt , show they be english man ( eight in number ) that have late be prisoner in Tercera , and find opportunity to escape at that time , with that small boat commit themselves to the sea , under god providence , have no other yard for their main sail , but two pipe staff tie together by the end , and no more provision of victual , than they can bring in their pocket and bosom . have take they all into the victory , they give we certain intelligence , that the carack be depart from thence about a week before . thus be without any further hope of those carack , we resolve to return for Fayall , with intent to surprise the town , but until the nine of September , we have either the wind so contrary , or the weather so calm , that in all that time , we make scarce nine or ten league way , linger up and down not far from Pico . the ten of September , be Wednesday in the afternoon , we come again to Fayal ride . whereupon immediate my lord send captain Lister , with one of Graciosa ( who captain Munson have before take ) and some other , towards Fayal , who certain of the inhabitant meet in a boat , and come with captain Lister to my lord , to who he give this choice : either to suffer he quiet to enter into the platform there without resistance , where he and his company will remain a space without offer any injury to they , that they ( the inhabitant ) may come unto he and compound for the ransom of the town ; or else to stand to the hazard of war . with these word they return to the town : but the keeper of the platform answer , that it be against their oath and allegiance tp king Philip to give over without fight . whereupon my lord command the boat of every ship , to be present man , and soon after land his man on the sandy shore , under the side of a hill , about half a league to the northward from the platform : upon the top of which hill certain horseman and footman show themselves , and other two company also appear , with ensign display , the one before the town upon the shore by the sea side , which march towards our land place , as though they will encounter we ; the other in a valley to the southward of the platform , as if they will have come to help the townsman : during which time , they in the platform also play upon we with great ordinance . notwithstanding my lord ( have set his man in order ) march along the sea shore , upon the sand , betwixt the sea and the town towards the platform for the space of a mile or more , and then the shore grow rocky , and permit no further progress without much difficulty , he enter into the town and pass through the street take of without resistance , unto the platform ; for those company before mention at my lord approach , be paya^ i soon disperse , and sudden vanish . likewise they of the platform , be all flee at my [ n . two . 158. ] lord come thither , leave he and his company to scale the wall , to enter and take possession without resistance . in the mean time our ship cease not to batter the foresay town and platform with great shot , till such time as we see the redcross of England flourish upon the forefront thereof . 4 description this Fayal be the principali town in all that island , of the town of and js situate direct over against the high and mighty my mountain Pico , lie towards the west northwest from that mountain , be divide therefrom by a narrow sea , which at that place be by estimation about some two or three league in breadth between the isle of Fayal and Pico . the town contain some three hundred household , their house be fair and strong build of lime and stone , and double cover with hollow tile much like our roof-tile , but that they be less at the one end then at the other . Every house almost have a cistern or well in a garden on the back side : in which garden grow vine ( with ripe cluster of grape ) make pleasant shadow , and tobacco now common know and use in England , wherewith their woman there dye their face reddish , to make they seem fresh and young : pepper indian and common ; figtree bear both white and red fig : peach tree not grow very tall : orange , lemon , quince , potato-root , etc sweet wood ( cedar i think ) be there very common , even for building and fire . my lord have possess himself of the town and platform , and be careful of the preservation of the town , give commandment , that no mariner or soldier shall enter into any house , to make any spoil thereof . but especial he be careful that the church and house of religion there shall be keep inviolate , which be accord perform , through his appointment of guarder arid keeper for those place : but the rest of the town either for want of the former inhibition , or for desire of spoil and prey , be rifle , and ransack by the soldier and mariner , who scarce leave any house unsearched , out of which they take such thing as like they , as chest of sweet wood , chair , cloth , coverlet , hang , bed , apparel : and further range into the country , where some of they 8 the earl of Cumberland also be hurt by the inhabitant . the friary there contain and maintain thirty Franciscan friar ( among who we can not find any one able to speak true latin ) be build by a friar of Angra in Tercera of the same order , about the year of our lord one thousand five hundred and six . the table in the hall have seat for the one side only , and be always cover , as ready at all time for dinner or supper . from Wednesday in the afternoon , at which time we enter the town , till Saturday night , we continue there , until the inhabitant have agree and pay for the ransom of the town , two thousand ducat , most part whereof be church-plate . we find in the platform eight and fifty iron piece of ordinance , whereof three and twenty ( as i remember ) or moor be ready mount upon their carriage , between barricado , upon a platform towards the seaside , all which ordinance we take , and set the platform on fire , and so depart : my lord have invite to dinner in the victory , on the Sunday follow , so many of the inhabitant as will willing come ( save only Diego Gomes the governor , who come but once only to parley about the ransom ) only four come and be well entertain , and solemn dismiss with sound of drum and trumpet , and a peal of ordinance : to who my lord deliver his letter subscribe with his own hand , import a request to all other Englishmen to abstain from any further molest they , save only for fresh water , and victual necessary for their intend voyage . during our abode here ( viz. the 11 of September ) two man come out of Pico which have be prisoner there : also at Fayal we set at liberty a prisoner translate from saint Jago who be cousin to a servant of don Anthonio king of Portugal ! in England : these prisoner we detain with we . on Monday we send our boat a shore for fresh water , which ( by reason of the rain that fall the former night ) come plentiful run down the hill , and will 9 otherwise have be hard to be get there . on Tuesday likewise have not yet sufficient serve our turn , we send again for fresh water , which be then not so easy to be get as the day before , by reason of a great wind : which in the afternoon increase also in such sort , that we think it not safe to ride so near the land ; whereupon we weigh anchor and so depart northwest and by west , alongst the coast of Fayal island . some of the inhabitant come aboard to we this day , tell we that always about that time of the year such wind west Southwest blow on that coast . this day , as we sail near saint George island , a huge fish lie still a little under water , or rather even therewith , appear hard by a head of we , the sea break upon his back , which be black colour , in such sort as deem at the first it have be a rock , and the [ ii two . 159. ] ship stem direct with he , we be put in a sudden fear for the time : till soon after we see he move out of the way . the 16 of September in the night it lighten much , whereupon there follow great wind and rain , which continue the 17 18 19 20 and 21 of the same . the 23 of September we come again into faial road to weigh a anchor which ( for haste and fear of foul weather ) we have leave there before , where we go on shore to see the town , the people ( as we think ) have now settle themselves there again , but notwithstanding many of they through too much distrustfulness , depart and prepare to depart with their packet at the first sight of we : until such time as they be assure by my lord , that our come be not any way to injury they , but especial to have fresh water , and some other thing needful for we , content they for the same . so than we view the town quiet , and buy such thing as we desire for our money as if we have be in England . and they help to fill we in fresh water , receive for their pain such satisfaction as content they . the 25 day we be force again to depart from thence , before we have sufficient water , by reason of a great tempest that sudden arise in the night , in so much , that my lord himself soon after midnight raise our man out of their cabin to weigh anchor , himself also together with they hale at the Capsten , and after cheer they up with wine . the next day we send our caravel and the Sawsie-Jacke to the road of saint Michael , to see what they can espy : our follow after they upon the 27 day , ply to and fro , come within sight of saint Michael , but by contrary wind the 28 29 and 30 day we be drive to leewarde , and can not get near the island . the first of October we sail alongst Tercera , and even against Brasill ( a promontory near to Angra the strong town in that island ) we espy some boat come to the town , and make out towards they : but be near to the land they run to shore and escape we . in the afternoon we come near to Graciosa , whereupon my lord forthwith send captain Lister to the hander , to let they understand that his desire be only to have water and wine of they , and some fresh victual , and not any further to trouble they . they answer they can give no resolute answer to this demand , until the governor of the hand have consult thereupon , and therefore desire he to send again to they the next day . upon the second day of October early in the morning , we send forth our long boat and pinnace , with empty cask , and about some fifty or sixty man together with the Margaret , and captain Davis his ship : for we now want all the rest of our consort . but when our man will have land , the hander shoot at they , and will not suffer they . and troop of man appear upon land , with ensign display to resist we : so our boat row alongst the shore , to find some place where they may land , not with too much 11 disadvantage : our ship and they still shoot at the hander : but no place can be find where they may land without great peril of loose many of their life , and so be constrain to retire without receive any answer , as be promise the day before . we have three man hurt in this conflict , while our boat be together in consult what be best to be do : two of they be strike with a great shot ( which the hander draw from place to place with ox ) wherewith the one lose his hand , and the other his life within two or three day after : the three be shoot into his neck with a small shot , without any great hurt . with these news our company return back again at night , whereupon preparation be make to go to they again the next day : but the day be far spend before we can come near they with our ship : neither can we find any good ground to anchor in , where we may lie to batter the town , and further we can find no land place , without great danger to loose many man : which may turn not only to the overthrow of our voyage , but also put the queen ship in great peril for want of man to bring she home . therefore my lord think it best to write to they to this effect : that he can not a little marvel at their inhumanity and cruelty which they have show towards his man , see they be send by he unto they in peaceable manner to receive their answer which they have promise to give the day before : and that be it not for don Antonio their lawful king his sake , he can not put up so great injury at their hand , without just revengement upon they : notwithstanding for don Antonio his sake , who friend he be , he be yet content to send to they once again for their answer : at night captain Lister return with this answer from they . that their gunner shoot off one of their piece , which be charge with powder only , and be stop ; which our man think it have be shoot at they , shoot again , and so begin the fight : [ ILii . 160. ] and that the next morning they will send my lord a 12 resolute answer to his demand , for as yet they can not know their governor mind herein . the next morning there come unto we a boat from the shore with a flag of truce , wherein be three of the chief man of the island , who agree with my lord that he shall have of they sixty buttes of wine , and fresh victual to refresh himself and his company withal : but as for fresh water , they can not satisfy our need therein , have themselves little or none , save such as they save in vessel or cistern when it rain , and that they have rather give we two ton of wine then one of water : but they request that our soldier may not come on shore , for they themselves will bring all they have promise to the waterside , which request be grant , we keep one of they aboard with we until their promise be perform , and the other we send to shore with our empty cask , and some of our man to help to fill , and bring they away with such other provision as be promise : so the Margaret , captain Davis his ship , and another of Weymouth stay ride at anchor before the town , to take in our provision . this ship of Weymouth come to we the day before , and have take a rich prize ( as it be report ) worth sixteen thousand pound , which bring we news that the west-indian fleet be not yet come , but will come very short . but we with the victory put off to sea , and upon Saturday the four of October , we take a french ship of saint Malo ( a city of the unholy league ) load with fish from Newfoundland : which have be in so great a tempest , that she be constrain to cut her main mast overboard for her safety , and be now come to Graciosa , to repair her self . but so hardly it befall she , that she do not only not repair her former loss , but lose all that remain unto we . the chief of her man we take into our ship , and send some of our man , mariner , and soldier into she to bring she into England . upon the Sunday follow at night , all our pro-13 miss provision be bring unto we from gratiosa : and we friendly dismiss the hander with a peal of ordinance . upon Monday , Tuesday , and Wednesday , we ply to and fro about those island , be very rough weather . and upon Thursday at night , be drive some three or four league from Tercera , we see fifteen sail of the west-indian fleet come into the haven at Angra in Tercera . but the wind be such , that for the space of four day after , though we lie as close by the wind as be possible , yet we can not come near they . in this time we lose our late french prize , not be able to lie so near the wind as we , and hear no more of she till we come to England where she safe arrive . upon Monday we come very near the haven mouth , be mind to have run in among they , and to have fetch out some of they if it have be possible : but in the end this enterprise be deem too daun-gero'us , consider the strength of the place where they ride , be hale and tow in near the town , at the first sight of our approach , and lie under the protection of the castle of Brasill , on the one side ( have in it five and twenty piece of ordinance ) and a fort on the other side wherein be 13 or 14 great brass piece . beside , when we come near land the wind prove too scant for we to attempt any such enterprise . upon Tuesday the fourteenth of October we send our boat to the road to sound the depth , to see if there be any anchor place for we , where we may lie without shot of the castle and fort , and within shot of some of those ship , that we may either make they come out to we , or sink they where they lie . our boat return have find out such a place as we desire , but the wind will not suffer we to come near it , and again if we can have ankor there , it be think likely that they will rather run themselves a ground to save their life and liberty , and some of their good , then come forth to loose their liberty and good to we their enemy . so we shoot at they to see if we can reach they , but it fall far short . and thus we depart , think it not probable that they will come forth so long as we watch for they before the haven mouth , or within sight of they . for the space of five day after we put off to sea , and lie without sight of they , and send a pinnace to lie out of sight close by the shore , to bring we word if they shall come forth . after a while the pinnace return and tell we that those ship in the haven have take down their sail , and let down their top mast : so that we suppose they will never come forth , till they perceive we to be quite go . wherefore upon the 20 of October , hear that there be certain scottish ship at saint Michael , we sail thither , and find there one scottish reader , and two or three more at villa Franca , the next ride a league or two from the town of saint Michael , to the eastwards : of who we have for our relief some small quantity of wine ( viz. some five or six buttes of they all ) and some fresh water , but nothing sufficient to serve our turn . upon Tuesday the one and twenty of October , we send our long boat to shore for fresh water at a brook a little to the westwards from villa Franca . but the inhabitant espy we come down with two [ ii two . 161. ] ensign display , and about some hundred and fifty man arm , to withstand our land . so our man have spend all their powder upon they in attempt to land , and not be able to prevail at so great odds , return frustrate . from hence we depart towards saint Mary island , mind to water there , and then to go for the coast of Spain . for we have intelligence that it be a place of no great force , and that we may water there very well : therefore upon Friday follow , my lord send captain Lister , and captain Amias Preston now sir Amias Preston ( who not long before come to we out of his own ship , and she loose we in the night , he be force to tarry still with we ) with our long boat and pinnace , and some sixty or seventie shot in they , with a friendly letter to the hander , that they will grant we leave to water , and we will no further trouble they . so we depart from the victory for the hand , about nine of the clock in the forenoon , and row fresh until about 3 a clock afternoon . at which time our man be something weary with row , and be within a league or two of the shore , and 4 or 5 league from the victory , they espy ( to their refresh ) two ship ride at anchor hard under the town , whereupon have shift some 6 or 7 of our man into captain Davis his boat , be too much pester in our own , and retain with we some 20 shot in the pinnace , we make way towards they with all the speed we can . by the way as we row we see boat pass betwixt the reader and the shore , and man in their shirt swim and wade to shore , who as we perceive afterwards , be labour to set those ship fast on ground , and the inhabitant as busy prepare themselves for the defence of those roader , their hand , and themselves . when we come near they , captain Lister command the trumpet to be sound , but prohibit any shot to be discharge at they , until they have direction from he : but some of the company , either not well perceive or regard what he say , immediate upon the sound of the trumpet discharge their piece at the islander , which for the most part lie in trench and fortify place unseen , to their own best advantage : who immediate shoot likewise at we , both with small and great shot , without danger to themselves : notwithstanding captain Lister earnest hasten forward the sailor that row , who begin to shrink at that shot , fly so fast about their ear , and himself first enter one of the ship that lie a little further from shore than the other , we speedy follow after he into she , still ply they with our shot . and have cut in sunder her cable and hauser , tow she away with our pinnace . in the mean time captain Davis his boat overtake we and enter into the other ship , which also ( as the former ) be forsake by all her man : but they be constrain to leave she and to come again into their boat ( while shoot and stone from shore fly fast among they ) find she to stick so fast a ground , that they can not stir she : which the townsman also perceive , and see that they be but few in number , and we ( busy about the other ship ) not come to aid they , be prepare to have come and take they . but they return unto we , and so together we come away towards the victory , tow after we the prize that we have now take , which be late come from Brasill , load with sugar . in this fight we have two man slay and 16 wound : and as for they , it be like they have little hurt , lie for the most part behind stone wall , which be build one above another hard by the sea side , upon the end of the hill whereupon the town stand betwixt two valley . upon the top of the hill lie their great ordinance ( such as they have ) wherewith they shoot leaden bullet , whereof one pierce through our prize side , and lie still in the ship without do any more harm . the next day we go again for water to the same hand , but not know before the inconvenience and disadvantage of the place where we attempt to land , we return frustrate . the same night the 25 of October we depart for saint George hand for fresh water , whither we come on Monday follow October 27 , and have espy where a spout of water come run down : the pinnace and long boat be present man and send under the conduct of captain Preston , and captain Munson , by who my lord send a letter to the hander as before , to grant we leave to water only , and we will not seven 17 b further trouble they : notwithstanding our man come on shore find some of the poor hander , which for fear of we hide themselves among the rock . and on Wednesday follow our boat return with fresh water , whereof they bring only six ton for the victory , allege they can get no more , think [ ii two . 162. ] ( as it be suppose ) that my lord have no more provision of water and wine , but only 12 ton , will not go for the coast of Spain , but straight for the coast of England , as many of our man great desire : notwithstanding my lord be unwilling so to do , and be mind the next day to have take in more water : but through roughness of the sea and wind , and unwillingness of his man it be not do . yet his Hon. purpose not to return with so much provision unspent , and his voyage ( as he think ) not yet perform in such sort as may give some reasonable contentment or satisfaction to himself and other . therefore because no more water can now convenient be get , and be uncertain when it can be get , and the time of our stay aboard also uncertain , the matter be refer to the choice of the whole company , whither they will tarry long , till we may be more sufficient provide of fresh water , or go by the coast of Spain for England , with half so much allowance of drink as before , they willing agree that every mess shall be allow at one meal but half so much drink as they be accustom ( except they that be sick or wound ) and so to go for England , take the coast of Spain in our way , to see if we can that way make up our voyage . upon Saturday October 31 we send the Margaret ( because she leak much ) direct for England , together with the prize of Brasile which we take at saint marie , and in they some of our hurt and wound man or otherwise sick be send home as they desire , for England : but captain Monson be take out of the Meg into the victory . so we hold on our course for the coast of Spain with a fair wind and a large which before our seidome have . and upon Twesday follow be the 4 of Novemb. we espy a sail right before we , which we chase till about three a clock in the afternoon , at which time we overtake she , she strike sail , and be demand who be her owner and from whence she be , they answer , a Portugal , and from pernan-bucke in Brasile . she be a ship of some no tun burden , freight with 410 chest of sugar , and 50 kintal of brasill-wood , every kintail contain one hundred pound weight : we take she in latitude nine and twenty degree , about two hundred league from Lisbon westwards : captain Preston be present send unto she , who bring the principali of her man aboard the victory , and certain of our man , mariner and soldier be send aboard she . the Portugal of this prize tell we that they see another ship before they that day about noon . have therefore dispatch all thing about the prize aforesaid and leave our long boat with captain Davis , take his lesser boat with we , we make way after this other ship with all the sail we can bear , hold on our course due east , and give order to captain Davis his ship and the prize that they shall follow we due east , and that if they have sight of we the morning follow they shall follow we still : if not , they shall go for England . the next morning we espy not the sail which we chase , and captain Davis his ship and the prize be behind we out of sight : but the next Thursday the sixth of November ( be in latitude 38 degree 30 minute , and about sixty league from Lisbon westwards ) early in the morning captain Preston descry a sail some two or three league a head of we , after which we present hasten our chase , and overtake she about eight or nine of the clock before noon . she come late from saint Michael road , have be before at Brasill load with sugar and Brasile . Having 19 scent our boat to they to bring some of the chief of their man aboard the victory , in the mean time while they be in come to we one out of the main top espy another sail a head some three or four league from we . so immediate upon the return of our boat , have send her back again with some of our man aboard the prize , we pursue speedy this new chase , with all the sail we can pack on , and about two a clock in the afternoon overtake she : she have make provision to fight with we , have hang the side of the ship so thick with hide ( wherewith especial she be load ) that musket shot can not have pierce they : but year we have discharge two great piece of our ordinance at she , she strike sail , and approach near , we ask of whence they be , they answer from the West-indies , from Mexico , and saint John de Lowe ( true call Ulhua . ) this ship be of some three or four hundred ton , and have in her seven hundred hide worth ten shilling a piece : six chest of Cochinell , every chest hold one hundred pound weight , and every pound worth six and twenty shilling and eight penny , and certain chest of sugar and China dish , with some plate and silver . the captain of she be a italian , and by his behaviour seem to be a grave , wise , and civil man : he have put a adventure in this ship five and twenty thousand ducat . we take he with certain other of her chief man ( which be Spaniard ) into the victory : and captain Lister with so many other of the chief of our mariner , soldier , and sailor as be think sufficient , to the number of 20. or there about , be send into she . in the mean time ( our stay ) our other prize which follow after , come up to we . and now we have our hand full and with joy shape our course for England , for so it be think meet , have now so many Portugal , Spaniard and Frenchman among we , that if we shall have take any more prize afterward , we have not be well able to have man they without endanger our self . so about 6. of the clock in the afternoon ( when our other prize have overtake we ) we set sail for England . but our prize not be able to bear we company without spare they many of our sail , which cause our ship to roll and wallow , in such sort that it be not only very troublesome to we , but , as it be think , will also have put the main mast in danger of fall overboard : have acquaint they with these inconvenience , we give they direction to keep their course together , follow we , and so to come to Portsmouth . we take this last prize in the latitude of 39 degree , and about 46. league to the westwards from the rock . she be one of those 16. ship which we see go into the haven at Angra in Ter^era , October 8. some of the man that we take out of she tell we , that while we be ply up and down before that haven , as before be show , expect the come forth of those ship , three of the great and best of they , at the appointment of the governor of Tergera , be unlade of their treasure and merchandise . and in every of they be put three hundred soldier , which be appoint to have come to lay the victory aboard in the night , and take she : but when this shall have be do the victory be go out of their sight . now we go merry before the wind with all the sail we can bear , insomuch that in the space of 24. hour , we sail near 47. league , that be sevenscore English mile , betwixt Friday at noon and Saturday at noon ( notwithstanding the ship be very foul , and much grow with long be at sea ) which cause some of our company to make account they will see what run at tilt there shall be at Whitehall upon the queen day . other be imagine what a Christmas they will keep in England with their share of the prize we have take . but so it befall , that we keep a cold Christmas with the bishop and 21 his clerk ( rock that lie to the westwards from silly , and the western part of England : ) for soon after the wind scant come about to the eastwards ( the worst part of the heaven for we , from which the wind can blow ) in such sort , that we can not fetch any part of England . and hereupon also our allowance of drink , which be scant enough before , be yet more more scant , because of the scarcity thereof in the ship . so that now a man be allow but half a pint at a meal , and that many time cold water , and scarce sweet . notwithstanding this be a happy estate in comparison of that which follow : for from half a pint we come to a quarter , and that last not long neither , so that by reason of this great scarcity of drink , and contrariety of wind , we think to put into Ireland , there to relieve our want . but when we come near thither , lie at hull all night ( tarry for the daylight of the next morning , whereby we may the safely bring our ship into some convenient harbour there ) we be drive so far to leeward , that we can fetch no part of Ireland , so as with heavy heart and sad cheer , we be constrain to return back again , and expect till it shall please God to send we a fair wind either for England or Ireland . in the mean time we be allow every man three or four spoon full of vinegar to drink at a meal : for other drink we have none , save only at two or three meal , when we have in stead hereof as much wine , which be wringe out of wine-lee that remain . with this hard fare ( for by reason of our great want of drink , we dare eat but very little ) we continue for the space of a fortnight or thereabouts : save that now and then we feast for it in the mean time : and that be when there fall any hail or rain : the hailstone we gather up and do eat they more pleasant then if they have be the sweet comfit in the world ; the rain-drop be so careful save , that so near as we can , not one be lose in all our ship . some hang up sheet tie with cord by the four corner , and a weight in the midst that the water may run down thither , and so be receive into some vessel set or hang underneath : some that want sheet , hang up nakins , and clout , and watch they till they be through wet , then wring and suck out the water . and that water which fall down and wash away the filth and soil of the ship , tread under foot , as bad as run down the kennel many time when it rain , be not lose i warrant you , but watch and attend careful ( yea sometime with strife and contention ) at every scupper-hole , and other place where it run down , with dish , pot , can , and jar , whereof some drink hearty draught even as it be , mud and all , without tarry to dense or settle it : other elense it first , but not often , for it be so thick and go so slow thorough , that they may ill endure to tarry so long , and be loath to loose too much of such precious stuff : some lick with their tongue ( like dog ) the board under foot , the side , rail , and mast of the ship : other that be more ingenious , fasten girdle or rope about the mast , daub tallow betwixt they and the mast ( that the rain may not run down between ) in such sort , that those rope or girdle hang low on the one side then on the other , a spout of leather be fasten to the low part of they , that all the rain drop that come run down the mast , may meet together at that place , and there be receive . he that get a can of water by these mean be speak of , sue to , and envy as a rich man . quam pulchrum digito monstrari and dicier hic est ? some of the poor Spaniard that we have take ( who notwithstanding have the same allowance that our own man have ) will come and crave of we , for the love of God , but so much water as they can hold in the hollow of their hand : and they have it , notwithstanding our great extremity , to teach they some humanity in stead of their accustom barbarity , both to we and other nation heretofore . 23 [ ii two . 164. ] they put also bullet of lead into their mouth to slake their thirst . now in every corner of the ship be hear the lamentable cry of sick and wound man sound woeful in our ear , cry out and pitiful complain for want of drink , be ready to die , yea many die for lack thereof , so as by reason of this great extremity we lose many more man , than we have do all the voyage before : have before this time be so well and sufficient provide for , that we live in manner as well and healthful , and die as few as if we have be in England , whereas now light every day some be cast overboard . but the second day of December 1589. be a festi vail day with we , for than it rain a good pace , and we save some pretty store of rain water ( though we be well wet for it , and that at midnight ) and fill our skin full beside : notwithstanding it be muddy and bitter with wash the ship , but ( with some sugar which we have to sweeten it withal ) it go merry down , yet remember we and wish for with all our heart , many a conduit , pump , spring , and stream of clear sweet run water in England : and how miserable we have account some poor soul who we have see drive for thirst to drink thereof , and how happy we will now have think our self if we may have have our fill of the same : yet shall we have fare the better with this our poor feast , if we may have have our meat and drink ( such and so much as it be ) stand quiet before we : but beside all the former extremity , we be so toss and tur-moiled with such horrible stormy and tempestuous weather , that every man have best hold fast he can , cup , and dish in his hand , yea and himself too , many time , by the rope , rail , or side of the ship or else he shall soon find all under foot . herewith our main sail be tear from the yard and blow overboard quite away into the sea without recovery , and our other sail so rend and tear ( from side to side some of they ) that hardly any of they escape hole . the rage wave and foam surge of the sea come roll like mountain one after another , and overrake the waste of the ship like a mighty river run over it , whereas in fair weather it be near 20. foot above the water , that now we may cry out with the princely prophet psalm 107. vers . 26. they mount up to heaven , and descend to the deep , so that their soul melt away for trouble : they reel too and fro , and stagger like a drunken man , and all their cunning be go . with this extremity of foul weather the ship be so toss and shake , that by the crake noise it make , and by the leak which be now much more than ordinary , we be in great fear it will have shake in sunder , so that now also we have just cause to pray a little otherwise then the poet , though mar the verse , yet mend the meaning . Deus maris and coeli , quid enim nisi vota supersunt , Solvere quassatae parcito membra ratis . notwithstanding it please God of his great goodness to deliver we out of this danger . then forthwith a new main sail be make and fasten to the yard , and the rest repair as time • and place will suffer : which we have no soon do , but yet again we be trouble with as great extremity as before , so that again we be like to have lose our new main sail , have not master William Antony the master of the ship himself ( when none else will or dare ) venture with danger of drown by creep along upon the main yard ( which be let down close to the rail ) to gather it up out of the sea , and to fasten it thereto , be in the mean while ofttimes duck over head and ear into the sea . Theise storm be so terrible , that there be some in our company , which confess they have go to sea for the space of 20. year , and have never see the like , and vow that if ever they return safe home , they will never come to sea again . the last of November at night we meet with a english ship , out of which ( because it be too late that night ) it be agree that we shall have have the next morning two or three ton of wine , which , as they say , be all the provision of drink they have , save only [ ii two . 165. ] a but or two , which they must needs reserve for their own use : but after that , we hear of they no more , till they be set on ground upon the coast of Ireland , where it appear that they may have spare we much more than they pretend they can , so as they may well have relieve our great necessity , and have have sufficient for themselves beside , to bring they into England . the first of December at night we speak with another english ship , and have some beer out of she , but not sufficient to carry we into England , so that we be constrain to put into Ireland , the wind so serve . the next day we come to a anchor , not far from the saint kelme under the land and wind , where we be somewhat more quiet , but ( that be no safe harbour to ride in ) the next morning we go about to weigh anchor , but have some of our man hurt at the Capsten , we be fain to give over and leave it behind , hold on our course to Ventrie haven , where we safe arrive the same day , that place be a very safe and convenient harbour for we , that now we may sing as we have just cause , they that go down to the sea , etc so soon as we have anchor here my lord go forthwith to shore , and bring present fresh water and fresh victual , as mutton , pig , hen , etc to refresh his company withal . notwithstanding himself have late be very weak , and taste of the same extremity that his company do : for in the time of our former want , have a little fresh water leave he 26 remain in a pot , in the night it be break , and the water drink and dry up . soon after the sick and wound man be carry to the next principali town , call dingenacush , be about three mile distant from the foresay haven , where our ship road , to the eastwards , that there they may be the better refresh , and have the chirurgeon daily to attend upon they . here we well refresh our self while the irish harp sound sweet in our ear , and here we , who for the former extremity be in manner half dead , have our life ( as it be ) restore unto we again . this dingenacush be the chief town in all that part of Ireland , it consist but of one main street , from whence some small doe proceed on either side . it have have gate ( as it seem ) in time pass at either end to open and shut as a town of war , and a castle also . the house be very strong build with thick stone wall , and narrow window like unto castle : for as they confess , in time of trouble , by reason of the wild irish or otherwise , they use their house for their defence as castle . the castle and all the house in the town , save four , be win , burn , and ruinate by the earl of Desmond . Theise four house fortify themselves against he , and withstand he and all his power perforce , so as he can not win they . there remain yet a thick stone wall that pass overthwart the midst of the street which be a part of their fortification . notwithstanding while they thus defend themselves , as some of they yet alive confess , they be drive to as great extremity as the Jew , besiege by Titus the roman emperor , insomuch that they be constrain to eat dead man carcase for hunger . the town be now again somewhat repair , but in effect there remain but the ruin of the former town . common they have no chim-neis in their house , except they of the better sort , 27 the english voyage so that the smoke be very troublesome to we , while we continue there . their fuel be turf , which they have very good , and whinne or fur . there grow little wood thereabouts , which make building chargeable there : as also want of lime ( as they report ) which they be fain to fetch from far , when they have need thereof . but of stone there be store enough , so that with they they common make their hedge to part each man ground from other ; and the ground seem to be nothing else within but rock and stone : yet it be very fruitful and plentiful of grass , and grain , as may appear by the abundance of cow and cattle there : insomuch that we have good mutton ( though somewhat less than we in England ) for two shilling or five groat a piece , good pig and hen for 3. penny a piece . the great want be industrious , painful , and husbandly inhabitant to till and trim the ground : for the common sort , if they can provide sufficient to serve from hand to mouth , take no further care . of money ( as it seem ) there be very small store among they , which perhaps be the cause that make they double and triple the prize of many thing we buy of they , more than they be before our come thither . good land be here to be have for four penny the acre yearly rend . there be mine of Alome , tin , brass , and iron . stone we see there as clear as crystal , natural square like diamond . that part of the country be all full of great mountains and hill , from whence come running down the pleasant stream of sweet fresh run water . the naturali hardness of that nation appear in this , that their small child run usual in the midst of winter up and down the street barefoot and barelegged , with no other apparel ( many time ) save only a manteli to cover their nakedness . the chief officer of their town they call their sovereign , who have the same office and authority 28 the earl of Cumberland among they that our major have with we in England , and have his sergeant to attend upon he , and bear the mace before he as our major . we be first entertain at the sovereign house , which be one of those 4. that withstand the earl of Desmond in his rebellion . they have the same form of common prayer word for word in latin , that we have here in England . upon the Sunday the sovereign come into the church with the sergeant before he , and the sheriff and other of the town accompany he , and there they kneel down every man by himself private to make his prayer . after this they rise and go out of the church again to drink , which be do , they return again into the church , and then the minister begin prayer . their manner of baptize differ something from we : part of the service belong thereto be repeat in latin , and part in irish . the minister take the child in his hand , and first dip it backward , and then forward , over head and ear into the cold water in the midst of winter , whereby also may appear their naturali hardness , ( as before be specify . ) they have neither bell , drum , nor trumpet , to call the parishioner together , but they expect till their sovereign come , and then they that have any devotion follow he . they make their bread all in cake , and , for the ten part , the baker bake for all the town . we have of they some 10. or 11. ton of beer for the victory , but it prove like a present purgation to they that take it , so that we choose rather to drink water than it . the 20. of December we loose from hence , have well provide our self of fresh water , and other thing necessary , be accompany with sir Edw. Dennie , his lady , and two young son . this day in the morning my lord go ashore to dispatch away speedy some fresh water that remain for the victory , the wind be very fair for we , 29 bring we news that there be 60. Spanish prize take and bring to England . for two or three day we have a fair wind , but afterward it scant so , that ( as i say before ) we be fain to keep he cool Christmas with the bishop and his clerk . after this we meet with a english ship , that bring we joyful news of 91. Spanish prize that be come to England : and sorrowful news withal , that the last and best prize we take , have suffer shipwreck at a place upon the coast of Cornwall which the cornish man call ais efferne , that be , hell-cliff , and that captain Lister and all the man in the ship be drown , save 5. or 6. the one half english , the other Spanish that save themselves with swim : but notwithstanding much of the good be save , and reserve for we , by sir Francis Godolphin , and the worshipful gentleman of the country there . my lord be very sorry for captain lister death , wish that he have lose his voyage to have save his life . the 29. of December we meet with another ship , that tell we then same news , and that sir Martin Frobisher , and captain Reymond have take the admiral and vice-admirall of the fleet that we espy go to Tercera haven . but the admiral be sink with much leak , near to the idy stone , a rock that lie over against Plymouth sound , and the man be save . this ship also certify we that captain prestons ship have take a prize load with silver . my lord enter present into this ship , and go to Falmouth , and we hold on our course for Plymouth . at night we come near to the ram-head ( the next cape westwards from Plymouth sound ) but we be afraid to double it in the night , misdoubt the scantness of the wind . so we stand off to sea half the night , and towards morning have the wind more large , and make too little spare thereof , that partly for this cause , and partly through mistake of the land , we be drive so much to leeward , that we can not double that cape : therefore 3° we return back again , and come into Falmouth haven , where we strike on ground in 17. foot water : but it be a low ebb , and ready again to flow , and the ground soft , so as no hurt be do . here with gladness we set foot again upon the english ground ( long desire ) and refresh our self with keep part of Christmas upon our native soil . the valiant fight perform by 10. merchant ship of London , against 12. Spanish galley in the strait of Gibraltar , the 24. of April 1590. t be not long since sundry valiant ship appertain to the merchant of London , be freight and rig forth , some for Venice , some for Constantinople , and some to sundry other place of traffic , among who these ensue meet within the strait of Gibraltar , as they be take their course homeward , have before escape all other danger . the first whereof be the Salomon appertain to m. Aiderman Barnam of London , and m. bond , and m. Twyd of Harwich ; which go forth the first day of February last . the second be the Margaret and John belong to m. wat of London : the third be the minion : the four be the ascension . the five be the centurion of master cordal : the sixth the violet : the seven the Samuel : the eight the crescent : the nine the Elizabeth : and the 10. be the Richard belong to m. Duffield . all these ship be of notable and approve service , coming near to the mouth of the strait hard by the coast of Barbary , descry twelve tall galley brave furnish and strong provide with man and munition , ready to seize upon these english ship : which be perceive by the captain and master thereof , we make speedy preparation for the defence of our self , 31 [ ii two . 167. ] February I59° - 