day after in the expedition of London , and two more in a flemish flyboat , and one in the mary Edward also of London , other two of our number die in the country of the bloody-flux : the one at our first imprisonment at Morocco , who name be George Hancock , and the other at saint Cruz , who name be Robert Swancon , who death be hasten by eat of root and other unnatural thing to slake their rage hunger in our travail , and by our hard and cold lodging in the open field without tent . thus of fifty person through the rashness of a unskilful master ten only survive of we , and after a thousand misery return home poor , sick , and feeble into our country . Richard Johnson . Thomas Henmore . William William carpenter . John Silvester . John Durham . Thomas Whiting . Abraham rouse . William church . John Matthewes . John fox . the letter of the queen most excellent majestic send by one Laurence Aldersey unto the emperor of Aethiopia , 1597. invictissimo potentissimoque Abassenorum regi , magnoque utriusque Aethiopia ? imperatori etc Lizabetha dei gratia angliae , francia , and hiberniae regina , fidei defensor etc summo ac potentissimo tethiopiae imperatori salutem . quod ab omnibus qui ubivis terrarum ac gentium sunt regibus principibusque praestari par and aequum est , ut quanquam maximo locorum intervallo dissiti , and moribus ac legibus discrepantes , communem tamen generis humani societatem tueri and conservare , mutuaque ut occasio ferret , charitatis and benevolentiae officia velint exercere : in eo nos de vestra fide atque humanitate spem certissimam concipiente , huic subito un 129 1 A.D. nostro Laurentio Alderseio in regnum vestrum proficiscenti , hasce litera nostras , quibus and nostra erga vos benevolentia testata sit , and illum hinc profectum esse constet , potissimiim vobis indicandas dedimus . Qui ciim orbis terrarum perscrutandi cognoscendique study permotus , multis antehac regionibus peragratis , jam tandem in eas regiones , quae vestrae ditionis sunt , longum , periculosiimque iter instituat : ciim ipse existimavit , tum nos etiam sumus in eadem opinion , ad incolumitatem svam , atque etiam ad gratiam apud vos , plurimum illi profuturum , si diplomat nostro munitus , benevolentiae nostrae and profectionis hinc svae testimonium ad vos deferret . nam cum summus ille mundi conditor rect6r-que praepotens deus , regibus principibiisque qui svam vicem gerunt , orbem terrarum , suis cuique finibus pro rata portion designatis , regendum atque administrandum dederit ; e6que munere jus quoddam inter eos fraternae necessitudinis , aetermimque foedus ab illis colendum sanxerit : non erit ( ut arbitramur ) ingratum vobis , ciim benevolentiae nostrae significationem , tam immensa maris ac terrarum spatia transgressam , ab ultima britannia ad vos in aethiopiam perferri intellexeriti . Nobisque rursus erit jucundum , ciim subditorum nostrorum predication , ab ipsis Nili fontibus , and ab iis regionibus quae solis cursum definiunt , fama vestri nominis ad nos recurret . erit igitur humanitatis vestrae huic subdito nostro eam largiri gratiam , ut in ditionem vestram sub praesidio ac tutela vestri nominis intrare , ibique salvus and incolumis manner possit : quod ipsum etiam ab aliis principibus , per quorum regiones illi transeundum erit , magnopere petimus , nobisque ipsis illud honoris causa tributum existimabimus : neque tamen majorem hac in re gratiam postulamus , quam vicissim omnium principum subditis , omnidmque gentium hominibus ad nos commeantibus liberrimi concedimus . Datum Londini quinto die novembris : anno regni nostri tricesimo nono : ann6que Dom. 1597. 130 to the most invincible and puissant king of the Abassens , the mighty emperor of Aethiopia the high and the low . ELizabeth by the grace of God queen of England , France and Ireland , defender of the faith , etc to the most high and mighty emperor of Aethiopia greeting . whereas it be a matter requisite and well beseem all king and prince of what land or nation soever , be they never so much dissever in place or differ in custom and law , to maintain and preserve the common society of mankind , and , as occasion shall be offer , to perform mutual duty of charity and benevolence : we for that cause conceive most undoubted hope of your princely fidelity and courtesy , have give unto this our subject Laurence Aldersey intend to travel into your dominion , these our letter to be deliver without fail unto your highness , to the end they may be a testimony of our good will towards you and of our say subject his departure from England . who , after his travel in many foreign country , be as yet inflame with a desire more thorough to survey and contemplate the world , and now at length to undertake a long and dangerous journey into your territory and region : both the say Laurence think , and our self also deem , that it will very much avail he , as well for his own safety as for the attain of your favour , if , be protect with our broad seal , he may transport unto your highness a testimony of our love affection and of his departure from hence . for sithence almighty God the high creator and governor of the world have allot unto king and prince his vicegerent over the face of the whole earth , their design portion and limit to be rule and administer by they ; and by this his gift have establish among they a certain law of I3I A.D. ’597 - brotherly kindness , and a eternal league by they to be observe : it will not ( we hope ) seem unpleasant unto your highness , when you shall have intelligence of our love letter send so huge a distance over sea and land , even from the far realm of England unto you in Aethiopia . on the other side our self shall take great solace and delight , when as by the relation of our own subject , the renown of your name shall be bring unto we from the fountain of Nilus , and from those region which be situate under the southern Tropike . may it please you therefore of your princely clemency to vouchsafe so much favour on this our subject , that he may , under the safeguard and protection of your name , enter into your highness dominion , and there remain safe and free from danger . which favour and courtesy we do likewise most earnest request at the hand of other prince , through who signory our say subject be to pass ; and we shall esteem it as do unto our self and for our honour sake . neither do we require any great favour in this behalf , than we be upon the like occasion most ready to grant unto the subject of all prince and the people of all nation , travel into our dominion . give at London the five day of November , in the thirty and nine year of our reign : and in the year of our lord I597 - 132 