offer of Christopher Columbus a.d. 1488. Carmina Meredith filii Rhesi mentionem facientia de madoco filio oweni Guynedd , and de sva navigation in terras incognitas . vixit hic Meredith circiter annum domini 1477. MAdoc wife , mwyedic wed , verse 1 lawn genau Owyn Guynedd : TaZdfrZ ni tynnum dir , ry enaid oedd 7^ , William na da mawr , and y moroedd . Camden . the same in english . Madoc i be the son of Owen Gwynedd with stature large , and comely grace adorn : no land at home nor store of wealth i please , my mind be whole to search the ocean sea . the offer of the discovery of the west Indies [ he . 2. ] by Christopher Columbus to king Henry the seven in the year 1488 the 13 of February : with the king acceptation of the offer , and the cause whereupon he be deprive of the same : record in the thirteenth chapter of the history of don Fernand Columbus of the life and deed of his father Christopher Columbus . Hristophoro Colon temendo , se parimente i re di Castiglia non assentissero alia sva impresa , non gli bisognasse proporla di nuovo a qualche altro principe , and cosi in cio passasse lungo tempo ; mando in inghilterra un suo fratello , che haveva appresso di se , chiamato Bartholomeo Colon : il qual , quantunque non havesse lettere latin , era perd huomo prattico , and giudicioso nelle cose del mare , and sapea molto bene far cart da navigare , and sphere , and altri instrumenti di quella profession , come 135 dal suo fratello era instrutto . partito adunque bartholomeo colon per inghilterra , voile la sva sort , i desk in man di cor sali , i quali lo spogliarono insieme con gli altri della sva nave . Per la qual cosa , and per la sva poverti and infirmity , i in cosi diverse terre lo assalirono crudelmente , prolungo per grand tempo la sva ambasciata , fin che , aquistata un poco di faculta con le cart , change ’ ei fabricava , comincio a far pratiche counterfeit ’ il re Enrico settimo , padre de Enrico ottavo , i all present regna : a cvi appresento un mappamondo , nel quale erano scritti question versi , i from le sue scripture io trovai , and da i saranno qui posti piu tosto per 1 ’ antichita , che per la loro eleganza . terrarum quicunque cupis foeliciter oras noscere , cuncta decens docte pictura docebit , quam Strabo affirmat , Ptolomaeus , Plinius , atque Isidorus : non una tamen sententia cuique . pingitur hic etiam nuper sulcata carinis Hispanis zona illa , prius incognita genti torrida , quae tandem nunc est notissima multis . et piu di sotto diceva . Pro authore sive pictore . Janua cvi patriae est nomen , cvi Bartholomaeus Columbus de terra Rubra , opus edidit istud , londoniis anno domini 1480 atque insuper anno octavo , decimaque die cum tertia mensis Februarii . laudes christo cantentur abunde . et , percioche awertira alcuno , i dice Columbus de terra Rubra , dico , che medesimamente io viddi alcune sotto scritioni dell ’ ammiraglio , primo i acquistasse lo stato , ou ’ egli si sotto scriveva , Columbus de terra Rubra . ma , tornando all re d ’ inghilterra , dico , che , da il il mappamondo veduto , and cio i baptize ’ ammiraglio gli offeriva , con allegro volto accetto la sva offerta , and mandolo a chiamare . ma , percioche dio 1 ’ haveva per Castiglia serbata , gia 1 ’ ammiraglio in quel tempo era 136 andato , and tomato con la vittoria della sva impresa , secondo che per ordine si raccontera . Lasciard hora di raccontar cid , i Bartolomeo Colon haveva negociato in inghilterra , and tornaro all ’ ammiraglio , etc the same in english . / " ^Hristopher Columbus fear lest if the king of v-u Castille in like manner ( as the king of Portugal have do ) shall not condescend unto his enterprise , he shall be enforce to offer the same again to some other prince , 8c so much time shall be spend therein , send into England a certain brother of he which he have with he , who name be Bartholomew Columbus , who , albeit he have not the latin tongue , yet nevertheless be a man of experience and skilful in sea cause , and can very well make sea card and globe , and other instrument belong to that profession , as he be instruct by his brother . wherefore after that Bartholomew Columbus be depart for England , his luck be to fall into the hand of pirate , which spoil he with the rest of they which be in the ship which he go in . upon which occasion , and by reason of his poverty and sickness which cruel assault he in a country so far distant from his friend , he defer his am-bassage for a long while , until such time as he have get somewhat handsome about he with make of sea fir England . card . at length he begin to deal with king Henry the seven the father of Henry the eight , which reign at this present : unto who he present a map of the world , wherein these verse be write , which i find among his paper : and i will here set they down , rather for their antiquity then for their goodness . thou which desire easy the coast of land to know , this comely map right learned the same to thou will show : which Strabo , Pliny , Ptolomew and Isodore maintain : yet for all that they do not all in one accord remain . 137 [ he . 3 - ] . the occasion why the west Indies be not discover king Henry the seven his acceptation of Columbus offer . the english voyage here also be set down the late discover burn zone by Portugal , unto the world which whilom be unknown , whereof the knowledge now at length through all the world be blow ; and a little under he add : for the author or the drawer . he , who dear native soil hight stately Genua , even he who name be Bartholomew Colon de terra Rubra , the year of grace a thousand and four hundred and fourscore and eight , and on the thirteenth day of February more , in London publish this work . to Christ all laud therefore . and because some peradventure may observe that he call himself Columbus de terra Rubra , i say , that in like manner i have see some subscription of my father Christopher Columbus , before he have the degree of admiral , wherein he sign his name thus , Columbus de terra Rubra . but to return to the king of England , i say , that after he have see the map , and that which my father Christopher Columbus offer unto he , he accept the offer with joyful countenance , and send to call he into England . but because God have reserve the say offer for Castille , Columbus be go in the mean space , and also return with the performance of his enterprise , as hereafter in order shall be rehearse . now will i leave off from make any far mention of that which Bartholomew Colon have negotiate in England , and i will return unto the admiral , etc * 3 » 