Principali navigation , voyage , traffic and discovery of the english nation make to the northwest , west , and Southwest part of the world , with the letter , privilege , discourse , observation , and other necessary thing concern the same the most ancient discovery of the west Indies [ in . i . ] by Madoc the son of Owen guyne prince of North-wales , in the year 1170 : take out of the history of wale , late publish by m. David Powel doctor of divinity . B'ter the death of Owen guyne , his son fall at debate who shall inherit after he : for the elder son bear in matrimony , Edward or jorw drwy-dion , be count unmeet to govern , because of the maim upon his face : and Howell that take upon he all the rule be a base son , beget upon a irish woman . therefore David gather all the power he can , and come against Howel , and fight with he , slay he ; and afterward enjoy quiet then whole land of North-wales , until his brother jorwerths son come to age . Madoc another of Owen guyne his son leave the land in contention betwixt his brethren , and prepare T33 Madoc the son of Owen guyne . certain ship , with man and munition , and seek adventure by sea , sail west , and leave the coast of Ireland so far north , that he come unto a land unknown , where he see many strange thing . Humf. Lloyd . this land must needs be some part of that country of which the Spaniard affirm themselves to be the first finder since hannos time . whereupon it be manifest that that country be by Britain discover , long before Columbus lead any Spaniard thither . of the voyage and return of this Madoc there be many fable feign , as the common people do use in distance of place and length of time rather to augment then to diminish : but sure it be there he be . and after he have return home , and declare the pleasant and fruitful country hat he have see without inhabitant , and upon the contrary part , for what barren and wild the second ground his brethren and nephew do murder one voyage of ma - another , he prepare a number of ship , and get with doc the son of , .. r , 1. ° . Owen he such man and woman as be desirous to live in gu^neth . quietness : and take leave of his friend , take his journey thitherward again . therefore it be to be suppose that he and his people inhabit part of those Gomara . lib . country : for it appear by Francis Lopez de Gomara , » • cap . 16. that in Acuzamil and other place the people honour the cross . whereby it may be gather that Christians have be there before the come of the Spaniard . but because this people be not many , they follow the manner of the land which they come unto , and use the language they find there . m. Powels this Madoc arrive in the western country , unto addition . the whjch he camejn the year 1170 , leave most of his people there , and return back for more of his own nation , acquaintance and friend to inhabit that fair and large country , go thither again with ten sail , as Gutyn Owen . i find note by Gutyn Owen . i be of opinion that the land whereunto he come be some part of the west Indies . 134 offer of Christopher Columbus a.d. 1488. Carmina Meredith filii Rhesi mentionem facientia de madoco filio oweni Guynedd , and de sva navigation in terras incognitas . vixit hic Meredith circiter annum domini 1477. MAdoc wife , mwyedic wed , verse 1 lawn genau Owyn Guynedd : TaZdfrZ ni tynnum dir , ry enaid oedd 7^ , William na da mawr , and y moroedd . Camden . the same in english . Madoc i be the son of Owen Gwynedd with stature large , and comely grace adorn : no land at home nor store of wealth i please , my mind be whole to search the ocean sea . the offer of the discovery of the west Indies [ he . 2. ] by Christopher Columbus to king Henry the seven in the year 1488 the 13 of February : with the king acceptation of the offer , and the cause whereupon he be deprive of the same : record in the thirteenth chapter of the history of don Fernand Columbus of the life and deed of his father Christopher Columbus . Hristophoro Colon temendo , se parimente i re di Castiglia non assentissero alia sva impresa , non gli bisognasse proporla di nuovo a qualche altro principe , and cosi in cio passasse lungo tempo ; mando in inghilterra un suo fratello , che haveva appresso di se , chiamato Bartholomeo Colon : il qual , quantunque non havesse lettere latin , era perd huomo prattico , and giudicioso nelle cose del mare , and sapea molto bene far cart da navigare , and sphere , and altri instrumenti di quella profession , come 135 