the first voyage of m. Martine Frobisher , to the northwest , for the search of the straight or passage to China , write by Christopher hall , master in the Gabriel , and make in the year of our lord 1576. he 7. of June be Thursday , the two bark , viz. the Gabriel , and the two Michael and our pinnace set sail at Ratcliff , and bear down to Detford , and there we anchor : the cause be , that our pinnace burst her boultsprit , and foremast aboard of a ship that ride at Detford , else we mean to have pass that day by the court then at Grenewich . the 8. day be Friday , about 12 of the clock we weigh at Detford , and set sail all three of we , and bear down by the court , where we shoot off our ordinance and make the best show we can : her majesty behold the same , commend it , and bid we farewell , with shake her hand at we out of the window . afterwards she send a gentleman aboard of we , who declare that her majesty have good like of our do , and thank we for it , and also will our captain to come the next day to the court to take his leave of she . the same day towards night m. secretary Woolly come aboard of we , and declare to the company , that her majesty have appoint he to give they charge to be obedient , and diligent to their captain , and governor in all thing , and wish we happy success . the 12. day be over against Gravesend , by the castle or blockhouse , we observe the latitude , which be 51. degree 33. min. and in that place the variation of the compass be 11. degree and a half . fair island . the 24. day at 2. of the clock after noon , i have sight of fair isle , be from we 6. league north and by east , and when i bring it northwest and by north , 204 it do rise at the southermost end with a little home - mock , and swampe in the mid . the 25. day from 4. to 8. a clock in the forenoon , the wind at northwest and by north a fresh gale , i cast about to the westward , the southermost head of shot - Shotland . land call Swinborne head northnorthwest from i , and the land of fair isle , west Southwest from i . i sail direct to the north head of that say land , sound as i run in , have 60. 50. and 40. fathom , and grey red shell : and within half a mile of that island , there be 36. fathom , for i sail to that island to see whether there be any roadesteede for a northwest wind , and i find by my sound hard rock , and foul ground , and deep water , within two cable length of the shore , 28. fathom , and so do not anchor but ply to and fro with my foresail , and mizzen till it be a high water under the island . the tide set there northwest and southeast : the flood set southeast , and the ebb northwest . the 26. day have the wind at south a fair gale , sail from fair isle to Swinborne head , i do observe the latitude , the island of Fowlay be west northwest from i 6. league , and Swinborne head east southeast from i , i find my * elevation to be 37. degr . and my declination 22. degr . 46. min. so that my latitude be 59 degr . 46. min. at that present be near to Swinborne head , have a leak which do trouble we , as also to take in fresh water , i ply room with a sound , which be call saint tronions , and there do anchor in seven fathom water , and fair sand . you have come in the sound mouth in the enter 17. 15. 12. 10. 9 8. and 7. fathom , and the sound lie in north northwest , and there we ride to a west sun , and stop our leak , and have refresh our self with water , at a north northwest sun , i set sail from saint tronions the wind at south south , and turn out till we be clear of the sound , and so sail west to go clear of the island of fowlay . And run olf towards fowlay , 205 * by elevation he mean the distance of the sun from the •zenith . S. tronions . fowlaylstand . i sound , have fifty fathom , and streamy ground , and also i sound fowlay be north from i one league off that island , have fifty fathom at the south [ three . 30. ] head , and streamy ground , like break otmell , and one shell be read and white like mackerel . latitude 59 the 27. day at a south sun i do observe the erelhe^be latitude5 the island of Fowlay be from i two league to sail * east north-east : i find my self to be in latitude 59 west and by degree , 59 min. true observe , the wind at south north . Southwest : i sail west and by north . from 12. to four a clock afternoon , the wind at south , a fair gale the ship sail west and by north 6. league , and at the end of this watch , i sound have 60. fathom , with little stone and shell , the island from we 8. league east . July the first . the first of July , from 4. to 8. a clock , we sail west 4. glass 4. league , and at that present we have so much wind that we spoon afore the sea Southwest 2. league . 3 - the 3. day we find our compass to be vary one point to the westwards : this day from 4. to 8. a clock we sail west and by north 6. league . the compass from 8. to 12. a clock at noon west and by north ards^one111 ' 4 ’ league - at that present i find our compass to point . be vary ill . deg . and one 4. part to the westwards , which be one point . 11. the 11 day at a southeast sun we have sight of the ne island open janj of FriSeland bear from we west northwest 16. s a ' league , and rise like pinnacle of steeple , and all cover with snow . i find my self in 61. degr . of latitude . we sail to the shore and can find no ground at 150. fathom , we hoist out our boat , and the captain with 4. man row to the shore to get on land , but the land lie full of ice , they can not get on land , and so they come aboard again : we have much ado to get clear of the ice by reason of the fog . yet from Thursday 8. a clock in the morning to Friday at noon we sail Southwest 20. league . 206 the 18. day at a southwest sun i find the sun 18. to be elevate 33. deg . and at a southsoutheast sun 40. deg . so i observe it till i find it at the high , and then it be elevate 52. deg . i judge the variation the variation of the compass to be 2. point and a half to the t^o point and westward . , a half to the the 21. day we have sight of a great drift of ice , west . seem a firm land , and we cast westward to be a great clear of it . of ice . the 26. we have sight of a land of ice : the latitude the latitude off be 62. degree , and two minute . 62. degree z . the 28. day in the morning be very foggy : but at * the clear up of the fog , we have sight of land , sight of land which i suppose to be Labrador , with great store of t0 ice about the land : i run in towards it , and sound , i^nr . but can get no ground at 100 fathom , and the ice be so thick , i can not get to the shore , and so lie off , and come clear of the ice . upon Monday 30. we come within a mile of the shore , and seek a harborowe : all the sound be full of ice , and our boat row a shore , can get no ground at 100 fathom , within a cable length of the shore : than we sail eastnortheast along the shore , for so the land lie , and the currant be there great , set Northeast , and Southwest : and if we can have get anchor ground , we will have see with what force it have run , but i judge a ship may drive a league and a half , in one hour , with that tide . this day at 4. of the cloak in the morning , be 31. fair and clear , we have sight of a head land , as we judge , bear from we north , and by east , and we sail Northeast , and by north to that land , and when we come thither , we can not get to the land for ice : for the ice stretch along the coast , so that we can not come to the land , by five league . Wednesday the first of August it calm , and in the augiist . after noon i cause my boat to be hoist out , be king hard by a great island of ice , and i and four man row 2 ' 207 they enter the strait in the latitude of fit , . deg . ands.min . 12. ' 3 - [ he - 3i i 14. ’S - 16. the english voyage to that ice , and sound within two cable length of it , and have sixteen fathom , and little stone , and after that sound again within a minion shoot , and have ground at a hundred fathom , and fair sand : we sound the next day a quarter of a mile from it , and have sixty fathom rough ground , and at that present be aboard , that great island of ice fall one part from another , make a noise as if a great cliff have fall into the sea and at four of the clock i sound again , and have 90. fathom , and small black stone , and little white stone , like pearl . the tide here do set to the shore . the ten i take four man , and my self , and row to shore to a island one league from the main , and there the flood set southwest alongst the shore , and it flow as near as i can judge so too , i can not tarry to prove it , because the ship be a great way from i , and i fear a fog : but when i come a shore , it be a low water . i go to you top of the island , and before i come back , it be hie a foot water , and so without tarry i come aboard . the 11. we find our latitude to be 63. degr . and eight minute , and this day we enter the strait . the 12. we set sail towards a island , call the gabriels island , which be 10. league then from we . we espy a sound , and bear with it , and come to a sandy bay , where we come to a anchor , the land bear east southeast off " we , and there we ride all night in 8. fathom water . it flow there at a southeast moon . we call it prior sound , be from the gabriels island , ten league . the 14. we weigh , and run into another sound , where we anchor in 8. fathom water , fair sand , and black oaze , and there calk our ship , be weak from the wale upward , and take in fresh water . the 15. day we weigh , and sail to prior bay , be a mile from thence . the 16. day be calm , and we ride still , without ice , 208 1576-but present within two hour it be freeze round about the ship , a quarter of a inch thick , and that day very fair , and calm . the 17. day we weigh , and come to Thomas Williams 17. island . the 18. day we sail north northwest , and anchor « 8. again in 23. fathom , and tough oaze , under burcher island , which be from the former island , ten league . the 19 day in the morning , be calm , and no 19 wind , the captain and i take our boat , with eight man in she , to row we a shore , to see if there be there any people , or no , and go to the top of the island , we have sight of seven boat , which come row °ftke from the east side , towards that island : whereupon we return aboard again : at length we send our boat p with five man in she , to see whither they row , and so with a white cloth bring one of their boat with their man along the shore , row after our boat , till such time as they see our ship , and then they row a shore : then i go on shore my self , and give every of they a threadden point , and bring one of they aboard of i , where he do eat and drink , and then carry he on shore again . whereupon all the rest come aboard with their boat , be nineteen person , and they speak , but we understand they not . they ducrip-bee like to Tartar , with long black hair , broad face , °£the and flat nose , and tawny in colour , wear seal p p ’ skin , and so do the woman , not differ in the fashion , but the woman be mark in the face with blow streeke down the cheek , and round about the eye . their boat be make all of seal skin , with a keel of wood within the skin : the proportion of they be like a spanish shallop , save only they be flat in the bottom , and sharp at both end . , the twenty day we weigh , and go to the east - 20. side of this island , and i and the captain , with four man more go on shore , and there we see their house , and the people espy we , come row towards seven 209 oh our boat : whereupon we ply towards our boat : and we be in our boat and they ashore , they call to we , and we row to they , and one of their company come into our boat , and we carry he a board , and give he a bell , and a knife : so the captain and i c . of our man will five of our man to set he a shore at a rock , take by they and not among the company , which they come from , f ' but their wilfulness be such , that they will go to they , and so be take themselves , and our boat lose . 21. the next day in the morning , we stand in near the shore , and shoot off a fauconet , and sound our trumpet , but we can hear nothing of our man : this sound we call the five man sound , and ply out of it , but anchor again in thirty fathom , and oaze : and ride there all night , in the morning , the snow lie a foot thick upon our hatch . 22. the 22. day in the morning we weigh , and go again to the place where we lose our man , and our boat . we have sight of fourteen boat , and some come near to we , but we can learn nothing of our man : among the rest , we entice one boat to our ship side , with a bell , and in give he the bell , we take he , and his boat , and so keep he , and so row down to Thomas William island , and there anchor all night . they retume . the 26. day we weigh , to come homeward , and by 2 • 12. of the clock at noon , we be thwart of trumpet island . 27. the next day we come thwart of gabriels island , and at 8. of the clock at night we have the cape Labrador as we suppose west from we , ten league . 28. the 28. day we go our course southeast . 29. we sail southeast , and by east , 22. league . September . the first day of September in the morning we have king sight of the land of Friseland , be eight league from we , but we can not come near it , for the monstrous ice that lie about it . from this day , till the six of this month , we run along island , and have the south part of it at eight of the clock , east from we ten league . 210 the seven day of this month we have a very terrible 7 « storm , by force whereof , one of our man be blow into the sea out of our waste , but he catch hold of the foresail sheate , and there hold till the captain pluck he again into the ship . the 25. day of this month we have sight of the [ he . 32. ] island of Orkney , which be then east from we . the first day of October we have sight of the shield , 2% Sam and so sail about the coast , and anchor at Yarmouth , and the next day we come into Harwich . the language of the people of Meta incognita . argoteyt , a hand . Cangnawe , a nose . arere , a eye . Keiotot , a tooth . mutchatet , the head . Chewat , a ear . Comagaye , a leg . Atoniagay , a foot . Callagay , a pair of breech . ' attegay , a coat . Pollevetagay , a knife . Accaskay , a ship . coblone , a thumb . teckkere , the foremost finger . Ketteckle , the middle finger . Mekellacane , the four finger . Yacketrone , the little finger . the second voyage of master Martin Frobisher , make to the west and northwest region , in the year 1577. with a description of the country , and people : write by master dionise settle . n Whitsunday , be the six and twenty of May , in the year of our lord God 1577. captain Frobisher depart from black wall , with one of the queen majesty ship , call the aid , of nine score ton , or thereabouts : and two other little bark like - wise , the one call the Gabriel , whereof master Fenton , a gentleman of my lord of warwikes , be captain : 211 