the three voyage northwestward , make by m. John Davis gentleman , as chief captain and pilot generail , for the discovery of a passage to the isle of the Moluccas , or the coast of China , in the year 1587. write by m. John Janes . May . he 19 of this present month about midnight we weigh our anchor , set sail , and depart from Dartmouth with two bark and a clincher , the one name the Elizabeth of Dartmouth , the other the sunshine of London , and the clincher call the Helen of London : thus in god name we set forward with the wind at Northeast a good fresh gale . about 3. hour after our departure , the night be somewhat thick with darkness , we have lose the pinnace : the captain imagine that the man have run away with she , will the master of the sunshine to stand to seaward , and see if we can descry they , we bear in with the shore for Plymouth . at length we descry she , bear with she , and demand what the cause be : they answer that the tiller of their helm be burst . So shape our course Westsouthwest , we go forward , hope that a hard beginning will make a good end , yet some of we be doubtful of it , fall in reckon that she be a clincher ; nevertheless we put our trust in God . the 21. we meet with the red lion of London , which come from the coast of Spain , which be afraid that we have be man of war , but we hail they , and after a little conference , we desire the master to carry our letter for London direct to my uncle Sanderson , who promise we a safe delivery . and after we have heave they a lead and a line , whereunto we have make fast our 414 1587-letter , before they can get they into the ship , they fall into the sea , and so all our labour and they also be lose ; notwithstanding they promise to certify our departure at London , and so we depart , and the same day we have sight of Silley . the 22. the wind be at Northeast by east with fair weather , and so the 23. and 24. the like . the 25. we lay our ship on the lee for the sunshine , who be a rummage for a leak , they have 500 stroke at the pump in a watch , the wind at northwest . the 26. and 27. we have fair weather , but this 27. the pinnace foremast be blow overboard . the 28. the Elizabeth tow the pinnace , which be so much brag off by the owner report before we come out of England , but at sea she be like a cart draw with ox . sometime we tow she because she can not sail for scant wind . the 31. day our captai ne ask if the pinnace be staunch , peerson answer that she be as sound and staunch as a cup . This make we something glad , when we see she will brook the sea , and be not leak . June . the first 6. day we have fair weather : after that for 5. day we have fog and rain , the wind be south . the 12. we have clear weather . the mariner in the sunshine and the master can not agree : the mariner will go on their voyage a fish , because the year begin to waste : the master will not depart till he have the company of the Elizabeth , whereupon the master tell our captain that he be afraid his man will shape some contrary course while he be asleep , and so he shall lose we . at length after much talk and many threaten , they be content to bring we to the land which we look for daily . the 14. day we discover land at five of the clock land descry . in the morning , be very great and high mountain , the top of the hill be cover with snow . here the 415 the english voyage wind be variable , sometime Northeast , Eastnortheast , and east by north : but we imagine ourselves to be 16. or 17. league off from the shore . the 16. we come to a anchor about 4. or 5. of the clock after nun , the people come present to we after the old manner , with cry ilyaoute , and show we seal skin . the 17. we begin to set up the pinnace that peerson frame at Dartmouth , with the board which he bring from London . the 18. peerson and the carpenter of the ship begin to set on the plank . the 19 as we go about a island , be find black pumise stone , and salt kern on the rock , very white and glister . this day also the master of the sunshine take of the people a very strong lusty young fellow . the 20. about two of the clock in the morning , the savage come to the island where our pinnace wk build ready to be launch , and tear the two upper strike , and carry they away only for the love of the iron in the board . while they be about this practice , we man the Elizabeth boat to go a shore to they : our man be either afraid or amaze , be so long before they come to shore , that our captain will they to stay , and make the gunner give fire to a saker , and lay the piece level with the boat which the savage have turn on the one side because we shall not hurt they with our arrow , and make the boat their bulwark against the arrow which we shoot at they . our gunner have make all thing ready , give fire to the piece , and fear to hurt any of the people , and regard the owner profit , think belike he will save a saker shoot , doubt we shall have occasion to fight with man of war , and so shoot off the saker without a bullet : our look still when the savage that be hurt shall run away without leg , at length we can perceive never a man hurt , but all have their leg can carry away their body : we have not soon shoot off the piece , but the master of the sun - 416 shine man his boat , and come row towards the island , the very sight of who make each of they take that he have get , and flee away as fast as they can to another island about two mile off , where they take the nail out of the timber , and leave the wood on the isle , when we come on shore , and see how they have spoil the boat , after much debate of the matter , we agree that the Elizabeth shall have she to fish withal : whereupon she be present carry aboard , and stow . now after this trouble , be resolve to depart with the first wind , there fall out another matter worse than all the rest , and that be in this manner . John churchyard one who our captain have appoint as pilot in the pinnace , come to our captain , and master Bruton , and tell they that the good ship which we must all hazard our life in , have three hundred stroke at one time as she ride in the harbour : this disquiet we all great , and many doubt to go in she . at length our captain by who we be all to be govern , determine rather ' to end his life with credit , than to return with infamy and disgrace , and so be all agree , we purpose to live and die together , and commit our self to the ship . now the 21. have bring all our thing aboard , about 11. or 12. of the clock at night , we set sail and depart from those isle , which lie in 64. degree of latitude , our ship be all now at sea , and we shape our course to go , coast the land to the northward upon the eastern shore , which we call the shore of our merchant , because there we meet with people which traffic with we , but here we be not without doubt of our ship . the 24. be in 67. degree , and 40. minute , we have great store of whale , and a kind of sea bird which the mariner call cortinous . this day about six of the clock at night , we espy two of the country people at sea , think at the first they have be two great seal , until we see their oar seven 417 2d A.D. I587 . Isles in 64. degree . store of whale in 67 degree . the great variation of the compass . London coast . between Gronland in the north . of americaabovt 40. league . the english voyage glister with the sun : they come row towards we , as fast as they can , and when they come within hear , they hold up their oar , and cry ilyaoute , make many sign : and at last they come to we , give we bird for bracelet , and of they i have a dart with a bone in it , or a piece of unicorn horn , as i do judge . this dart he make store of , but when he see a knife , he let it go , be more desirous of the knife then of his dart : these people continue row after our ship the space of 3. hour . the 25. in the morning at 7. of the clock we descry 30. Savages row after we , be by judgement 10 , league off from the shore : they bring we salmon peal , bird , and caplin , and we give they pin , needle , bracelet , nail , knife , bell , look glass , and other small trifle , and for a knife , a nail or a bracelet , which they call Ponigmah , they will sell their boat , coat , or any thing they have , although they be far from the shore . we have but few skin of they , about 20. but they make sign to we that if we will go to the shore , we shall have more store of chichsanege : they stay with we till 11. of the clock , at which time we go to prayer , and they depart from we . ' the 28. and 29. be foggy with cloud , the 30. day we take the heighth , and find our self in 72. degree and 12 minute of latitude both at noon and at night , the sun be 5. degree above the horizon . at midnight the compass set to the variation of 28. degree to the westward . now have coast the land , which we call London coast , from the 21. of this present , till the 30. the sea open all to the westwards and northwards , the land on starboard side east from we , the wind shift to the north , whereupon we leave that shore , name the same hope Sanderson , and shape our course west , and run 40. league and better without the sight of any land . 418 the second of July we fall with a mighty bank of a mighty ice west from we , lie north and south , which bank we will glad have double out to the north - an southt ward , but the wind will not suffer we , so that we be fain to coast it to the southward , hope to double it out , that we may have run so far west till we have find land , or else to have be thorough resolve of our pretend purpose . the 3. we fell with the ice again , and put off from it , we seek to the northward , but the wind cross we . the 4. be foggy : so be the 5. also with much wind at the north . the 6. be very clear , we put our bark with oar through a gap in the ice , see the sea free on the west side , as we think , which fall out otherwise , cause we to return after we have stay there between the ice . the 7. and the 8. about midnight , by god help we recover the open sea , the weather be fair and calm , and so be the 9 the 10. we coast the ice . the 11. be foggy , but calm . the 12. we coast again the ice , have the wind at northnorthwest . the 13. bear off from the ice , we determine to go with the shore and come to a anchor , and to stay 5. or 6. day for the dissolve of the ice , hope that the sea continual beat it , and the sun with the extreme force of heat which it have always shin - extreme heat king upon it , will make a quick dispatch , that we may sun . have a further search upon the western shore . now when we be come to the eastern coast , the water something deep , and some of our company fearful withal , we dare not come to a anchor , but bear off into the sea again . the poor people see we go away again , come row after we into the sea , the wave be somewhat lofty . we truck with they for a few skin and dart , and give they bead , nail , pin , 419 they be drive west six point out of their course in 67. degree , 45. minute . mount Raleigh . the earl of cumberland isle . the variation of the compass you . deg . westward . the land trend fi-om this place Southwest and by south . my lord Lumleys inlet . the english voyage needle and card , they point to the shore , as though they will show we some great friendship : but we little regard their courtesy , give they the gentle farewell , and so depart . the 14. we have the wind at south . the r 5. there be some fault either in the bark , or the set of some current , for we be drive six point beyond our course west . the 16. we fell with the bank of ice west from we . the 17. and 18. be foggy . the 19 at one a clock after noon , we have sight of the land which we call mount Raleigh , and at 12. of the clock at night , we be thwart the strait which we discover the first year . the 20. we traverse in the mouth of the strait , the wind be at west , with fair and clear weather . the 21. and 22. we coast the northern coast of the strait . the 23. have sail threescore league northwest into the strait , at two a clock after noon we anchor among many isle in the bottom of the gulf , name the same the earl of cumberland isle , where ride at anchor , a whale pass by our ship and go west in among the isle . here the compass set at thirty degree westward variation . the 23. we depart , shape our course southeast to recover the sea the 25. we be becalm in the bottom of the gulf , the air be extreme hot . master Bruton and some of the mariner go on shore to course dog , where they find many grave and Trane spill on the ground , the dog be so fat that they be scant able to run . the 26. we have a pretty storm , the wind be at southeast . The,27 . and 28. be fair . the 29. we be clear out of the strait , have coast the south shore , and this day at noon we be in 62. degree of latitude . the 30. in the afternoon we coast a bank of ice , which lie on the shore , and pass by a great bank or inlet , which lie between 63. and 62. degree of latitude , which we call lumly inlet . we have oftentimes , as we sail alongst the coast , great rutte , the 420 water as it be whirl and overfal , as if it be the fall of some great water through a bridge . the 31. as we sail by a Headland , which we name Warwick foreland , we fall into one of those overfal Warwick with a fresh gale of wind , and bear all our sail , we for^nd . look upon a island of ice between we and the shore , have think that our bark do make no way , which cause we to take mark on the shore : at length we perceive our self to go very fast , and the island of ice which we see before , be carry very forcible with the set of the current fast than our ship go . a very forcible this day and night we pass by a very great gulf , the c^^twest water whirl and roar as it be the meeting of it tide . August . [ Iii . 114. ] the first of August have coast a bank of ice which be drive out at the mouth of this gulf , we fall with the southermost cape of the gulf , which we name Chidleis cape , which lie in 61 degree and 10 minute of Chldleys cape . latitude . the 2 and 3 be calm and foggy , so be the 4 , 5 , and 6. the 7 be fair and calm : so be the 8 , with a little gale in the morning . the 9 be fair , and we have a little gale at night . the 10 we have a frisk gale at westnorthwest . the 11 fair . the 12 we see five dear on the top of a island , call by we darcy the lord dar-island . and we hoist out our boat , and go ashore to eye they , think to have kill some of they . but when we come on shore , and have course they twice about the island , they take the sea and swim towards island distant from that three league . when we perceive that they have take the sea we give they over because our boat be so small that it can not carry we , and row after they , they swim so fast : but one of they be as big as a good pretty cow , and very fat , their foot as big as ox foot . here upon this island i kill with my piece a grey hare . the 13 in the morning we see three or four white 421 bear , but dare not go on shore to they for lack of a good boat . this day we strike a rock seek for a harbour , and receive a leak : and this day we be in 54 degree of latitude . the 14 we stop our leak in a storm not very outrageous , at noon . the 15 be almost in 52 degree of latitude , and not find our ship , nor ( accord to their promise ) any kind of mark , token , or beacon , which we will they to set up , and they protest to do so upon every head land , island or cape , within twenty league every way off the fish from their fish place , which our captain appoint to place between between 54 and 55 degree : this 15 i say we shape ^ ■ ee of lati - our course homeward for England , have in our ship tude . but little wood , and half a hogshead of fresh water . our man be very willing to depart , and no man more forward than peerson , for he fear to be put out of his office of stewardship : but because every man be so willing to depart , we consent to return for our own country : and so we have the 16 fair weather , with the wind at Southwest . the 17 we meet a ship at sea , and as far as we can judge it be a biskaine : we think she go a fish abundance of for whale ; for in 52 degree or thereabouts we see very whale in m d€et£€s . < # e ’ the 18 be fair , with a good gale at west . the 19 fair also , with much wind at west and by south . they arrive at Dartmouth the 15 of September . and thus after much variable weather and change of wind we arrive the 15 of September in Dartmouth anno 1587 , give thank to God for our safe arrival . 422 