1586. shot through his arm . Theise wicked miscreant never offer parley or speech , but present execute their curse fury . this present evening it please God further to increase our sorrow with a mighty tempestuous storm , the wind be north north-east , which last unto the ten of this month very extreme . we unrig our ship , and purpose to cut down our mast , the cable of our shutanker break , so that we only expect to be drive on shore among these cannibal for their prey . yet in this deep distress the mighty mercy of God , when hope be pass , give we succour , and send we a fair lee , so as we recover our anchor again , and new more our ship : where we see that God manifest deliver we : for the strain of one of our cable be break , and we only road by a old junke . thus be fresh more a new storm arise , the wind be westnorthwest , very forcible , which last unto the ten day at night . the eleven day with a fair westnorthwest wind we depart with trust in god mercy , shape our course for England , and arrive in the west country in the begin of October . master Davis be arrive , write his letter to m. William Sanderson of London , concern his voyage , as foliow . ir , the sunshine come into Dartmouth the four of this month : she have be at island , and from thence to Greenland , and so to Estotiland , from thence to desolation , and to our merchant , where she make trade with the people , stay in the country twenty day . they have bring home five hundred seal skin , and a hundred and forty half skin and piece of skin . i stand in great doubt of the pinnace , God be merciful 407 the english voyage unto the poor man , and preserve they , if it be his bless will . i have now experience of much of they northwest part of the world , and have bring the passage to that likelihood , as that i be assure it must be in one of four place , or else not at all . and further i can assure you upon the peril of my life , that this voyage may be perform without further charge , nay with certain profit to the adventurer , if i may have but your favour in the action . i hope i shall find favour with you to see your card i pray God it be so true as the card shall be which i will bring you : and i hope in God , that your skill in navigation shall be gaineful unto you , although at the first it have not prove so . and thus with my humble commendation i commit you to God , desire no long to live , than i shall be you most faithful to command . Exon this fourteenth of October . 1586. you to command John Davis . the relation of the course which the sunshine a bark of fifty ton , and the northstarre a small pinnace , be two vessel of the fleet of m. John Davis , hold after he have send they from he to discover the passage between Greenland and island , write by Henry Morgan servant to m. William Sanderson of London . he seven day of May 1586. we depart out of Dartmouth haven four sail , to wit , the mermaid , the sunshine , the moonshine , and the northstarre . in the sunshine be sixteen man , who name be these : Richard pope master , mark carter master mate , Henry Morgan Purser , George Draward , John Mandie , Hugh break , Philip Jane , Hugh Hempson , Richard Borden , 408 