the twenty hour and a half , and in the night be absent three hour and a half . and although the sun be absent these 3. hour and a half , yet it be not dark that time , for that the sun be never above three or four degree under the edge of their horizon : the cause be , that the Tropic of Cancer do cut their horizon at very uneven and oblique angle . but the moon at any time of the year be in cancer , have north latitude , do make a full revolution above their horizon , so that sometime they see the moon above 24. hour together . some of our company of the more ignorant sort , think we may continual have see the sun and the moon , have it not be for two or three high mountain . the people be now become so wary , and so circumspect , by reason of their former loss , that by no mean we can apprehend any of they , although we attempt often in this last voyage . but to say truth , we can not bestow any great time in pursue they , because of our great business in lade , and other thing . A.D. 158 ? . [ Iii . 96. ] a full revolution of the moon above their horizon . the letter patent of the queen majestic , grant to master Adrian Gylbert and other , for the search and discovery of they northwest passage to China . Lizabeth by the grace of God of England , France , and Ireland queen , defender of the faith , etc to all , to who these present shall come , greeting : forasmuch as our trusty and well-beloved subject Adrian Gylbert of Sandridge in the county of Devon , gentleman , to his great cost and charge , have great and earnest travel and seek , and yet do travel and seek , and by diverse mean endeavour and labour , that the passage unto China and the isle of the Moluccas , by the northwestward , northeastward , or northward , 375 unto which part or part of the world , none of our loyal subject have hitherto have any traffic or trade , may be discover , know , and frequent by the subject of this our realm : know you therefore that for the consideration aforesaid and for diverse other good consideration we thereunto special move . we of our grace especial , certain knowledge , and mere motion , have give and grant , and by these present for we , our heir and successor , do give and grant free liberty , power , and full authority to the say Adrian Gylbert , and to any other person by he or his heir to be assign , and to those his associate and assistant , who name be write in a schedule hereunto annex , and to their heir , and to one assignee of each of they , and each of their heir at all time , and at any time or time after the date of these present , under our banner and ensign free , without let , interruption , or restraint , of we , our heir or successor , any law , statute , proclamation , patent , charter , or proviso to the contrary notwithstanding , to sail , make voyage , and by any manner of mean to pass and to depart out of this our realm of England , or any our realm , dominion , or territory into all or any isle , country , region , province , territory , sea , river , port , bay , creek , arm of the sea , and all haven , and all manner of other place whatsoever , that by the say northwestward , northeastward , or northward , be to be by he , his associate or assign discover , and for and in the say sail , voyage , and passage , to have and use so many ship , bark , pinnace , or other vessel of any quantity or burden , with all the furniture of man , victual , and all manner of necessary provision , armour , weapon , ordinance , target , and appurti nance whatsoever , as to such a voyage shall or may be requisite , convenient or commodious , any law , statute , ordinance or proviso to the contrary thereof notwithstanding . and also we do give and grant to the say Adrian Gylbert , and his 376 say associate , and to such assignee of he , and his heir , and to the heir and one assignee of every of his say associate for ever , full power and absolute authority to trade and make their resiance in any of the say isle , country , region , province , territory , sea , river , port , bay , and haven , and all manner of other place whatsoever with all commodity , profit , and emolument in the say place or any of they , grow and arise , with all manner of privilege , prerogative , jurisdiction and royalty both by sea and land whatsoever , yield and pay therefore unto we , our heir and successor , the ten part of all such gold and silver oar , pearl , jewel , and precious stone , or the value thereof , as the say Adrian Gylbert and his say associate , their heir and assign , servant , factor , or workman , and every or any of they shall find , the say ten to be deliver due to our customer , or other officer by we , our heir or successor thereunto assign , in the port of London , Dartmouth , or Plymouth , at which three place only the say Adrian Gylbert , and his say associate , their say heir and assign , shall lade , charge , arrive , and discharge all manner of ware , good , and merchandize whatsoever to the say voyage , and new trade belong or appertain . and moreover , we have give , grant , and authorize , and by these present for we , our heir and successor , of our grace especial , certain knowledge , and mere motion , do give , grant , and authorise the say Adrian Gilbert , and his say associate for ever , their heir and their say assign and every of they , that if the aforesaid isle , country , region , province , territory , sea , river , port , bay , or haven , or any other of the premise by the say Adrian Gylbert or his associate , their heir and their say assign or any of they , to be find by they , discover and traffic unto by any trade as aforesaid , shall be by any other our subject visit , frequent , haunt , trade unto or inhabit by the way afore - 377 [ he . 97 ] the colleague of the fellowship for the discovery of they northwest passage . the english voyage say , without the special licence in write of the say Adrian Gylbert and his associate , and their heir and assign for ever , or by the most part of they , so that the say Adrian Gilbert , his heir or assign be one of they , that then aswell their ship , or ship in any such voyage or voyage be use , as all and singular their good , ware , and merchandize , or any other thing whatsoever , from or to any of the place aforesaid transport , that so shall presume to visit , frequent , haunt , trade unto , or inhabit , shall be forfeit and confiscate , ipso facto , the one half of the same good and merchandize , or other thing whatsoever , or the value thereof to be to the use of we , our heir or successor , and the other moiety thereof to be to the use of the say Adrian Gylbert and his say associate , their heir and assign for ever : and unto the say Adrian Gylbert and his say associate , their heir and assign we impose , give , assign , create and confirm this name peculiar to be name by , to sue and to be sue by , that be to wit , by the name of the colleague of the fellowship for the discovery of they northwest passage , and they for we , our heir and successor by that name do incorporate , and do erect and create as one body corporate to have continuance for ever . Moreover unto the say Adrian Gylbert , and his say associate , and unto their heir and their say assign for ever , by name of the colleague of the fellowship , for the discovery of they northwest passage , we have give , grant , and confirm , and do by these present give , grant , and confirm full power and authority from time to time , and at all time hereafter , to make order , decree and enact , constitute and ordain , and appoint all such ordinance , order , decree , law , and act , as the say new corporation or body politic , colleague of the fellowship for the discovery of they northwest passage , shall think meet , necessary , and convenient , so that they or any of they be not contrary 378 to the law of this realm , and of this our present grant . and we by our royal prerogative , and fullness of our authority , of our grace especial , certain knowledge and mere motion , do establish , confirm and ratify all such ordinance , order , decree , law and act to be in so full and great power and authority , as we , our heir or successor may or can in any such case grant , confirm , or ratify . and further for the better encouragement of our love subject in this discovery , we by our royal prerogative , and fullness of authority for we , our heir and successor , do give , grant , establish , confirm , ordain , ratify and allow by these present , to the say Adrian Gylbert and to his associate , and to the heir and assign of they and every of they for ever , and to all other person or person of our love subject whatsoever that shall hereafter travail , sail , discover , or make voyage as aforesaid to any the isle , Mainelands , country or territory whatsoever , by virtue of this our grant to be discover , that the heir and assign of they and every of they be bear within any of the isle , Mainelands and country , or territory whatsoever before mention , shall have and enjoy all the privilege of free denizen , as person native bear within this our realm of England , or within our allegiance for ever , in such like ample manner and form , as if they be or have be bear and personal resiant within our say realm , any law , statute , proclamation , custom or usage to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding . Moreover , for the consideration aforesaid by virtue hereof , we give and grant unto the say Adrian Gylbert , his heir and assign for ever , free liberty , licence and privilege , that during the space of five year next and immediate ensue the date hereof , it shall not be lawful for any person or person whatsoever , to visit , haunt , frequent , trade , or make voyage A. . TS . I583 - free denization grant . this patent remain in force five year . 379 AuthoriAe to proce ede at sea against mutineer . the english voyage to any isle , mainland , country , region , province , territory , sea , river , port , bay , and haven , nor to any other haven or place whatsoever hitherto not yet discover by any of our subject by virtue of this grant to be trade unto , without the special consent and good like of the say Adrian Gylbert , his heir or assign first have in write . and if any person or person of the associate of the say Adrian , his heir or assign , or any other person or person whatsoever , free of this discovery , shall do any act or act contrary to the tenor and true meaning hereof , during the space of the say five year , that than the party and party so offend , they and their heir for ever shall loose ( ipso facto ) the benefit and privilege of this our grant , and shall stand and remain to all intent and purpose as person exempt out of this grant . and further by virtue hereof we give and grant , for we , our heir and successor at all time during the space of five year next ensue the date hereof liberty and licence , and full authority to the say Adrian Gylbert , and his heir and assign , that if it shall happen any one or more in any ship or ship sail on their say voyage , to become mutinous , seditious , disorder , or any way unruly to the prejudice or hindrance of the hope for the success in the attempt or prosecute of this discovery or trade intend , to use or execute upon he or they so offend , such punishment , correction , or execution , as the cause shall be find in justice to require by the verdict of twelve of the company swear thereunto , as in such a case appertain : that express mention of the certainty of the premise , or of other gift or grant by we to the say Adrian Gylbert and his associate before this time make be not mention in these present , or any other law , act , statute , proviso , grant , or proclamation heretofore make or hereafter to be make to the contrary hereof in any wise notwith-380 stand . in witness whereof we have make these our letter to be make patent : witness our self 1583. at Westminster , the sixth day of February , in the six and twenty year of our reign . the first voyage of m. John Davis , undertake in June 1585. for the discovery of they northwest passage , write by m. John Janes merchant , sometime servant to the worshipful master William Sanderson . ertaine honourable personage and worthy gentleman of the court and country , with diverse worshipful merchant of London and of the west country , move with desire to advance God glory and to seek the good of their native country , consult together of the likelihood of the discovery of they northwest passage , which heretofore have be attempt , but unhappy give over by accident unlooked for , which turn the enterpriser from their principali purpose , resolve after good deliberation , to put down their adventure to provide for necessary ship , and a fit man to be chief conductor of this so hard a enterprise . the set forth of this action be commit by the adventurer , especial to the care of m. William Sanderson merchant of London , who be so forward therein , that beside his travail which be not small , he become the great adventurer with his purse , and commend unto the rest of the company one m. John Davis , a man very well ground in the principle of the art of navigation , for captain and chief pilot of this exploit . thus therefore all thing be put in a readiness , we depart from Dartmouth the seven of June , towards the discovery of the aforesaid northwest passage , with two bark , the one be of 50. ton , 381 