country wherein they live , and the danger of a great multitude which they be subject unto , if good watch and ward be not keep , for at every low water the enemy may come almost dryfoot from the main unto we , wherefore he will every man to prepare he in good readiness upon all sudden occasion , and so give the watch their charge , the company depart to rest . i think the captain letter well worth the remembering , not for the circumstance of curious endite , but for the substance and good meaning therein contain , and therefore have repeat here the same , as by himself it be hasty write . the form of m. Martin Frobishers letter to the english captive . in the name of God , in who we all believe , who ( i trust ) have preserve your body and soul among these infidel , i commend i unto you . i will be glad to seek by all mean you can devise for your deliverance , either with force , or with any commodity within my ship , which i will not spare for your sake , or any thing else i can do for you . i have aboard , of they , a man , a woman , and a child , which i be content to deliver for you , but the man which i carry away from hence the last year be dead in England . Moreover you may declare unto they , that if they deliver you not , i will not leave a man alive in their country . and thus , if one of you can come to speak with i , they shall have either the man , woman , or child in pawn for you . and thus unto God who i trust you do serve , in haste i leave you , and to he we will daily pray for you . This Tuesday morning the seven of August . anno 1557. you to the uttermost of my power , Martin Frobisher . i have send you by these bearer , pen , ink , and postscript paper , to write back unto i again , if personal you can come to certify i of your estate . 3°9 the cause why m , Frobisher enter no fur-therwithin the streit this year . best bulwark . their king calledCatchoe . how he be honour . the english voyage now have the generali alter his determination for go any further into the streite at this time for any further discovery of the passage , have take a man and a woman of that country , which he think sufficient for the use of language : and have also meet with these people here , which intercept his man the last year , ( as the apparel and english furniture which be find in their tent , very well declare ) he know it be but a labour lose to seek they further off , when he have find they there at hand . And consider also the short time he have in hand , he think it best to bend his whole endeavour for the get of i , and to leave the passage further to be discover hereafter . for his commission direct he in this voyage , only for the search of the ore , and to defer the further discovery of the passage until another time . on Thursday the nine of August we begin to make a small fort for our defence in the countess island , and entrench a corner of a cliff , which on three part like a wall of good heighth be compass and well fence with the sea , and we finish the rest with cask of the earth , to good purpose , and this be call best bulwark , after the lieutenant name , who first devise - the same . this be do for that we suspect more lest the desperate man may oppress we with multitude , than any fear we have of their force , weapon , or policy of battle : but as wisdom will we in such place ( so far from home ) not to be of our self altogether careless : so the sign which our captive make unto we , of the come down of his governor or prince , which he call Catchoe , give we occasion to foresee what may ensue thereof , for he show by sign that this Catchoe be a man of high stature far then any of our nation be , and he be accustom to be carry upon man shoulder . about midnight the lieutenant cause a false alarm to be give in the island , to prove as well the readiness of the company there ashore , as also what help may be 310 hope for upon the sudden from the ship if need so require , and every part be find in good readiness upon such a sudden . Saturday the eleven of August the people show themselves again , and call unto we from the side of a hill over against we . the general ( with good hope to hear of his man , and to have answer of his letter ) go over unto they , where they present themselves not above three in sight , but be hide indeed in great number behind the rock , and make sign of delay with we to entrap some of we to redeem their own , do only seek advantage to train our boat about a point of land from sight of our company : whereupon our man just suspect they , keep aloof without their danger , and yet set one of our company ashore , which take up a great bladder which one of they offer we , and leave a look glass in the place , come into the boat again . in the mean while our man which stand in the countess island to behold , who may better discern they , than those of the boat , by reason they be on high ground , make a great outcry unto our man in the boat , for that they see diverse of the savage creep behind the rock towards our man , whereupon the generali present return without tiding of his man . concern this bladder which we receive , our captive make sign that it be give he to keep water and drink in , but we suspect rather it be give he to swim and shift away withal , for he and the woman seek diverse time to escape , have loose our boat from astern our ship , and we never a boat leave to pursue they withal , and have prevail very far , have they not be very timely espy and prevent therein . after our general come away from they they muster themselves in our sight , upon the top of a hill , to the number of twenty in a rank , all hold hand over their head , and dance with great noise and song 3 “ [ he - 7i . ] a bladder change fir a looking-glass . no news oj the english captive . to what end the bladder be deliver . those people dance upon the hill top . a skirmish show to those people . their flag make of bladder . the english voyage together : we suppose they make this dance and show for we to understand , that we may take view of their whole company and force , mean belike that we shall do the same . and thus they continue upon the hill top until night , when hear a piece of our great ordinance , which thunder in the hollowness of the high hill , it make unto they so fearful a noise , that they have no great will to tarry long after . and this be do more to make they know our force then to do they any hurt at all . on Sunday the 12 of August , captain Fenton train the company , and make the soldier maintain skirmish among themselves , as well for their exercise , as for the country people to behold in what readiness our man be always to be find , for it be to be think , that they lie hide in the hill thereabouts , and observe all the manner of our proceed . on Wednesday the fourteenth of August , our generali with two small boat well appoint , for that he suspect the country people to lie lurk thereabouts , go up a certain bay within the countess sound , to search for ore , and meet again with the country people , who so soon as they see our man make great outcry , and with a white flag make of bladder sow together with the gut and sinew of beast , waft we amain unto they , but show not above three of their company . but when we come near they , we may perceive a great multitude creep behind the rock , which give we good cause to suspect their traitorous meaning : whereupon we make they sign , that if they will lay their weapon aside , and come forth , we will deal friendly with they , although their intent be manifest unto we : but for all the sign of friendship we can make they they come still creep towards we behind the rock to get more advantage of we , as though we have no eye to see they , think belike that our single wit can not discover so bare devise and simple drift of they . their spokesman earnest persuade we with 312 ... I577 > many entice show , to come eat and sleep ashore , with great argument of courtesy , and clap his bare hand over his head in token of peace and innocence , will we to do the like . but the better to allure our hungry stomach , he bring we a trim bait of raw great offer . flesh , which for fashion sake with a boathook we catch into our boat : but when the cunning cater perceive his first cold morsel can nothing sharpen our stomach , he cast about for a new train of warm flesh to procure our appetite , wherefore he cause one of his fellow in halt manner , to come forth as a lame man from behind the rock , and the better to declare his kindness in carve , he hoist he upon his shoulder , and bring he hard to the water side where we be , leave he there limp as a easy prey to be take of we . his hope be that we will bite at this bait , and speedy leap ashore within their danger , whereby they may have apprehend some of we , to ransom their friend home again , which before we have take . the gentleman and soldier have great will to encounter they ashore , but the generali moor careful by process of time to win they , then wilful at the first to spoil they , will in no wise admit that any man shall put himself in hazard ashore , consider the matter he now intend be for the ore , and not for the conquest : notwithstanding to prove this cripple footmanship , he give liberty for one to shoot : whereupon the cripple have a part blow , light recover a rock and go away a true and no feign cripple , and have learn his lesson for ever halt afore such cripple again . but his fellow which lie hide before , full quick then appear in their likeness , and maintain the skirmish with their sling , bow and arrow very fierce , and come as near as the water suflr they : and with as desperate mind as have be see in any man , without fear of shcrtte or any thing , follow we all along the coast , but all their shot fall short of we , and be of little danger . they have belay all the coast along for we , [ in . 72. ] 313 and be disperse so , be not well to be number , a hundred but we may discern of they above a hundred perSavages . sonsj anj bad cause to suspect a great number . and thus without loss or hurt we return to our ship again . now our work grow to a end , and have , only with five poor miner , and the help of a few gentleman and soldier , bring aboard almost two hundred ton of ore in the space of twenty day , every man therewithal ! well comfort , determine lusty to work a fresh for a bone voyage , to bring our labour to a speedy and happy end . and upon Wednesday at night be the one and twenty of August , we full finish the whole work . and it be now good time to leave , for as the man be well weary , so their shoe and clothes be well wear , their basket bottom tear out , their tool break , and the ship reasonable well fill . some with overstraining themselves receive hurt not a little dangerous , some have their belly break , and other their leg make lame . and about this time the ice begin to congeal and freeze about our ship side a night , which give we a good argument of the sun decline southward , and put we in mind to make more haste homeward . it be not a little worth the memory , to the commendation of the gentleman and soldier herein , who leave all reputation apart , with so great willingness and with courageous stomach , have themselves almost overcome in so short a time the difficulty of this so great a labour . and this to be true , the matter , if it be well weigh without further proof , now bring home do well witness . Thursday the 22 of August , we pluck down our tent , and every man haste homeward , and make bonfire upon the top of the high mount of the island , and march with ensign display round about the island , we give a volley of shot for a farewell , in honour of the right honourable lady Anne , countess of Warwick , who name it bearethi : and so depart aboard . the 23 of August have the wind large at west , we set sail from out of the countess sound homeward , they return . but the wind calm we come to anchor within the point of the same sound again . the 24 of August about three of the clock in the morning , have the wind large at west , we set sail again , and by nine of the clock at night , we leave the queen foreland astern of we , and be clear of the streite , we bear further into the main ocean , keep our course more southerly , to bring our self the soon under the latitude of our own climate . the wind be very great at sea , so that we lay a hull all night , and have snow half a foot deep on the snow a hatch . fauus ? e from the 24 until the 28 we have very much wind , * ' but large , keep our course southsoutheast , and have like to have lose the bark , but by good hap we meet again . the height be take , we be in degree and a half . the 29 of August the wind blow much at Northeast , so that we can bear but only a bunt of our foresail , and the bark be not able to carry any sail at all . the Michael lose company of we and shape her course towards Orkney because that way be better know unto they , and arrive at Yermouth . the 30 of August with the force of the wind , and a surge of the sea , the master of the Gabriel and than the master boatswain be strike both overboard , and hardly be the boatswain recover , have hold on a rope hang overboard in the sea , and yet the bark be lace fore and after with rope a breast high within board . this master be call William smith , be but a young man and a very sufficient mariner , who be all the morning before exceed pleasant , tell his captain he dream that he be cast overboard , and that the 315 boatswain have he by the hand , and can not save he , and so immediate upon the end of his tale , his dream come right evil to pass , and indeed the boatswain in like sort hold he by one hand , have hold on a rope with the other , until his force fail , and the master drown . the height be take we find our self to be in the latitude of degree and a half , and reckon our self from the queen cape homeward about two hundred league . the last of August about midnight , we have two or three great and sudden flaw or storm . the first of September the storm be grow very great , and continue almost the whole day and night , and lie a hull to tarry for the bark our ship be much beat with the sea , every sea almost overtake our poop , so that we be constrain with a bunt of our sail to try it out , and ease the roll of our ship . and so the Gabriel not able to bear any sail to keep company with we , and our ship be high in the poop , [ three . 73. ] and a tall ship , whereon the wind have more force to drive , go so fast away that we lose sight of they , and leave they to God and their good fortune of sea the second day of September in the morning , it please God of his goodness to send we a calm , whereby we perth rudder of ceive the rudder of our ship tear in twain , and almost the aid tome ready to fap away . wherefore take the benefit of the ’ time , we fling half a dozen couple of our best man over board , who take great pain under water , drive plank , and bind with rope , do well strengthen and mend the matter , who return the most part more than half dead out of the water , and as god pleasure be , the sea be calm until the work be finish . how the lati - the September , the height of the sun be tude be take , we find our self to be in the latitude of always take degree and a half . in this voyage common we ' ratte-mth^^ take the latitude of the place by the height of the sun , staff then because the long day take away the light not only of astrolabe . the polar , but also of all other fix star . and here 316 the north star be so much elevate above the horizon , that with the staff it be hardly to be well observe , and the degree in the astrolabe be too small to observe minute . therefore we always use the staff and the sun as fit instrument for this use . have spend four or five day in traverse of the sea with contrary wind , make our Souther way good as near as we can , to raise our degree to bring our self with the latitude of Sylley , we take the height the ten of September , and find our self in the latitude of degree and ten minute . the eleven of September about six a clock at night the wind come good Southwest , our vex sb eat and set our course southeast . and upon Thursday , the twelve of September , take the height , we be in the latitude of and a half , and reckon our self not past one hundred and fifty league short of Sylley , the weather fair , the wind large at Westsouth west , we keep our course southeast . the thirteenth day the height be take , we find our self to be in the latitude of degree , the wind Westsouthwest , then be in the height of Sylley , and we keep our course east , to run in with the sleeve or chanel so call , be our narrow sea , and reckon we short of Sylley twelve league . Sunday , the 15 of September about four of the clock , we begin to sound with our lead , and have ground at 61 fathom depth , white small sandy ground , and reckon we upon the back of Sylley , and set our course east and by north , Eastnortheast , and Northeast among . the sixteenth of September , about eight of the clock in the morning sound , we have 65. fathom osey sand , and think our self thwart of saint George channel a little within the bank . And bear a small sail all night , we make many sounding , which be about forty fathom , and so shallow , that we can not well tell where we be . 317 the seventeenth of September we sound , and have forty fathom , and be not far off the land end , find brand sand with small worm and cockle shell , and be shoot between Sylley and the land end , and be within the bay , we be not able to double the point with a south and by east way , but be fain to make another board , the wind be at southwest and by west , and yet can not double the point to come clear of the land end , to bear along the channel : and the weather clear up when we be hard aboard the shore , and we make the land end perfect , and so put up along saint George chanel . and the weather be very foul at sea , we covet some harbour , because the arrival of our steerage be break , and so come to anchor in Padstow ? road in Cornwall . but ride there a very dangerous Cornwall ride , we be advise by the country , to put to sea again , and of the two evil , to choose the less , for there be nothing but present peril where we ride : whereupon we ply along the channel to get to Londy , from whence we be again drive , be but a open road , where our anchor come home , and with force of weather put to sea again , and about the three and twenty our cam of September , arrive at Milford haven in wale , which ^haven^ be a very good harbour , make we happy man , that ’ we have receive such long desire safety . about one month after our arrival ! here , by order from the lord of the counsel , the ship come up to the arrival Bristol , where the ore be commit to keep in the ^qrhtow^1 castle there . here we find the Gabriel one of the ’ bark , arrive in good safety , who have never a man within board very sufficient to bring home the ship , after the master be lose , by good fortune , when she come upon the coast , meet with a ship of Bristol at sea , who conduct she in safety thither . the Michael here we hear good tiding also of the arrival of the “ llorth ' art^ other bark call the Michael , in the north part , which cr pars . as not a ttie joyful unto we , that it please God so to bring we to a safe meeting again , and we lose in 318 all the voyage only one man , beside one that die only one man at sea , which be sick before he come aboard , and be die the so desirous to follow this enterprise , that he rather choose to dye therein , than not to be one to attempt so notable a voyage . the three voyage of captain Frobisher , pre - [ m . 74. ] tend for the discovery of Cataia , by Meta incognita , anno do. 1578. he generali be return from the second voyage , immediate after his arrival in England , repair with all haste to the court be then at Windsor , to advertise her majesty of his prosperous proceed , and good success in this last voyage , and of the plenty of gold over , with other matter of importance which he have in these septentrional ! part discover . he be courteous entertain , and hearty welcome of many noble man , but especial for his great adventure , commend of her majesty , at who hand he receive great thanks , and most gracious countenance , accord to his desert . her highness also great commend the rest of the gentleman in this service , for their great forwardness in this so dangerous a attempt : but especial she rejoice very much , that among they there be so good order of government , so good agreement , every man so ready in his call , to do whatsoever the general shall command , which due commendation gracious of her majesty remember , give so great encouragement to all the captain and gentleman , that they , to continue her highness so good and honourable opinion of they , have since neither spare labour , limb , nor life , to bring this matter ( so well begin ) to a happy and prosperous end . And find that the matter of the gold over have appearance and make show of great riches and profit , and the hope of the passage to Cataya , by this last voyage great 3X9 m. Frobisher commend of her majesty . the gentleman commend . 1578-commissioner appoint to examine the goodness of the ore . a name give tope place new discover . the hope of the passage to Cataya . a fort to be build in Meta incognita . the english voyage increase , her majesty appoint speciali Commissioners choose for this purpose , gentleman of great judgement , art , and skill , to look thorough into the cause , for the true trial and due examination thereof , and for the full handle of all matter thereunto appertain . and because that place and country have never heretofore be discover , and therefore have no speciali name , by which it may be call and know , her majesty name it very proper Meta incognita , as a mark and bind utter hitherto unknown . the commissioner after sufficient trial and proof make of the ore , and have understand by sundry reason , and substantiali ground , the possibility and likelihood of the passage , advertise her highness , that the cause be of importance , and the voyage great worthy to be advance again . whereupon preparation be make of ship and all other thing necessary , with such expedition , as the time of the year then require . and because it be assure make account of , that the commodity of mine , there already discover , will at the least countervail in all respect the adventurer charge , and give further hope and likelihood of great matter to follow : it be think needful , both for the better guard of those part already find , and for further discovery of the inland and secret of those country , and also for further search of the passage to Cataya ( whereof the hope continual more and more increase ) that certain number of choose soldier and discreet man for those purpose shall be assign to inhabit there . whereupon there be a strong fort or house of timber , artificial frame , and cunning devise by a notable learned man here at home , in ship to be carry thither , whereby those man that be appoint to winter and stay there the whole year , may aswell be defend from the danger of the snow and cold air , as also fortify from the force or offence of those country people , which perhaps otherwise with too great multitude may oppress they . and to this great adventure and notable exploit many 320 well mind and forward young gentleman of our country willing have offer themselves . and first captain Fenton lieutenant generail for captain Frobisher , and in charge of the company with he there , captain best , and captain Filpot , unto who good discretion the government of that service be chief commend , who , as man not regard peril in respect of the profit and common wealth of their country , be willing to abide the first brunt and adventure of those danger among a savage and brutish kind of people , in a place hitherto ever think for extreme can not habitable . the whole number of man which have offer , and be appoint to inhabit Meta incognita all the year , be one hundred person , whereof 40 shall be mariner for the use of ship , 30 miner for gather the gold over together for the next year , and 30 soldier for the better guard of the rest , within which last number be include the gentleman , goldfiner , baker , carpenter , and all necessary person . to each of the captain be assign one ship , aswell for the further search of the coast and country there , as for to return and bring back their company again , if the necessity of the place so urge , or by miscarry of the fleet the next year , they may be disappoint of their further provision . be therefore thus furnish with all necessary , there be ready to depart upon the say voyage 15 sail of good ship , whereof the whole number be to return again with their load of gold over in the end of the summer , except those 3 ship , which shall be leave for the use of those captain which shall inhabit there the whole year . And be in so good readiness , the generali with all the captain come to the court , then lie at Greenwich , to take their leave of her majesty , at who hand they all receive great encouragement , and gracious countenance . her highness beside other good gift , and great promise , bestow on the generali a fair chain of gold , and the rest of the captain kiss her hand , take unto 321 ten a hundred man appoint to inhabit there . fifteen sail . [ he . 75-1 a chain of gold give to m. Frobisher . their leave , and depart every man towards their charge . the name of the ship with their several captain . i in the aid be Amirali , be the generali captain Frobisher . 2 in the Thomas Allen vice-admiral York . 3 in the Judith lieutenant generail Fenton . 4 in the anne Francis Best . 5 in the Hopewell Carew . 6 in the bear Filpot . 7 in the Thomas of Ipswich Tanfield . 8 in the Emmanuel of Exeter Courtney . 9 in the Francis of Foy moil . 10 in the moon Upcot . 11 in the Emmanuel of Bridgewater Newton . 12 in the Salomon of Weymouth Randal . 13 in the bark Dennis Kendal . 14 in the Gabriel Harvey . 15 in the Michael , Kinnersley . the say fifteen sail of ship arrive and meet together at Harwich , the seven and twenty day of May anno 1578 , where the generali and the other captain make view , and muster their company . and every several captain receive from the generali certain article of direction , for the better keep of order and company together in the way , which article be as follow . article and order to be observe for the fleet , set down by captain Frobisher generali , and deliver in write to every captain , as well for keep company , as for the course , the 31 of May . 1 tnprimis , to banish swear , dice , and card-playing , 1. and filthy conmunication , and to serve God twice a day , with the ordinary service usual in church of 322 