1585. see four very fair falcon ; and m. Bruton take Faukens . from one of they his prey , which we judge by the wing and leg to be a snite , for the head be eat off . the 24 in the afternoon , the wind come somewhat fair , we depart from this road , purpose by God grace to return for England . the 26 we depart from sight of the north land of their return . this entrance , direct our course homeward until the ten of the next month . the 10. of September we fall with the land of desola - September . cion , think to go on shore , but we can get never IO3'J a good harbour . that night we put to sea again think to search it the next day : but this night arise a very great storm , and separate our ship , so that we lose the sight of the moonshine . the 13. about noon ( have try all the night before with a goose wing ) we set sail , and within two hour after we have sight of the moonshine again : this day England in we depart from this land . 14. day . the 27. of this month we fall with sight of England . this night we have a marvelous storm and lose the moonshine . the 30. of September we come into Dartmouth , where we find the moonshine be come in not two hour before . the second voyage attempt by m. John Davis with other , for the discovery of they northwest passage , in anno 1586. he 7. day of May , i depart from the port of Dartmouth for the discovery of they northwest passage , with a ship of a hundred and twenty ton name the mermaid , a bark of 60. ton name the sunshine , a bark of 35. ton name the moonshine , and a pinnace of ten ton name the north star . 393 and the 15. of June i discover land in the latitude of 60. degree , and in longitude from the meridian of London Westward 47. degree , mighty pester with ice and snow , so that there be no hope of land : the ice lie in some place ten league , in some 20. and in some 50. league off the shore , so that we be constrain to bear into 57 degree to double the same , and to recover a free sea , which through God favourable mercy we at length obtain . the 29. of June after many tempestuous storm we again discover land , in longitude from the meridian of London 58. degr . 30. min. and in latitude 64. being east from we : into which course sith it please God by contrary wind to force we , i think it very necessary to bear in with it , and there to set up our pinnace , provide in the mermaid to be our scout for this discovery , and so much the rather because the year before i have be in the same place , and find it very convenient for such a purpose , well store with float wood , and possess by a people of tractable conversation : so that the 29. of this month we arrive within the isle which lie before this land , lie north northwest , and south southeast , we know not how far . this land be very high and mountainous , have before it on the west side a mighty company of isle full of fair sound , and harborough . this land be very little trouble with snow , and the sea altogether void of ice . the ship be within the sound we send our boat to search for shoal water , where we may anchor , which in this place be very hard to find : and as the boat go sound and search , the people of the country have espy they , come in their canoas towards they with many shout and cry : but after they have espy in the boat , some of our company that be , the year before here with we , they present row to the boat , and take hold on the oar , and hang about the boat with such comfortable joy , as will require a long discourse to be utter : they come with the boat to our 394 ship , make sign that they know all those that the year before have be with they . after i perceive their gentle and joy and small fear of we , my self with the merchant and : other of the company go a shore , bear with ' i twenty knife : i have no soon land , but they leap out of their canoas and come run to i and the rest , and embrace we with many sign of hearty welcome : at this present there be eighteen of they , and to each of they i give a knife : they oflr skin to i for reward , but i make sign that they be not sell , but give they of courtesy : and so dismiss they for that time , with sign that they shall return again after certain hour . the next day with all possible speed the pinnace be ^ » 100 land upon a isle there to be finish to serve our purpose for the discovery , which isle be so convenient mo^et for that purpose , as that we be very well able to defend our self against many enemy . during the time that the pinnace , be there set up , the people come continual unto we sometime a hundred canoas at a time , sometime fourty , fifty , more and less , as occasion serve . they bring with they seal skin , stag skin , white hare , seal fish , salmon peal , small cod , dry caplin , with other fish , and bird such as the country do yield . my self still desirous to have a further search of this place , send one of the shipboat to one part of the land , and my self go to another part to search for the habitation of this people , with straight commandment [ three . 104. ] that there shall be no injury offer to any of the people , neither any gun shoot . the boat that go from i find the tent of the image , trane people make with seal skin set up upon timber , where - c > I|will > an‘i seal in they find great store of dry caplin , be a little st^ m tan fish no big than a pilchard : they find bag of Trane oil , many little image cut in wood , seal skin in tan-tub , with many other such trifle , whereof they diminish nothing . 395 a grave with a cross lay over . the english voyage they also find ten mile within the snowy mountains a plain champion country , with earth and grass , such as our moory and waste ground of England be : they go up into a ri^er ( which in the narrow place be two league broad ) about ten league , find it still to continue they know not how far : but i with my company take another river , which although at the first it offer a large inlet , yet it prove but a deep bay , the end whereof in four hour i attain , and there leave the boat well man , go with the rest of my company three or four mile into the country , but find nothing , nor see any thing , save only gripe , raven , and small bird , as lark and linnet . the three of July i man my boat , and go with fifty canoas attend upon i up into another sound where the people by sign will i to go , hope to find their habitation : at length they make sign that i shall go into a warm place to sleep , at which place i go on shore , and ascend the top of a high hill to see into the country , but perceive my labour vain , i return again to my boat , the people still follow i , and my company very diligent to attend we , and to help we up the rock , and likewise down : at length i be desirous to have our . man leap with they , which be do , but our man do overleap they : from leap they go to wrestle , we find they strong and nimble , and to have skill in wrestle , for they cast some of our man that be good wrestler . the four of July we launch out pinnace , and have forty of the people to help we , which they do very willing : at this time our man again wrestle with they , and find they as before , strong and skilful . this four of July the master of the mermaid go to certain hand to store himself with wood , where he find a grave with diverse bury in it , only cover with seal skin , have a cross lay over they . the people be of good stature , well in body proportion , with small slender hand and foot , with broad visage , 396 1586. and small eye , wide mouth , the most part unbearded , Tartar great lip , and close tooth . their custom be as often “ jf^arealso as they go from we , still at their return to make a new jialey saint truce , in this sort , hold his hand up to the sun with a loud voice he cry ylyaoute , and strike his breast with like sign , be promise safety , he give credit . Theise people be much give to bleed , and therefore stop their nose with dear hair , or the hair of a elan . they be idolater and have image great store , which they wear about they , and in their boat , which we suppose they worship . they be witch , and have many kind of enchantment , which they often use , but to small purpose , thanks be to God . be among they at shore the four of July , one of they make a long oration , begin to kindle a fire in this manner : he take a piece of a board wherein be a hole half through : into that hole he put the end of a round stick like unto a bedstaff , wet the end thereof in Trane , and in fashion of a turner with a piece their manner of leather , by his violent motion do very speedy ofkindlingfire produce fire : which do , with turf he make a fire , into which with many word and strange gesture , he a£re make you put diverse thing , which we suppose to be a sacrifice : turf . my self and diverse of my company stand by , they be desirous to have i go into the smoke , i will they likewise to stand in the smoke , which they by no mean will do . i then take one of they , and thrust he into the smoke , and will one of my company to tread out the fire , and to spurn it into the sea , which be do to show they that we do contemn their sorcery . Theise people be very simple in all their conversation , great thief . but marvelous thievish , especial for iron , which they have in great account . they begin through our lenity to show their vile nature : they begin to cut our cable : they cut away the moonelight boat from her stern , they cut our cloth where it lie to air , though we do careful look unto it , they steal our oar , a caliver , a boar spear , a sword , with diverse other thing , whereat 397 their weapon . strange net . Theise islander war with the people of the main . copper oar . their language . the english voyage the company and master be grieve , for our better security , desire i to dissolve this new friendship , and to leave the company of these thievish miscreant : whereupon there be a caliver shoot among they , and immediate upon the same a falcon , which strange noise do sore amaze they , so that with speed they depart : notwithstanding their simplicity be such , that within ten hour after they come again to we to entreat peace ; which be promise , we again fall into a great league . they bring we seal skin , and salmon peal , but see iron , they can in no wise forbear steal : which when i perceive , it do but minister unto i a occasion of laughter , to see their simplicity , and i will that in no case they shall be any more hardly use , but that our own company shall be the more vigilant to keep their thing , suppose it to be very hard in so short time to make they know their evil . they eat all their meat raw , they live most upon fish , they drink salt water , and eat grass and ice with delight : they be never out of the water , but live in the nature of fish , save only when dead sleep take they , and then under a warm rock lay his boat upon the land , he lie down to sleep . their weapon be all dart , but some of they have bow and arrow and sling . they make net to take their fish of the fin of a whale : they do all their thing very artificial : and it shall seem that these simple thievish islander have war with those of the main , for many of they be sore wound , which wound they receive upon the main land , as by sign they give we to understand . we have kesinyoh , eat some . among they copper oar , black copper , and red copper : they pronounce their language very hollow , and deep in the throat : these word follow we learn from they . paaotyck , a oar . madlycoyte , music . Aginyoh , go fetch . Yliaoute , ! meanenoharme . Ponameg , a boat . Asanock , a dart . ► < Sawygmeg , a knife . Uderah , a nose . Aoh , iron . 398 Panygmah , a needle . Aob , the sea Mysacoah , wash it . lethicksaneg , a seal skin . Canyglow , kiss i . Ugnera , my son . Acu , shot . Conah , leap . maatuke , fish . Sambah , below . Maconmeg , will you have this . it Cocah , go to he . Aba , fall down . Icune , come hither . awennye , yonder . Nugo , no tucktodo , a fog . Lechiksah , a skin . , Maccoah , a dart . ’ Sugnacoon , a coat . Gounah , come down . sasobneg , a bracelet . ugnake , a tongue . ataneg , a seal . Macuah , a beard . Pignagogah , a thread . Quoysah , give it to i . the 7. of July be very desirous to search the habitation of this country , i go myself with our new pinnace into the body of the land , think it to be a firm continent , and pass up a very large river , a great flaw of wind take i , whereby we be constrain to seek succour for that night , which be have , i land with the most part of my company , and go to the top of a high mountain , hope from thence to see into the country : but the mountain be so many and so mighty as that my purpose prevail not : whereupon i again return to my pinnace , and will diverse of my company to gather muscle for my supper , whereof in this place there be great store , my self have espy a very strange sight , especial to i that never before see the like , which be a mighty whirlwind take up the water in very great quantity , furious mount it into the air , which whirlwind , be not for a puff or blast , but continual , for the space of three hour , with very little intermission , which sith it be in the course that i shall pass , we be constrain that night to take up our lodging under the rock . the next morning the storm be break up , we A.D. 1586. muscle . a strange whirlwind . 399 [ three . 106. ] the english voyage go forward in our attempt , and sail into a mighty great river direct into the body of the land , and in brief , find it to be no firm land , but huge , waste , and desert isle with mighty sound , and inlet pass between sea and sea whereupon we return towards our ship , and land to stop a flood , we find the burial of these miscreant ; we find of their fish in bag , plaice , and caplin dry , of which we take only one bag and depart . the nine of this month we come to our ship , where we find the people desirous in their fashion , of friendship and barter : our mariner complain heavy against the people , and say that my lenity and friendly use of they give they stomach to mischief : for they have steal a anchor from we , they have cut our cable very dangerous , they have cut our boat from our stern , and now since your departure , with sling they spare we not with stone of half a pound weight : and will you still endure these injury ? it be a shame to bear they . i desire they to be content , and say , i doubt not but all shall be well . the 10. of this month i go to the shore , the people follow i in their canoas : i toll they on shore , and use they with much courtesy , and then depart aboard , they follow i , and my company . i give some of they bracelet , and cause seven or eight of they to come aboard , which they do willing , and some of they go into the top of the ship : and thus courteous use they , i let they depart : the sun be no soon down , but they begin to practise their devilish nature , and with sling throw stone very fierce into the moonlight , and strike one of her man then boatswain , that he overthrow withal : whereat be move , i change my courtesy , and grow to hatred , my self in my own boat well man with shot , and the bark boat likewise pursue they , and give they diverse shot , but to small purpose , by reason of their swift row : so small content we return . 400 the 11. of this month there come five of they to make a new truce : the master of the admiral come to i to show i of their come , and desire to have they take and keep as prisoner until we have his anchor again : but when he see that the chief ringleader and master of mischief be one of the five , he then be vehement to execute his purpose , so it be determine to take he : he come cry iliaout , and strike his breast offer a pair of glove to sell , the master offer he a knife for they : so two of they come to we , the one be not touch , but the other be soon captive among we : than we point to he and his fellow for our anchor , which be have , we make sign that he shall be set at liberty : within one hour after he come aboard the wind come fair , whereupon we weigh and set sail , and so bring the oneofthepeo-fellow with we : one of his fellow still follow our ship close aboard , talk with he and make a kind a ™ r you ' of lamentation , we still use he well with yliaout , which be the common course of courtesy . at length this fellow aboard we speak four or five word unto the other and clap his two hand upon his face , whereupon the other do the like , depart as we suppose with heavy cheer . we judge the cover of his face with his hand and bow of his body down , signify his death . at length he become a pleasant companion among we . i give he a new suit of freeze after the english fashion , because i see he can not endure the cold , of which he be very joyful , he trim up his dart , and all his fish tool , and will make okam , and set his hand to a rope end upon occasion . he live with the dry caplin that i take when i be search in the pinnis , and do eat dry Newland fish . all this while , God be thank , our people be in very good health , only one young man except , who die at sea the fourteenth of this month , and the fifteen , accord to the order of the sea , with praise give to God by service , be cast overboard . vn 401 2 c a huge quantity ofyce in 63. degree of latitude . the nature of fog . the english voyage the 17 of this month be in the latitude of 63. degree 8. minute , we fall upon a most mighty and strange quantity of ice in one entire mass , so big as that we know not the limit thereof , and be withal so very high in form of a land , with bay and cape and like high cliff land , as that we suppose it to be land , and therefore send our pinnace off to discover it : but at her return we be certain inform that it be only ice , which breed great admiration to we all consider the huge quantity thereof , incredible to be report in truth as it be , and therefore i omit to speak any further thereof . This only i think , that the like before be never see : and in this place we have very stickle and strong current . we coast this mighty mass of ice until the 30 of July , find it a mighty bar to our purpose : the air in this time be so contagious and the sea so pester with ice , as that all hope be banish of proceed : for the 24 of July all our shrowd , rope and sail be so freeze , and compass with ice , only by a gross fog , as seem to i more than strange , sith the last year i find this sea free and navigable , without impediment . our man through this extremity begin to grow sick and feeble , and withal hopeless of good success : whereupon very orderly , with good discretion they entreat i to regard the state of this business , and withal advise i , that in conscience i ought to regard the safety of my own life with the preservation of they , and that i shall not through my overboldness leave their widow and fatherless child to give i bitter curse . this matter in conscience do great move i to regard their estate : yet consider the excellency of the business if it may be attain , the great hope of certainty by the last year discovery , and that there be yet a three way not put in practice , i think it will grow to my great 402 disgrace , if this action by my negligence shall grow into discredit : whereupon seek help from God , the fountain of all mercy , it please his divine majesty to move my heart to prosecute that which i hope shall be to his glory , and to the contentation of every christian mind . whereupon fall into consideration that the mermaid , albeit a very strong and sufficient ship , yet by reason of her burden be not so convenient and nimble as a small bark , especial in such desperate hazard : further have in account her great charge to the adventurer be at xoo . li . the month , and that in doubtful service : all the premise consider with diverse other thing , i determine to furnish the moonlight with revictual and sufficient man , and to proceed in this action as God shall direct i . whereupon i alter our course from the ice , and bare eastsoutheast to recover the next shore where this thing may be perform : so with favourable wind it please God that the first of August we discover the land in latitude 66. degree , 33. min. [ Iii . 107. ] and in longitude from the meridian of London 70. degree void of trouble without snow or ice . the second of August we harbour our self in a very excellent good road , where with all speed we grave the moonlight , and revictual she : we search this country with our pinnace while the bark be trim , which William Eston do : he find all this land to be only hand , with a sea on the east , a sea on the west , and a sea on the north . in this place we find it very hot , and we be very much trouble great heat . with a fly which be call muskyto , for they do sting grievous . the people of this place at our first coming in catch a seal , and with bladder fast tie to he send he unto we with the flood , so as he come . right with our ship , which we take as a friendly present from they . the five of August i go with the two master and other to the top of a hill , and by the way William 403 Eston espy three canoas lie under a rock , and go unto they : there be in they skin , dart , with diverse superstitious toy , whereof we diminish nothing , but leave upon every boat a silk point , a bullet of lead , and a pin . the next day be the sixth of August , the people come unto we without fear , and do barter with we for skin , as the other people do : they differ not from the other , neither in their canoas nor apparel , yet be their pronunciation more plain than the other , and nothing hollow in the throat . Oure Savage aboard we keep himself close , and make show that he will fain have another companion . thus be provide , i depart from this land the twelve of August at six of the clock in the morning , where i leave the mermaid at a anchor : the fourteen sail west about fifty league , we discover land , be in latitude 66. degree 66. degree igminut : this land be 70. league from the 19 minute . other from whence we come . this fourteenth day from nine a clock at night till three a clock in the morning , we anchor by a hand of ice , twelve league off the shore , be more to the ice . the fifteen day at three a clock in the morning we depart from this land to the south , and the eighteenth of August we discover land northwest from we in the morning , be a very fair promontory , in latitude 65. degree , have no land on the south . great hope of here we have great hope of a through passage . a passage . this day at three a clock in the afternoon we again discover land Southwest and by south from we , where at night we be becalm . the nineteenth of this month at noon , by observation , we be in 64. . degr . 20. 64. degree 20. minute . from the eighteenth day at mn ' noon unto the nineteenth at noon , by precise ordinary care , we have sail 15. league south and by west , yet by art and more exact observation , we find our . course to be southwest , so that we plain perceive rend to the a great current strike to the west . west . this land be nothing in sight but isle , which in - 404 crease our hope . this nineteenth of August at six a clock in the afternoon , it begin to snow , and so continue all night with foul weather , and much wind , so that we be constrain to lie at hull all night five league off the shore : in the morning be the twenty of August , the fog and storm break up , we bear in with the land , and at nine a clock in the morning we anchor in a very fair and safe road and lock for all weather . at ten of the clock i go on shore to the top of a very high hill , where i perceive that this land be Islands : at four hand , of the clock in the afternoon we weigh anchor , have a fair north north-east wind , with very fair weather ; at six of the clock we be clear without the land , and so shape our course to the south , to discover the coast , whereby the passage may be through god mercy find . we coast this land till the eight and twenty of they runnel . August , find it still to continue towards the south , ^9 " south from the latitude of 67. to 57 degree : we find 7^^ / marvelous great store of bird , gull and mew , incredible upon the coast . to be report , whereupon be calm weather , we lie one glass upon the lee , to prove for fish , in which space we catch 100 of cod , although we be but bad provide for fish , not be our purpose . this eight and twenty have great distrust of the weather , we arrive in a very fair harbour in the latitude of 56. a harbonugh degree , and sail 10. league into the same , be two ™ degree . league broad , with very raire wood on both side : in this place we continue until the first of September , in which time we have two very great storm . i land , and go six mile by guess into the country , and find that the wood be fir , pineapple , alder , yew , withy , fair wood . and birch : here we see a black bear : this place yield great store of bird , as fezant , partridge , Barbary hen or the like , wild goose , duck , black bird , jeye , thrush , with other kind of small bird . of the partridge and fezant we kill great store with bow and 405 a perfect hope of the passage about 54. degree and a half . two of our man slay by the savage . the english voyage arrow : in this place at the harbour mouth we find great store of cod . the first of September at ten a clock we set sail , and coast the shore with very fair weather . the third day be calm , at noon we strike sail , and let fall a cadge anchor , to prove whether we can take any fish , be in latitude 54. degree 30. minute , in which place we find great abundance of cod , so that the hook be no soon overboard , but present a fish be take . it be the large and the best feed fish that ever i see , and diverse fisher man that be with i say that they never see a more suavle or better skull of fish in their life : yet have they see great abundance . the four of September at five a clock in the afternoon we anchor in a very good road among great store of isle , the country low land , pleasant and very full of fair wood . to the north of this place eight league , we have a perfect hope of the passage , find a mighty great sea pass between two land west . the south land to our judgement be nothing but isle : we great desire to go into this sea , but the wind be direct against we . we anchor in four fathom fine sand . in this place be foul and fish mighty store . the sixth of September have a fair northnorthwest wind , have trim our bark we purpose to depart , and send five of our sailor young man a shore to a island , to fetch certain fish which we purpose to weather , and therefore leave it all night cover upon the isle : the brutish people of this country lie secret lurk in the wood , and upon the sudden assault our man : which when we perceive , we present let slip our cable upon the halse , and under our foresail bear into the shore , and with all expedition discharge a double musket upon they twice , at the noise whereof they flee : notwithstanding to our very great grief , two of our man be slay with their arrow , and two grievous wound , of who at this present we stand in very great doubt , only one escape by swim , with a arrow 406 1586. shot through his arm . Theise wicked miscreant never offer parley or speech , but present execute their curse fury . this present evening it please God further to increase our sorrow with a mighty tempestuous storm , the wind be north north-east , which last unto the ten of this month very extreme . we unrig our ship , and purpose to cut down our mast , the cable of our shutanker break , so that we only expect to be drive on shore among these cannibal for their prey . yet in this deep distress the mighty mercy of God , when hope be pass , give we succour , and send we a fair lee , so as we recover our anchor again , and new more our ship : where we see that God manifest deliver we : for the strain of one of our cable be break , and we only road by a old junke . thus be fresh more a new storm arise , the wind be westnorthwest , very forcible , which last unto the ten day at night . the eleven day with a fair westnorthwest wind we depart with trust in god mercy , shape our course for England , and arrive in the west country in the begin of October . master Davis be arrive , write his letter to m. William Sanderson of London , concern his voyage , as foliow . ir , the sunshine come into Dartmouth the four of this month : she have be at island , and from thence to Greenland , and so to Estotiland , from thence to desolation , and to our merchant , where she make trade with the people , stay in the country twenty day . they have bring home five hundred seal skin , and a hundred and forty half skin and piece of skin . i stand in great doubt of the pinnace , God be merciful 407 