no essoigne , protection , or wager of law shall be allow . and for the second offence the party so offend not only to lose and forfeit his or their office or office in the admiralty , but also to make fine and ransom at the king will and pleasure . by this act it appear , that the trade out of England [ three . 132. ] to newfound land be common and frequent about the begin of the reign of Edward the 6. namely in the year 1548. and it be much to be marveil , that by the negligence of our man , the country in all this time have be no better search . a letter write to m. Richard Hakluyt of the middle temple , contain a report of the true state and commodity of Newfoundland , by m. Anthony Parkhurst gentleman , 1578. Aster Hakluyt , after most hearty commendation , with like thanks for your manifold kindness to i show , not for any merit that hitherto have be i , but whole proceed , i must needs confess , of your own good nature , which be so ready press to benefit your country and all such poor man as have any spark in they of good desire , that you do not only become their friend , but also - humble your self as servant in their affair : for which i will to God i be once in place where i may cause your burn zeal to be know to those that have authority , power , and ability to recompense your travel mind and pen , wherewith you cease not day nor night to labour and travel to bring your good and godly desire to some pass , though not possible to that happy end that you most thirst for : for such be the malice of wicked man the devil instrument in this our age , that they can suffer any thing ( or at least few ) to proceed and prosper that tend to the set forth of God glory , and the amplify of the christian faith , wherein hitherto prince have not be so diligent as their call require . Alas , the labourer as yet be few , the harvest great , i trust God have make you a instrument to increase the number , and to move man of power , to redeem the people of Newfoundland and those part from out of the captivity of that spirituali Pharaoh , the devil . now to answer some part of your letter touch the sundry navy that come to Newfoundland , or terra nova , for fish : you shall understand that some fish not near the other by 200. league , and therefore the certainty be not know ; and some year come many more english , then other some , as i see the like among we : who since my first travel be but 4. year , be increase from 30. sail to 50. which come to pass chief by the imagination of the western man , who think their neighbour have have great gain than in very deed they have , for that they see i to take such pain yearly to go in proper person : they also suppose that i find some secret commodity by reason that i do search the harbour , creek and haven , and also the land much more than ever any Englishman have do . Surely i be glad that it so increase , whereof soever it spring . but to let this pass , you shall understand that i be inform that there be above 100 sail of Spaniards . Spaniards that come to take cod ( who make all wet , and do dry it when they come home ) beside 20. or 30. more that come from biskaie to kill whale for train . Theise be better appoint for ship and furniture of munition , than any nation save the Englishman , who common be lord of the harbour where they fish , and do use all stranger help in fish if need require , accord to a old custom of the country , which thing they do willing , so that you take nothing from they more than a boat or twain of salt , in respect of your protection of they against rover or other violent intruder , who do often put they from good harbour , etc as touch their tunnage , i think it may be a report of Newfoundland a.d. . 1578. near five or six thousand ton . but of Portugal Portugal ! . there be not light above 50. sail , and they make all wet in like sort , who tunnage may amount to three thousand tun , and not upward . of the french nation french . and Briton , be about one hundred and fifty sail , Briton . the most of their ship be very small , not past forty ton , among which some be great and reasonable well appoint , better than the Portugal , and not so well as the Spaniard , and the burden of they may be some 7000 ton . their ship be from all part of France and Britain , and the Spaniard from most part of Spain , the Portugal from Aviero and Viana , and from 2. or 3. port more . the trade that our nation have to island make , that the english be not there in such number as other nation . now to certify you of the fertility and goodness of the fertility the country , you shall understand that i have in sundry place sow wheat , barley , rye , oat , bean , Pease ’ and seed of herb , kernel , plumstone , nut , all which have prosper as in England . the country yield many good tree of fruit , as filbert in some place , but in all place cherry tree , and a kind of pearetree meet to graft on . as for rose , they be as common as bramble here : strawberry , dewbery , and rasp , as common as grass . the timber be most fir , yet plenty of pineapple tree : few of these two kind meet to mast a ship of threescore and ten : but near cape Briton , and to the southward , big and sufficient for any ship . there be also oak and thorn , there be in all the country [ three . 133. i plenty of birch and alder , which be the meet wood for coal , and also willow , which will serve for many other purpose . as touch the kind of fish beside cod , several sort there be herring , salmon , thornebacke , plase , or °ffish-rather we shall call they flounder , dog fish , and another most excellent of taste call of we a cat , oyster , and muscle , in which i have find pearl above 40. in one muscle , and general all have some , great or small . i hear of a Portugal that find one worth 300. ducat : there be also other kind of shellfish , as limpet , cockle , wilke , lobster , and crab : also a fish call by the like a * smell which come on shore , and another that nchwas have the like property , call a squid : these be then and by the fish , which ( when i please to be merry with my old Portugal : companion ) i say , do come on shore when i command capernas . they in the name of the 5. port , and conjure they by such like word : these also be the fish which i may sweep with broom on a heap , and never wet my foot , only pronounce two or three word whatsoever they be appoint by any man , so they hear my voice : the virtue of the word be small , but the nature of the fish great and strange . for the squid , who nature be to come by night as well as by day , i tell they , i set he a candle to see his way , with which he be much delight , or else come to wonder at it as doe our fresh water fish , the other come also in the night , but chief in the day , be force by the cod that will devour he , and therefore for fear come so near the shore , be drive dry by the surge of the sea on the pibble and sand . of these be as good as a smell you may take up with a shove-net as plentiful as you do wheat in a shovel , sufficient in three or four hour for a whole city . there be also other fish which i tell those that be desirous of strange news , that i take as fast as one will gather up stone , and they i take with a long pole and hook . yea marry say they , we believe so , and that you catch all the rest you bring home in that sort , from Portugal and Frenchman . no sure , but thus i do : with three hook stretch forth in the end of a pole , i make as it be a eel spear , with which i prick those flounder as fast as you will take up fritter with a sharp point stick , and with that tool i may take up in less than half a day lobster sufficient to find three hundred man for a day meat . this pastime end , i show they that for my pleasure i take a great mastive i have , and say no more than thus : go fetch i this rebellious fish that obey not this gentle - man that come from Kent and Christendom , bring they to the high water mark , and when he doubt that any of those great cod by reason of shelve ground be like to tumble into the sea again , he will wary take heed and carry he up back to the heap of his fellow . this do cause my friend to wonder , and at the first hear to judge they notorious lie , but they laugh and be merry when they hear the mean how each tale be true . i tell you once i do remember how in my travail into Africa and America , i find tree that bear oyster , which be strange to you , till i tell you that their bough hang in the water , on which both oyster and muscle do stick fast , as their property be , to stake and timber . now to let these merry tale pass , and to come to earnest matter again , you shall understand , that Newfoundland be in a temperate climate , and not so cold as foolish mariner do say , who find it cold sometime when plenty of isle of ice lie near the shore : but up in the land they shall find it hot than in England in many part of the country towards the south . this cold come by a accidentali mean , as by the ice that come fleet from the north part of the world , and not by the situation of the country , or nature of the climate . the country be full of little small river all the year long proceed from the mountain , engender both of snow and rain : few spring that ever i can find or hear of , except it be towards the south : in some place or rather in most place great lake with plenty of fish , the country most cover with wood of fir , yet in many place indifferent good grass , and plenty of bear every where , so that you may kill of they as oft as you listen : their flesh be as good as young beef , and hardly you may know the one from the other if it be powder but two day . of otter we may take like store . there be sea gull , murre , duck , wild goose , and many other kind of bird store , too long to write , especial at one island name Penguin , where we may drive they on a plank into our ship as many as shall lade she . Theise bird be also call penguin , and can fly , there be more meat in one of these then in a goose : the Frenchman that fish near the grand bay , do bring small store of flesh with they , but victuali themselves always with these bird . now again , for venison plenty , especial to the north about the grand bay , and in the south near cape race , and pleasance : there be many other kind of beast , as luzarne and other mighty beast like to camel in greatness , and their foot cleave , i do see they far off not able to discern they perfect , but their step show that their foot be cleave , and big than the foot of camel , i suppose they to be a kind of buff which i read to be in the country adjacent , and very many in the firm land . there be also to the northward , hare and fox in all part so plentiful , that at noon day they take away our flesh before our face within less than half a pair of butt length , where four and twenty person be turn of dry fish , and two dog in sight , yet stand they not in fear till we give shot and set the dog upon they : the bear also be as bold , which will not spare at midday to take your fish before your face , and i believe assure will not hurt any body unless they be force . now to show you my fancy what place i suppose meet to inhabit in those part discover of late by our nation : there be near about the mouth of the grand bay , a excellent harbour call of the Frenchman chas-teaux , and one island in the very entry of the straight call bell isle , which place if they be people and well fortify ( as there be stone and thing meet for it throughout all newfound land ) we shall be lord of the whole fish in small time , if it do so please the queen majesty , and from thence send wood and coal with all necessary to Labrador late discover : but i be of opinion , and do most steadfast believe that we shall find as rich mine in more temperate place and climate , and more profitable for fish then any yet we have use , where we shall have not far from thence plenty of salt make by fire undoubted , and very likely by the heat of the sun , by reason i find salt kern on the rock in nine and forty and better : these place may be find for salt in three and forty . i know more touch these two commodity last remember then any man of our nation do ; for that i have some knowledge in such matter , and have most desire the find of they by painful travail , and most diligent inquiry . now to be short , for i have be over long by master Butlers mean , who cry on i to write at large , and of as many thing as i call to mind worthy of remembrance : wherefore this one thing more . i can wish the island in the mouth of the river of Canada shall be inhabit , and the river search , for that there be many thing which may rise thereof , as i will show you hereafter . i can find in my heart to make proof whether it be true or not that i have read and hear of Frenchmen and Portugal to be in that river , and about cape Briton . i have almost forget to speak of the plenty of wolf , and to show you that there be fox , black , white and grey : other beast i know none save those before remember . i find also certain mine of iron and copper in saint Johns , and in the island of iron , which thing may turn to our great benefit , if our man have desire to plant thereabouts , for proof whereof i have bring home some of the oar of both sort . and thus i end , assure you on my faith , that if i have not be deceive by the vile Portugal descend of the Jew and Judas kind , i have not fail to have search this river , and all the coast of Cape briton , what may have be find to have benefit our country : but they break their band , and falsify their faith and promise , disappoint i of the salt they shall have bring i in part of recompense of my good service in defend they two year against french rover , that have spoil they , if i have not defend they . by mean whereof they make i lose not only the search of the country , but also force i to come home with great loss above 600. livre . for recompense whereof i have send my man into Portugal to demand justice at the king hand , if not , i must put up my supplication to the queen majesty and her honourable council , to grant i leave to stay here so much of their good as they have damnify i , or else that i may take of they in newfound land , as much fish as shall be worth 600. livre . or as much as the salt may have make . i pray you advertise i what way i be best to take , and what hope there will be of a recompense if i follow the suit : many there be that do comfort i , and do bid i proceed , for that her majesty and the council do tender poor fisher man , who with i have sustain three hundred pound loss in that voyage . and to conclude , if you and your friend shall think i a man sufficient and of credit , to seek the isle of S. John , or the river of Canada , with any part of the firm land of Cape briton , i shall give my diligence for the true and perfect discovery , and leave some part of my own business to further the same : and thus i end , commit you to God . from Bristol the 13. of November , 1578. you to use and command Anthony Parckhurst . 16 