a letter write from . m. Thomas Aidworth merchant and mayor of the city of Bristol , to the right honourable sir Francis Walsingham principali secretary to her majesty , concern a western voyage intend for the discovery of the coast of America , lie to the southwest of Cape briton . ight honourable , upon the receit of your letter direct unto i and deliver by the bearer hereof m. Richard Hakluyt and m. Steventon , bear date the 11. of march , i present confer with my friend in private , who i know most affectionate to this godly enterprise , especial with m. William salterne deputy of our company of merchant : whereupon my self be as then sick , with as convenient speed as he can , he cause a assembly of the merchant to be gather : where after dutiful mention of your honourable disposition for the benefit of this city , he by my appointment cause your letter be direct unto i private , to be read in public , and after some good light give by m. Hakluyt unto they that be ignorant of the country and enterprise , and be desirous to be resolve , the motion grow general so well to be like , that there be eftsoon set down by man own hand then present , and apparent know by their own speech , and very willing offer , the sum of 1000 mark and upward : which sum if it shall not suffice , we doubt not but otherwise to furnish out for this western discovery , a ship of threescore , and a bark of 40. ton , to be leave in the country under the direction and government of your son in law m. Carlile , of who we have hear much good , if it shall stand with your honour good like and his acceptation . in one of which bark we be also willing to have m. Steventon your honour 133 messenger , and one well know to we , as captain . and here in humble manner , desire your honour to vouchsafe we of your further direction by a generail letter to my self , my brethren , and the rest of the merchant of this city , at your honour best and most convenient leisure , because we mean not to defer the final proceed in this voyage , any further than to the end of April next come , i cease , beseech God long to bless and prosper your honourable estate . Bristol . march 27. 1583. a brief and summary discourse upon the intend voyage to the hithermost part of America : write by captain Carlile in April , 1583. for the better inducement to satisfy such merchant of the moscovian company and other , as in disburse their money towards the furniture of the present charge , do demand forthwith a present return of gain , albeit their say particular disbursement be require but in very slender sum , the high be 25. livre . the second at 12. livre . 10. s . and the low at 6. pound five shilling . Hen the goldsmith desire to find the certain goodness of a piece of gold , which be new offer unto he , he present bring the same to the touchstone , where , by compare the show or touch of this new piece with the touch or show of that which he [ he . 183. ] know of old , he forthwith be able to judge what the value be of that , which be new offer unto he . after the example whereof i have think it good to make some brief repetition of the particular estate of many other foreign voyage and trade already frequent and know unto we , whereby we may be the better 134 