Insula Penguin . ornatissimo viro , Magistro Richardo Hakluyto Oxonii in collegio sedis christi , Artium and Philosophise Magistro , amico , and fratri suo .. Non statueram ad te scribere , cum in mentem veniret promissum literarum tuarum . Putabas te superiore jam junio nos subsecuturum . itaque de meo statu ex doctore humfredo certiorem te fieri jusseram . verum sic tibi non esset satisfactum . itaque scribam ad te iisdem fere verbis , quia nova meditari and wvow / M^eiv mihi hoc tempore non vacat . undecimo Junii ex anglia revera tandem and serio solvimus , portu and terra apud Plemuthum simul relictis . Classis quinque navibus constabat : maxima , quam* frater amiralii accommodaverat , ignotum quo consilio , statim tertio die a nobis se subduxit . reliqui perpetud conjunctim navigavimus ad 23. Julii , quo tempore magnis nebulis intercepto aspectu alii aliam viam tenuimus : nobis seorsim prima terra apparuit ad calendas Augusti , ad gradum circiter 50. cum ultri 41. paucis ante diebus descendissemus spe Australium ventorum , qui tamen nobis suo tempore nunquam spiravere . Insula est ea , quam vestri Penguin vocant , ab avium ejusdem nominis multitudine . Nos tamen nec ave vidimus , nec insulam accessimus , ventis alio vocantibus . Caeteriim convenimus omnes in eundem locum paulo ante portum in quem communi consilio omnibus veniendum erat , idque intra duas horas , magna dei benignitate and nostro gaudio . Locus situs est in Newfoundlandia , inter 47. and 48. gradum , divum joan-nem vocant . ipse Admiralius propter multitudinem hominum and angustiam navis pauld afflictiorem comitatum habuit , and jam duos dysentericis doloribus amisit : de caeteris bona spes est . ex nostris ( nam ego i Mauricio Browno veer generoso juveni i conjunxeram ) dvo etiam casu quodam submersi sunt . Cseteri salvi and long 78 firmiores . ego nunquam sanior . in hunc locum tertio Augusti appulimus : quinto autem ipse Admiralius have regione in svam and regni angliae possessionem potestatemque vendicavit , latis quibusdam legibus de religion and obsequio reginae angliae . reficimur hoc tempore paulo hilarius and lautius . certain enim and qualibus ventis usi simus , and quam fessi esse potuerimus tam longi temporis ratio docuerit , proinde nihil nobis deerit . nam extra Anglos , 20 circiter nave lusitanicas and hispanicas nacti in hoc loco sumus : eae nobis impare non patientur nos esurire . Angli etsi satis firmi , and a nobis tuti , authoritate regii diplomatis omni obsequio and humanitate prosequuntur . nunc narrandi erant mores , regiones , and populi . caeterum quid narrem mi hakluyte , quando praeter solitudinem nihil video ? piscium inexhausta copia : inde huc commeantibus magnus quaestus . vix hamus fundum attigit , illico insigni aliquo onustus est . Terra universa * montana and sylvestris : arbores ut pluri - 2 » the south mum pinus : eae partim consenuere , partim nunc adolescunt : magna pars vetustate collapsa , and aspectum j°t^re be jt’re terrae , and iter euntium ita impedit , ut nusquam progredi ofplaine and liceat . Herbae omnes procerae : sed raro a nostris champion diversae . Natura videtur velle niti etiam ad generandum as frumentum . inveni enim gramina , and spica in similitu - qiarhe find , dinem secale : and facile cultura and satione in usum humanum assuefieri posse videntur . Rubi in sylvis vel potius fraga arborescentia magna suavitate . Ursi circa tuguria nonnunquam apparent , and conficiuntur : sed albi sunt , ut mihi ex pellibus conjicere licuit , and minores quam nostri . populus a ullus sit in hac region incertum est : nec ullum vidi qui testari posset . et quis quaeso posset , cum ad longum progredi non liceat ? nec minus ignotum est a aliquid metalli sub sit montibus . Causa eadem est , etsi aspectus eorum minera latentes prae se ferat . Nos Admiralio authore fuimus sylvas incendere , quo ad inspiciendam regionem spacium pateret : nec displicebat illi consilium , si non magnum incommodum allaturum videretur . confirmatum est enim ab idoneis hominibus , cum casu quopiam in alia nescio qua station id accidisset , septennium totum pisces the great non comparuisse , ex acerbata maris unda ex terebynthina , heateofthe conflagrantibus arboribus per rivulos defluebat . summer . coelum hoc anni tempore ita fervidum est , ut msi pisces , qui arefiunt ad solemn , assidui invertantur , ab adustione defendi non possint . Hyeme quam frigidum sit , magnae mole glaciei in medio mari nos docuere . Relatum est a comitibus mense Maio sexdecim totos dies interdum se inter tantam glaciem haesisse , ut 60. orgya altae essent insulae : quarum latera soli apposita cum liquescerent , liberation quadam universam molem ita inversam , ut quod ante pronum erat , supinum eva - [ three . 162. ] deret , magno praesentium discrimine , ut consentaneum est . aer in terra mediocriter clarus est : ad orientem supra mare perpetuae nebulae : et in ipso mari circa Bancum ( sic vocant locum ubi quadraginta leucis a terra fundus attingitur , and pisces capi incipiunt ) nullus ferme dies absque pluvia . Expeditis nostris necessitatibus in hoc loco , in austrum ( deo juvante ) progrediemur , tanto indies majori spe , qud plura de iis quas petimus regionibus commemorantur . haec de nostris . Cupio de vobis scire : sed metuo ne incassum . imprimis autem quomodo Untonus meus absentiam meam ferat , praeter modum intelligere velim : habebit nostrum obsequium and officium paratum , quandiu vixerimus . Revera autem spero , hanc nostram peregrinationem ipsius instituto usui futuram . nunc restat , ut i tuum pute , and quidem ita tuum , ut neminem magis . Juvet dei filius labores nostros eatenus , ut tu quoque participare possis . Vale amicissime , suavissime , ornatissime hakluyte , and nos ama . in Newfundlandia apud portum sancti Johannis 6. Augusti 1583. Stephanus Parmenius . Budeius , tuus . to the worshipful , master Richard hakluit at Oxford in Christchurch master of art , and philosophic , his friend and brother . i have not purpose to write unto you , when the promise of your letter come to my mind : you think in June last to have follow we your self , and therefore i have leave order that you shall be advertise of my state , by master doctor Humphrey : but so you will not be satisfy : i will write therefore to you almost in the same word , because i have no leisure at this time , to meditate new matter , and to vary or multiply word . the two . of June we set sail at length from England in good earnest , and depart , leave the haven and land behind we at Plymouth : our fleet consist of five ship : the great , which the admiral brother have lend we , withdraw her self from we the three day , we know not upon what occasion : with the rest we sail still together till the 23. of July : at which time our view of one another be intercept by the great mist , some of we sail one way , and some another : to we alone the first land appear , the first of August , about the latitude of 50. degree , when as before we have descend beyond 41. degree in hope of some southerly wind , which notwithstanding never blue to we at any fit time . shall it be a island which your man call Penguin , because of the multitude of bird of the same name . yet we neither see any bird , nor draw near to the land , the wind serve for our course direct to another place , but we meet altogether at that place a little before the haven , whereunto by common council we have determine to come , and that within the space of two hour by the great goodness of God , and to our great joy . the place be situate in newfound land , between 47. and vni 81 F A.D. .1583 . 48. degree , call by the name of saint Johns : the admiral himself by reason of the multitude of the man , and the smallness of his ship , have his company somewhat sickly , and have already lose two of the same company , which die of the flix : of the rest we conceive good hope . of our company ( for i join my self with Maurice brown , a very proper gentleman ) two person by a mischance be drown , the rest be in safety , and strong , and for my own part i be never more healthy . we arrive at this place the three of August : and the five the admiral take possession of the country , for himself and the kingdom of England : have make and publish certain law , concern religion , and obedience to the queen of England : at this time our fare be somewhat better , and dainty , than it be before : for in good sooth , the experience of so long time have teach we what contrary wind we have find , and what great travel we may endure hereafter : and therefore we will take such order , that we will want nothing : for we find in this place about twenty Portugal and spanish ship , beside the ship of the english : which be not able to match we , suffer we not to be hunger starve : the English although they be off themselves strong enough , and safe from our force , yet see our authority , by the queen letter patent , they show we all manner of duty and humanity . the manner of this country and people remain now to be speak of . but what shall i say , my good Hakluyt , when i see nothing but a very wilderness ? of fish here be incredible abundance , whereby great gain grow to they , that travel to these part : the hook be no soon throw out , but it be eftsoon draw up with some goodly fish : the whole land be full of hill [ three . 163. ] and wood . the tree for the most part be pine and of they some be very old , and some young : a great part of they be fall by reason of their age , do so hinder the sight of the land , and stop the way of those that seek to travel , that they can go no whither : all the 82 grass here be long , and tall , and little differ from we . it seem also that the nature of this soil be fit for corn : for i find certain blade and ear in a manner beard , so that it appear that by manure and sow , they may easy be frame for the use of man : here be in the wood bush berry , or rather straw berry grow up like tree , of great sweetness . bear also appear about the fisher stage of the country , and be sometime kill , but they seem to be white , as i conjecture by their skin , and somewhat less than we . whether there be any people in the country i know not , neither have i see any to witness it . and to say truth , who can , when as it be not possible to pass any whither ? in like sort it be unknown , whither any metal lie under the hill : the cause be all one , although the very colour and hue of the hill seem to have some mine in they : we move the admiral to set the wood a fire , that so we may have space , and entrance to take view of the country , which motion do nothing displease he , be it not for fear of great inconvenience that may thereof ensue : for it be report and confirm by very credible person , that when the like happen by chance in another port , the fish never come to the place about it , for the space of 7. whole year after , by reason of the water make bitter by the turpentine , and rosin of the tree , which run into the river upon the fire of they . the weather be so hot this time of the year , that except the very fish , which be lay out to be dry by the sun , be every day turn , it can possible be preserve from burn : but how cold it be in the winter , the great heap , and mountain of ice , in the midst of the sea have teach we : some of our company report , that in may , they be sometime keep in , with such huge ice , for 16. whole day together , as that the island thereof be threescore fathom thick , the side whereof which be towards the sun , when they be melt , the whole mass or heap be so invert and turn in manner of balance , that that part which be before downward rise upward , to the great peril of those that be near they , as by reason we may gather . the air upon land be indifferent clear , but at sea towards the east there be nothing else but perpetuali mist , and in the sea it self , about the bank ( for so they call the place where they find ground forty league distant from the shore , and where they begin to fish ) there be no day without rain . when we have serve , and supply our necessity in this place , we purpose by the help of God to pass towards the south , with so much the more hope every day , by how much the great the thing be , that be report of those country , which we go to discover . thus much touch our estate . now i desire to know somewhat concern you , but i fear in vain , but special i desire out of measure to know how my patron master Henry Umpton do take my absence : my obedience , and duty shall always be ready towards he as long as i live : but in deed i hope , that this journey of we shall|be profitable to his intention . it remain that you think i to be still you , and so you as no man moor . the son of God bless all our labor , so far , as that you your self may be partaker of our blessing . adieu , my most friendly , most sweet , most virtuous Hakluyt : in newfound land , at saint Johns port , the 6. of August . 1583. Steven Parmenius of Buda , you . 84 