nevertheless we lose our admiral with all the man and provision , not know certain the place . yet for induce man of skill to make conjecture , by our course and way we hold from cape race thither ( that thereby the flat and danger may be insert in sea card , for warn to other that may follow the same course hereafter ) i have set down the best reckon that be keep by expert man , William Cox master of the hind , and John Paul his mate , both of Limehouse . reckon keep in our course from cape race towards cape Briton , and the island of Sablon , to the time and place where we lose our admiral . August 22. August 29. ' west , west and by south . wonderful estnorthwest , wonderful estnorthwest , southsouthwest , Southwest , Southsouthwest , westnorthwest . 14. league . 25. 25. 9 - 10. 12. 10. 12. here we lose , our admiral . sum of these league , 117. the reckon of John Paul master mate from cape race . August 22. ' west , 14 league . 23 northwest and by west , 9 24 Southwest and by south , 5. 25 west and by south , 40. 26 west and by north , 7. 27 - southwest , 3. 28 Southwest , 9 Southwest , 7. Westsouth west , 7. 29 northwest and by west , 20. here we lose . our admiral . sum of all these league , 121. 64 our course we hold in clear we of these flat be [ three . 156. ] eastsoutheast , and southeast , and south 14 league with a marvelous scant wind . the manner how our admiral be lose . upon Tewsday the 27 of August , towards the evening , August 27. our generali cause they in his frigate to sound , who find white sand at 35 fathom , be then in latitude about 44 degree . Wednesday towards night the wind come south , and we bear with the land all that night , westnorthwest , contrary to the mind of master Cox : nevertheless we follow the admiral , deprive of power to prevent a mischief , which by no contradiction can be bring to hold other course , allege they can not make the ship to work better , nor to lie otherways . the evening be fair and pleasant , yet not without prediction token of storm to ensue , and most part of this t1 , e Wednesday night , like the swan that sing before it her death , they in the admiral , or delight , continue in sound of trumpet , with drum , and fife : also wind the cornet , haughtboye : and in the end of their jollity , leave with the battle and ring of doleful kneel . towards the evening also we catch in the golden hind a very mighty porpose , with a harp iron , have first strike diverse of they , and bring away part of their flesh , stick upon the iron , but can recover only that one . Theise also pass through the ocean , in herd , do portend storm . i omit to recite frivolous report by they in the frigate , of strange voice , the same night , which scar some from the helm . Thursday the 29 of August , the wind rise , and blow vehement at south and by east , bring withal rain , and thick mist , so that we can not see a cable length before we . and betimes in the morning we be all - loss of our together run and fold in among flat and sand , admirdu . among which we find shoal and deep in every three vin 65 e 