our course we hold in clear we of these flat be [ three . 156. ] eastsoutheast , and southeast , and south 14 league with a marvelous scant wind . the manner how our admiral be lose . upon Tewsday the 27 of August , towards the evening , August 27. our generali cause they in his frigate to sound , who find white sand at 35 fathom , be then in latitude about 44 degree . Wednesday towards night the wind come south , and we bear with the land all that night , westnorthwest , contrary to the mind of master Cox : nevertheless we follow the admiral , deprive of power to prevent a mischief , which by no contradiction can be bring to hold other course , allege they can not make the ship to work better , nor to lie otherways . the evening be fair and pleasant , yet not without prediction token of storm to ensue , and most part of this t1 , e Wednesday night , like the swan that sing before it her death , they in the admiral , or delight , continue in sound of trumpet , with drum , and fife : also wind the cornet , haughtboye : and in the end of their jollity , leave with the battle and ring of doleful kneel . towards the evening also we catch in the golden hind a very mighty porpose , with a harp iron , have first strike diverse of they , and bring away part of their flesh , stick upon the iron , but can recover only that one . Theise also pass through the ocean , in herd , do portend storm . i omit to recite frivolous report by they in the frigate , of strange voice , the same night , which scar some from the helm . Thursday the 29 of August , the wind rise , and blow vehement at south and by east , bring withal rain , and thick mist , so that we can not see a cable length before we . and betimes in the morning we be all - loss of our together run and fold in among flat and sand , admirdu . among which we find shoal and deep in every three vin 65 e or four ship length , after we begin to sound : but first we be upon they unaware , until master Cox look out , discern ( in his judgement ) white cliff , cry ( land ) withal , though we can not afterward descry any land , it be very likely the break of the sea white , which seem to be white cliff , through the haze and thick weather . immediate token be give unto the delight , to cast about to seaward , which , be the great ship , and of burden 120 ton , be yet foremost upon the breach , keep so ill watch , that they know not the danger , before they feel the same , too late to recover it : for present the admiral strike a ground , and have soon after her stern and hinder part beat in piece : whereupon the rest ( that be to say , the frigate in which be the generali and the golden hind ) cast about eastsoutheast , bear to the south , even for our life into the wind eye , because that way carry we to the seaward . make out from this danger , we sound one while seven fathom , than five fathom , than four fathom and less , again deep , immediate four fathom , than but three fathom , the sea go mighty and high . at last we recover ( God be thank ) in some despair , to sea room enough . in this distress , we have vigilant eye unto the admiral , who we see cast away , without power to give the man succour , neither can we espy any of the man that leap overboard to save themselves , either in the same pinnace or cock , or upon rafter , and such like mean , present themselves to man in those extremity : for we desire to save the man by every possible mean . but all in vain , sith God have determine their ruin : yet all that day , and part of the next , we beat up and down as near unto the wrack as be possible for we , look out , if by good hap we may espy any of they . this be a heavy and grievous event , to lose at one blow our chief ship freight with great provision , 66 1583 gather together with much travel , care , long time , and difficulty . but moor be the loss of our man , which perish to the number almost of a hundred soul . among who be drown a learned man , a hun - Stephanus garian , bear in the city of Buda , call thereof Budaeus , Parmeni ™ a who of piety and zeal to good attempt , adventure in sar-tan . this action , mind to record in the latin tongue , the gest and thing worthy of remembrance , happen in this discovery , to the honour of our nation , the same be adorn with the eloquent stile of this orator , and rare poet of our time . here also perish our saxon refiner and discoverer Daniel a of inestimable riches , as it be leave among some of we nfiwof • j i j 1 ° metal . in undoubted hope . no less heavy be the loss of the captain Maurice brown , a virtuous , honest , and discreet gentleman , [ he . 157. ] oversee only in liberty give late before to man , that aught to have be restrain , who show himself a man resolve , and never unprepared for death , as by his last act of this tragedy appear , by report of they that escape this wrack miraculous , as shall be hereafter declare . for when all hope be pass of recover the ship , and that man begin to give over , and to save themselves , the captain be advise before to shift also for his life , by the pinnace at the stern of the ship : but refuse that counsel , he will not give example with the first to leave the ship , but use all mean to exhort his people not to despair , nor so to leave off their labour , choose rather to die , than to incur infamy , by forsake his charge , which then may be think to have perish through his default , show a ill precedent unto his man , by leave the ship first himself . with this mind he mount upon the high deck , where he attend imminent death , and unavoidable : how long , i leave it to God , who withdraw not his comfort from his servant at such time . in the mean season , certain , to the number of fourteen person , leap into a small pinnace ( than a wmderfull escape and deliverance . a great distress . a desperate resolution . two man famish . the english voyage bigness of a Thames barge , which be make in the new find land ) cut off the rope wherewith it be tow , and commit themselves to God mercy , amid the storm , and rage of sea and wind , destitute of food , not so much as a drop of fresh water . the boat seem overcharge in foul weather with company , Edward Headly a valiant soldier , and well repute of his company , prefer the great to the lesser , think better that some of they perish then all , make this motion to cast lot , and they to be throw overboard upon who the lot fall , thereby to lighten the boat , which otherways seem impossible to live , offer himself with the first , content to take his adventure glad : which nevertheless Richard clarke , that be master of the admiral , and one of this number , refuse , advise to abide God pleasure , who be able to save all , as well as a few . the boat be carry before the wind , continue six day and night in the ocean , and arrive at last with the man ( alive , but weak ) upon the new find land , save that the foresay Headly , ( who have be late sick ) and another call of we Brasile , of his travel into those country , die by the way , famish , and less able to hold out , than those of better health . for such be these poor man extremity , in cold and wet , to have no better sustenance than their own urine , for six day together . thus who God deliver from drown , he appoint to be famish , who do give limit to man time , and ordain the manner and circumstance of die : who again he will preserve , neither sea , nor famine can confound . for those that arrive upon the new find land , be bring into France by certain french man , then be upon that coast . after this heavy chance , we continue in beat the sea up and down , expect when the weather will clear up , that we may yet bear in with the land , which we judge not far off , either the continent or some 68 island . for we many time , and in sundry place find ground at 50 , 45 , 40 fathom , and less . the ground come upon our lead , be sometime oazy sand , and otherwhile a broad shell , with a little sand about it . our people lose courage daily after this ill success , the weather continue thick and bluster , with increase of cold , winter draw on , which take from they all hope of amendment , sell a assurance of worse weather to grow upon we every day . the leeside of we lay full of flat and danger inevitable , if the wind blow hard at south . some again doubt we be ingulf in the bay of S. Laurence , the coast full of danger , and unto we unknown . but above all , provision wax scant , and hope of supply be go , with loss of our admiral . Cautes enforce we to return home again . those in the frigate be already pinch with spare allowance , and want of clothes chief : whereupon they beseech the generali to return for England , before they all perish . and to they of the golden hind , they make sign of their distress , point to their mouth , and to their clothes thin and ragged : then immediate they also of the golden hind , grow to be of the same opinion and desire to return home . the former reason have also move the generali to have compassion of his poor man , in who he see no want of good will , but of mean fit to perform the action they come for , resolve upon retire : and call the captain and master of the hind , he yield they many reason , enforce this unexpected return , withal protest himself , great satisfy with that he have see , and know already . reiterate these word , be content , we have see enough , and take no care of expense past : i will set you forth royal the next spring , if God send we safe home . therefore i pray you let we no long strive here , where we fight against the element . omit circumstance , how unwilling the captain and master of the hind condescend to this motion , his [ three , 158. ] a monster of the sea . September 2. own company can testify : yet comfort with the general promise of a speedy return at spring , and induce by other apparent reason , prove a impossibility , to accomplish the action at that time , it be conclude on all hand to retire . so upon Saturday in the afternoon the 31 of August , we change our course , and return back for England , at which very instant , even in wind about , there pass along between we and towards the land which we now forsake a very lion to our seem , in shape , hair and colour , not swim after the manner of a beast by move of his foot , but rather slide upon the water with his whole body ( except the leg ) in sight , neither yet dive under , and again rise above the water , as the manner be , of whale , dolphin , tunise , porpoise , and all other fish : but confident show himself above water without hide : notwithstanding , we present our self in open view and gesture to amaze he , as all creature will be common at a sudden gaze and sight of man . thus he pass along turn his head to and fro , yawn and gape wide , with ugly demonstration of long tooth , and glare eye , and to bid we a farewell ( come right against the hind ) he send forth a horrible voice , roar or bellow as do a lion , which spectacle we all behold so far as we be able to discern the same , as man prone to wonder at every strange thing , as this doubtless be , to see a lion in the ocean sea , or fish in shape of a lion . what opinion other have thereof , and chief the generali himself , i forbear to deliver : but he take it for bonum omen , rejoice that he be to war against such a enemy , if it be the devil . the wind be large for England at our return , but very high , and the sea rough , insomuch as the frigate wherein the generali go be almost swallow up . Monday in the afternoon we pass in the sight of cape race , have make as much way in little more than two day and night back again , as before we have do in eight day from cape race , unto the place where our ship perish . which hindrance thitherward , and speed back again , be to be impute unto the swift current , as well as to the wind , which we have more large in our return . This Monday the generali come aboard the hind to have the surgeon of the hind to dress his foot , which he hurt by tread upon a nail : at what time we comfort each other with hope of hard success to be all past , and of the good to come . So agree to carry out light always by night , that we may keep together , he depart into his frigate , be by no mean to be entreat to tarry in the hind , which have be more for his security . immediate after follow a sharp storm , which we overpass for that time . praise be God . the weather fair , the generali come aboard the hind our last con - again , to make merry together with the captain , ference mth master , and company , which be the last meeting , and on Generatt‘ continue there from morning until night . during which time there pass sundry discourse , touch affair past , and to come , lament great the loss of his great ship , more of the man , but most of all of his book and note , and what else i know not , for which he be out of measure grieve , the same doubtless being some matter of more importance than his book , which i can not draw from he : yet by circumstance i gather , the same to be the ore which Daniel the saxon have bring unto he in the new find land . whatsoever it be , the remembrance touch he so deep , as not able to contain himself , he beat his boy in great rage , even at the same time , so long after the miscarry of the great ship , because upon a fair day , when we be becalm upon the coast of the new find land , near unto cape race , he send his boy aboard the admiral , to fetch certain thing : among which , this be chief , be yet forget and leave behind . after which time he can never convenient send again 7i circumstance to be well observe in our generali , import the ore to be of a silver i . aboard the great ship , much less he doubt her ruin so near at hand . herein my opinion be better confirm diverse , and by sundry conjecture , which make i have the great hope of this rich i . for where as the generali have never before good conceit of these north part of the world : now his mind be whole fix upon the new find land . and as before he refuse not to grant assignment liberal to they that require the same into these north part , now he become contrary affect , refuse to make any so large grant , especial of saint Johns , which certain english merchant make suit for , offer to employ their money and travel upon the same : yet neither by their own suit , nor of other of his own company , who he seem willing to pleasure , it can be obtain . also lay down his determination in the spring follow , for dispose of his voyage then to be reattempt : he assign the captain and master of the golden hind , unto the south discovery , and reserve unto himself the north , affirm that this voyage have win his heart from the south , and that he be now become a northern man altogether . last , be demand what mean he have at his arrival in England , to compass the charge of so great preparation as he intend to make the next spring : have determine upon two fleet , one for the south , another for the north : leave that to i ( he reply ) i will ask a penny of no man . i will bring good tiding unto her majesty , who will be so gracious , to lend i 10000 pound , will we therefore to be of good cheer : for he do thank God ( he say ) with all his heart , for that he have see , the same be enough for we all , and that we need not to seek any further . and these last word he will often repeat , with demonstration of great fervency of mind , be himself very confident , and settle in belief of inestimable good by this voyage : which the great number of his follower nevertheless mistrust altogether , not be make partaker of those secret , which the generali keep unto himself . yet all of they that be live , may be witness of his word and protestation , which spare i have deliver . leave the issue of this good hope unto God , who know the truth only , 8c can at his good pleasure bring the same to light : i will hasten to the end of this wilfalnes in tragedy , which must be knit up in the person of our then generau-generali . and as it be God ordinance upon he , even so the vehement persuasion and intreaty of his friend can nothing avail , to divert he from a wilful resolution of go through in his frigate , which be overcharge upon their deck , with fight , netting , and small artillery , too cumbersome for so small a boat , that be to pass through the ocean sea at that season of the year , when by course we may expect much storm of foul weather , whereof indeed we have enough . but when he be entreat by the captain , master , a °fa and other his well willer of the hind , not to venture in the frigate , this be his answer : i will not forsake my little company go homeward , with who i have pass so many storm and peril . and in very truth , he be urge to be so over hard , by hard report give of he , that he be afraid of the sea , albeit this be rather rashness , then advise resolution , to prefer the wind of a vain report to the weight of his own life . see he will not bend to reason , he have provision out of the hind , such as be want aboard his frigate . and so we commit he to god protection , 8c set he aboard his pinnace , we be more than 300 league onward of our way home . by that time we have bring the island of Azores south of we , yet we then keep much to the north , until we have get into the height and elevation of England : we meet with very foul weather , and terrible sea , break short and high pyramid wise . the reason whereof seem to proceed either of hilly ground high a resolute and christian-like say in a distress sir Humphrey Gilbert drown . arrival in England of the golden hind . the english voyage and low within the sea , ( as we see hill and dale upon the land ) upon which the sea do mount and fall : or else the cause proceed of diversity of wind , shift often in sundry point : all which have power to move the great ocean , which again be not present settle , so many sea do encounter together , as there have be diversity of wind . howsoever it come to pass , man which all their life time have occupy the sea , never see more outrageous sea . we have also upon our main yard , a apparition of a litde fire by night , which seaman do call Castor and Pollux . but we have only one , which they take a evil sign of more tempest : the same be usual in storm . Monday the nine of September , in the afternoon , the frigate be near cast away , oppress by wave , yet at that time recover : and give forth sign of joy , the generali sit abaft with a book in his hand , cry out unto we in the hind ( so oft as we do approach within hear ) we be as near to heaven by sea as by land . reiterate the same speech , well beseem a soldier , resolute in Jesus Christ , as i can testify he be . the same Monday night , about twelve of the clock , or not long after , the frigate be ahead of we in the golden hind , sudden her light be out , whereof as it be in a moment , we lose the sight , and withal our watch cry , the generali be cast away , which be too true . for in that moment , the frigate be devour and swallow up of the sea yet still we look out all that night , and ever after , until we arrive upon the coast of England : omit no small sail at sea , unto which we give not the token between we , agree upon , to have perfect knowledge of each other , if we shall at any time be separate . in great torment of weather , and peril of drown , it please God to send safe home the golden hind , which arrive in Falmouth , the 22 day of September , be Sunday , not without as great danger escape in a flaw , come from the southeast , with such thick mist , that we can not discern land , to put in right with the haven . from Falmouth we go to Dartmouth , and lie there at anchor before the range , while the captain go aland , to inquire if there have be any news of the frigate , which sail well , may happy have be before we . also to certify sir John Gilbert , brother unto the generali of our hard success , who the captain desire ( while his man be yet aboard he , and be witness of all occurrent in that voyage , ) it may please he to take the examination of every person particular , in fi-ey Gilbert . discharge of he and their faithful endeavour . sir John [ three . 160. ] a fit motion of the captain unto sir hum - Gilbert refuse so to do , hold himself satisfy with report make by the captain : and not altogether despairing of his brother safety , offer friendship and courtesy to the captain and his company , require to have his bark bring into the harbour : in furtherance whereof , a boat be send to help to tow she in . nevertheless , when the captain return aboard his ship , he find his man bend to depart , every man to his home : and then the wind serve to proceed high upon the coast : they demand money to carry they home , some to London , other to Harwich , and elsewhere , ( if the bark shall be carry into Dartmouth , and they discharge , so far from home ) or else to take benefit of the wind , then serve to draw near home , which shall be a less charge unto the captain , and great ease unto the man , have else far to go . reason accompany with necessity persuade the captain , who send his lawful excuse and cause of his sudden departure unto sir John Gilbert , by the boat of Dartmouth , and from thence the golden hind depart , and take harbour at Waimouth . all the man tire with the tediousness of so unprofitable a voyage to their seem : in which their long expense of time , much toil and anillrecom-labour , hard diet and continual hazard of life be un - pense-recompensed : their captain nevertheless by his great charge , impair great thereby , yet comfort in the the english voyage goodness of God , and his undoubted providence follow he in all that voyage , as it do always those at other time , whosoever have confidence in he alone . yet have we more near feel and perseverance of his powerful hand and protection , when God do bring we together with other into one same peril / in which he leave they , and deliver we , make we thereby the beholder , but not partaker of their ruin . Even so , among very many difficulty , discontentment , mutiny , conspiracy , sickness , mortality , spoiling , and wrack by sea , which be affliction , more than in so small a fleet , or so short a time may be suppose , albeit true in every particularity , as partly by the former relation may be collect , and some i suppress with silence for their sake live , it please God to support this company , ( of which only one man die of a malady inveterate , and long infest ) : the rest keep together in reasonable contentment and concord , beginning , continue , and end the voyage , which none else do accomplish , either not please with the action , or impatient of want , or prevent by death . thus have i deliver the content of the enterprise and last action of sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , faithful , for so much as i think meet to be publish : wherein may always appear , ( though he be extinguish ) some spark of his virtue , he remain firm and resolute in a purpose by all pretence honest and godly , as be this , to discover , possess , and to reduce unto the service of God , and christian piety , those remote and heathen country of America , not actual possess by Christians , and most right appertain unto the crown of England : unto the which , as his zeal deserve high commendation : even so , he may just be tax of temerity and presumption ( rather ) in two respect . first , when yet there be only probability , not a certain and determinate place of habitation select , neither any demonstration of commodity there in esse , to induce his follower : nevertheless , he both be too prodigal of 76 his own patrimony , and too careless of other man expense , to employ both he and their substance upon a ground imagine good . the which fall , very like his associate be promise , and make it their best reckon to be salve some other way , which please not God to prosper in his first and great preparation . second , when by his former preparation he be enfeeble of ability and credit , to perform his designments , as it be impatient to abide in expectation better opportunity and mean , which God may raise , he thrust himself again into the action , for which he be not fit , presume the cause pretend on God behalf , will carry he to the desire end . into which , have thus make reentry , he can not yield again to withdraw , though he see no encouragement to proceed , lest his credit foil in his first attempt , in a second shall utter be disgrace . between extremity , he make a right adventure , put all to God and good fortune , and which be worst , refuse not to entertain every person and mean whatsoever , to furnish out this expedition , the success whereof have be declare . but such be the infinite bounty of God , who from ■ Affllctimis every evil derive good . for beside that fruit may grow in time of our travel into those . northwest land , the cross , turmoil , and affliction , both in the preparation and execution of this voyage , do correct the intemperate humour , which before we note to be in [ three . 161. ] this gentleman , and make unsavoury , and less delightful his other manifold virtue . then as he be refine , and make near draw unto the image of God : so it please the divine will to resume he unto himself , whither both he , and every other high and noble mind , have always aspire . [ ornatissimo viro , 77 