get into the down : where for lack of wind we keep our Christmas with dry bread only for drop of our clothes . one thing very strange happen in this voyage : to wit , that a mighty great whale follow our ship by the space of many day as we pass by cape Razo , which by no mean we can chase from our ship , until one of our man fall overboard and be drown , after which time she immediate forsake we , and never afterward appear unto we . A.D. * 593* a huge whale pursue their ship by the space of many day , till one of their man fall overboard . a brief note concern the voyage of m. George drake of Apsham to isle of Ramea in the aforesaid year 1593. krsn the begin of the former relation write by Richard fisher servant to the worshipful master pjjp open rejriffe be } as you read , a brief report of their loose of their consort the ship of master George drake of Apsham : which though she come direct to the isle of Ramea , yet because she be not ready so soon by two month as she ought to have be , she be not only the hindrance of her consort the marigold , and lose the season of the year for the make of her voyage of kill the morse or sea ox , which be to be take in April , may , and June : but also suffer the fit place and harborough in the isle which be but two , as far as i can learn , to be forestall and take up by the Briton of saint Malo and the bask of saint John de Luz , by come a day after the fair , as we say . which linger improvidence of our man have be the overthrow of many a worthy enterprise and of the undertaker of the same . the relation of this voyage at large i be promise by the author himself : but the same not come to my hand in time i be constrain to leave it out . the want whereof , for the better understanding of the state of the say island , the frequent of that gainful trade by the aforesaid nation or the Briton and bask , may in part be supply by the voyage of master Charles vin 161 l leigh to the say island of Ramea : which also come much too late thither , as master George Drake have do , be whole prevent and shut out to his and his friend no small detriment and mischief , and to the discourage of other hereafter in the say gainful and profitable trade . nevertheless albeit hitherto the success have not answer our expectation through our own default , as be abovesaid , yet i be very willing to set down in brief and homely stile some mention of these three voyage of our own man . the first of m. George Drake , the second of m. Silvester Wyet , the three of m. Charles Leigh , because they be the first , for aught that hitherto be come to my knowledge , of our own nation , that have conduct english ship so far within this gulf of saint Laurence , and have bring we true relation of the manifold gain which the french , britaynes , bask , and biskaine do yearly return from the say part ; while we this long time have stand still and have be idle looker on , make courtisie who shall give the first adventure , or once be give , who shall continue or prosecute the same . [ Iii . 194. ] the voyage of the grace of Bristol of m. rice Jones , a bark of thirty five ton , up into the bay of saint Laurence to the northwest of Newefoundland , as far as the isle of Assumption or Natiscotec , for the barb or fynne of whale and train oil , make by Silvester Wyet , shipmaster of Bristol . i depart with the aforesaid bark man with twelve man for the place aforesaid from ----- Bristol the 4 of April 1594. and fall with cape d’espere on the coast of Newefoundland the nineten of may in the height of 47. we go thence for cape Raz , be distant from thence 18 or 19 league , the very same day . 162 