a brief note of the morsse and the use thereof . n the first voyage of Jaques Carthier , wherein he discover the gulf of saint Laurence and the ------ say isle of Ramea , in the year 1534 , as you may read in page . 205 of this present volume , he meet with these beast , as he witness in these word . about the say island be very great beast as great as ox , which have two great tooth in their mouth like unto elephant tooth , and live also in the sea . we see one of they sleep upon the bank of the water , and think to take it , we go to it with our boat , but so soon as he hear we , he cast himself into the sea . touch these beast which Jaques Carthier say to be as big as ox and to have tooth in their mouth like elephant tooth : true it be that they be call in latin boves Marini , or Vaccas Marinas , and in the russian tongue morss , the hide whereof i have see as big as any ox hide , and be dress i have yet a piece of one thick than any two ox or Buis hide in England . the leatherdresser take they to be excellent good to make light target against the arrow of the savage ; and i hold they far better than the light leather target which the moor use in Barbary against arrow and lance , whereof i have see diverse in her majesty stately armoury in the tower of London . the tooth of the say fish , whereof i have see a dryfat full at once , be a foot and some time more in length : and have be sell in England to the comb and knife-maker , at 8 groat and 3 shilling the pound weight , whereas the best ivory be sell for half the money : the grain of the bone be somewhat more yellow than the ivory . one m. Alexander Woodson of Bristol my old friend , a excellent mathematician and skilful physician , show i one of these beast tooth which be bring from the isle of Ramea in the first prize , which be half a yard long or very little less : and assure i that he have make trial of it in minister medicine to his patient , and have find it as sovereign against poison as any unicorn horn . the voyage of the ship call the marigold of m. hill of Redrife unto cape Briton and beyond to the latitude of 44 degree and a half , 1593 write by Richard fisher master hill man of redriffe . he ship call the marigold of 70 ton in burden furnish with 20 man , whereof 10 be mariner , the master name be Richard strong of Apsham , the master mate Peter Langworth of Apsham , with 3 cooper , 2 butcher to flay the morss or sea ox ( whereof diverse have tooth above a cubit long and skin far thick than any bull hide ) with other necessary people , depart out of Falmouth the 1 of June 1593 inn consort of another ship of m. drake of Apsham , which upon some occasion be not ready so soon as she shall have be by two month . the place for which these two ship be bind be a island within the straight of saint Peter on the back side of Newfoundland to the southwest in the latitude of forty seven degree , call by the Briton of saint Malo the isle of Ramea , but by the savage and natural of the continent next adjoin , menquit : on which isle be so great abundance of the huge and mighty sea ox with great tooth in the month of April , may and June , that there have be fifteen hundred kill there by one small bark , in the year 1591. the two english ship aforesay , lose company before they come to Newfoundland : and never come after together in all their voyage . the ship of m. George Drake fall first with Newfoundland , and afterward very direct come to the isle 157 the voyage of m. drake of Apsham to Ramea . [ Iii . 192. ] the isle of Ramea , or menquit . 