Leigh to the say island of Ramea : which also come much too late thither , as master George Drake have do , be whole prevent and shut out to his and his friend no small detriment and mischief , and to the discourage of other hereafter in the say gainful and profitable trade . nevertheless albeit hitherto the success have not answer our expectation through our own default , as be abovesaid , yet i be very willing to set down in brief and homely stile some mention of these three voyage of our own man . the first of m. George Drake , the second of m. Silvester Wyet , the three of m. Charles Leigh , because they be the first , for aught that hitherto be come to my knowledge , of our own nation , that have conduct english ship so far within this gulf of saint Laurence , and have bring we true relation of the manifold gain which the french , britaynes , bask , and biskaine do yearly return from the say part ; while we this long time have stand still and have be idle looker on , make courtisie who shall give the first adventure , or once be give , who shall continue or prosecute the same . [ Iii . 194. ] the voyage of the grace of Bristol of m. rice Jones , a bark of thirty five ton , up into the bay of saint Laurence to the northwest of Newefoundland , as far as the isle of Assumption or Natiscotec , for the barb or fynne of whale and train oil , make by Silvester Wyet , shipmaster of Bristol . i depart with the aforesaid bark man with twelve man for the place aforesaid from ----- Bristol the 4 of April 1594. and fall with cape d’espere on the coast of Newefoundland the nineten of may in the height of 47. we go thence for cape Raz , be distant from thence 18 or 19 league , the very same day . 162 * 594-the 20. day we be thwart of cape Raz . cape Raz . than we set our course northwest for cape S. marie , cape S. which be distant from cape Raz 19 league , and be on the Marie-Eastside of the great bay of Placentia almost at the entry thereof . from thence we shape our course for the island of S. Pedro pass by the break island of the martyer : the island of and when we be thwart of the say isle of the martyer the martym-our course to the isle of S. Pedro be west and by the isle of north . in these isle of S. Pedro there be a fair harbour , s - Peter ' which we go into with our bark , and find there 2 ship of Sibiburo fish for cod : where we stay 2 day , and take in bale for our ship . there be as fair and tall fir tree grow therein , as in any other part of Newfoundland . than we depart thence , and as we come out of the harbour mouth we lay the ship upon the lee , and in 2 hour space we take with our hook 3 or 4 hundred great cod for our provision of our ship . than we depart from the isle of S. Pedro to enter into the gulf of saint Laurence between cape Briton and the say isle , and set our course west north west , and fall with cape de Rey which we find to be distant from cape de Rey. the isle of S. Pedro 42 league . from cape de Rey to cape de Angullie we set our course northnorthwest be cape the an-distant thence 12 or 13 league . from the cape de Angullie into the bay of S. George we run Northeast the bay of and by east some 18 or 19 league . 5amt georse - in this bay of saint George , we find the wrack of 2 great biskaine ship , which have be cast away three year before : where we have some seven or eight hundred whale fin , and some iron bolt and chain of their main shroud and before shroud : all their train be beat out with the weather but the cask remain still . some part of the commodity be spoil by tumble down of the cliff of the hill , which cover part of the cask , and the great part of those whale fin , which we understand to be there by four Spaniard which escape , and be bring to saint John de Luz . here we 163 they land on the isle of Natiscotec . the english voyage find the house of the savage , make of fir tree bind together in the top and set round like a dovehouse , and cover with the bark of fir tree , we find also some part of their victual , which be dear flesh roast upon wooden spit at the fire , and a dish make of a ryne of a tree , sow together with the sinew of the deer , wherein be oil of the deer . there be also fowl call cormorant , which they have pluck and make ready to have dress , and there we find a wooden spoon of their make . and we discern the track of the foot of some forty or fifty man , woman and child . when we have dispatch our business in this bay of saint George and stay there ten day , we depart for the northern point of the say bay , which be nine or ten league broad . then be inform , that the whale which be deadly wound in the grand bay , and yet escape the fisher for a time , be wont usual to shoot themselves on shore on the isle of Assumption , or natiscotec , which lie in the very mouth of the great river that run up to Canada , we shape our course over to that long isle of Natiscotec , and we find the distance of the way to the estermost end thereof to be about forty four league : and it stand in the latitude of 49. here we arrive about the midst of June at the east end , and ride in eighteen fathom water in fair white sand and very good ankerage , and for trial heave a line overboorde and find wonderful fair and great cod fish : we go also seven of we on shore and find there exceed fair great wood of tall fir tree , and hear and see store of land and sea fowl , and see the foot of diverse beast in the sand when we be on shore . from the easter end we go to the norther side of the island , which we perceive to be but narrow in respect of the length thereof . and after we have search two day and a night for the whale which be wound which we hope to have find there , and miss of our purpose , we return back to the south - 164 ward , and be within one league of the island of Penguin , which lie south from the eastermost part of Natiscotec some twelve league . from the isle of Penguin we shape our course for cape de Rey and have sight of the island of Cape briton : then return we by the isle of saint Pedro , and so come into the bay of Placentia , and arrive in the easterside thereof some ten league up within the bay among the fisherman of saint [ three . 195. ] John de Luz and of Sibiburo and of Biskay , which be to the number of threescore and odd sail , whereof eight ship only be Spaniard , of who we be very well use and they wish hearty for peace between they and we . there the man of saint John and Sibiburo man bestow two pinnace on we to make up our voyage with fish . than we depart over to the other side of the bay , where we arrive in a harbour which be call Pesmarck , and there make our stage and fish so long , that in the end the savage come , and in the night , when our man be at rest , cut both our pinnace and our ship boat away to our great hindrance of our voyage , yet it be our good fortune to find out our pinnace and get they again . then for fear of a shrewd turn of the savage , we depart for cape saint marie , and have pass cape Raz , we pass northward fourteen league and arrive in Farrillon , and find there two and twenty sail of Englishman , we make up our fish voyage to the full in that harbour the twenty four of August to our good content : and depart thence we arrive first in comb and stay there a seven night , and afterward in Hungrod in the river of Bristol by the grace of God the 24 of September . 1594. i65 [ the voyage 