word that they will keep we company for England . but i have give William Crafton commission before to go for the island of the azore , and there to spend his victual for a man of war . the next day be the five of August , have a fair wind , we put off from the coast of Newfoundland , and keep our course direct for England , the Hopewell keep we company until midday , whenas have lose we in a fog , she shoot off two piece of ordinance , and we answer she with three : afterward we speak not with she , suppose that she go for the island . the 27 of August , draw near the coast of England , we sound and find ground at seventy fathom . some of the mariner think we be in Bristol channel , and other in silly channel : so that through variety of judgement , and evil marinership we be fain to dance the hay four day together , sometime run to the north-east , sometime to the southeast , then again to the east , and eastnortheast . thus do we spend fair wind , and lose our time until the last of August . and then it please God that we fall with the island of Lundy within the channel of Bristol ; from whence we shape our course : and after diverse danger , the three of September we meet with the Tramontane of the queen off of Dartmouth ; to the captain whereof we give certain thing that he have need of . the five of September i land on the outside of the isle of wight , and within few day after it please God to bring the ship in safety to London , where she be make prize as belong to the enemy of this land . certain observation touch the country and place where we travel . he Newfoundland we find very subject to fog and mist . the ground of it be very rocky : and upon it there be great store of fir tree , and in some place read ; and about the shore it have great abundance of codfish . we be on land in it in 180 1597-foure several place : 1 at caplin bay and Farrillon : 2 at cape raze : 3 at the harbour of Lano , which lie four league to the west beyond cape Laurence : 4 at saint marie port . the island of Menego for the soil be much like Newfoundland , but the fish about it , as also throwout the grande bay within Cape briton , be much large and better than that of the Newfoundland . this island be scant two league long , and very narrow . in the midst of it , a great way within the wood be a great pool . here we be thrice on shore : once at the east side , and twice at the west . the three island of bird be sandy red , but with the multitude of bird upon they they look white . the bird sit there as thick as stone lie in a pave street . the great of the island be about a mile in compass . [ he . 201. ] the second be little less . the three be a very little one , like a small rock . at the second of these three lay on the shore in the sunshine about thirty or forty seaoxen or morse : which when our boat come near they , present make into the sea , and swim after the boat . brion island we find to be very good , and sandy ground . it have in it store of fir tree . it be somewhat more than a league long , and about three league in compass . here we be on land once , and go from the one side of it to the other . the island of Ramea we take to be like grind as brion island , have also abundance of fir tree . it seem to be in length about twelve or thirteen league at least . we be there in harbour , but not on shore , which we much desire , and hope to have be : but the conflict which we have there with the bask and Briton , mention before , prevent we . the isle Blanche likewise seem in quality of the ground and bigness of it to be much like brion island aforesaid , but somewhat less . we be not on shore upon it , but ride before it at anchor . the land of cape Briton we find to be somewhat like 181 than Newfoundland , but rather better . here towards the west end of it we see the cloud lie low than the hill : as we do also at cape Laurence in Newfoundland . the easterly end of the land of cape Briton be nothing so high land , as the west . we go on shore upon it in five place : i at the bay where the Chancewell be cast away : 2 at Cibo : 3 at a little island between Cibo and the new port : 4 at the new port : and 5 at port ingle , or the english port . concern the nature and fruitfulness of brion island , isle Blanche , and of Ramea , they do by nature yield exceed plenty of wood , great store of wild corn like barley , strawberry , gooseberry , mulberry , white rose , and store of wild peason . also about the say island the sea yield great abundance of fish of diverse sort . and the say island also seem to proffer , through the labour of man , plenty of all kind of our grain , of root , of hemp , and other necessary commodity . Charles Leigh . 182 