.. I54X snow there often then in France be , because it rain the cause of there but seidome : for the rain be convert into the often snow-tnetn Canada . snow . all thing above mention , be true . John Alphonse make this voyage with monsieur Roberval . there be a pardon to be see for the pardon of monsieur de saine terre , lieutenant of the say monsieur de Roberval , give in Canada in the presence of the say John Alphonse . the voyage of John Francis de la Roche , knight , lord of Roberval , to the country of Canada , Saguenai , and Hochelaga , with three tall ship , and two hundred person , both man , woman , and child , begin in April , 1542. in which part he remain . the same summer , and all the next winter . ir John Francis de la Roche knight , lord of Roberval , appoint by the king as his lieutenant general in the country of Canada , Saguenay , and Hochelaga , furnish 3. tall ship , chief at the king cost : and have in his fleet 200. person , aswell man as woman , accompany with diverse gentleman of quality , as namely with monsieur saineterre he lieutenant , l’Espiney his ensign , captain Guinecourt , monsieur noire fontaine , dieu lamont , frote , la Brosse , Francis de Mire , la salle , and roieze , and John alfonse of Xanctoigne a excellent pilot , set sail from rochel the 16. of April 1542. the same day about noon we come athwart of chief the boy , where we be enforce to stay the night follow . on Monday the seventeenth of the say month we depart from chief de-boy . the wind serve we notable for a time : but within few day it come quite contrary , 283 Jacques Cartier steal away . [ Iii . 24I . ] the english voyage which hinder our journey for a long space : for we be sudden enforce to turn back , and to seek harbour in belle isle , on the coast of Bretaigne , where we stay so long , and have such contrary weather by the way , that we can not reach newfound land , until the seven of June . the eight of this month we enter into the road of saint John , where we find seventeen ship of fisher . while we make somewhat long abide here , Jaques Cartier and his company return from Canada , whither he be send with five sail the year before , arrive in the very same harbour . who , after he have do his duty to our generali , tell he that he have bring certain Diamonts , and a quantity of gold over , which be find in the country . which ore the Sunday next ensue be try in a furnace , and find to be good . Furthermore , he inform the generali that he can not with his small company withstand the savage , which go about daily to annoy he : and that this be the cause of his return into France . nevertheless , he and his company commend the country to be very rich and fruitful ! . but when our generali be furnish with sufficient force , command he to go back again with he , he and his company , move as it seem with ambition , because they will have all the glory of the discovery of those part themselves , steal privy away the next night from we , and without take their leaf depart home for Bretaigne . we spend the great part of June in this harbour of saint John , partly in furnish ourselves with fresh water , whereof we stand in very great need by the way , and partly in compose and take up of a quarrel between some of our countryman , and certain Portugal . at length , about the last of the aforesaid month , we depart hence , and enter into the grand bay , and pass by the isle of ascension : and final arrive four league westward of the isle of Orleans . in this place we find a convenient harbour for our ship , where we cast 284 1542. anchor , go a shore with our people , and choose out a convenient place to fortify ourselves in , fit to command the main river , and of strong situation against all invasion of enemy . thus toward the end of July , we July . bring our victual and other munition and provision on shore , and begin to travail in fortify of our self . of the fort of france-roy , and that which be do there . have describe the beginning , the midst , and the end of the voyage make by monsieur Roberval in the country of Canada , Hochelaga , Saguenay , and other country in the west part : he sail so far , ( as it be declare in other book ) that he arrive in the say country , accompany with two hundred person , soldier , mariner , and common people , , with all furniture necessary for a fleet . the say generali at his first arrival build a fair fort , near and somewhat westward above Canada , which be very beautiful to behold , and of great force , situate upon a high mountain , wherein there be two court of building , a great tower , and another of forty or fifty foot long : wherein there be diverse chamber , a hall , a Kitchine , house of office , seller high and low , and near unto it be a oven and mill , and a stoove to warm man in , and a well before the house . and the building be situate upon the great river of Canada , call France prime , by mon - France prime . sieur Roberval . there be also at the foot of the mountain another lodging , part whereof be a great tower of two story high , two court of good building , where at the first all our victual , and whatsoever be bring with we be send to be keep : and near unto that tower there be another small river . in these two place above and beneath , all the mean sort be lodge . and in the month of August , and in the begin of Autist 1542. September every man be occupy in such work as each one be able to do . but the fourteenth of Septem - September 14. ber , our aforesaid generali send back into France two 285 ship which have bring his furniture , and he appoint for admiral monsieur de saineterre , and the other captain be Monsieur Guinecourt , to carry news unto the king , and to come back again unto he the year next ensue , furnish with victual and other thing , as it shall please the king : and also to bring news out of France how the king accept certain diamond which be send he , and be find in this country . after these two ship be depart , consideration be have how they shall do , and how they may pass out the winter in this place . first they take a view of the victual , and it be find that they fall out short : the proportion and they be scantle so , that in each mess they have but two loaf weigh a pound a piece , and half a pound of beef . they eat bacon at dinner with half a pound of butter : and beef at supper , and about two handful of bean without butter . on the Wednesday , Friday , and Saturday they do eat dry cod , and sometime they do eat it green at dinner with butter , and they eat of porpoise and bean at supper . about that time the savage bring we great store of aloses , which be a fish somewhat read like a salmon , to get knife and other small trifle for they . in the end many of our people fall sick of a certain disease in their leg , reins , and stomach , so that they seem to be deprive of all their limb , and there die thereof about fifty . the length of note that the ice begin to break up in April . Monsieur Roberval use very good justice , and punish every man accord to his offence . one who name be Michael Gaillon , be hang for his theft . John of Nantes be lay in iron , and keep prisoner for his offence , and other also be put in iron , and diverse be they have whip , as well man as woman : by which mean they woman with live in jet . they . 286 