of a mountain , which be at the foot of the fault , where i have see the say river beyond the say fault , which show unto we to be broad than it be where we pass it . the people of the country advertise we , that there be ten day journey from the fault unto ten this great lake . we know not how many league they make to a day journey . at this present encage can write this great unto you more at large , because the messenger can stay lake . no long . here therefore for the present i will end , salute you with my hearty commendation , pray God to give you your heart desire . for s. malo in haste this 19 day of June . 1587. your love friend , Jaques Noel . cousin , i pray you do i so much pleasure as to send i a book of the discovery of new Mexico , and one of those new map of the west Indies dedicate to m. Hakluyt the english gentleman , which you send to your brother in law Giles Walter . i will not fail to inform my self , if there be any mean to find out those description which captain Cartier make after his two last voyage into Canada . underneath the aforesaid unperfect relation that which follow be write in another letter send to m. John growte student in Paris from Jaques Noel of S. Malo , the grand nephew of Jaques Cartier . can write nothing else unto you of any thing that i can recover of the write of captain Jaques Cartier my uncle diseased , although i have make search in all place that i can possible in this town : save of a certain book make in manner of a sea chart , which be draw by the hand of my say uncle , which be in the possession of master cremeur : which book be pass vin 273 s well mark and draw for all the river of Canada , whereof i be well assure , because i my self have knowledge thereof as far as to the fault , where i have be : the fault be the height of which fault be in 44. degree . i find in sa^ chart beyond the place where the river be ’ ' divide in twain in the midst of both the branch of the say river somewhat near that arm which run towards the northwest , these word follow write in the hand of Jaques Cartier . by the people of Canada and Hochelaga it be say , that here be the land of Saguenay , which be rich and wealthy in precious stone . [ Iii . 237. ] and about a hundred league under the same 1 find write these two line follow in the say card inclining towards the southwest . here in this country be cinnamon and clove , which they call in their language Canodeta . touch the effect of my book whereof i speak unto you , it be make after the manner of a sea chart , which i have deliver to my two son Michael and John , which at this present be in Canada . if at their return , which will be God willing about Magdalene tie , they have learn any new thing worthy the writing , i will not fail to advertise you thereof . your love friend , Jaques Noel . 274 