a very great number of savage assemble together . the fault be in 44. deg . a penny easy to pass . but 5. league journey to pass the 3 fault . the english voyage the savage of the country come not any more about our fort as they be accustom , to bring we fish , and that they be in a wonderful doubt and fear of we . wherefore our captain , have be advertise by some of our man which have be at Stadacona to visit they , that there be a wonderful number of the country people assemble together , cause all thing in our fortress to be set in good order : etc the rest be want . a letter write to m. John growte student in Paris , by Jaques Noel of S. Malo , the nephew of Jaques Cartier , touch the foresay discovery . Aster growte , your brother in law Giles Walter show i this morning a map print at Paris , dedicate to one m. Hakluyt a english gentleman : wherein all the west Indies , the kingdom of new Mexico , and the country of Canada , Hochelaga and Saguenay be contain . i hold that the river of Canada which be describe in that map be not mark as it be in my book , which be agreeable to the book of Jaques Cartier : and that the say chart do not mark or set down the great lake , which be above the fault , accord as the savage have advertise we , which dwell at the say fault . in the foresay chart which you send i hither , the great lake be place too much towards the north . the fault or fall of the river stand in 44. degree of latitude : it be not so hard a matter to pass they , as it be think : the water fall not down from any high place , it be nothing else but that in the midst of the river there be bad ground . it be best to build boat above the fault : and it be easy to march or travel ! by land to the end of the three fault : it be not above five league journey . i have be upon the top 272 of a mountain , which be at the foot of the fault , where i have see the say river beyond the say fault , which show unto we to be broad than it be where we pass it . the people of the country advertise we , that there be ten day journey from the fault unto ten this great lake . we know not how many league they make to a day journey . at this present encage can write this great unto you more at large , because the messenger can stay lake . no long . here therefore for the present i will end , salute you with my hearty commendation , pray God to give you your heart desire . for s. malo in haste this 19 day of June . 1587. your love friend , Jaques Noel . cousin , i pray you do i so much pleasure as to send i a book of the discovery of new Mexico , and one of those new map of the west Indies dedicate to m. Hakluyt the english gentleman , which you send to your brother in law Giles Walter . i will not fail to inform my self , if there be any mean to find out those description which captain Cartier make after his two last voyage into Canada . underneath the aforesaid unperfect relation that which follow be write in another letter send to m. John growte student in Paris from Jaques Noel of S. Malo , the grand nephew of Jaques Cartier . can write nothing else unto you of any thing that i can recover of the write of captain Jaques Cartier my uncle diseased , although i have make search in all place that i can possible in this town : save of a certain book make in manner of a sea chart , which be draw by the hand of my say uncle , which be in the possession of master cremeur : which book be pass vin 273 s 