a extract of master Ralph lane letter to m. Richard Hakluyt esquire , and another gentleman of the middle temple , from Virginia . n the mean while you shall understand , that since sir Richard greenvil departure from we , as also before , we have discover the main to be the goodly oil under the cope of heaven , so abound with sweet tree , that bring such sundry rich and pleasant gum , grape of such greatness , yet wild , as France , Spain nor Italy have no great , so many sort of apothecary drug , such several kind of flax , and one kind like silk , the same gather of a grass , as common there , as grass be here . and now within these few day we have find here maiz or guinie wheat , who ear yield corn for bread 400. upon one ear , and the cane make very good and perfect sugar , also Terra Samia , otherwise terra sigillata . beside that , it be the goodly and most please territory of the world : for the continent be of a huge and unknown greatness , and very well people and town , though savage , and the climate so wholesome , that we have not one sick since we touch the land here . to conclude , if Virginia have but horse and cow in some reasonable proportion , i dare assure my self be inhabit with english , no realm in Christendom be comparable to it . for this already we find , that what commodity soever Spain , France , Italy , or the east part do yield unto we , in wine of all sort , in oil , in flax , in rosen , pitch , frankincense , corran , sugar , and such like , these part do abound with the growth of they all , but be Savages that possess the land , they know no use of the same . and sundry other rich commodity , that no part of the world , be they west or east Indies , have , here we find great abundance of . the people natural be most [ three . 255. ] the rich and manifold commodity of Virginia . commodity courteous , and very desirous to have clothes , but especial Virgula * course do rather than silk , course canvas they also ' like well of , but copper carri the price of all , so it be make red . thus good m. Hakluyt and m. H. i have join you both in one letter of remembrance , as two that i love dear well , and commend i most hearty to you both , i commit you to the tuition of the almighty . from the new fort in Virginia , this three of September , 1585. your most assure friend Ralph lane . a account of the particularity of the employments of the english man leave in Virginia by sir Richard greenevill under the charge of master Ralph lane generali of the same , from the 17. of August 1585. until the 18. of June 1586. at which time they depart the country : send and direct to sir Walter Ralegh . hat i may proceed with order in this discourse , i think it requisite to divide it into two part . the first shall declare the particularity of such part of the country within the main , as our weak number , and supply of thing necessary do inable we to enter into the 2. part of this discourse . discovery of . the second part shall set down the reason general move we to resolve on our departure at the instant with the generali sir Francis Drake , and our common request for passage with he , when the bark , pinnace , and boat with the master and mariner mean by he to be leave in the country , for the supply of such , as for a further time mean to have stay there , be carry away with tempest and foul weather : in the beginning whereof shall be declare the conspiracy of Pemisapan , with the savage of the main to have cut we off , etc 320 