the first voyage to Virginia a.d. 1584. the first voyage make to the coast of America , with two bark , where in be captain m. Philip Amadas , and m. Arthur Barlowe , who discover part of the country now call Virginia , anno 1584. write by one of the say captain , and send to sir Walter Ralegh knight , at who charge and direction , the say voyage be set forth . [ in . 246. ] he 27 day of April , in the year of our redemption , 1584 we depart the west of England , with two bark well furnish with man and victual , have receive our last and perfect direction by your letter , confirm the former instruction , and commandment de liver by your self at our leave the river of Thames . and i think it a matter both unnecessary , for the manifest discovery of the country , as also for tediousness sake , to remember unto you the diurnal of our course , sail thither and return : only i have presume to present unto you this brief discourse , by which you may judge how profitable this land be likely to succeed , as well to your self , ( by who direction and charge , and by , who servant this our discovery have be perform ) as also to her highness , and the common wealth , in which we hope your wisdom will|be satisfy , consider that as much by we have be bring to light , as by those small mean , and number of man we have , can any way have be expect , or hope for . the ten of May we arrive at the canary , and the ten of June in this present year , we be fall with the island of the west Indies , keep a more south - a southerly course not easterly course then be needful , because we doubt . .. that the current of the bay of Mexico , disbogging be - ^Virginia . between the cape of Florida and Havana , have be of 297 great force then afterwards we find it to be . at which island , we find the air very unwholesome , and our man grow for the most part ill dispose : so that have refresh our self with sweet water , and fresh victuali , we depart the twelve day of our arrival there . Theise Islands , with the rest adjoin , be so well know to your self , and to many other , as i will not trouble you with the remembrance of they . a sweet smell the second of July , we find shoal water , where we from the land . smejt so sweet } anj so strong a smell , as if we have be in the midst of some delicate garden abound with all kind of odoriferous flower , by which we be assure , that the land can not be far distant : and keep good watch , and bear but slack sail , the four of the same month we arrive upon the coast , which we suppose to be a continent and firm land , and we sail along the same a hundred and twenty english mile before we can find any entrance , or river issue into the sea the first the first that appear unto we , we enter , though not n^r - without some difficulty , and cast anchor about - three harque - buz-shot within the haven mouth , on the left hand of the same : and after thanks give to God for our safe arrival thither , we man our boat , and go to view “ July x^pos - the land next adjoin , and “ to take possession of the session take . samej | n the right of the queen most excellent majesty , as rightful queen , and princess of the same , and after deliver the same over to your use , accord to her majesty grant , and letter patent , under her highness great seal . which be perform , accord to the ceremony use in such enterprise , we view the land about we , be , whereas we first land , very sandy and abundance of low towards the water side , but so full of grape , as the grape . very beat ancl surge of the sea overflow they , of which we find such plenty , as well there as in all place else , both on the sand and on the green soil on the hill , as in the plain , as well on every little shrub , as also climb towards the top of high cedar , that i think in all the world the like abundance be not to be find : and 298 my self have see those part of Europe that most abound , find such difference as be incredible to be write . we pass from the sea side towards the top of the isle of those hill next adjoin , be but of mean highth , and from thence we behold the sea on both side to the north , and to the south , find no end any of both way . this land lie stretch it self to the west , which after we find to be but a island of twenty mile long , and not above six mile broad . under the bank or hill whereon we stand , we behold the valley replenish with goodly cedar tree , and have discharge our harquebuz-shot , such a flock of crane ( the most part white ) arise under we , with such a cry redouble by many echo , as if a army of man have shout all together . this island have many goodly wood full of deer , cony , hare , and foul , even in the midst of summer in incredible abundance . the wood be not such as you find in Bohemia , Moscovia , or Hercynia , barren and fruitless , but the high and red cedar of the world , goodly far better the ceder of the azore , of the Indies , or ^ars ' 0 Lybanus , Pynes , cypress , sassafras , the lentisk , or the saphras^ ' tree that bear the mastic , the tree that bear the rind of black cinnamon , of which master winter bring [ in . 247. ] from the strait of Magellan , and many other of excellent smell and quali tie . we remain by the side of this island two whole day before we see any people of the country : the three day we espy one small boat row towards we have in it three person : this boat come to the island side , four harquebuz-shot from our ship , and there two of the people remain , the three come along the shoreside towards we , and we be then all within board , he walk up and down upon the point of the land next unto we : then the master and the pilot conference of the admiral , Simon Ferdinando , and the captain wthasavage . Philip Amadas , my self , and other row to the land , who come this fellow attend , never make any 299 show of fear or doubt . and after he have speak of many thing not understand by we , we bring he with his own good like , aboard the ship , and give he a shirt , a hat and some other thing , and make he taste of our wine , and our meat , which he like very well : and after have view both bark , he depart , and go to his own boat again , which he have leave abundance of in a little cove or creek adjoin : assoon as he be two bow shoot into the water , he fall to fish , and in less than half a hour , he have lade his boat as deep , as it can swim , with which he come again to the point of the land , and there he divide his fish into two part , point one part to the ship , and the other to the pinnace : which , after he have ( as much as he may ) requite the former benefit receive , depart out of our sight . the arrival the next day there come unto we diverse boat , and nther^ * n one the king brother , accompany with ’ forty or fifty man , very handsome and goodly people , and in their behaviour as mannerly and civil as any of Europe . his name be Granganimeo , and the king be call Wingina , the country Wingandacoa , and now by her majesty Virginia . the manner of his come be in this sort : he leave his boat altogether as the first man do a little from the ship by the shore , and come along to the place over against the ship , follow with forty man . when he come to the place , his servant spread a long mat upon the ground , on which he sit down , and at the other end of the mat four other of his company do the like , the rest of his man stand round about he , somewhat a far off : when we come to the shore to he with our weapon , he never move from his place , nor any of the other four , nor never mistrust any harm to be offer from we , but sit still he beckon we to come and sit by he , which we perform : and be set he make all sign of joy and welcome , strike on his head and his breast and afterwards on we , to show we 300 be all one , smile and make show the best he can of all love , and familiarity . after he have make a long speech unto we , we present he with diverse thing , which he receive very joyful , and thankful . none of the company dare speak one word all the time : only the four which be at the other end , speak one in the other ear very soft . the king be great obey , and his brother and child reverence : the king himself in person be at our being there , sore wound in a fight which he have with the king of the next country , call Wingina , and be shoot in two place through the body , and once clean through the thigh , but yet he recover : by reason whereof and for that he lie at the chief town of the country , be six day journey off , we see he not at all . after we have present this his brother with such thing as we think he like , we likewise give somewhat to the other that sit with he on the mat : but present he arise and take all from they and put it into his own basket , make sign and token , that all thing ought to be deliver unto he , and the rest be but his servant , and follower . a day or two after this , we fall to trade with they , exchange some thing traffickemth that we have , for chamoy , buff , and dear skin : the savage . when we show he all our packet of merchandise , of all thing that he see , a bright tin dish most please he , which he present take up and clap it before his tin much breast , and after make a hole in the brim thereof and hang it about his neck , make sign that it will defend he against his enemy arrow : for those people maintain a deadly and terrible war , with the people and king adjoin . we exchange our tin dish for twenty skin , worth twenty crown , or twenty noble : and a copper kettle for fifty skin worth fifty crown . they offer we good exchange for our hatchet , and axe , and for knife , and will have give any thing for sword : but we will not 3oi the english voyage depart with any . after two or three day the king brother come aboard the ship , and drink wine , and eat of our meat and of our bread , and like exceed thereof : and after a few day overpass , he bring his wife with he to the ship , his daughter and two or three child : his wife be very well favour , of mean stature , and very bashful : she have on her back a long cloak of leather , with the fiirre side next to her body , and before she a piece of the same : about her forehead she have a band of white corail , and so have her husband many time : in her ear she have bracelet of pearl hang down to her middle , ( whereof we deliver your worship a little bracelet ) and those be of the bigness of good pease . the rest of her woman of the better sort have pendant of copper hang in either ear , and some of the child of the king brother and other noble man , have five or six in either ear : he himself have upon his head a broad plate of gold , or copper , for be unpolished we know not what metal it shall be , neither will he by any mean suffer we to take it off his head , but feel it , it will bow very easy . his apparel be as his wife , only the woman wear their hair long on both side , and the man but on one . they be of colour yellowish , and their hair black for the most part , and yet we see child that have very fine aburne , and chestnut colour hair . after that these woman have be there , there come down from all part great store of people , bring with they leather , coral , diverse kind of die very excellent , and exchange with we : but when Granganimeo the king brother be present , none dare trade but himself : except such as wear red piece of copper on their head like himself : for that be the difference between the noble man , and the governor of country , and the mean sort . and we both note there , and you have understand since by these man , which we bring home , that no people in the world carry more respect to their king , nobili tie , and governor , than these doe . the 302 king brother wife , when she come to we ( as she do many time ) be follow with forty or fifty woman always : and when she come into the ship , she leave they all on land , save she two daughter , her nurse and one or two more . the king brother always keep this order , as many boat as he will come withal to the ship , so many fire will he make on the shore a far off , to the end we may understand with what strength and company he approach . their boat be make of one tree , either of pine or of pitch tree : a pitch tree . wood not common know to our people , nor find grow in England . they have no edge-tool to make they withal : if they have any they be very few , and those it seem they have twenty year since , which , as those two man declare , be out of a wreck which happen upon their coast of some christian ship , be beat that way by some storm and outrageous weather , whereof none of the people be save , but only the ship , or some part of her be cast upon the sand , out of who side they draw the nail and the spike , and with those they make their best instrument . the man - manner ner of make their boat be thus : they burn down some great tree , or take such as be wind fall , and put gum and rosin upon one side thereof , they set fire into it , and when it have burn it hollow , they cut out the coal with their shell , and ever where they will burn it deep or wide they lie on gum , which burn away the timber , and by this mean they fashion very fine boat , and such as will transport twenty man . their oar be like scoop , and many time they set with long pool , as the depth serve . the king brother have great like of our armour , a sword , and diverse other thing which we have : and offer to lay a great box of pearl in gage for they : but we refuse it for this time , because we will not make they know , that we esteem thereof , until we have understood in what place of the country the pearl grow : which now your worship do very well understand . 3°3 he be very just of his promise : for many time we deliver he merchandise upon his word , but ever he come within the day and perform his promise . he send we every day a brace or two of fat buck , cony , hare , fish the best of the world . he send we diverse kind of fruit , melon , walnut , cucumber , gourd , pease , and diverse root , and fruit very excellent good , and of their country corn , which be very white , fair and well taste , and grow three time in five month : in may they sow , in July they reap , in June they sow , in August they reap : in July they sow , in September they reap : only they cast the corn into the ground , break a little of the soft turf with a wooden mattock , or pickeaxe : our self prove the soil , and put some of our pease in the ground , and in ten day they be of fourteen inche high : they have also bean very fair of diverse colour and wonderful plenty : some grow natural , and some in their garden , and so have they both wheat and oat . the soil be the most plentiful , sweet , fruitful and wholesome of all the world : there be above fourteen several sweet smell timber tree , and the most part of their underwoods be bay and such like : they have those oak that we have , but far great and better . after they have be diverse time aboard our ship , my self , with seven moor go twenty mile into the river , that run toward the city of skicoak , which river they call Occam : and the evening follow , we come to a koanoak island , which they call Raonoak , distant from the harbour island , by which we enter , seven league : and at the north end thereof be a village of nine house , build of cedar , and fortify round about with sharp tree , to keep out their enemy , and the entrance into it ' make like a turn pike very artificial ; when we come towards it , stand [ three . 249. ] near unto the water side , the wife of Granganimo the king brother come run out to meet we very cheerfully and friendly , her husband be not then in the village ; some of her people she command to draw 3°4 1584-our boat on shore for the beat of the billoe : other 2% great she appoint to carry we on their back to the dry ground , and other to bring our oar into the house for ers fear of steal . when we be come into the utter room , have five room in her house , she cause we to sit down by a great fire , and after take off our clothes and wash they , and dry they again : some of the woman pluck off our stocking and wash they , some wash our foot in warm water , and she she self take great pain to see all thing order in the best manner she can , make great haste to dress some meat for we to eat . after we have thus dry our self , she bring we a solemn into the inner room , where she set on the board stand - banquet . ing along the house , some wheat like furmentie , sodden venison , and roast , fish sodden , boil , and roast , Melon raw , and sodden , root of diverse kind , and diverse fruit : their drink be common water , but while the grape last , they drink wine , and for want of cask to keep it , all the year after they drink water , but it be sodden with ginger in it , and black cinnamon , and sometime sassafras , and diverse other wholesome , and medi-cinable herb and tree . we be entertain with all love and kindness , and with as much bounty ( after their manner ) as they can possible devise . we find the people most gentle , love , and faithful , void of all guile and treason , and such as live after the manner of the golden age . the people only care how to defend themselves from the cold in their short winter , and to feed themselves with such meat as the soil afford : there meat be very well sodden and they make broth very sweet and savoury : their vessel be earthen pot , very large , white and sweet , their dish be wooden platter of sweet timber : within the place where they feed be their lodging , and within that their idol , which their i dole . they worship , of who they speak incredible thing . while we be at meat , there come in at the gate two or three man with their bow and arrow from hunt , vin 305 u who when we espy , we begin to look one toward another , and offer to reach our weapon : but assoon as she espy our mistrust , she be very much move , and cause some of her man to run out , and take away their bow and arrow and break they , and withal beat the poor fellow out of the gate again . when we depart in the evening and will not tarry all night , she be very sorry , and give we into our boat our supper half dress , pot and all , and bring we to our boat side , in which we lay all night , remove the same a pretty distance from the shore : she perceive our jealousy , be much grieve , and send diverse man and thirty woman , to sit all night on the bank side by we , and send we into our boat five mat to cover we from the rain , use very many word to entreat we to rest in their house : but because we be few man , and if we have miscarry , the voyage have be in very great danger , we dare not adventure any thing , though there be no cause of doubt : for a more kind and love people there can not be find in the world , as far as we have hitherto have trial . beyond this island there be the main land , and over against this island fall into this spacious water , the great river call Occam by the inhabitant on which stand a town call Pomeiock , and six day journey from the same be situate their great city , call skicoak , which this people affirm to be very great : but the savage be never at it , only they speak of it by the report of their father and other man , who they have hear affirm it to be above one hour journey about . into this river fall another great river , call Cipo , in which there be find great store of muscle in which there be pearl : likewise there descend into this Occam , another river , call Nomopana , on the one side whereof stand a great town call Chawanook , and the lord of that town and country be call Pooneno : this Pooneno be not subject to the king of Wingandacoa , 306 but be a free lord : beyond this country be there another king , who they call Menatonon , and these three king be in league with each other . towards the southwest , four day journey be situate a town call Sequotan , which be the southermost town of Wingandacoa , near unto which , six and twenty year pass there be a ship s^p cast cast away , whereof some of the people be save , and aw^‘ those be white people , who the country people preserve . and after ten day remain in a out island unhabit , call Wocokon , they with the help of some of the dweller of Sequotan , fasten two boat of the country together and make mast unto they , and sail of their shirt , and have take into they such victual as the country yield , they depart after they have remain in this out island 3 week : but short after it seem they be cast away , for the boat be find upon the coast , cast a land in another island adjoin : other then these , there be never any people apparel , or white of colour , either see or hear of among these [ he . 250. ] people , and these aforesaid be see only of the inhabitant of Seco tan , which appear to be very true , for they wonder marvelous when we be among they at the whiteness of our skin , ever covet to touch our breast , and to view the same . beside they have our ship in marvelous admiration , and all thing else be so strange unto they , as it appear that none of they have ever see the like . when we discharge any piece , be it but a hargubuz , they will tremble thereat for very fear , and for the strangeness of the same : for the weapon which themselves use be bow and arrow : the arrow be but of small cane , head with a sharp shell or tooth of a fish sufficient enough to kill a naked man . their sword be of wood harden : likewise they their wa-use wooden breastplate for their defence . they have pan ' beside a kind of club , in the end whereof they fasten the sharp horn of a stag , or other beast . when they go to war they carry about with they their idol , 307 of who they ask counsel , as the roman be wont of the oracle of Apollo . they sing song as they march towards the battle in stead of drum and trumpet : their war be very cruel and bloody , by reason whereof , and of their civil dissension which have happen of late year among they , the people be marvelous waste , and in some place the country leave desolate . adjoin to this country aforesaid call Secotan begin a country call Pomovik , belong to another king who they call piamacum , and this king be in league with the next king adjoin towards the set of the sun , and the country newsiok , situate upon a goodly river call Neus : these king have mortali war with Wingina king of Wingandacoa : but about two year pass there be a peace make between the king Piemacum , and the lord of Secotan , as these man which we have bring with we to England , have give we to understand : but there remain a mortali malice in the secotane , for many injury and slaughter do upon they by this Piemacum . they invite diverse man , and thirty woman of the best of his country to their town to a feast : and when they be altogether merry , and pray before their idol , ( which be nothing else but a mere illusion of the devil ) the captain or lord of the town come sudden upon they , and slay they every one , reserve the woman and child : and these two have oftentimes since persuade we to surprise Piemacum his town , have promise and assure we , that there will be find in it great store of commodity . but whether their persuasion be to the end they may be revenge of their enemy , or for the love they bear to we , we leave that to the trial hereafter . beyond this island call Roanoak , be main island very plentiful of fruit and other naturali increase , together with many town , and village , along the side of the continent , some bound upon the island , and some stretch up further into the land . when we first have sight of this country , some think 308 the first land we see to be the continent : but after we enter into the haven , we see before we another mighty long sea : for there lie along the coast a tract of island , two hundred mile in length , adjoin to the ocean sea , and between the island , two or three entrance : when you be enter between they ( these island be very narrow for the most part , as in most place six mile broad , in some place less , in few more ) than there appear another great sea , contain in breadth in some place , forty , and in some fifty , in some twenty mile over , before you come unto the continent : and in this enclose sea there be above a hundred island of diverse bigness , whereof one be sixteen mile long , at which we be , find it a most pleasant and fertile ground , replenish with goodly cedar , and diverse other sweet wood , full of corrant , of flax , and many other notable commodity , which we at that time have no leisure to view . beside this island there be many , as i have say , some of two , or three , of four , of five mile , some more , some less , most beautiful and pleasant to behold , replenish with deer , cony , hare and diverse beast , and about they the goodly and best fish in the world , and in great abundance . thus sir , we have acquaint you with the particular of our discovery , make this present voyage , as far forth as the shortness of the time we there continue will affbord we take view of : and so content our self with this service at this time , which we hope hereafter to enlarge , as occasion and assistance shall|be give , we resolve to leave the country , and to apply our self to return for England , which we do accord , and arrive safe in the west of England about the midst of September . and whereas we have above certify you of the country take in possession by we , to her majesty use , and so to you by her majesty grant , we think good for the better assurance thereof to record some of the particular gentleman , and man of account , who then be 3°9 Roanoak sixteen mile long . present , as witness of the same , that thereby all occasion of cavil to the title of the country , in her majesty behalf may be prevent , which otherwise , such as like not the action may use and pretend , who name be : master Philip Amadas , master Arthur Barlow , j - captain . it William Greenevile , John wood , James Browewich , ! Henry green , ’ Benjamin wood , Simon Ferdinando , Nicholas Petman , John Hewes , ► of the company . we bring home also two of the savage be lusty man , who name be Wanchese and Manteo . the voyage make by sir Richard Greenvile , for sir Walter Ralegh , to Virginia , in the year 1585. he 9 day of April , in the year abovesaid , we depart from Plymmouth , our fleet consist of the number of seven sail , to wit , the tiger , of the burden of seven score ton , a flyboat call the roebuck , of the like burden , the lion of a hundred ton or thereabouts , the Elizabeth , of fifty ton , and the Dorothy , a small bark : whereunto be also adjoin for speedy service , two small pinnace . the principali gendeman of our company , be these , m. Ralph lane , m. Tomas Candish , m. John Arundel , m. Raymund , m. Stukley , m. Bremige , m. Vincent , and m. John Clarke , and diverse other , whereof some be captain , and other some assistant for counsel , and good direction in the voyage . the 14. day of April we fall with Lancerota and Forteventura , isle of the canary , and from thence 310 