hereby that they be not void of reason . the captain care not great for their departure , consider they have not be use otherwise then well : and that therefore they will not estrange themselves from the Frenchman . captain Ribault therefore know the singular fairness of this river , desire by all mean to encourage some of his man to dwell there , well foresee that this thing may be of great importance for the king service , and the relief of the common wealth of France . therefore proceed on with his intent , he command the anchor to be weigh and to set thing in order to return unto the open of the river , to the end that if the wind come fair he may pass out to accomplish the rest of his meaning . when therefore we be come to the mouth of the river , he make they cast anchor , whereupon we stay without discover any thing all the rest of the day . the next day he command that all the man of his ship shall come up upon the deck , say that he have somewhat to say unto they . they all come up , and immediate the captain begin to speak unto they in this manner . i think there be none of you that be ignorant of how his compete ° great consequence this our enterprise be , and also how acceptable it be unto our young king . therefore my friend ( as one desire your honour and benefit ) i will not fail to advertise you all of the exceed good hap which shall fall to they , which , as man of valour and worthy courage , will make trial in this our first discovery of the benefit and commodity of this new land : which shall be , as i assure my self , the great occasion that ever can happen unto they , to arise unto the title and degree of honour . and for this cause i be desirous to propose unto you and set down before your eye the eternal memory which of right they deserve , which forget both their parent and their country have have the courage to enterprise a thing of such importance , which even king themselves understand to be man aspire to so high degree of 468 magnanimity and increase of their majesty , do not disdain so well to regard , that afterward employ they in matter of weight and of high enterprise , they make their name immortali for ever . howbeit , i will not have you persuade your self , as many do , that you shall never have such good fortune , as not be know neither to the king nor the prince of the realm , and beside descend of so poor a stock , that few or none of your parent , have ever make profession of arm , have be know unto the great estate . for albeit that from my tender year i my self have apply all my industry to follow they , and have hazard my life in so many danger for the service of my prince , yet can i never attain thereunto ( not that i do not deserve this title and degree of government ) as i have see it happen to many other , only because they descend of a noble race , since more regard be have of their birth then of their virtue . for well i know that if virtue be regard , there will moor be find worthy to deserve the title , and by good right to be name noble and valiant . i will therefore make sufficient answer to such proposition and such thing as you may object against i , lay before you the infinite example which we have of the roman ; which concern the point of honour be the first that triumph over the world . for how many find we among they , which for their so valiant enterprize , not for the greatness of their parentage , have obtain the honour to triumph ? if we have recourse unto their ancestor , we shall find that their parent be of so mean condition , that by labour with their hand they live very base . as the father of / Elius - ^Rus Perti-Pertinax , which be a poor artisan , his grandfather nfx^scend-likewise be a bond man , as the historiographer do parentage witness : and nevertheless , be move with a valiant become em-courage , • he be nothing dismay for all this , but perour of rather desirous to aspire unto high thing , he begin rome-with a brave stomach to learn feat of arm , and 469 Rusten Bassha of a herdsmans son through his valour become the great Turk son in law . Agathocles a potters son become king of sicibe . the english voyage profit so well therein , that from step to step he become at length to be emperor of the roman . for all this dignity he despise not his parent : but contrariwise , and in remembrance of they , he cause his father shop to be cover with a fine wrought marble , to serve for a example to man descend of base and poor lineage , to give they occasion to aspire unto high thing notwithstanding the meanness of their ancestor . i will not pass over in silence the excellency and prowess of the valiant and renown Agathocles the son of a simple potter , and yet forget the contemptible estate of his father , he so apply himself to virtue in his tender year , that by the favour of arm he come to be king of Sicily : and for all this title he refuse not to be count the son of a potter . but the more to eternize the memory of his parent and to make his name renown , he command that he shall be serve at the table in vessel of gold and silver and other of earth : declare thereby that the dignity wherein he be place come not unto he by his parent , but by his own virtue only . if i shall speak of our time , i will lay before you only Rusten Bassha , which may be a sufficient example to all man : which though he be the son of a poor herdsman , do so apply his youth in all virtue , that be bring up in the service of the great Turk , he seem to aspire to great and high matter , in such sort that grow in year he increase also in courage , so far forth , that in fine for his excellent virtue he marry the daughter of the great Turk his prince . Howe much then ought so many worthy example to move you to plant here ? consider also that hereby you shall|be registered for ever as the first that inhabit this strange country . i pray you therefore all to advise your self thereof , and to declare your mind free unto i , protest that i will so well imprint your name in the king ear , and the other prince , that your re - 470 1587-nowme shall hereafter shine unquenchable through our realm of France . he have scarce end his oration , but the great part of our soldier reply : that a soldier great pleasure can never betide they , perceive ^eretori-well the acceptable service which by this mean they shall do unto their prince : beside that this thing shall be for the increase of their honour : therefore they beseech the captain , before he depart out of the place , to begin to build they a fort , which they hope afterward to finish , and to leave they munition necessary for their defence , show as it seem that they be displease , that it be so long in do . whereupon John Ribault be as glad as may be to see his man so well willing , determine the next day to search the most fit and convenient place to be inhabit . wherefore he embark himself very early in the morning and command they to follow he that be desirous to inhabit there , to the intent that they may like the better of the place . Having sail up the great river on the north side , in coast a isle which end with a sharp point towards the mouth of the river , have sail a while , he discover a small river , which enter into the island , which he will not fail to search out . which do , and find the same deep enough to harbour therein galley and galliot in good number , proceed further , he find a very open place , join upon the brink thereof , where he go on land , and see the place fit to build a fortress in , and commodious for they that be willing to plant there , he resolve incontinent to cause the bigness of the fortification to be measure out . And consider that there stay but six and twenty there , he cause the fort to be make in length but the length and sixteen fathom , and thirteen in breadth , with flank p^ak^by accord to the proportion thereof . the measure be Laudonnier ? take by " i and captain Salles , we send unto they and captain ship for man , and to bring shovel , pickax and other instrument necessary to make the fortification . 471 a fort build we travail so diligent , that in a short space the fort in port royal be make in some sort defenciable . in which mean by Ribault . time john Ribault cause victual and warlike munition to be bring for the defence of the place . after he have furnish they with all such thing as they have need of , he determine to take his leave of they . but before his departure he use this speech unto captain Albert , which he leave in this place . ribaults captain Albert , i have to request you in the speech to cap - presence of a ] these man , that you will quit your tame ere|it . se | pe so w | sejy your charge , and govern so modest your small company which i leave you , which with so good cheer remain under your obedience , that i never have occasion but to commend you , and to recount unto the king ( as i be desirous ) the faithful service which before we all you undertake to do he in his new France : and you companion , ( quoth he to the soldier ) i beseech you also to esteem of captain Albert as if he be my self that stay here with you , yield he that obedience which a true soldier owe unto his generali and captain , live as brethren one with another , without all dissension : and in so do god will assist you and bless your enterprise . have end his exhortation , we take our leaf of each of they , and sail towards our ship , call the fort by the name of charles-fort , and the river by the name Chenonceau . the next day we determine to depart from this place be as well content as be possible that we have so happy end our business , with good hope , if occasion will permit , to discover perfect the river of Jordan . for this cause we hoist our sail about ten of the clock in the morning : after we be ready to depart captain Ribault command to shoot off our ordinance to give a farewell unto our Frenchman , which fail not to do the like on their part . This be do we sail towards the north : and then we name this river porte royal , because of the largeness and excellent 472 then aforesaid fort be call charles-fort . port royal . fairness of the same . after that we have sail about 15 league from thence , we espy a river , whereupon we send our pinnace thither to discover it . at their return they bring we word that they find not past ward of port half a fathom water in the mouth thereof . which royal . when we understand , without do any thing else , we continue our way , and call it the base or shallow river . as we still go on sound we find not shallow water . past five or six fathom water , although we be six P^ ' good league from the shore : at length we find not past three fathom , which give we occasion great to muse . and without make any far way we strike our sail , partly because we want water , and partly because the night approach : during which time captain John Ribault bethink with himself whether it be best for he to pass any far , because of the eminent danger which every hour we see before our eye : or whither he shall content himself with that which he have certain discover , and also leave man to inhabit the country . be not able for that time to resolve with himself , he refer it until the next day . the morning be come he propose to all the company what be best to be do , to the end that with good advisement every man may deliver his opinion . some make answer , that accord to their judgement he have occasion full to content himself , consider he can do no more : lay before his eye , that he have discover more in six week , than the Spaniard have do in two year in the conquest of their new Spain : and that he shall do the king very great service , if he do bring he news in so short a time of his happy discovery . other show unto he the loss and spoil of his victual , and on the other side the inconvenience that may happen by the shallow water that they find continual along the coast . which thing be well and at large debate we resolve to leave the coast , forsake the north , to take our way towards the east , which be the right way and course to our 473 their arrwall France , where we happy arrive the twenty day of in France July , the year 1562. 1562. ^20 7 7 i of my . the state and condition of those which be leave behind in charles-fort . KingAudusta . note . Mayon . Hoya . Touppa . stalame . our man after our departure never rest , but night and day do fortify themselves , be in good hope that after their fort be finish , they will begin to discover far up within the river . it happen one day , as certain of they be in cut of root in the grove , that they espy on the sudden a indian that hunt the deer , which find himself so near upon they , be much dismay , but our man begin to draw near unto he and to use he so courteous , that he become assure and follow they to charles-fort , where every man seek to do he pleasure . captain Albert be very joyful of his come , which after he have give he a shirt and some other trifle , he ask he of his dwell : the indian answer he that it be far up within the river , and that he be vassal of king Audusta : he also show he with his hand the limit of his habitation . after much other talk the indian desire leave to depart , because it draw towards night , which captain Albert grant he very willing . certain day after the captain determine to sail towards Audusta , where be arrive , by reason of the honest entertainment which he have give to the indian , he be so courteous receive , that the king talk with he of nothing else but of the desire which he have to become his friend : give he beside to understand that he be his friend and ally , he shall have the amity of four other king , which in might and authority be able to do much for his sake : beside all this , in his necessity they may be able to succour he with victual . one of these king be call Mayon , another Hoya , the three Touppo , and the four stalame . he tell he moreover , that they will be very glad , when they shall understand the news of his come , and 474 therefore he pray he to vouchsafe to visit they . the captain willing consent unto he , for the desire that he have to purchase friend in that place . therefore they depart the next morning very early , and first arrive at the house of king Touppa , and afterward go into the other king house , except the house of king stalame . he receive of each of they all the amiable courtesy that may be : they show themselves to be as affection friend unto he as be possible , and offer unto he a thousand small present . after that he have remain by the space of certain day with these strange king , he determine to take his leave : and be come back to the house of Audusta , he command all his man to go aboard their pinnace : for he be mind to go towards the country of king stalame , the country which dwell towards the north the distance of 15 great league from charles-fort . therefore as they sail up kagfus north-the river they enter into a great current , which they ward of it follow so far till they come at the last to the house of charles-fort . stalame : which bring he into his lodging , where he seek to make they the best cheer he can devise . he present immediate unto captain Albert his bow and arrow , which be a sign and confirmation of alliance between they . he present he with chamoy chamoy skin . the captain see the best part of the day s^nnes-was now past , take his leave of king stalame to return to charles-fort , where he arrive the day follow . by this time the friendship be grow so great between our man and king Audusta , that in a manner all thing be common between he and they : in such sort that this good indian king do nothing of importance , but he call our man thereunto . for when the time draw the feast of near of the celebrate their feast of Toya , which be ceremony most strange to recite , he send ambassador pjj j to our man to request they on his behalf to be there present . whereunto they agree most willing for the desire that they have to understand what this may be . they embark themselves therefore and sail towards 475 The Indians trim of themselves with rich feather . the english voyage the king house , which be already come forth on the way towards they , to receive they courteous , to bid they welcome and bring they to his house , where he seek to entreat they the best he may . in the mean while the indian prepare themselves to celebrate the feast the morrow after , and the king bring they to see the place , wherein the feast shall be keep : where they see many woman round about , which labour by all mean to make the place clean and neat . this place be a great circuit of ground with open prospect and round in figure . on the morrow therefore early in the morning , all they which be choose to celebrate the feast , be paint and trim with rich feather of diverse colour , put themselves on the way to go from the king house towards the place of Toya : whereunto when they be come they set themselves in order , and follow three Indians , which in paint and in gesture be differ from the rest : each of they bear a Tabret in their hand , dance and sing in a lamentable tune , when they begin to enter into the midst of the round circuit , be follow of other which answer they again . after that they have sing , dance , and turn 3 time , they fall on run like unbridle horse , through the midst of the thick wood . and then the indian woman continue all the rest of the day in tear as sad and woeful as be possible : and in such rage they cut the arm of the young girl , which they lance so cruel with sharp shell of muscle that the blood follow which they fling into the air , cry out three time , he Toya . the king Audusta have gather all our man into his house , while the feast be celebrate , and be exceed offend when he see they laugh . this he do , because the Indians be very angry when they be see in their ceremony . notwithstanding one of our man make such shift that by subtle mean he get out of the house of Audusta , and secret go and hide himself behind a very thick bush , where at his pleasure , he may easy descry the ceremony of the feast . they three that begin 476 1587-the feast be name Jawas : and they be as it be three Jawas be priest of the indian law : to who they give credit and their rtestes-beliefe partly because that by kindred they be ordain to be over their sacrifice , and partly also because they be so subtle magician that any thing that be lose be Maidans . straightway recover by their mean . again they be position . not only reverence for these thing , but also because they heal disease by i wot not what kind of knowledge and skill they have . those that run so through the wood return two day after : after their return they begin to dance with a cheerful courage in the midst of the fair place , and to cheer up their good old indian father , which either by reason of their too great age , or by reason of their naturali indisposition and feebleness be not call to the feast . when all these dance be end , they fall on eat with such a greediness , that they seem rather to devour their meat then to eat it , for they have neither eat nor drink the day of the feast , nor the two day follow . our man be not forget at this good cheer , for the indian send for they all thither , show themselves very glad of their presence . while they remain certain time with the Indians , a man of we get a young boy for certain trifle , and inquire of he , what the Indians do in the wood during their absence : which boy make he understand by sign , that the Jawas have make invocation to Toya , and that by magical character invocation of they have make he come that they may speak with the Jawas or he and demand diverse strange thing of he , which for unt° fear of the Jawas he dare not utter . they have also y ’ many other ceremony , which i will not here rehearse for fear of molest the reader with a matter of so small importance . when the feast therefore be finish our man return unto charles-fort : where have remain but a while their victual begin to wax short , which force they their victual to have recourse unto their neighbour , and to pray they fail they . to succour they in their necessity : which give they 477 the indian manner of live in the winter time of mast and root . king Covexis mighty and renown . king ovade . king Maccou . [ he . 316. ] ovade country in the river Belle . the english voyage part of all the victual which they have , and keep no more unto themselves then will serve to sow their field . they tell they far that for this cause it be needful for they to retire themselves into the wood , to live of mast and root until the time of harvest , be as sorry as may be that they be not able any far to aid they . they give they also counsel to go towards the country of king Covexis a man of might and renown in this province , which make his abode towards the south abound at all season and replenish with such quantity of mill , corn , and bean that by his only succour they may be able to live a very long time . but before they shall come into his territory , they be to repair unto a king call ovade the brother of Covexis , which in mill , bean , and corn be no less wealthy , and withal be very liberali , and which will be very joy full if he may but once see they . our man perceive the good relation which the Indians make they of those two king resolve to go thither ; for they feel already the necessity which oppress they . therefore they make request unto king Maccou , that it will please he to give they one of his subject to guide they the right way thither : whereupon he condescend very willing , know that without his favour they shall have much ado to bring their interprize to pass . wherefore after they have give order for all thing necessary for the voyage , they put themselves to sea , and sail so far that in the end they come into the country of ovade , which they find to be in the river Belle . be there arrive they perceive a company of Indians , which assoon as they know of their be there come before they . assoon as they be come near they , their guide show they by sign that ovade be in this company , wherefore our man set forward to salute he . and then two of his son which be with he , be goodly and strong man salute they again in very good sort , and use very friendly entertainment on their part . the king immediate begin to make a oration in his indian language of the great pleasure and contentment which he have to see they in that place , protest that he will become so loyal a friend of they hereafter , that he will be their faithful defendor against all they that will offer to be their enemy . after these speech he lead they towards his house , where he seek to entreat they very courteous . his house be hang about with tapestry of feather of diverse colour the height of a tapistrieof pike . Moreover the place where the king take his rest be cover with white coverlette embroider ietsedgedwlth with devise of very witty and fine workmanship , and red fringe . fringe round about with a fringe die in the colour of scarlet . they advertise the king by one of the guide which they bring with they , how that ( have hear of his great liberality ) they have put to the sea to come to beseech he to succour they with victual in their great want and necessity : and that in so do , he shall bind they all hereafter to remain his faithful friend and loyal defender against all his enemy . this good indian assoon ready to do they pleasure , as they be to demand it , command his subject that they shall fill our pinnace with will and bean . afterwards he thehberahtie cause they to bring he six piece of his tapestry ofkingqvade . make like little coverlet , and give they to lour man with so liberal a mind , as they easy perceive the desire which he have to become their friend . in recompense of all these gift our man give he two cut hook and certain other trifle , wherewith he hold himself great satisfy . This be do , our man take their leave of the king , which for their farewell , say nothing else but that they shall return if they want victual , and that they may assure themselves of he , that they shall qvade coun-neve want any thing that be in his power . wherefore trey twenty-they embark themselves , and sail towards charles-fort , which from this place may be some five and f^m^charles tcn&alCf league distant . but as soon as our man first . 479 the fort set on fire by casualty . the fort reedify by the savage in the space of sz hour . the english voyage think themselves at their ease , and free from the danger whereunto they have expose themselves night and day in gather together of victual here and there : lo , even as they be asleep , the fire catch in their lodging with such fury , be increase by the wind , that the room that be build for they before our man departure , be consume in a instant , without be able to save any thing , save a little of their victual . whereupon our man be far from all succour , find themselves in such extremity , that without the aid of almighty God , the only searcher of the heart and thought of man , which never forsake those that seek he in their affliction , they have be quite and clean out of all hope . for the next day betimes in the morning the king Audusta and king Maccou come thither , accompany with a very good company of Indians , which know the misfortune , be very sorry for it . and then they utter unto their subject the speedy diligence which they be to use in build another house , show unto they that the Frenchman be their love friend , and that they have make it evident unto they by the gift and present which they have receive : protest that whosoever put not his help hand unto the work with all his might , shall be esteem as unprofitable , and as one that have no good part in he , which the savage fear above all thing . this be the occasion that every man begin to endeavour himself in such sort , that in less than 12 hour , they have begin and finish a house which be very near as great as the former . which be end , they return home full content with a few cut hook , and hatchet , which they receive of our man . within a small while after this mischance , their victual begin to wax short : and after our man have take good deliberation , think and bethink themselves again , they find that there be no better way for they then to return again to the king ovade and Covexis his brother . wherefore they resolve to send thither some of their company the 480 next day follow : which with a indian Canoa sail up into the country about io league : afterward they find a very fair and great river of fresh water , which they fail not to search out : they find therein a great number of crocodile , which in greatness pass those of crocodile . the river Nilus : moreover , all along the bank thereof , there grow mighty high cypress . after they have cypress . stay a small while in this place , they purpose to follow sec^he their journey , help themselves so well with the tide , countrey0of ‘ that without put themselves in danger of the continual ! ovade . peril of the sea , they come into the country of ovade : of who they be most courteous receive . they advertise he of the occasion wherefore they come [ three . 317. ] again to visit he , and tell he of the mischance , which happen unto they since their last voyage : how they have not only lose their household stuff by casualty of fire , but also their victual which he have give they so bountiful : that for this cause they be so bold as to come once again unto he , to beseech he to vouchsafe to succour they in such need and necessity . after that the king have understand their case , he send messenger unto his brother Covexis , to request he upon his behalf to send he some of his mill and bean , which thing he do : and the next morning , they be come again with victual , which the king cause to be bear into their Canoa . our man will have take their leave of he , find themselves more then satisfy with this liberality . but for that day he will not suffer they , but retain they , and seek to make they the best cheer he can devise . the next day very early in the morning , he take they with he to show they the place where his corn grow , and say unto they that they shall not want as long as all that will do last . afterwards he give . they a certain number of exceed fair pearl , and two stone of fine crystal , and certain silver oar . our yne man forget not to give he certain trifle in recom - silver ore , vin 481 2 h the flace where crystal gp-oweth in very good quantity ten day journey from the river Belle . note . mutiny against the captain , and the cause thereof . the english voyage penny of these present , and require of he the place whence the silver oar and the crystal come . he make they answer , that it come ten day journey from his habitation up within the country : and that the inhabitant of the country do dig the same at the foot of certain high mountain , where they find of it in very good quantity . be joyful to understand so good news , and to have come to the knowledge of that which they most desire , they take their leave of the king , and return by the same see , by which they come . behold therefore how our man behave themselves very well hitherto , although they have endure many great mishap . but misfortune or rather the just judgement of God will have it , that those which can not be overcome by fire nor water , shall be undo by their own self . this be the common fashion of man , which can continue in one state , and have rather to overthrow themselves , than not to attempt some new thing daily . we have infinite example in the ancient history , especial of the roman , unto which number this little handful of man , be far from their country and absent from their countryman , have also add this present example . they enter therefore into partiality and dissension , which begin about a soldier name Guernache , which be a drummer of the french band : which , as it be tell i , be very cruel hang by his own captain , and for a small fault : which captain also use to threathen the rest of his soldier which stay behind under his obedience , and peradventure ( as it be to be presume ) be not so obedient to he as they shall have be , be the cause that they fall into a mutiny , because that many time he put his threaten in execution : whereupon they so chase he , that at the last they put he to death . and the principali occasion that move they thereunto be , because he degrade another soldier name la cheer ( which he have banish ) and because he have not perform his 482 • .. 15871 promise : for he have promise to send he victual , from 8 day to 8 day , which thing he do not , but say on the contrary , that he will be glad to hear of his death . he say moreover , that he will chastise other also , and use so evil sound speech , that honesty forbid i to repeat they . the soldier captain . see his madness to increase from day to day , and Albert slay rear to rail into the danger or the other , resolve to soul < liar . kill he . have execute their purpose , they go to seek the soldier that be banish , which be in a small island distant from charles-fort about 3 league , where they find he almost half dead for hunger . when they be come home again , they assemble themselves together to choose one to be governor over they who name be Nicolas bar a man worthy of commendation , Nicolas and one which know so well to quite himself of his bar . > c ! t0 ! en charge , that all rancour and dissension cease among ca^tain ' they , and they live peaceable one with another . during this time , they begin to build a small pinnace , with hope to return into France , if no succour come unto they , as they expect from day to day . and though there be no man among they that have any skill , notwithstanding necessity , which be the mistress of all science , teach they the way to build it . after that it be finish , they think of nothing else save how to furnish it with all thing necessary to undertake the voyage . but they want those thing that of all other be most needful , as cordage and sail , without which the enterprise can not come to effect . have no mean to recover these thing , they be in worse case than at the first , and almost ready to fall into despair . but that good God , which never forsake the afflict , do succour they in their necessity . as they be in these perplexity king Audusta and Maccou come to they , accompany with two hundred [ three . 318. ] Indians at the least , who our Frenchman go forth to meet withal , and show the king in what need of cordage they stand : who promise they to return 483 cordage for tackle . they put to the sea without sufficient victual . the english voyage within two day , and to bring so much as shall suffice to furnish the pinnace with tackle . our man be please with these good news and promise , bestow upon they certain cut hook and shirt . after their departure our man seek all mean to recover rosin in the wood , wherein they cut the pine tree round about , out of which they draw sufficient reasonable quantity to bray the vessel . also they gather a kind of moss which grow on the tree of this country , to serve to calk the same withal . there now want nothing but sail , which they make of their own shirt and of their sheet . within few day after the indian king return to Charles fort with so good store of cordage , that there be find sufficient for tackle of the small pinnace . our man as glad as may be , use great liberality towards they , and at their leave of the country , leave they all the merchandise that remain , leave they thereby so full satisfy , that they depart from they with all the contentation of the world . they go forward therefore to finish the brigandine , and use so speedy diligence , that within . a short time afterward they make it ready furnish with all thing . in the mean season the wind come so fit for their purpose that it seem to invite they to put to the sea : which they do without delay , after they have set all their thing in order . but before they depart they embark their artillery , their forge , and other munition of war're which captain Ribault have leave they , and then as much mill as they can gather together . but be drunken with the too excessive joy , which they have conceive for their return into France , or rather deprive of all foresight and consideration , without regard the inconstancy of the wind , which change in a moment , they put themselves to sea , and with so slender victual , that the end of their enterprise become unlucky and fortunate . for after they have sail the three part ot their way , they be surprise with calm which do so much hinder they , that in three week they sail not above 484 five and twenty league . during this ti’me their victual consume , and become so short , that every man be their victual constrain to eat not past twelve grain of mill by the utterh con day , which may be in value as much as twelve peason . fume ' yea , and this felici tie last not long : for their victual fail they altogether at once : and they have nothing for their moor assure refuge but their shoe and leather jerkin which they do eat . touch their beverage , some of they drink the sea water , other do drink their they drink own urine : and they remain in such desperate necessity a very long space , during the which part of water 0 they die for hunger . beside this extreme famine , which do so grievous oppress they , they fall every minute of a hour out of all hope ever to see France again , insomuch that they be constrain to cast the water continual out , that on all side enter into their bark . and every day they fare worse and worse : for after they have eat up their shoe and their leather jerkin , there arise so boisterous a wind and so contrary to their course , that in the turn of a hand , the wave fill their vessel half full of water and bruise it upon the one side . be now more out of hope then ever to escape out of this extreme peril , they care not for cast out of the water which now be almost ready to drown they . and as man resolve to die , every one fall down backward , and give themselves over altogether unto the will of the wave . when as one of they a little have take heart unto he declare unto they how little way they have to sail , assure they , that if the wind hold , they shall see land within three day . this man do so encourage they , that after they have throw the water out of the pinnace they remain three day without eat or drink , except it be of the sea water . when the time of his promise be expire , they be more trouble than they be before , see they can not descry any land . wherefore in this extreme despair extreme certain among they make this motion that it be better fam ™ - that one man shall dye , then that so many man shall 485 perish : they agree therefore that one shall die to sustain the other . which thing be execute in the person of la cheer , of who we have speak heretofore , who flesh be divide equal among his fellow : a thing so pitiful to recite , that my pen be loath to write it . after so long time and tedious travel , God of his goodness use his accustom favour , change their sorrow into joy , and show unto they the sight of land . whereof they be so exceed glad , that the pleasure cause they to remain a long time as man without sense : whereby they let the pinnace float this and that way without hold any right way or course . but a the french small english bark board the vessel , in the which succour by there be a Frenchman which have be in the first voyage aBar^U into Florida , who easy know they , and speak unto they , and afterward give they meat and drink . incontinent [ three . 319. ] they recover their naturali courage , and declare unto it seem he at large all their navigation . the Englishman the^a^ consult < l a long while what be best to be do , and intendedby in une they resolve to put on land those that be Stukely . most feeble , and to carry the rest unto the queen of England , which purpose at that time to send into Florida . thus you see in brief that which happen to they which captain John Ribault have leave in Florida . and now will i go forward with the discourse of my own voyage . end of volume Viii . 