the english voyage make himself fear of the Spaniard , and acceptable unto the queen of England for the desert of his virtue . to conclude , he die in the year 1582 , to the great grief of such as know he . the relation of Pedro Morales a Spaniard , which sir Francis Drake bring from saint augustines in Florida , where he have remain six year , touch the state of those part , take from his mouth by master Richard Hakluyt 1586. Wateri a goodly river . Hree score league up to the northwest from saint Helena be the mountain of the gold and crystal mine , name Apalatci . the river of Wateri be thirty league from saint Helena northward , which be able to receive any fleet of ship of great burden . Wateri and Caiowa be two king , and two river to the north of saint Helena . Oristou , Ahoia , ahoiaue , isamacon , king and river to the south of " faint Helena . Icosa or Dicosa the Spaniards have kill three hundred of the subject of Potanou . the great number of Spaniards that have be in Florida this six year , be three hundred , and now they be but two hundred in both the fort . there be a great city sixteen or twenty day journey from saint Helena northwestward , which the Spaniard call la grand Copal , which they think to be very rich and exceed great , and have be within the sight of it , some of they . they have offer in generail to the king to take no 112 1586. wage at all of he , if he will give they leave to discover this city , and the rich mountain , and the passage to a sea or mighty lake which they hear to be within four and twenty day travel from saint Helena , which be in 32. degree of latitude : and be that river which the french call Port-royal . he say also that he have see a rich diamond which be bring from the mountain that lie up in the country westward from saint Helena . Theise hill seem whole to be the mountain of Apalatci , whereof the savage advertise Laudonniere , and it may be they be the hill of Chaunis Temoatam , which master lane have advertisement of . the relation of Nicholas Burgoignon , alias holy , who sir Francis Drake bring from saint Augustine also in Florida , where he have remained six year , in i and master heriot hear . his Nicholas Burgoignon say , that between saint Augustine and S. Helen there be a casique who name be Casicola , which be lord of ten thousand Indians , and another casique who name be Dicasca , and another call Touppekyn towards the north , and a four name Potanou towards the south , and another call Moscita towards the south likewise . beside these he acknowledge Oristou , Ahoia , ahoiaue , isamacon , allege by the Spaniard . he further affirm , that there be a city northwestward from S. helenes in the mountain , which the Spaniard call la grand Copal , and be very great and rich , and that in these mountain there be great store of crystal , gold , and ruby , and diamond : and that a Spaniard bring from thence a diamond which be worth five thousand crown , which Pedro Melendes ix i13 h 