the other side , the lord don Antonio allege that it belong to he to make that discovery , as be viceroy of Nueva Espanna . so that they fall at great variance , and Cortes return into Spain to complain unto the emperor . don Antonio in the mean season have obtain knowledge of the voyage , which Andrew Dorantez ( who be one of the company of Pamphilo Narvaez that escape , as you may read in the relation of Alvero nunnez , call Cabe^a de Vaca ) make ; send Frier Marco de ni ? a with a negro of the say Dorantez to discover that country . which friar Marco de ni ? a being return , and have inform his lordship of all his discovery , he send captain Francis Vasquez de Coronado with many Spaniards on horseback and Indians on foot : likewise he send a fleet by sea , whereof Ferdinando Alorchon be captain , as may be see in the relation follow . a extract of a letter of captain Francis Vasques de Coronado , write to a secretary of the right noble don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy of Nueva Espanna . Dated in culiacan , the 8. of march 1539 he say that Frier Marcus de Ni$a arrive in the province of Topira , where he find all the Indians flee unto the mountain for fear of the christian , and that for his sake they come all down to see he , with great joy and boldness . they be man of good make , and white than other , and their woman be more beautiful than other of the neighbourprovince . there be no great city there , yet be the house build of stone , and be very good , and in they store of gold , they have great store of gold , which be as it be silver , and [ often } because they know not what use to put it to . ^intopira^5 the people wear emerald and other precious jewel [ three . 363. ] upon their body : they be valiant , have very strong armour make of silver , fashion after diverse shape 116 of beast . they worship for their god such thing as they have in their house , as namely herb , and bird , and sing song unto they in their language , which differ but little from that of culiacan . they tell the friar that they be willing to become Christians , and the emperor subject , for they be without a governor ; with condition that no man shall hurt they : and that they will change their gold for such thing as they want . commandment be give , that they shall be receive without do they any displeasure . near unto this country there be another province heretofore discover by our man , where the people go naked without any thing before they : they be very hardly reduce to Christianity , and they be valiant and stout . their house be cover with straw : they seek no other riches but to feed cattle . they go at certain season to their sacrifice into a valley situate in that province , which be inhabit with people , esteem by those of the country as saint and priest , who they call Chichimecas , which dwell in the wood without house : and they eat such thing as they of the country give they of alm . they go naked , and be tan in the smoke , and tie their privy member with a string unto their knee , and the woman likewise go stark naked . they have certain temple cover with straw , with small round window full of the skull of dead man ; before their temple be a great round ditch , the brim whereof be compass with the figure of a serpent make of gold and silver , and with another mixture of unknown metal : and this serpent hold his tail in his mouth . they of this valley from time to time cast lot , who luck it shall be to be sacrifice , and they make he great cheer , on who the lot fall , and with great joy they crown he with flower upon a bed prepare in the say ditch all full of flower and sweet herb , on which they lie he along , and lie great store of dry wood on both side of he , and set it on fire on either part , and so 117 he die . where he continue so quiet without be bind , as though he do something , wherein he take great pleasure . and they say that he be a saint , and do worship he for that year , and sing praise , and hymn unto he , and afterward set up his head with the rest in order within those window . also they sacrifice their prisoner , who they burn in another deep ditch , and not with the foresay ceremony . the Spaniard which be in Xalisco write , that have good assistance , they hope that those people will become Christians . the country be very good and fruitful , and have great store of good and wholesome water . a letter of Francis Vazquez de Coronado , governor of Nueva Galicia , to the lord don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy of Nueva Espanna . Dated in saint Michael of culiacan the 8. of march , 1539 of the hard passage from saint Michael of culiacan to Topira . the description of that province , and of another near unto the same , very rich in gold and precious stone . the number of the people which Vazquez carry with he in his journey thither ; and how great friar Marcus of Ni^a be honour by the Indians of Petatlan . y the help of God i mean to set forward from this city of saint Michael of culiacan towards Topira the 10. of April : neither can i any soon set forward , because the powder and match which your lordship send i , can be bring thither before that time , and i think it be now in Compostella . beside this , i be to pass many league over mighty high mountain , which reach up to the sky , and over a river , which at this present be so big and swell , that it can in no place be wade over . 118 