the Spaniard of S. Augustine have slay three hundred of the subject of Potanou . one Potassi be neighbour to Potanou . Oratina be he which the french history call Olata Outina . Calauai be another casique which they know . sundry voyage make from Nueva Galicia , and Nueva Viscaia in new Spain , to the 15. province of new Mexico , and to Quivira and Cibola , all situate on the backside of Guastecan , Florida , and Virginia , as far as 37. degree of northerly latitude : with a description of the river , lake , city , town , nation , fertile soil , and temperate air in those part ; and most certain notice of many exceed rich silver mine , and other principali commodity . a discourse of the famous cosmographer John Baptista Ramusius , concern the three voyage of friar Marco de Nica , Francis Vasquez de Coronado , and Ferdinando al-orchon next follow : take out of his three volume of navigation and voyage . he right honourable don Antonio de mendoga be send by Charles the emperor to be viceroy of Mexico and Nueva Espanna , and have understand that don Ferdinando Cortes have send many ship along the coast of Nueva Espanna to discover country , and to find out the isle of the Malucos , begin himself to desire to do the like , as viceroy of Nueva Espanna ; and hereupon they fall out : for Cortes say that he be general and discoverer of the south sea , and that it belong to he to set forth those voyage . on ” 5 the other side , the lord don Antonio allege that it belong to he to make that discovery , as be viceroy of Nueva Espanna . so that they fall at great variance , and Cortes return into Spain to complain unto the emperor . don Antonio in the mean season have obtain knowledge of the voyage , which Andrew Dorantez ( who be one of the company of Pamphilo Narvaez that escape , as you may read in the relation of Alvero nunnez , call Cabe^a de Vaca ) make ; send Frier Marco de ni ? a with a negro of the say Dorantez to discover that country . which friar Marco de ni ? a being return , and have inform his lordship of all his discovery , he send captain Francis Vasquez de Coronado with many Spaniards on horseback and Indians on foot : likewise he send a fleet by sea , whereof Ferdinando Alorchon be captain , as may be see in the relation follow . a extract of a letter of captain Francis Vasques de Coronado , write to a secretary of the right noble don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy of Nueva Espanna . Dated in culiacan , the 8. of march 1539 he say that Frier Marcus de Ni$a arrive in the province of Topira , where he find all the Indians flee unto the mountain for fear of the christian , and that for his sake they come all down to see he , with great joy and boldness . they be man of good make , and white than other , and their woman be more beautiful than other of the neighbourprovince . there be no great city there , yet be the house build of stone , and be very good , and in they store of gold , they have great store of gold , which be as it be silver , and [ often } because they know not what use to put it to . ^intopira^5 the people wear emerald and other precious jewel [ three . 363. ] upon their body : they be valiant , have very strong armour make of silver , fashion after diverse shape 116 