the relation of Francis Vazquez de Coronado , captain generail of the people which be send in the name of the emperor majesty to the country of Cibola new discover , which he send to don Antonio de Mendo9a viceroy of Mexico , of such thing as happen in his voyage from the 22. of April in the year 1540 which depart from culiacan forward , and of such thing as he find in the country which he pass . Chap. 1. Francis Vazquez depart with his army from culiacan , and after diverse trouble in his voyage , arrive at the valley of the people call los Caracones , which he find barren of Maiz : for obtain whereof he send to the valley call the valley of the lord : he be inform of the greatness of the valley of the people call Caracones , and of the nature of those people , and of certain island lie along that coast . he 22. of the month of April last pass i depart from the province of culiacan with part of the army , and in such order as 1 mention unto your lordship , and accord to the success i assure my self , by all likelihood that i shall not bring all my army together in this enterprise : because the trouble have be so great and the want of victual , that i think all this year will not be sufficient to perform this enterprise , and if it shall be perform in so short a time , it will be to the great loss of our people . for as i write unto your lordship , i be fourscore day in travail to culiacan , in all which time i and those gentleman my companion which be horseman , carry on our back , ix 145 king [ he . 374 - ] this be but 200. league from Mexico . and on our horse , a little victuali , so that from henceforward we carry none other needful apparel with we , that be above a pound weight : and all this notwithstanding , and though we put our self to such a small proportion of victual which we carry , for all the order that possible we can take , we be drive to our shift . and no marvel , because the way be rough and long : and with the carriage of our harquebuss down the mountain and hill , and in the passage of river , the great part of our corn be spoil . and because i send your lordship our voyage draw ' in a map , i will speak no more thereof in this my letter . thirty league before we arrive at the place which the father provinciali tell we so well of in his relation , i send Melchior Diaz before with fifteen horse , give he order to make but one day journey of two , because he may examine all thing , against my arrival : who travail four day journey through exceed rough mountain where he find neither victual , nor people , nor information of any thing , save that he find two or three poor little village , contain 20. or 30. cottage a piece , and by the inhabitant thereof he understand that from thence forward there be nothing but exceed rough mountain which run very far , utter disinhabit and void of people . and because it be labour lose , i will not write unto your lordship thereof . it grieve the whole company , that a thing so high commend , and whereof the father have make so great brag , shall be find so contrary , and it make they suspect that all the rest will fall out in like sort . which when i perceive i seek to encourage they the best i can , tell they that your lordship always be of opinion , that this voyage be a thing cast away , and that we shall fix our cogitation upon those seven city , and other province , whereof we have knowledge : that there shall be the end of our enterprise : and 146 ... i540 , with this resolution and purpose we all march cheerfully through a very bid way which be not passable but one by one , or else we must force out with pioner the path which we find , wherewith the soldier be not a little offend , find all that the friar have say to be quite contrary : for among other thing which the father say and affirm , this be one , that the way be plain and good , and that there be but one small hill of half a league in length . and yet in truth there be mountain which although the way be well mend can not be pass without great danger of break the horse neck : and the way be such , that of the cattle which your lordship send we for the provision of our army we lose a great part in the voyage through the roughness of the rock . the lamb and sheep lose their hoof in the way : and of those which i bring from culiacan , i leave the great part at the river of Lachimi , because they can not the river of keep company with we , and because they may come lachimi . soft after we , four man on horseback remain with they which be now come unto we , and have bring we not past four and twenty lamb , and four sheep , for all the rest be dead with travail through that rough passage , although they travail but two league a day , and rest themselves every day . at length i arrive at the valley of the people call the valley of Caracones , the 26. day of the month of May : and from culiacan until i come thither , i can not help my ara~ self , save only with a great quantity of bread of Maiz : for see the Maiz in the field be not yet ripe , i be constrain to leave they all behind i . in this valley of the Caracones we find more store of people then in any other part of the country which we have pass , and great store of tillage . but i understand that there be store thereof in another valley call the talk deal lord valley , which i will not disturb with force , sennor-but send thither Melchior Diaz with ware of exchange to procure some , and to give the say Maiz to the 147 indian our friend which we bring with we , and to some other that have lose their cattle in the way , and be not able to carry their victual so far which they bring from culiacan . it please God that we gate some small quantity of Maiz with this traffic , whereby certain Indians be relieve and some Spaniard . and by that time that we be come to this valley of the Caracones , some ten or twelve of our horse be dead through weariness : for be overcharge with great burden , and have but little meat , they can not endure the travail . likewise some of our negro and some of our Indians dye here ; which be no small want unto we for the performance of our enterprise . they the valley de tell i that this valley of the Caracones be five day isumt^ve5 journey fr°m the western sea i send for the indian davet intima of the sea coast to understand their estate , and while i from the wes - stay for they the horse rest : and i stay there team sea . four day , in which space the Indians of the sea coast [ three . 375. ] come unto i : which tell i , that two day sail seven or eight from their coast of the sea , there be seven or eight ^t^isks s^an^s tight over against they , well inhabit with of California , people , but bad furnish with victual , and be a rude people : and they tell i , that they have see a ship see a ship pass by not far from the shore : which i coast . wot not what to think whither it be one or those that go to discover the country , or else a ship of the Portugal . 148 they come to chichilticale : after they have rest themselves two day there , they enter into a country very barren of victual , and hard to travail for thirty league , beyond which they find a country very pleasant , and a river call Rio deal Lino , they fight with the Indians be assault by they , and with victory vanquish their city , they relieve themselves of their pinch hunger . 1 depart from the Caracones , and always keep by the sea coast as near as i can judge , and in very deed i still find my self the far off : in such sort that when i arrive at chichilticale i find my self ten day journey from the sea : and the father provinciali say that it be only but five league distance , and that he have see the same . we all conceive great grief and be not a little confound , when we see that we find every thing contrary to the information which he have give your lordship . the Indians of chichilticale say , that if at any time they go to the sea for fish , and other thing that they carry , they go traverse , and be ten day journey in go thither . and i be of opinion that the information which the Indians give i shall be true . the sea return towards the west right over against the Caracones the space of ten or twelve league . where i find that your lordship ship be see , which go to discover the haven of chichilticale , which father Marcus of ni ? a say to be in five and thirty degree . God know what grief of mind i have sustain : because i be in doubt that some mishap be fall unto they : and if they follow the coast , as they say they will , as long as their victual last which they carry with they , whereof i leave they store in culiacan , and if they be not fall into some misfortune , i hope well in God that by this they have make some good discovery , and in this respect their long stay out may be pardon . 149 chichilticale ten day journey from the sea . this chichil-ticaleisindeede but in 28. deg . i rest my self two day in chichilticale , and to have do well i shall have stay long , in respect that here we find our horse so tire : but because we want victual , we have no leisure to rest any long : i enter the confine of the desert country on the 23. of saint Johns eve , and to refresh our former travail , the June . first day we find no grass , but worse way of mountain and bid passage , than we have pass already : and the horse be tire , be great molest therewith : so that in this last desert we lose more horse than we have lose before : and some of my Indians which be our friend die , and one Spaniard who name be Spinosa ; and two negro , which die with eat certain herb for lack of victual . from this place i send before i one day journey the master don Garcia of the field don Garcia Lopez de Cardenas with fifteen nas^^^ ' h°rses to discover the country , and prepare our way : ' wherein he do like himself , and accord to the confidence which your lordship repose in he . and well i wot he fail not to do his part : for as i have inform your lordship , it be most wicked way , at least thirty league and more , because they be inaccessible mountain . a godly and but after we have pass these thirty league , we fruitful con - founj fresh river , and grass like that of Castille , and ’ special of that sort which we call Scaramoio , many nut tree and mulberry tree , but the nut tree differ from those of Spain in the leaf : and there be flax , but chief near the bank of a certain river which Rio deal Lino , therefore we call el Rio del Lino , that be say , the river of flax : we find no Indians at all for a day travail , but afterward four Indians come out unto we in peaceable manner , say that they be send even to that desert place to signify unto we that we be welcome , and that the next day all the people will come out to meet we on the way with victual : and the master of the field give they a cross , will they to signify to those of their city that they shall not fear , and they shall 150 rather let the people stay in their house , because i come only in the name of his majesty to defend and aid they . and this do , Fernando Alvarado return to advertise i , that certain Indians be come unto they in peaceable manner , and that two of they stay for my come with the master of the field . whereupon i go unto they and give they bead and certain short cloak , will they to return unto their city , and bid [ three . 376. ] they to stay quiet in their house , and fear nothing . and this do i send the master of the field to search wisefore-wheth there be any bad passage which the Indians cast it may keep against we , and that he shall take and defend it until the next day that i shall come thither . so he go , and find in the way a very bad passage , where we may have sustain very great harm : wherefore there he seat himself with his company that be with he : and that very night the Indians come to take that passage to defend it , and find it take , they assault our man there , and as they tell i , treason of they assault they like valiant man ; although in the the n^ans-ende they retire and flee away ; for the master of the field be watchful , and be in order with his company : the Indians in token of retreat sound on a certain small trumpet , and do no hurt among the Spaniard . the very same night the master of the great forecast field certify i hereof . whereupon the next day in the best order that i can i depart in so great want master . of victuali , that i think that if we shall stay one day long without food , we shall all perish for hunger , especial the Indians , for among we all we have not two bushel of corn : wherefore it behoove i to prick forward without delay . the Indians here and their make fire , and be answer again afar off as orderly as we for our life can have do , to give their fellow understanding , how we march and where we arrive . 0 . assoon as i come within sight of this city of Granada , at city y i send don Garcias Lopez campmaster , friar Daniel , Cibola . 151 the arrogande of the people of Cibola . the english voyage and friar Lewis , and Fernando Vermizzo somewhat before with certain horseman , to seek the Indians and to advertise they that our come be not to hurt they , but to defend they in the name of the emperor our lord , accord as his majesty have give we in charge : which message be deliver to the inhabitant of that country by a interpreter . but they like arrogant people make small account thereof ; because we seem very few in their eye , and that they may destroy we without any difficulty ; and they strike friar Lewis with a arrow on the gown , which by the grace of God do he no harm . in the mean space i arrive with all the rest of the horseman , and footman , and find in the field a great sort of the Indians which begin to shoot at we with command - their arrow : and because i will obey your will and mean to use ^g command of the mark , i will not let my and they savage people charge they , forbid my company , which entreat i that they may set upon they , in any wise to provoke they , say that that which the enemy do be nothing , and that it be not meet to set upon so few people . on the other side the Indians perceive that we stir not , take great stomach and courage unto they : insomuch that they come hard to our horse heal to shoot at we with their arrow . whereupon see that it be now time to stay no long , and that the friar also be off the same opinion , i set upon they without any danger : for sudden they flee part to the city which be near and well fortify , and other into the field , which way they can shift : and some of the indian be slay , and more have be if i will have suffer they to have be pursue . but consider that hereof we may reap but small profit , because the Indians that be without , be few , there be and those which be retire into the city , with they t^towne ' which stay within at the first be many , where the ' comara^ist . victual be whereof we have so great need , i assemble gen . cap . wonderful > - my people , and divide they as i think best to assault ! 52 the city , and i compass it about : and because the famine which we sustain suffer no delay , my self with certain of these gentleman and soldier put our self on foot , and command that the crossbow and harquebusier shall give the assault , and shall beat the enemy from the wall , that they may not hurt we , and i assault the wall on one side , where they tell i there be a scale ladder set up , and that there be one gate : but the crossebowman sudden break the string of their bow , and the harquebusier do nothing at all : for they come thither so weak and feeble , that scarce they can stand on their foot : and by this mean the people that be aloft on the wall to defend the town be no way hinder from do we all the mischief they can : so that twice they strike i to the ground with infinite number of great stone , which they cast down : and if i have not be defend with a excellent good headpiece which i wear , i think it have go hardly with i : nevertheless my company take i up with two small wound in the face , and a arrow stick in my foot , and many blow with stone on my arm and leg , and thus i go out of the battle very weak . i think that if don Garcias Lopez they defend the wait with stone like those of Hochelaga . de Cardenas the second time that they strike i to the ground have not succour i with stride over i like a good knight , i have be in far great danger than i be . but it please God that the Indians yield themselves unto we , and that this city be take : and such store of Maiz be find therein , as our necessity [ three . 377. ] require . the master of the field , and don Pedro de Tovar , and Fernando de Alvarado , and Paul de Melgosa captain of the footman escape with certain knock with stone : though none of they be wound with arrow , yet Agoniez Quarez be wound in one arm with the shot of a arrow , and one Torres a townsman of Panuco be shoot into the face with another , and two footman more have two small wound with arrow . and because my armour be gild and glitter , they 153 excellent house four or five loft high . all lay load on i , and therefore i be more wound than the rest , not that i do more than they , or put my self forward than the rest , for all these gentleman and soldier carry themselves as manful as be look for at their hand . i be now well recover i thank God , although somewhat bruise with stone . likewise in the skirmish which we have in the field , two or three other soldier be hurt , and three horse slay , one of don Lopez , the other of Viliega and the three of don Alonso Manrique , and seven or eight other horse be wound ; but both the man and horse be whole and sound . Chap. 3. of the situation and state of the seven city call the kingdom of Cibola , and of the custom and quality of those people , and of the beast which be find there . it remain now to certify your honour of the seven city , and of the kingdom es and province whereof the father provinciali make report unto your lordship . and to be brief , i can assure your honour , he say the truth in nothing that he report , but all be quite contrary , save only the name of the city , and great house of stone : for although they be not wrought with turquese , nor with lime , nor brick , yet be they very excellent good house of three or four or five loft high , wherein be good lodging and fair chamber with lather in stead of stair , and certain cellar under the ground very good and pave , which be make for winter , they be in manner like stoove : and the lather which they have for their house be all in a manner moveable and portable , which be take away and set down when they please , and they be make of two piece of wood with their step , as we be . the seven city be seven small town , all make with these kind of house that i speak of : and they stand all within four league together , and they * 54 be all call the kingdom of Cibola , and every one Cibola be a of they have their particular name : and none of they be call Cibola , but altogether they be call Cibola . and this town which i call a city , i have name Granada , as well because it be somewhat like unto it , as also in remembrance of your lordship . in this town where i now remain , there may be some two hundred house , all compass with wall , and i think that with the rest of the house which be not so wall , they may be together five hundred . there five hundred be another town near this , which be one of the seven , bouse in and it be somewhat big than this , and another of the ’ same bigness that this be of , and the other four be somewhat less : and i send they all paint unto your faint ne-lordship with the voyage . and the parchment wherein [ essarl^ zn a the picture be , be find here with other parchment . new tscovery it the people of this town seem unto i of a reasonable stature , and witty , yet they seem not to be such as they shall be , of that judgement and wit to build these house in such sort as they be . for the most part they go all naked , except their privy part which be cover : and they have paint mantle like those paint which i send unto your lordship . they have no cotton mantbes-wooll grow , because the country be cold , yet they wear mantel thereof as your honour may see by the show thereof : and true it be that there be find in their house certain yarn make of cotton wool . they wear their hair on their head like those of Mexico , and they be well nurture and condition : and they store of tur-have turquese i think good quantity , which with the lueses-rest of the good which they have , except their corn , they have convey away before i come thither : for i find no woman there , nor no youth under fifteen year old , nor no old folk above sixty , save two or three old folk , who stay behind to govern all the rest of the youth and man of war . there be find in a certain paper two point of emrald , and emrald . certain small stone break which be in colour some - 155 excellent and very great guinie cock . [ HL 378 - ] Gomara hist . gen . Cap. zi$ . say that that the cold be by reason of the high mountain . a wood of cedar . excellent grass . deer , hare , and cony . what like granate very bad , and other stone of crystal , which i give one of my servant to lay up to send they to your lordship , and he have lose they as he tell i . we find here guinie cock , but few . the indian tell i in all these seven city , that they eat they not , but that they keep they only for their feather . i believe they not , for they be excellent good , and great than those of Mexico . the season which be in this country , and the temperature of the air be like that of Mexico : for sometime it be hot , and sometime it rain : but hitherto i never see it rain , but once there fall a little shower with wind , as they be wont to fall in Spain . the snow and cold be wont to be great , for so say the inhabitant of the country : and it be very likely so to be , both in respect to the manner of the country , and by the fashion of their house , and their fur and other thing which this people have to defend they from cold . there be no kind of fruit nor tree of fruit . the country be all plain , and be on no side mountainous : albeit there be some hilly and bad passage . there be small store of fowl : the cause whereof be the cold , and because the mountain be not near . here be no great store of wood , because they have wood for their fuel sufficient four leaugue off from a wood of small cedar . there be most excellent grass within a quarter of a league hence , for our horse as well to feed they in pasture , as to mow and make hay , whereof we stand in great need , because our horse come hither so weak and feeble . the victual which the people of this country have , be Maiz , whereof they have great store , and also small white pease : and venison , which by all likelihood they feed upon , ( though they say no ) for we find many skin of deer , of hare , and cony . they eat the best cake that ever i see , and every body general eat of they . they have the fine order and way to grind that we ever see in any place . and one indian woman of this country will grind as much as four woman of Mexico . they have most excellent salt in kernel , which they fetch ery good from a certain lake a day journey from hence . they s^^esterne have no knowledge among they of the north sea , nor sea within of the western sea , neither can i tell your lordship 150. league to which we be near : but in reason they shall fnm seem to be near to the western sea : and at the lion lest i think i be a hundred and fifty league from porkesplck , ’ thence : and the northern sea shall be much further mlghtlesheep , off . your lordship may see how broad the land be wild gpate . here . here be many sort of beast , as bear , tiger , bose . Lions , porkespick , and certain sheep as big as a horse , with very great home and little tail , i have stag . see their home so big , that it be a wonder to be - tty travalle hold their greatness . here be also wild goat who rd^ head likewise i have see , and the paw of bear , n^e sea . and the skin of wild boar . there be game of deer , qxe hide ounce , and very great stag : and all man be of dress and opinion that there be some big than that beast f°ity^very which your lordship bestow upon i , which once belong to John Melaz . they travel eight day journey unto certain plain lie towards the north sea in this country there be certain skin well dress , and they dress they and paint they where they kill their ox , for so they say themselves . 157 [ Chap. 4. Tadouac seems because it be a lake , and end in ac to have some affinity herewith . other town near a river . Chap. 4. of the state and quality of the kingdom of Totonteac , Marata , and Acus , quite contrary to the relation of Frier Marcus . the conference which they have with the Indians of the city of Granada which they have take , which have fifty year past foresee the coming of the christian into their country . the relation which they have of other seven city , whereof Tucano be the principali , and how he send to discover they . a present of diverse thing have in these country scent unto the viceroy Mendosa by Vasques de Coronado . the kingdom of Totonteac so much extol by the father provinciali , which say that there be such wonderful thing there , and such great matter , and that they make cloth there , the Indians say be a hot lake , about which be five or six house ; and that there be certain other , but that they be ruinate by war . the kingdom of Marata be not to be find , neither have the Indians any knowledge thereof . the kingdom of Acus be one only small city , where they gather cotton which be call Acucu . and i say that this be a town . for Acus with a aspiration nor without , be no word of the country . and because i guess that they will derive acucu of Acus , i say that it be this town whereinto the kingdom of Acus be convert . beyond this town they say there be other small town which be near to a river which i have see and have have report of by the relation of the Indians . i will to God i have better news to write unto your lordship : nevertheless i must say the truth : and as i write to your lordship from culiacan , i be now to advertise your honour as well of the good as of the bad . yet this i will have you be assure , that if all the riches and the treasure of the world be here , i can have do no more in the service of his majesty and of your 158 1540 lordship , than i have do in come hither whither you have send i , my self and my companion carry our victual upon our shoulder and upon our horse three hundred league ; and many day go on foot travail over hill and rough mountain , with other trouble which i cease to mention , neither purpose i to depart unto the death , if it please his majesty and your lordship that it shall be so . three day after this city be take , certain Indians [ three . 379. ] of these people come to offer i peace , and bring i certain turquese and bid mantle , and i re - turqueses . ceive they in his majesty name with all the good mant^es-speaches that i can devise , certify they of the purpose of my come into this country , which be in the name of his majesty , and by the commandment of your lordship , that they and all the rest of the people of this province shall become Christians , and shall know the true God for their lord , and receive his majesty for their king , and earthly sovereign : and herewithal they return to their house , and sudden Indians the next day they set in order all their good and sub - A* / 1 ’ stance , their woman and child , and flee to the hill , w-tves child leave their town as it be abandon , wherein re - and good . maim very few of they . when i see this , within eight or ten day after be recover of my wound , i go to the city , which i say to be great than a city great this where i be , and find there some few of they , ^Granada . to who i say that they shall not be afraid , and that they shall call their governor unto i : howbeit , forasmuch as i can learn or gather , none of they have any governor : for i see not there any chief house , whereby any preeminence of one over another may be gather . after this a old man come , which say that he be their lord , with a piece of a mantle make of many piece , with who i reason that small while that he stay with i , and he say that within three day after , he and the rest of the chief of that town will come and visit i , and give order what course shall 159 be take with they . which they do : for they bring i certain mantle and some turquese . i advise they to come down from their hold , and to return with their wife and child to their house , and to become Christians , and that they will acknowledge the emperor majesty for their king and lord . and even to this present they keep in those strong hold their woman and child , and all the good which they have . two table i command they that they shall paint i out a paint by the of aq e beast which they know in their country : beasts0 ” 6 and such bid painter as they be , forthwith they another of paint i two clothes , one of their beast , another bird and of their bird and fish . they say that they will bring fish . their child , that our religious man may instruct they , and that they desire to know our law : and they assure ^^thatlhcM we ’ a^ove year past be prophesy among part shall be they , that a certain people like we shall come , and subdue by from that part that we come from , and that they shall christian . subdue all that country . they worship that which these Indians worship as far as hitherto the water . we can } earnej be the water : for they say it cause their corn to grow , and maintain their life ; and that they know none other reason , but that their ancestor do so . i have seek by all mean possible to learn of the inhabitant of these town , whether they have any knowledge of other people , country and city : and seven city they tell i of seven city which be far distant from ^Granada p^ace ’ i be bke unto these , though they have it not house like unto these , but they be of earth , and small : and that among they much cotton be gather . the chief of these town whereof they have knowledge , Tucana . they say be call Tucano : and they give i no perfect knowledge of the rest . and i think they do not tell i the truth , imagine that of necessity i must speedy depart from they , and return home . but herein they shall soon find themselves deceive . i send don Pedro de Tovar with his company of footman and with certain other horseman to see this town : and i will not 160 have dispatch this packet unto your lordship , until i have know what this town be , if i have think that within twelve or fifteen day i may have have news from he : for he will stay in this journey thirty day at least . and have examine that the knowledge hereof be of small importance , and that the cold and the water approach : i think it my duty to do according as your lordship give i charge in your instruction , which be , that immediate upon my arrival here , i shall signify so much unto your lordship , and so i do , send withal the bare relation of that which i have see . i have determine to send round about the country from hence to have knowledge of all thing , and rather to suffer all extremity , than to leave this enterprise to serve his majesty , if i may find any thing wherein i may perform it , and not to omit any diligence therein , until your lordship send i order what i shall do . we have great want of pasture : and your lordship also shall understand , that among all those which be here , there be not one pound of raisin , nor sugar , nor oil , nor any the Spaniard wine , save only one pint which be save to say mass : willing ™ for all be spend and spill by the way . now your lordship ’ may provide we what you think needful . and if your honour mean to send we cattle , your lordship must understand that they will be a summer in come unto we : for they will not be able to come unto we any soon . i will have send your lordship with this dispatch many muster of thing which be in this country : but the way be so long and rough , that it be hard for i to do so : nevertheless i send you twelve small mantle , such as the people of the country be wont to wear , and a certain garment also , which seem unto i to be well 38° - ] make : i keep the same , because it seem to i to be excellent well wrought , because i believe that no man broideredwith ever see any needle work in these Indies , except it be needle work . since the Spaniard inhabit the same . i send your lordship also two clothes paint with the beast of this country , although as i have say , the picture be ix 161 l the death of Stephan the negro . the english voyage very rude do , because the painter spend but one day in draw of the same . i have see other picture on the wall of the house of this city with far better proportion , and better make . i send your honour one oxhide , certain turquese , and two earring of the same , and fifteen comb of the Indians , and certain tablet set with these turquese , and two small basket make of wicker , whereof the Indians have great store . i send your lordship also two roll which the woman in these part be wont to wear on their head when they fetch water from their well , as we use to do in Spain . and one of these indian woman with one of these roll on her head , will carry a pitcher of water without touch the same with her hand up a lather . i send you also a muster of the weapon wherewith these people be wont to fight , a buckler , a mace , a bow , and certain arrow , among which be two with point of bone , the like whereof , as these conqueror say , have never be see . i can say nothing unto your lordship touch the apparel of their woman . for the indian keep they so careful from we , that hitherto i have not see any of they , save only two old woman , and these have two long robe down to the foot open before , and gird to they , and they be button with certain cordon of cotton . i request the Indians to give i one of these robe , which they wear , to send your honour the same , see they will not show i their woman . and they bring i two mantle which be these , which i send you as it be paint : they have two pendent like the woman of Spain , which hang somewhat over their shoulder . the death of the negro be most certain : for here be many of the thing find which he carry with he : and the Indians tell i that they kill he here , because the Indians of Chichilticale tell they that he be a wicked villain , and not like unto the Christians : because the christian kill nowoman : and he kill woman ; and also he touch their woman , which the Indians love more than themselves ; therefore 162 they determine to kill he : but they do it not after such sort as be report , for they kill none of the rest of those that come with he : neither slay they the young lad which be with he of the province of Petatlan , but they take he and keep he in safe custody until now . and when i seek to have he , they excuse themselves two or three day to give he i , tell i that he be dead , and sometime that the Indians of Acucu have carry he away . but in conclusion , when Acucu . i tell they that i shall be very angry if they do not give he i , they give he unto i . he be a interpreter , for though he can well speak their language , yet he understand the same very well . in this place there be find some quantity of gold and and s^-silver , which those which be skilful in minerail matter esteem to be very good . to this hour i can never ’ learn of these people from whence they have it : and i see they refuse to tell i the truth in all thing , imagine , as i have say , that in short time i will depart hence , but i hope in God they shall no long excuse themselves . i beseech your lordship to certify his majesty of the success of this voyage . for see we have no more than that which be aforesaid , and until such time as it please God that we find that which we desire , i mean not to write my self . our lord God keep and preserve your excellende . from the province of Cibola , and from this city of Granada the three of August 1540 Francis Vasques de Coronado kiss the hand of your excellende . the rest of this voyage to Acuco , Tiguex , Cicuic , and Quivira , and unto the western ocean , be thus write in the generali history of the west Indies by Francis Lopez de Gomara , Chap. 214. because they will not return to Mexico without do something , nor with empty hand , they agree to pass further into the country , which be tell they to be better and better . so they come to 163 the western sea discover . Tiguex . Axa and Quivira . [ he . 381. ] a town burn . another town assault . mantle . Turqueses . feather . precious thing . the english voyage Acuco a town upon a exceed strong hill . and from thence don Garcias Lopez de Cardenas with his company of horseman go unto the sea : and Francis Vasques go to Tiguex , which stand on the bank of a great river . there they have news of Axa and Quivira . there they say be a king who name be Tatarrax , with a long beard , hoary head , and rich , which be gird with a bracamart , which pray upon a pair of bead , which worship a cross of gold , and the image of a woman , the queen of heaven . this news do great rejoice and cheer up the army : although some think it to be false , and the report of the friar . they determine to go thither , with intention to winter in so rich a country as that be report to be . one night the Indians run away , and in the morning they find thirty horse dead , which put the army in fear . in their journey they burn a certain town : and in another town which they assault , they kill certain Spaniards , and wound fifty horse , and the inhabitant draw into their town Francis de Ovando wound or dead , to eat and sacrifice he as they think , or peradventure to see more perfect , what manner of man the Spaniard be : for there be not find there any sign of sacrifice man . our people lay siege unto the town , but can not take it in more than five and forty day space . the townsman that be besiege , drink snow in stead of water : and see themselves forlese they make a fire , wherein they cast their mantle , feather , turquese and precious thing , that those stranger may not enjoy they . they issue out in a squadron with their woman and child in the midst , to make way by force , and to save themselves , but few escape the edge of our sword and the horse , and a certain river which be near the town . Seven Spaniards be slay in this conflict , and fourscore be wound , and many horse : whereby a man may see of what force resolution be in necessity . 164 many Indians return to the town with the woman and child , and defend themselves , until our man set fire on the town . in this country there be melon , melon . and white and red cotton , whereof they make far large mantel , then in other part of the Indies . from fmre ' tigue they go in four day journey to Cicuic , which day journey be a small town , and four league from thence they meet from Tiguex . with a new kind of ox wild and fierce , whereof the first day they kill fourscore , which suffice the army with flesh . from Cicuic they go to Quivira , which after Quivira . their account , be almost three hundred league distant , through mighty plain , and sandy heath so smooth , and wearisome , and bare of wood , that they make heap of ox-dung for want of stone and tree , that they may heap of ox not lose themselves at their return : for three horse be mg make fir lose on that plain , and one Spaniard , which go from his n°w company on hunt . all that way and plain be as full of crookebacked ox , as the mountain Serena in Spain be of sheep : but there be no people but such as keep those cattle . they be a great succour for the hunger and want of bread which our people stand in . one day it rain in that plain a great shower of hail , as big as orange , which cause many tear , weakness , and vow . at length they come to Quivira and find Tatarrax , who they seek , a hoary head man , naked , and with a j ewell of copper hang at his neck , which be all his riches . the then Spaniards Spaniards see the false report of so famous riches , return to ti-returned to Tiguex , without see either cross or ^x\an^soto show or chnstiamtie : and from thence to Mexico . TheSpaniards in the end of march of the year 1542. Francis vas - wouldhavein-quez fall from his horse in Tiguex , and with the fall habit the fell out of his wit , and become mad . which some countrey-tooke to be for grief , and other think it to be but counterfeit : for they be much offend with he , because he people not the country . Quivira be in forty degree : it be a temperate country , and have very good water , and much grass , i65 ship see on the sea coast of Quivira , which be 30. day in sapling thither . Andrew de Campo travail from Quivira to Panuco . the cause why the Spaniard people not in Cibola . [ in . 382. ] the english voyage plum , mulberry , nut , melon and grape , which ripen very well . there be no cotton : and they apparel themselves with ox-hides and dear skin . they see ship on the sea coast , which bear Alcatrarzes or pelican of gold and silver in their prow , and be lade with merchandise , and they think they to be of Cathaya , and China , because they show our man by sign that they have sail thirty day . Frier John de Padilla stay behind in tigue , with another of his companion call friar Francis , and return to Quivira , with some dozen Indians of mechuacan , and with Andrew de Campo a Portugal ! , the gardener of Francis de solis : he take with he horse and mule with provision . he take sheep and hen of Castille , and ornament to say mass withal . the people of Quivira slay the friar , and the Portugal escape with certain Indians of mechuacan . who albeit at that time he escape death , yet can he not free himself out of captivity : for by and by after they catch he again . but ten month after he be take captive , he flee away with a couple of dog . as he travail , he bless the people with a cross , whereunto they offer much , and wheresoever he come , they give he alm , lodging , and food . he come to the country of the Chichimechas , and arrive at Panuco . when he come to Mexico , he wear his hair very long , and his beard tie up in a lace , and report strange thing of the land , river and mountain that he have pass . it grieve don Antonio de Mendosa very much that the army return home : for he have spend above threescore thousand peso of gold in the enterprise , and ought a great part thereof still . many seek to have dwell there ; but Francis Vasquez de Coronado , which be rich , and late marry to a fair wife , will not consent , say , that they can not maintain nor defend themselves in so poor a country , and so far from succour . they travail above nine hundred league in this country . 166 