the first and second discovery of the gulf of California , and of the sea-coast on the northwest or back side of America , lie to the west of new Mexico , Cibola and Quivira , together with sir Francis drake land and take possession upon Nova Albion in the behalf of the crown of England , and the notable voyage of Francis Gaul ; wherein among many other memorable matter be set down the huge breadth of the ocean sea from China and Japan to the northwest part of America , in the 38. and 40. degree . a relation of the discovery , which in the name of God the fleet of the right noble Fernando Cortes Marques of the valley , make with three ship ; the one call Santa Agueda of 120. ton , the other the Trinity of 35. ton , and the third saint Thomas of the burden of 20. ton . of which fleet be captain the right worshipful knight Francis de Ulloa bear in the city of Merida . take out of the three volume of the voyage gather by m. John Baptista Ramusio . Chap. 1. Francis Ulloa a captain of Cortes depart with a fleet from the port of Acapulco , and go to discover unknown land , he pass by the coast of Sacatula and Motin , and by tempest run to the river of Guajaval , from whence he cross over to the haven of Santa Cruz , along the coast whereof he discover 3. small hand , and within two day and a half return to the main land he discover the river call Rio de san Pedro y san Pablo , and not far distant from thence two other river as big or great than that of Guadalquivir which run by Sivil , together with their head-spring . e embark our self in the haven of Acapulco in Acapulco on the 8. of July in the year i 7 ; degree of of our lord 1539 , call upon almighty atitude-God to guide we with his holy hand unto such place where he may be serve , and his holy faith advance . and we sail from the say port by the coast of Sacatula and Motin , which be sweet and pleasant the coast of through the abundance of tree that grow thereon , and $acatfla river which pass through those country , for the which motin-wee often thank God the creator of they . So sail along we come to the haven of saint Iago in the province s - Iago de of Colima : but before we arrive there , the main mast of our ship call Santa Agueda be break by a storm of wind that take we , so as the ship be force to sail without her mast until we arrive in the say haven . from the port of Acapulco to this haven of Colima we be sail the space of 20. day . here we stay to mend our mast and to take in certain victual , water , and wood , the space of 27. day . and we depart from the say haven the 23. of August , and the isle of sail by the isle of Xalisco the 27. or 28. of the Xalisco . say month we be take with a extreme tempest wherein we think we shall have perish , and be toss and weather-beaten , we run as far as Guajaval . the river of Guajaval in the province of culiacan . in this storm we lose the pinnace call Sant Thomas , and because we have lose she we cross over to the Santa Cruz port of Santa Cruz in California : for while we be ' cedifornla so beat tbe f°rmer tempest , the pilot of the bark signify unto we , that he perceive she begin to leak , and that already she have receive in much water , insomuch that she begin to founder : whereupon , to help her need , and that we may meet together in a know haven , if by chance the tempest shall separate we , as it do indeed , we will he to repair to the haven of Santa Cruz , where we mean to repair his harm and our own . wherefore be all arrive in this place of Santa Cruz , we stay there five day and take in water , wherein we hear no news of our bark which we have lose : whereupon the captain resolve to follow on our voyage ; wherefore we set sail the 12. of September , and as we sail we three hand , see along the coast of the say haven 3. Islands , whereof the captain make no great account , think there can be no great good find in any of they . Theise Islands seem not to be great ; wherefore he command the master and pilot to proceed on their voyage , and not to lose time without any profit . So sail over the gulf of California , in two day and a half Rio de san we come to the river of saint Peter and S. Paul , find Ppablo* ! an before we enter into the same a small island in the a ° ' mouth of the river , be 4. or 5. mile distant from the main . on both side of this river we behold goodly and pleasant great plain full of many green and beautiful tree , and far within the land we behold certain exceed high mountain full of wood very pleasant to behold . from this river we sail still along the coast the space of 15. league , in which course we find two other river in our judgement two great as great or great than Guadalquivir the river of nvers-sivilia in Spain . all the coast by these river be plain as the other which we have pass , with many wood : likewise within the land appear great mountain cover with wood very beautiful to behold , and beneath in the plain appear certain lake of water . from these river we sail 18. league , and find very pleasant plain , and certain great lake who certainegreat mouth open into the sea : here our captain thought la^es ' good thorough to discover what those lake be , and to search whether there be any good haven for his ship to ride in , or to harbour themselves , if any tempest shall arise ; and so he command a boat to be hoist out into the sea , with a master and five or six man to view they , and to sound the depth , and bottom of they : who go thither , and find the coast very shall , and the mouth of the lake ; whereupon they make no account of they , only because the shore be so shallow , for otherwise the land be very pleasant . here at evening we see on the shore 10. or 12. Indians and fire . the aforesaid two river be two league distant the one from the other little more or less , and be great , as i have say , and be in the last of they we go up to the ship-top , and see many lake , and one among the rest exceed great , and we suppose that they have their spring out of this great lake , as other river also have from other lake , for we see the course of they several each by themselves , have goodly wood grow all along their bank . the current of these river may be discern three league within the sea : and at the mouth of they be many small stake set up for mark : the shore here be plain and sandy , and the country very pleasant . Chap. 2. sail along the coast from the two aforesaid great river , they discover three mouth of lake and a goodly country , they come unto Cabo Roxo , and take possession of those country for the emperor majesty . a discourse of the fair haven that be on those coast , and of very many island which they see , before they come to the cape call Capo de las plaias . this day we sail along the coast the space of 16. league , and in the midst of this voyage there be a bay very fair of 4. or 5. league , have certain bank or fence in it , in behold whereof we take great pleasure . the night follow we ride in 20. radome water . the next day we follow our voyage towards the north , and have sail 3. or 4. league we see 3. mouth of lake which enter into the land , where they become like stand pool . we ride a league distance from these mouth in 6. fathom water , to see what they be , and send our boat with certain man , to see if there be any entry for our ship : for half a league from shore we have not pass one or two fathom water . here our man see 7. or 8. Indians , and find sundry sort of green herb somewhat differ from those of Nueva Espanna . the country be plain , but far within land they see great and small hill extend themselves a great way , and be very fair and pleasant to behold . the day follow we proceed on our voyage , sail always in sight of the plain coast towards the northwest , in 10. or 15. fathom water . and have sail 6. good league we find a bay on the coast within the land of about 5. league over , from whence the coast trend northwest , and this day we sail about 16. league . all this coast be plain , and not so pleasant as that which we have pass : here be certain small hill , but not so high as those which we have find before . thus we sail all night northwest , and until the next day at noon , at which time we fall with a headland of white sand , where by the height which we take that day we find our self to be in the latitude of 27. degree and this cape we call Capo roxo . all the coast be plain and fair and clean sand , and we see within land some few tree not very great , with certain mountain 8c wood 3. or 4. league distant from the say cape : and here likewise appear a mouth of a river , which ( as far as we can discern ) make certain lake up within the land : from the mouth whereof for the space of a league into the sea it seem to be very shall , because the sea do break very much . here we see within the land 3. or 4. river . in this sort we sail on our voyage to the northward , 8c because we have not good weather we ride that night in a great haven lie in our way , where on the shore we see certain plain , and up within the land certain hill not very high : and continue our course towards the north about 3. league from this haven we find a hand of about one league in circuit lie before the mouth of the say haven . And sail forward we find a haven which have two mouth into the sea , into which we enter by the northermost mouth , which have 10. or 12. fathom water , 8c so decrease till it come to 5. fathom , where we ancker in a pool which the sea make , which be a strange thing to behold , for there be so many entrance 8c mouth of stream and haven , that we be all astonish at the sight thereof ; and these haven be so excellent frame by nature , as the like be not to be see in the world , wherein we find great store of fish . here we ancker , and the captain go on shore , and take possession , use all such ceremony as thereunto belong . here also we find certain wear to catch fish make by the Indians , and certain small cottage , wherein be diverse piece of earthen pot as fine make as those in Spain . here by commandment of the captain a cross be erect upon a hill , and it be set up by Francis Preciado . in this place we see the country full of fresh and green grass , howbeit differ from that of new Spain , and up within the country we see many great and very green mountain . this country seem very goodly and delightsome to all of we , in regard of the greenness and beauty thereof , and we judge it to be very populous within the land . from this haven we depart and keep our way towards the northwest with good weather , and begin to find hard by the seashore exceed high mountain spot with white , and in they we see many fowl which have their nest in certain hole of those rock , and sail io . league until night , all which night we be becalm . the next day we follow our course northwest with good weather : and from that day forward we begin to see on the western shore ( whereon the foresay haven of saint Cruz stand ) certain island or high land , whereat we rejoice not a little . and so sail a island . forward we meet with a island about two league in bigness , and on the east shore have still the main land and island in sight , we sail 15. league until the evening , always find hard by the sea-coast exceed high mountain bare of tree , the land appear still more plain unto we on the western shore . where-some take they upon we begin to be of diverse opinion , some think lfomiaafe ' that coast of Santa Cruz be a firm land , and nothing but that join with the continent of Nueva Espanna , island . other think the contrary , and that they be nothing else but island , which be to the westward . and in this sort we proceed forward , have the land on both side of we , so far , that we all begin to wonder at it . this day we sail some 15. league , and call this cape Capo de las plaias . Capo roxo . the coast run it northward . fishingweare like those of Virginia . of the strait which they discover on the coast of Capo de las plaias , and of the pleasant country which they find before they come to the rock call los diamantes . of the wonderful whiteness of that sea , and of the ebb and flow thereof : and of the multitude of island and land , which extend themselves northward from the haven of Santa Cruz. the day follow we sail until night with so good weather , that we run about 20. league . all this coast along the shore be full of little hill without grass or tree : and that night our ancker in 20. fathom water . the next day we follow our voyage beginning to sail before break of day northwestward , and we come into the midst of a strait or mouth which be straight of 12 league broad from one land to the other , which straight have two hand in the midst thereof be 4. cede depth league distant the one from the other : and here we discern the country to be plain , and certain mountain , 8c it seem that a certain gut of water like a brook run through the plain . This straight ( as far as we can perceive ) be very deep , for we can find no bottom : and here we see the land stretch afar off from the one shore to the other , and on the western shore of the haven of saint Cruz , the land be more high with very bare mountain . the day follow we pass on our way towards the north , and sail some the strait 15. league , and in the midst of our way we find a ^re rume circuit or bay of 6. league into the land with many northward . coove or creek , and the next day follow continue our course we sail some 10. league , and the coast in this day journey be all of high mountain naked and bare without any tree . it be very deep hard by the shore , and that night we be constrain to stay by reason of the contrary wind . the next morning before break of day we sail still along the coast to the northwest until evening , and run about some 15. league . all along this shore we see very goodly mountain within the land , and many plain and down with some few tree , and the sea shore be all sandy . in the midst of this day course we find certain small rock in the sea 4. league distant from the main , be the say land make a great point into the sea , and here we stay the rest of the night , where we have a very great shower of rain . the day follow we proceed on our voyage , and sail until night by a compass or turn , some 8. or 9 league , and see within land a few mountain have no tree upon they , but the sun shine always very clear , as far as we can descry , they be very great , on the western shore of the haven of Santa Cruz. here we stay all night because we find very shallow water and see the sea very white , and in a manner like to chalk , so that we all begin to marveile thereat . the day follow we go forward again along the coast northwestward , and sail eight league , and see another land which stretch northwest , and be full of high mountain . and still continue this course we search very diligent to see if there be any passage through between both the land , for right forward we see no land . and thus sail we always find more shallow water , and the sea thick , black , and very muddy , and come at length into five fathom water ; and see this , we determine to pass over to the land which we have see on the other side , and here likewise we find as little depth and less , whereupon we ride all night in five fathom water , and we perceive the sea to run with so great a rage into the land , that it be a thing much to be marveil at , and with the like fury it return back again with the ebb ; during which time we find 11. fathom water , and the flood and ebb continue from six to six hour . the day follow the captain and pilot go up to the ship top , and see all the land full of sand in a great round compass , and join it self with the other shore , and it be so low , that whereas we be a league from the same we can not well discern it , and it seem that there be a inlet of the mouth of certain lake , whereby the sea go in and out . there be diverse opinion among we , and some thought that that current enter into those lake , and also that some great river there may be the cause thereof . and when we can perceive no passage through , nor can discern the country to be inhabit , the captain accompany with certain of we go to take possession thereof . the same day with the ebb of the sea we fall down from the other coast from the side of Nueva Espanna , though always we have in sight the firm land on the one side of we , and the other island on our left hand , on the side of the port of Santa Cruz situate on the western shore : for on that side there be so many island and land , so far as we can descry , that it be great to be wonder at : for from the say haven of Santa Cruz , and from the coast of culiacan we have always in a manner land on both side of we , and that so great a country , that i suppose if it shall so continue further inward , there be country enough for many year to conquer . this day we have the wind contrary , and cast anchor until the flood increase , which be in the afternoon , and then we set sail likewise with contrary wind until midnight , and then cast anchor . the next day we depart , shape our course along the coast Southwest , until midnight with little wind , and we see within the land high mountain with some opening , and we make way some three league , and all the next night we be becalm , and the next day we continue our course but a little while , for we sail not above five league , and all the night be becalm , and see the land full of bare and high mountain , and on our left hand we descry a plain country , and see in the night certain fire . chap 4. they land upon a island to discover the same , and there they see many fire , which issue out of certain mountain , and many seal-fish . here they take a indian , and can not understand his language . run along they discover another island , and take possession thereof for the emperor majesty , and a great haven in the firm land , which they call Ancon de Sant Andres , or the haven of saint Andrew . the next day follow our course we see a great haven with a hand in the sea , within a crossbow shoot of the firm land , and in this island and on the firm land be see many smoke by the judgement of all the company ; wherefore the captain think good that we shall go on land to know the certainty of these smoke and fire , himself take ten or twelve of we with a boat in his company : and go on shore in the island , we find that the smoke proceed out of burn certain mountain and breach of burn earth , where-mountaine . out ascend into the air certain cinder and ash which mount up to the middle region of the air , in such great quantity , that we can not esteem less than twenty load of wood to be burn for the cause of every of those smoke , whereat we be all not a little amaze . in this island be such abundance of seal , as it be wonderful . here we stay that day , and kill a great number of these seal , with who we have some trouble : for they be so many , and aid one another so well , that it be strange to behold ; for it fall out , that while we be occupy in kill some of they with staff , they assemble twenty or thirty together , and lift abundance of themselves up assail we with their foot in a squadron , seal . and overthrow two or three of our company on the ground : whereupon let go those which they have in their hand , they and the other escape we and go into the sea , howbeit we kill good store of they , which be so fat as it be wonderful : and when we open some of they to have their liver , we find certain small b'lacke stone in their body , whereat we much marveil . the next day we ride at anchor here for lack of good weather to sail withal : whereupon the captain determine to go on shore with nine or ten in his company , to see whether there be any people there , or any sign of people that have be there , and they find on the main land seven or eight Indians like to Chichimecas , which be go a fish , and have a raft rafi °f of cane ; who so soon as they espy we run away and betake themselves to flight , but be pursue by we , in the end we take one of they , who language be so strange that we can by no mean understand he ; his clothing be nothing at all , for he be stark naked . Theise people carry their water in bottle make of beast skin , they fish with hook of bone , and we find good store of their fish , whereof we take three or four dozen . the indian which we have take see himself in our hand do nothing but weep , but the captain call he , and make much of he , give he certain bead , with a hat and certain hook of we , and then let he go . and it seem that after he be return to his companion , he declare unto they how we have do he no harm at all , show they the thing which we have give he : whereupon they also determine to come unto we to our boat , but because it be now night , and that our ship be far from we , we force not to stay for they , especial because it be a bad place and a dangerous . this country have on the sea-coast high and bare mountain with certain grass in some place like unto our broom , or like unto wood of rosemary . Bottles of beast skin and fishhook of bone Ancon de S. Andres , or the haven of saint Andrew in 32 degree . two Indians of exceed huge stature . the next day we sail near to the coast on the same side , with very scarce wind , and in a manner calm , and run not above five league , and all the night follow we lay becalm , and we see on the shore five or six fire . the land be high with very-high mountain without grass , have certain cave in they : the next day also , and part of the night follow we be becalm : and the morrow after we follow our course along the say coast , and pass between a great island full of exceed high mountain , and the main land , where we see a very great haven in the firm land in which we anchor to see what it be , and be come to a anchor , the captain and some of we go on land the same day to see if there be any people and fresh water , and we find certain small cottage cover with dry grass , with certain little staff lay overthwart , and we go a little way into the country which be very baren , by certain small and strait path , and find a little pond or pit , but dry and without water ; and here the captain take possession for the mark of the valley in the name of his majesty , and after this we return to our ship , and that night we see four or five fire on the land . the next day the captain determine , because he have see these fire , to go on shore , and so with our two boat we go fifteen or twenty of we unto certain crooked strand two league from the place where our ship ride , and where we have see the fire , and we find two Indians of exceed huge stature , so that they cause we great to wonder ; they carry their bow and arrow in their hand , and as soon as they see we leap on shore they run away , and we follow they unto their dwelling and lodging , which be certain cottage and bower cover with bough , and there we find great and small step of many people , but they have no kind of victual but only cuttle-fish which we find there . the country towards the sea side seem but barren , for we see neither tree nor green grass there , yet be there certain small path not well beat , and along the sea-coast we see many tract of dog , hare , and cony , and in certain small island near unto the main we see seal-fish . this haven be call Ancon Ancon de Zant de Sant Andres . Andres . Chap. 5. they discover a mountainous island very great , and near unto it certain other island with a goodly green and pleasant country . they have sight of certain Indians in canoas of cane , who language sound like the flemish tongue , with who they can not have any traffic . the next day we proceed on our voyage , sail between the main and a island , which we suppose to be in circuit about a hundred or eighty league , sail sometime within one , and sometime within two league of the main . the soil of this island be of certain mountain not very steep with cave in they , and as far as we can descry by the coast , there appear no sign of any plain country . here from this day forward we begin to be afraid , consider that we be to return to the port of Santa Cruz ; for it be suppose , that all along this mighty gulf from the entrance in at culiacan until the return back unto the say haven , be all firm land , and also because we have the firm land always on our right hand and it go round circlewise unto the say haven ; but many thought and hope that we shall find some mouth or outlet , whereby we may pass through unto the other coast . what our success be our will declare in the relation follow . the next day be Thursday we sail with scant wind , for it be almost calm , and pass beyond that great island , have firm land always on our right hand , and coast ( as i say ) very near unto it . the next day likewise we sail with little wind , it be in a manner calm , and pass near unto the shore by certain round bay , and certain point which the land make , which be pleasant to behold be somewhat green , and there seem to be some a great island . they return from the bot-tomeofthegulf of California . 219 creek there . This Friday at night we sail altogether with a fresh gale , and at break of day we another be between the main land , and a island on our island . | eft hand , which be somewhat big , as far as we can discern . there be a great bay in the firm land , and before it be a point which stretch far into the sea . the firm land seem to be much fresh and pleasant than those land which we have pass , have many bank and hill of indifferent height , and beautiful to behold . the country ( as far as we can discern ) be so pleasant and delightful , that we all desire to go on shore , and to search up into it two or three day journey , to see whether it be inhabit or not . we see within the land of that bay two fire . the night follow be Saturday we sail continual with a prosperous and fresh gale , and the wind be so great that we draw our bonnet to our main sail , and sail so till the morning . on Sunday the twelve of October we find our self altogether enclose with land , on the right hand with the main , which compass we before and behind , and on the left hand with a island of a league and a half ; and between the main and the island in the midst of the sea there lay a small Islet , and also between the say main and the island there be two mouth , through which there appear a passage whereby afterward we pass through . this main be much more fresh and green than the other which we have pass , and have certain plain and point of mountain of pleasant view , and full of green grass . here all this night we see two or three village which be very great , and at break of day we see a Canoa or boat make of cane , which come from the land out of a creek , and we stand still until it come near unto we in the ship , and they begin to speak in their language which no man understand , who pronunciation be like to the Fleming , and be 220 call they return with great haste unto the shore , and we be very sorry because our boat have not follow they . here happen unto we a very strange thing , which be , that as this indian return to the shore in [ he . 403. ] certain of these creek where a number of his fellow Indians be , as we view that part , we see five canoas issue forth , which come towards we : whereupon we stay to see what they will do . in the mean while our admiral come up unto we , which be near the shore , for she also have see they , and so be come together we cast anchor , expect what those canoas will do . in the mean while our generali command we to make ready our boat , and to furnish the same with oar and man , to try if we can by any mean take some of they , that we may come to some knowledge of they , and that we may give they some of our trifle , and special of our hook and bead to win their friendship . the indian with their five canoas approach within one or two stone cast of we , and then begin to speak very loud unto we in a very strange language , always stand upon their guard to retire themselves with speed . when our captain see this , and that they will not come near we , but rather retire , he command six mariner to go into the boat from the stern of the ship , and himself also go with they with all possible haste towards the Indians . the indian return to the shore with so great celerity , that they seem to fly in those little canoas of cane . nevertheless our man use such diligence that one of the Canaos be board and take ; but the indian in the Canoa see himself now take leap into the water , and our man follow with their boat to take he , but see himself within their reach , he duck with his head under their boat , and so deceive they , and then rise up again , and with their oar and with staff they give 221 he certain blow , to amaze he , but nothing will serve they ; for as they be about to lay hand upon he he still dive under water , and with his hand and foot get near to the shore : and as he rise up above the water , he call to his fellow which stand on the shore to behold , cry Belen with a loud voice , and so they pursue he , and strike he sometime be very near the shore , and he always go call the rest of his fellow to come and help he , whereupon within a short while after three other canoas come forth to succour he , be full of Indians with bow and arrow in their hand , cry with a loud voice , that we shall come on shore : these Indians be of great stature and savage , fat also and well set , and of a brown colour . our captain perceive this , lest they shall wound any of our people with their arrow , return back , and command we immediate to set sail , and so forthwith we depart . this day the wind scant , and we return to anchor in the foresay place , and our admiral ride from the firm land towards the island , and we which be in the ship call the Trinity lie near unto the main , and before break of day we depart with a fresh gale . and before we disemboque out of that channel we see certain grass very high and green upon the main : whereupon a mariner , and the pilot go up into the top , and see the mouth of a river which run through that green country into the sea . but because our admiral be under all her sail far from we , we can not tell they of this river , where we will have take water , whereof we have some need , and because it be a very good haven to go on shore to take it , and therefore without water we follow our course . on Monday we depart from this haven which be like unto a lake , for on all side we be compass with land , have the continent before , behind we , and on our right side , and the island on our left side , and we pass forth 222 1539 ' at those mouth beforemention , which show a outlet into the open sea . thus we sail along still view the situation of the country , rejoice all of we at the sight thereof , for it always please we moor and more , still appear moor green and pleasant , and the grass which we find near unto the shore be fresh and delectable , but not very high , be ( to all our judgement ) not past a span long . likewise the hill which we see , which be many , and many down make a very pleasant prospect , especial because we judge , that there be many valley and dale between they . Chap. 6. they discover a very great bay with four small island in it , whereas they take possession . as they sail along and discover diverse island they come at length to the port of Santa Cruz , where not be able to get any knowledge of those Indians , although they lie in wait for they at a place call the well of Grijalva , they depart thence . they have a perilous and long tempest , which cease , after they have see a light on their shrowd . at our come out of these opening we begin to great find a bay with a very great haven , environ with havendiver small hill have upon they green wood and pleasant to behold . in this bay and strand be two [ three . 404. ] small island near unto the shore , one of the which be like unto a table about half a league in bigness , and the other be a round hill almost as big as the former . Theise island serve we only to content our sight , for we pass by they without stay , have but a slack wind on Monday morning : all which day we follow our course with the foresay slack wind , and within a while after it become flat contrary , so that we be constrain to anchor at the say point of the say haven ; and on Tewesday at break of day we set sail , but make but little away all the day , because 223 the wind continue contrary , although but very weak . the night follow we be becalm a little beyond the point of this haven ; but about midnight we begin to have a fresh gale , and on Wednesday in the morning we be seven league distant from that point . this country show ( as it be indeed ) more plain than the rest , with certain small woody hill , and within the other point which be before descry , the situation seem to be more pleasant and delightsome than the rest which we have pass . and at the uttermost end of the point be two small islet . the say Wednesday about nine of the clock the wind blow a good gale , and we sail by evening between seven and eight league , and come over against a land not very high , where we see certain creek or breach not very ragged , into every of which a river seem to fall , because the soil be very green , and have certain tree grow on it far big than those which we have find before . here the captain with five or six man go on shore , and take possession pass up one of those river , and find the foot of many Indians upon the sand . on the bank of that river they see many fruitful tree , as cherry-tree and little appletree , and other white tree : they find also in the wood three or four beast call adibe , which be a kind of dog . the same night we set sail with the wind off - the land , which blow so fresh , that it make we to strike our foresail ; and on the sixeteenth of October at nine of the clock we come near unto a point of certain high mountain , on which day be Thursday we make little way , because the wind cease , but it rise again in the night , whereupon by the break of day on Friday we come before the say point be six or seven league off . the land seem to be very mountainous with certain sharp point not great clad with grass , but somewhat bare . on our left hand we see two island , the one of a league and a half , the other not so much , and it seem that we draw near 224 to the port of Santa Cruz , whereat we be sorry , because we be always in good hope to find some outlet into the main ocean in some place of that land , and that the same port be the same outlet , and also that by the say coast we may return to the foresay haven of Santa Cruz , and that we have commit a great error , because we have not certain seek out the secret , whether that be a strait or a river , which we have leave behind we unsearched at the bottom of this great sea or gulf . all Friday and the night follow we sail with a scant wind , and on Saturday at break of day we be between two point of land which make a bay , wherein - a bay with 4 we see before and behind four or five great and small or 5 inland . Islands . the land be very mountainous , part whereof be cover with grass , and part be void . within the land appear more mountain and hill , and in this place we be come near unto the haven of Santa Cruz , which be all firm land , except it be divide in the very nook by some streite or great river which part it from the main , which because we have not thorough discover , all of we that be employ in this voyage be not a little grieve . and this main land stretch so far in length , that i can well express it : for from the haven of Acapulco , which stand in seventeen degree and twenty minute of latitude , we have always the coast of the firm land on our right hand , until we come to the great current of the white and red sea : this current and here ( as i have say ) we know not the secret of this u in 32 ae-current , whether it be cause by a river or by a strait : and so suppose that the coast which we have on our and red . right hand be close up without passage , we return back again , always descend southward by our degree , until we return unto the say haven of this return santa Cruz , find still along the coast a goodly and u pleasant country , and still see fire make by the ca$ ' Indians , and canoas mad of cane . we determine to take in fresh water at the haven of Santa Cruz , to ix 225 p run along the outward western coast , and to see what it be , if it please God . here we rest our self , and eat of the plum and fruit call Pithaias : they arrive and we enter into the port of Santa Cruz on Sunday ‘ ot^san^’1 th® * 8 °f October and stay there eight day to take Qruz in wood and water rest our self all that while , that our man may strengthen and refresh themselves . our captain determine to divide among we certain garment of taffeta , with cloak and say , and a piece of taffeta , and likewise ordain , that we shall go on land to catch a couple of Indians , that they may talk with our interpreter , and that we may come to the knowledge of their language . whereupon thirteen of we go out [ three . 405. ] of our ship by night , and lie in ambush in a place which be call the well of Grijalva , where we stay until noon between certain secret way , and can never see or descry any one Indian : wherefore we return the Spaniard to our ship , with two mastive-dog which we carry with they to catc^ th® Indians with more ease : and in our Indians return we find two Indians hide in certain thicket , ' which be come thither to spy what we do : but because we and our dog be weary , and think not on they , these Indians issue out of the thicket , and flee away , and we run after they , and our dog see they not : wherefore by reason of the read more of thickness of the wild thistle , and of the thorn and these staff briar , and because we be weary , we can never cat - i0 - overtake they : they leave behind they certain staff so fine wrought that they be very beautiful to behold , consider how cunning they be make with a handle and a cord to fling they . the nine and twenty of October be Wednesday , we set sail out of this haven of Santa Cruz with little wind , and in sail down the channel our ship call the Trinity come on ground upon certain sholde : this be at noon at a low water , and with all the remedy that we can use we can not draw she off , whereupon we be constrain to underprop she , and to stay 226 the next tide : and when the tide begin to increase we use all diligence to draw she off , and can not by any mean , whereat all the company and the captain be not a little grieve : for we think we shall have lose she there , although we cease not with all our might to labour with both our boat , and with our cable and capsten . in the end it please God about midnight at a full sea with the great force which we use to recover she , that we draw she off the sand , for which we give God most hearty thanks , and ride at anchor all the rest of the night , wait for daylight for fear of fall into any further danger or mishap . when day be come , we set forward with a fresh gale , and proceed on our voyage , direct our prow to the main sea , to see whether it will please God to let we discover the secret of this point . but whether it please not his great goodness , or whether it be for our sin , we spend eight day from this port , before we can double the point , by reason of contrary wind , and great rain , and lightning and darkness every night : also the wind grow so rage and tempestuous , that they make we all to quake , and to pray continual unto God to aid we . and hereupon we make our cable and anchor ready , and the chief pilot command we with all speed to cast anchor , and in this sort we pass our trouble : and whereas we ride in no security , he cause we forthwith to weigh our anchor , and to go whither the wind shall drive we . and in this sort we spend those eight day , turn back by night the same way that we have go by day , and sometime make good in the night that which we have lose in the day , not without great desire of all the company to have a wind which may set we forward on our voyage , be afflict with the misery which we endure by reason of the thunder , lightning , and rain , wherewith we be wet from top to toe , by reason of the toil which we have in weigh and cast of our anchor , as need require . and on one of these night , which be very dark 227 and tempestuous with wind and rain , because we think we shall have perish , be very near the shore , we pray unto God that he will vouchsafe to aid and save we without call our sin to remembrance . and straightway we see upon the shrowd of the Trinity as it be a candle , which of it self shine , and give a light , whereat all the company great rejoice , in such sort that we cease not to give thanks unto God . whereupon we assure our self , that of his mercy he will guide and save we , and will not suffer we to perish , as indeed it fall out ; for the next day we have good weather , and all the mariner say , that it be the light of saint Elmo which appear on the shrowd , and they salute it with their song and prayer . Theise storm take we between the isle of saint Iago and saint Philip , and the isle call Isla de perlas lie over against the point of California suppose to be firm land . Chap. 7. sail on their way they discover a pleasant country , and in their judgement great inhabit , and find the sea-coast very deep . they go to discover or view the isle of pearl . and by a current one of their ship be separate from the other , and with great joy after three day they have sight again of she , and follow their voyage they discover certain great , green , and pleasant plain . we begin to sail along the coast the seven or eight of November , the land always show very green with grass pleasant to behold , and certain plain near the shore , and up within the country many [ three . 406. ] pleasant hill replenish with wood , and certain valley , so that we be delight above measure , and wonder at the greatness and goodly view of the country : and every night we see fire , which show that the country be great inhabit . thus we proceed on our voyage until the ten of the say month of November , have 228 1539-alwayes the coast of the main ocean on our right hand , from hence and the far we sail , we always find the country more delightsome and pleasant , as well in behold the green thereof , as also in that it show certain plain backside of and deep valley , through which river do fall down California . into the land , within certain mountain , and hill full of great wood which be not very high , and appear within the country . here we be 54 league distant from California little more or less , always towards the California . Southwest , see in the night three or four fire , whereby it appear that the country be inhabit , and full of people , for the greatness of the country argue no less : and we suppose that there must needs be great town inhabit within the land , although in this point we be of diverse opinion . the sea be so deep on all this coast that we can scarce find ground in 54 fathom . on the great part of the coast there be hill of very white sand , and it seem to be a dangerous coast , because of the great and swift tide which go there , for the sand show so much for the space of ten or twelve league , for so the pilot affirm . this day be Saturday the wind increase , and we have sight of the isle of Isla de perlas . pearl , which on this side of the gulf appear with a deep valley all cover over with tree , and show much fair than on the other side , and we enter into the porte of Santa Cruz. from the nine of November to the fifteen we sail not above ten league , because we have contrary wind , and great shower : and beside this we have another mischance which do not a little grieve we : for we lose company of the ship call the Trinity , and can never see she for the space of three day , whereupon we suspect that she be return home unto new Spain , or that she be sever from our company : wherefore we be grieve out of measure to see our self so leave alone , and the captain of all other be most sad , though he cease not to encourage we to proceed on our voyage , say that notwithstanding all this we ought 229 not to leave off this enterprise which we have begin , and that though we be leave alone we shall deserve the great commendation and credit : whereupon we all answer he , that we will not have he think that any of we will ever be discourage , but that we will follow he until he shall think it reasonable that we shall not proceed any further in the enterprise , and that we be in danger of perish , and that until then we will be at his commandment : but withal we persuade he that after he have see any great difficulty to proceed any further , he shall do well to return back to make relation of our success to the R. H. lord the mark de valle . hereupon he make a oration unto we wherein he tell we , that he can not believe , much less can imagine , wherefore the ship call the Trinity shall return into new Spain , nor why she shall willing depart from we , and go unto any other place , and that he think by all reason , that some current have carry she out of our sight , and that through contrary weather and tempest she can not fetch we up , and that notwithstanding all that which we have do in the voyage , he have a instruction , that if by chance we be separate one from the other , we be to take this course to meet again together , namely to return back eight or ten league to seek one another , beyond certain headland which lie out into the sea , and that therefore we shall do well to return to seek she up . this sentence please we all , and so return to seek she , we espy she two league distant from we , come towards we with a fresh gale of wind , whereat we great rejoice . thus be come together we anchor for that day , because the weather seem very contrary , and the captain chide they for their negligence in sail , because they have in such sort lose our company ; and they excuse themselves , that they can do no less , because a current have carry they away above three league , whereby they can never reach unto we . the next day 230 be the sixeteenth of November we set forward , but sail very little , for the north and northwest wind be against we . here we discover certain plain , in my judgement very great and green , and right before we we can not discern any mountain or wood , whereat we marveil to see so great a country . and we meet a indian in a Canoa on the shore whereon the sea do break , who stay to behold we a great while , and oftentimes he lift up himself to view we the better , and then return back along the coast : we use all diligence to see whether he will come out further from the shore , to give he chase , and to try whether we can catch he , but he very cunning view we without come near unto we , and return to the shore with his Canoa . here we see in the evening but one fire , and wit not whether it be do by the cunning of the Indians , because they will not have we know that there be people there , or that it be [ in . 407. ] so indeed . from the say 16 day of November until the 24 of the same month we can not proceed on our way above 12 or 15 league : and look into our sea-chart , we find our self distant from the xaguge of the port of Santa Cruz about 70 league . they be 70 now on the 24 be Monday very early in the morn - teagtuffrom ing we begin to take very good view of that SantaCruz country , and all along the coast we see many fair plain with certain furrow make in the midst like unto half plain , the say plain still appear up into the country , with pleasant champion , because the grass which grow there be very beautiful , short , and green , and good pasture for cattle . howbeit because we ride so far off , we can not perfect judge what kind of grass it be , but it show very short and green , and without thorn . Theise plain on the right hand make a bay into a valley which seem to be a piece of a mountain : the rest show to be all plain without any thistle or weed , but full of grass good for cattle very green and fair , as i have say . 231 one of their ship by tempest be separate from the other , and afterward meet with her consort she report that the land stretch to the west by the mouth of the great lake . the pilot be of diverse judgement touch the state of this coast inhabit by Chichimecas . they enter into a haven to take in fresh water , and be sudden assail by two squadron of Indians . they defend themselves valiant , and the captain with some of his soldier be grievous wound . the 26 of this month be Wednesday at night the north wind take we , which still increase more and more so great that it put we to much trouble , for it continue two day , in which the sea be always boisterous ; and this night again we lose the Trinity be beat with the north wind aforesaid ( and we have sight of she on Monday the 24 ) wherewith we be all of we great aggrieve , both captain , soldier and mariner , because we see we be leave alone , and our ship call Santa Agueda wherein we be , be but bad condition , and this grieve we more than the trouble which we have with the boisterousness of the sea , imagine that if we shall lose the Trinity , or if any mishap shall fall unto we , we shall not be able to follow our voyage accord to our captain and our own land run desire . This say 24 day be Monday we see a the country with high mountain towards the northwest , oit west . anj seem that the land stretch on still forward , whereat we exceed rejoice , because we judge that the land grow always broad and broad , and that we shall meet with some speciali good thing . whereupon we desire that it will please God to send we good weather for our voyage , which hitherto we note . find always contrary , so that in 26 day we sail not above 70 league , and that with much trouble , sometime ride at anchor and sometime sail , and seek 232 the remedy and benefit of the shore to avoid peril . in this country which we discover the 26 day we always see ( as i have say ) along the shore , and within the land , goodly plain without any tree , in the midst whereof be a lake or gather together of the seawater , which ( to our judgement ) be above 12 league in compass , and the sea-coast reach to the mountain before mention . and this day we see our ship call the Trinity , which ride 2 league distant from we , which so soon as she see we , set sail , and we come together and rejoice great . they bring we great quantity a wonderful of grey fish , and of another kind : for at the point fi^nsplace of those mountain they find a fish which be very wonderful , for they suffer themselves to be take by hand : and they be so great that every one have much ado to find room to lay his fish in . they find also on the say point a fountain of fresh water which descend from those hill , and they tell we that at the same place they have find a narrow passage , whereby the sea enter into the say lake . they comfort we much with the report of these thing , and in tell we that the land trend to the west ; for the chief pilot think , and the other pilot be of the same opinion , that we shall find a good country . this night we set sail to go to that point to take in fresh water which we want , and to see this lake , and to put some man on shore : and after midnight the wind come upon we so forcible at the north that we can not stay there : whereupon we be constrain to put further into the sea , and return the same way back again unto the shore with much ado , and come to a anchor a great way short of the place from whence we be drive : and there we ride until Thursday at noon with this bitter north wind , and on Friday about noon , when we most think it will have cease , it begin to increase again , which grieve we not a little see the weather so contrary , hope always that it will cease , and that some wind will blow from the shore , whereby 233 [ three . 408. ] we may recover the point of land to take in fresh water , and to search whether there be any people about that lake . here we lay from the 26 of the say month till the 29 , drive up and down the sea , wind in by little and little until we have get under the shelter of those mountain : which be obtain we ride the say 29 of the month half a league from those woody mountain , which we have see in the sea we stay in this place at our ease all the Sunday , and Juan Castilio the chief pilot go that day in the boat on shore with seven in his company , and they land near the sea , and on a certain low ground they find four or five Indians Chichimecas of great stature , and go towards they , who flee away like deer that have be chase . after this the pilot go a little way along the seashore , and then return to his boat , and by that time he be enter thereinto , he see about fifteen Indians of great stature also , with their bow and arrow which call unto he with a loud and strong voice , make sign with their bow ; but the pilot make no account of their gesture , but rather return to the ship , and declare what have pass between he and the Indians . the same day the captain command that our cask shall be make ready against the next morning to take in water , for in both the ship there be about five and twenty buttes empty . the first of December , and the second day in the morning the captain go with both the bark on shore with some dozen soldier , and the great part of the mariner which labour in fill of water , leave in the ship as many as be needful , and as soon as we be come on shore at the water place the captain cause the buttes to be take out , to the end they may be fill with water , and while they return to fetch the barrel and hogshead of the ship , the captain walk a turn or two upon the shore for the space of one or two crossbow shoot , and afterward we go up to certain of those 234 mountain , to view the disposition of the country , and in truth we find it in that place very bad to our judgement , for it be very ragged , full of wood and cave , and so stony , that we have much ado to go . be come unto the top we find certain small hill full of wood , and cliff that be not so craggy , although very troublesome to climb up ; and while we look from these little hill , we can not discern any more mountain , but rather judge that from that place forward there be great plain . the captain will not suffer we to go any further , because in those place we have see certain Indians which seem to be spy , and warn we thereof he command we to retire unto the shore , where we be to take in water , and to dispatch our business quick , and appoint we to make certain pit , that our butt may more easy be fill with water . And set our guard or centinel , we begin to fill water . in the mean while the captain take certain soldier , and go to the top of a high hill , from whence he descry a great part of the sea , and a lake which be within the land : for the sea enter in the space of a league , and there be a good fish place round about : and the lake be a fishingplace so great , that it seem unto we to be very near 30 °f league in compass , for we can not discern the end thereof . than we come down with no less trouble ’ than we have mount up unto the hill , by reason of the steepenesse of the place , and some tumble down with no small laughter of the rest . And be come somewhat late to our water place ( for it be then past noon ) we set our self to dinner , always appoint some of our company in sentinel , until we be call to dinner , and when some be call two other be appoint in their room . and about two of the clock after dinner , the captain and the rest suspect no danger of assault of Indians , both because the place seem not to be fit for it , as also for that we have set our centinel at the passage ; two squadron of Indians 235 a sudden assault of the indian with stone , arrow , and staff . [ Iii . 409. ] the english voyage come upon we very secret and covert , for one come by the great valley through which the water run which we take , and the other come by a part of that great hill which we have ascend to see the lake , and all of they come so covert , that our centinel can neither see nor hear they ; and we have not perceive they , if a soldier by chance lift up his eye have not say , arm , arm , my master , for many Indians come upon we . when we hear this the captain leap up in a great rage , because the guard be change out of their place : and with his sword and target , be follow by a soldier , who name be Haro , and afterward by the rest , he and the say soldier go towards a little gate of certain stone , whither the rest of we be to follow he : for if the Indians have get that place from we , we shall have incur great danger , and the great part of we have like to have be slay , and none can have escape but such as by chance can have leap into the boat , and the tide go so high , that none can be save but such as be most excellent swimmer . but at length the captain bestir himself very nimble , use all celerity that be possible . therefore when he and Haro have win the gate , the rest of the soldier gate up after they , and the captain and Haro turn themselves to the Indians and make head against they , and the Indians assail they with such number of stone , arrow , and javelin ( which be a very strange thing ) that they break in piece the target which the captain have on his arm , and beside that wound he with a arrow in the bend of his knee , and though the wound be not great , yet be it very painful unto he . while they thus stand to withstand their assault , they strike Haro which be on the other side so forcible with a stone , that they throw he flat upon the ground : and by and by another stone light upon he which shiver his target , and they hit the captain with another arrow , and shoot he quite through one of his ear . another arrow come and strike a 236 soldier call Graviello Marques in the leg , of which he feel great pain and go halt . in the mean space Francis Preciado , and certain other soldier come up and join himself with the rest on the left hand of the captain , say unto he , sir , withdraw your self , for you be wound , but be you not dismay , for they be but Indians and can hurt we . in this wise we begin to rush in among they upon the side of a rock always gain ground of they , which great encourage our mind , and when we begin to enforce they to retire , we win a small woody hill , where we shelter our self , whereas before they shoot upon we from aloft , for they be on the high ground under covert in safety , and then by no mean we can offend they , but by run forcible upon they with our target on our arm , and our sword in our hand . on the other side , to approach and seek to overtake they be a vain thing , see they be as swift as wild goat . by this time Haro be get up on foot , and have clap a woollen cloth upon his head , which have bleed extreme , he join himself unto we , of who we receive no small aid . in the mean space the indian fortify themselves on the crag of a rock , from whence they do not a little molest we , and we likewise fortify our self upon a hillock , whereby we descend into their fort , and there be a small valley between they and we , which be not very deep from the upper part . there we be 6 soldier and two negro with the captain , and all of we be of opinion that it be not good to pass that place , lest you Indians be many may destroy we all , for the rest of our soldier which be beneath at the foot of the hill , make head against the other squadron of the Indians , keep they from hurt those which take in water on the strand and from break the butt of water , and be but few , we conclude to stay here , and so we stand still fortify our self as well as we can , especial consider that we have no succour on any side ; for Berecillo our mastive-dogge which shall have 237 A.D. 1539 - the Spaniard use mastiffs in their warn against the Indians . Reade more hereof cap . 12. the english voyage aid we be grievous wound with 3 arrow , so that by no mean we can get he from we : this mastive be wound in the first assault when the Indians come upon we , who behave himself very well , and great aid we ; for he set upon they , and put 8 or 10 of they out of array , 8c make they run away , leave many arrow behind they : but at length ( as i have say ) he be so wound , that by no mean we can get he to go from we to set any more upon the Indians , 8c the other two mastiff do we more harm than good : for when they go against they , they shoot at they with their bow , and we receive hurt and trouble in defend they . the captain leg when he wax cold be so swell , that we lap it up in a woollen cloth , and he halt much of it : and while the Indians thus stand still , one part of they begin to dance , sing , and shout , and then they begin all to lade themselves with stone , and to put their arrow into their bow , and to come down towards we very resolute to assault we , and with great outcry they begin to fling stone and to shoot their arrow . then Francis Preciado turn he to the captain and say : sir , these Indians know or think , that we be afeard of they , 8c in itrueth it be a great fait to give they this encouragement , it be better for we resolute to set upon they with these dog , 8c to assault they on this hill , that they may know we to be no dastard , for they be but Indians and dare not stand we ; and if we can get their fort upon the hill , God will give we victory in all the rest . the captain answer , that he like well of the motion , and that it be best so to do , although for any further pursuit up the hill , he think we be to take another course . by and by Francis Preciado get his target on his arm , and his sword in his hand , run unto the other side of the valley , which on that part be not very steep , cry saint Iago , upon they my master , and after he leap Haro , Teresa , Spinosa , and a crossebow-man call Montanno , and after they follow the captain , 238 1539-though very lame , with a negro and a soldier which accompany he , encourage and comfort they , will they not to fear . thus we drive they to the place where they have fortify themselves , and from whence they descend , and we take another hill over against they within a dart cast of they . and have breathe our self a little , the captain come unto we , and say , go too my master , upon they before they strengthen themselves on this hill , for now we see plain that they be afeard of we , see we chase they continual from their fort : and sudden 3 or 4 of we go towards they well cover with target , unto the foot of their fort where they be assemble , and the rest of our company follow we : the Indians begin [ three . 410. ] to make head against we , and to fling many stone upon we , and shoot many arrow , and we with our sword in our hand rush upon they in such sort , that they see how furious we set upon they , abandon the fort , and run down the hill as swift as deer , and flee unto another hill over against we , where the other squadron of the indian stand , of who they be rescue , and they begin to talk among themselves , but in a low voice , and join together 6 and 6 and 8 8c 8 in a company , and make a fire and warm themselves , and we stand quiet behold what they do . 239 [ Chap. 9 after the skirmish the captain be wound , and the rest of the soldier see the indian depart , return unto their ship . the next day take in fresh water at the say place he send mariner to sound the mouth of the lake . depart thence they come to the port call Baya de Sant Abad , and endure a dangerous storm at sea . and afterward come near the shore to take fresh water in the say haven , they see certain peaceable Indians . by this time it be late and the night approach , and the Indians see this , within a short while after determine to get they pack , and each of they or the great part take firebrand in their hand , and get they away into craggy place . when the captain see this he command we to return aboard our boat , it be now dark night , thank we all for the good service we have do he . And be not able to stand upon his leg , he lean with his arm upon Francis Preciado ; and thus we return to our boat , where with much ado we get aboard , by reason of the great tide and roughness of the sea , so that our boat be fill with every wave . thus very weary , wet , and some wound ( as be aforesaid ) each man return unto his ship , where our bed which we find , and our refresh , and the cheer we have at supper do not great comfort we in regard of our former travel . we pass that night in this sort , and the next day be Tuesday the captain find himself great pain with his wound , and chief with that on his leg , because it be great swell with his go upon it . we lack 12 butt to fill with water , and the barrel in both the ship , and the captain will have go out to cause they to be fill , but we will not suffer he , and therefore we leave off the business for that day . but he appoint that the crossbow shall be make ready , and two speciali good 240 harquebuss , and the next day be Wednesday very early , he command Juan Castilio chief pilot to go out with both the boat and with all the soldier and mariner that he can make , have the day before command the Trinity to go as near the shore as she may , and to make ready some of her ordinance , that if the Indians shall show themselves , they may affright they , and do they as much hurt as they can . wherefore on the Wednesday all we that be soldier , save the wound person , go on shore with certain mariner in the best order that we can , and take the first hill , where we have fortify our self , stand all upon our guard until the water be fill , and until we be call , during which time not one indian show himself . thus we go aboard when we think good our self , at least without any suspicion of the Indians , although the tide of the sea go so high y‘ it put we to great trouble , for oftentimes with great wave it beat into our boat . this be on the Wednesday the 3 of December . and to avoid loss of time the captain command Juan Castilio the chief pilot to take a boat and certain mariner as he shall think good , and to view the mouth of the lake to see whether the entrance be deep enough for to harbour the ship . he take the boat of the admiral with 8 mariner , and we of the Trinity , go and sound the mouth , and on the shallow place of the bar without they find 3 fathom a special good depth , and far in 4 , and up high 5 , always increase unto 10 or 12 fathom , when they be come into the two point of the say lake , which be a league broad from one point to the other , and all their sound be exceed good ground . than they go over to the southeast point , and there they see a great boat or raft which they endeavour to take to carry unto their ship . in you mean while they espy certain cottage , which the pilot determine to go and see , and be come near they see 3 other raft with 3 Indians on they distant from the cottage one or two cross-bowe shoot , ix 241 q and he leap on land with 4 or 5 mariner in his company : and while they behold those cottage , they see many Indians descend down a small hill in warlike manner with their bow and arrow , whereupon they determine to retire to their boat , and to return to their ship , and they be not go from the seashore scarce a stone cast , but the indian be come upon they to shoot at they with their arrow , and because they be unarm , they will not fight with they , have go on shore for no other purpose , but to sound the mouth and entrance of that lake . on Thursday the 4 of December we set sail with a fresh gale of wind , and sail some 8 or 10 league , and come unto certain [ three . 411. ] mouth or inlet which seem to all of we as though they have be hand , and we enter into one of they , Baya deal and come into a haven which we call Baya deal Abad Abad it100 ap inc [ ose ( l anj compass with land , be one of they the point of fair haven that have be see : and about the same , California . especial on both side the land be green and goodly to behold ; we descry certain river on that part which seem green , and therefore we return back , go out at that mouth whereby we come in , always have contrary wind : yet the pilot use their best endeavour to make way : and we see before we certain woody hill , and beyond they certain plain ; this we see from the Friday the 5 of the say month , until the Tuesday , which be the nine . as we draw near to these wood they seem very pleasant , and there be goodly and large hill and beyond they towards the sea be certain plain , and through all the country we see these wood . many great from the day before , which be the conception of our tmoke , of lady , we see many great smoke , whereat we much Francis gualle marvel , be or diverse opinion among our self , make man - whether those smoke be make by the inhabitant of cion . the country or no . over against these wood there fall every night such a dew , that every morning when we rise , the deck of the ship be so wet , that until the sun be of a good height , we always make the 242 deck dirty with go upon it . we ride over against these wood from the Tuesday morning when we set sail , until Thursday about midnight , when a cruel northwest wind take we , which , whither we will or no , enforce we to way our anchor ; and it be so great , that the ship Santa Agueda begin to return back , until her cable break , and the ship hull , and sudden with a great gust the trinket and the mizzen be rend asunder , then northwest wind still grow more and more : within a short while after the main sail be rend with a mighty flaw of wind , so that we be enforce , both soldier , captain , and all of we , to do our best endeavour to mend our sail ; and the Trinity be drive to do the like , for she go round upon her anchor , when she come ahead of it , her cable break , so that there we lose two anchor , each ship one . we go back to seek Baya deal Abad , for we be within 20 league of the same , and this day we come within four league of it , and be not able to reach it by reason of contrary wind , we ride under the lee of certain mountain and hill which be bare , and almost void of grass , near unto a strand full of sandy hill . near unto this road we find a fishingplace under a point afishingplace . of land , where have let down our lead to see what ground be there , a fish catch it in his mouth , and begin to draw it , and he which hold the sounding-lead cry and show his fellow that it be catch , that they may help he , as soon as he have get it above the water , take the fish , and loose the cord of the sounding-lead , and throw it again into the sea , to see whither there be any good depth , and it be catch again , whereupon he begin to cry for help , and all of we make a shout for joy ; thus draw the fish the rope of the sounding-lead be very great be crack , but at length we catch the fish which be very fair . here we stay from Friday when we arrive there , until the Monday , when as it seem good to our captain , that we shall repair to the water place , from whence 243 we be some six league distant , to take in 12 buttes of water , which we have drink and spend , because he know not whither we shall from thenceforth find any water , or no ; and though we shall find water , it be doubtful whither we shall be able to take it by reason great tide of the great tide that go upon that coast . we draw upon this coast . near to that place on Monday at night , when as we see certain fire of the Indians . and on Tuesday morning our generali command that the Trinity shall come as near our ship and to the shore as it can , that if we have need , they may help we with their great ordinance : and have make 3 or 4 bourd to draw near the shore , there come 4 or 5 Indians to the seaside ; who stand and behold while we put out our boat and anchor , mark also how our bwoy float upon the water ; and when our boat return to the ship , two of they leap into the sea , and swim unto the bwoy , and behold it a great while ; then they take a cane of a arrow , and tie to the say bwoy a very fair and shine sea-oyster of pearl , and then return to the shore , near to the water place . Chap. 10. they give unto the Indians many trifle which stand upon the shore to see they , and seek to parley with they by their interpreter , which be a chichimeco , who can not understand their language . they go to take fresh water . Francis Preciado spend the time with they with many sign , and truck and be afeard of their great multitude , retire himself wise with his companion , return with safety to the ship . when the captain and we behold this , we judge these Indians to be peaceable people ; whereupon the captain take the boat with 4 or 5 mariner carry [ three . 412. ] with he certain bead to truck , and go to speak with they . in the mean while he command the indian interpreter our chichimeco , to be call out of 244 the admiral that he shall parley with they . and the captain come unto the boy , and lay certain thing upon it for exchange , and make sign unto the savage to come and take they ; and a indian make sign unto our man with his hand , his arm , and head , that they understand they not , but signify that they shall go aside . whereupon the captain depart a small distance from that place with his boat . and they make sign again that he shall get he further ; whereupon we depart a great way off , the say Indians leap into the water , come unto the boy , and take those bead , and return back again to land , and then come unto the other three , and all of they view our thing , they give a bow and certain arrow to a indian , and send he away , run with all haste on the shore , and make sign unto we that they have send word unto their lord what thing we have give they , and that he will come thither . within a while after the say Indian return , run as he do before , and begin to make sign unto we , that his lord be come . and while we stay here , we see on the shore ten or twelve Indians assemble themselves , which come unto the other Indians , apd by and by we see another company of 12 or 15 more appear , who assemble themselves all together . and again they begin to make sign unto we , to come forthwith to our boat , and show we many oyster of pearl on the top of certain cane , make sign that they will give they we . when we behold this , the captain command we to make ready our boat , and go aboard it with the say mariner , and row to a certain stone in form of a rock , which lie in the sea near unto the shore . and hither come first 2 or 3 Indians and lay down one of those oyster , and a garland make of parats feather , or sparrow feather paint red ; they lay down also certain plume of white feather , and other of blue colour . in the mean while we see continual Indians assemble to the shore by ten and ten , and so by little and little they come in squadron ; 245 and one of they assoon as he see the boat begin to leap forward and backward with so great nimbleness , that doubtless he seem to all of we a man of great agility , and we take no small pleasure while we behold he fetch those gambol : but the rest of the Indians which stand at the mouth of the fresh water run towards he , and cry unto he , forbid he to use those gesture , because we be come thither in peaceable sort , and by this mean he come with the rest to the water place , where by little and little in this manner there assemble above a hundred of they all in order , with certain staff with cord to fling they , and with their bow and arrow , and they be all paint . in the mean while our chichimeco-interpreter bear in the he of California , be come unto we , and the captain again command a mariner to strip himself , and to swim and lay upon the say rock certain bell , and more bead , and when he have lay they there , the Indians make sign that he shall go away ; and so they come thither and take they , and our man draw near with their boat . the captain command the indian our chichimeco to speak unto they , but they can not understand he , so that we assure believe , that they understand not the language of the he of California . this day be Tuesday until night the Indians stay at this water place , take some of our bead , and give unto we their feather and other thing , and when it be very late they depart . the morrow follow be Wednesday very early the captain command that our buttes shall be make ready , that before break of day , and before the Indians shall take the hill , which stand over the water place , we may be land in good order : which be put in execution : for we go on shore with as many as can go , save those that have charge to take in the water , and such as be to stay on shipboard , which in all be about fourteen or fifteen person , in as good order as we can devise : for we be four crossbow , two 246 ... I539 ' harquebuzier , and eight or nine target , and the most part of we carry very good sling , and every one eighteen river stone , which weapon the captain invent , because the indian at the first have handle we very shrewd with the multitude of stone which they fling at we : we have nothing to defend we save our target , and to seek to win the fort from whence they endamage we ; he therefore think with these sling , that we may offend they , and we likewise think well of his opinion , for make trial of they , we throw very well with they , and much far than we think we can have do : for the sling be make of hemp , we fling very far with they . now be come to the water place the say Wednesday by break of day we take the fort of the fountain , which be certain crag or rock hang over the same , between which there be a open or deep valley through which this water run , which be no great quantity , but a little brook not past a fathom broad . So stand all in order , other four or five Indians come thither , who as soon as they see we to be come on shore , and to have get the top of the water place , [ three . 413. ] they retire unto a small hill on the other side , for the valley be between they and we : neither stay they long before they begin to assemble themselves as they have do the day before by 10 and 10 , and 15 and 15 , range themselves on this high hill , where they make sign unto we . and Francis Preciado crave licence of the generali to parley with these Indians , and to give they some trifle ; wherewith he be content , charge he not to come too near they , nor to go into any place where they may hurt he . whereupon Francis go unto a plain place , under the hill where the Indians stand , and to put they out of fear he lay down his sword and target , have only a dagger hang down at his girdle , and in a scarf which he carry at his neck , certain bead to exchange with they , comb , fishinghook and comfit . and he begin to go up the hill , and 247 truck wonderful traffic with the indian fir mother ofpearle , and other thing . the english voyage to show they diverse of his merchandise . the Indians as soon as he have lay those thing on the ground , and go somewhat aside , come down from the hill and take they , and carry they up , for it seem that their lord be among they , to who they carry those trifle . than they come down again , and lay to give unto he in the say place , a oyster of pearl , and two feather like hawk feather , make sign to Preciado that he shall come and take they ; which he do , and again lay there a string of bell , and a great fishhook , and certain bead ; and they take the same , lay there again another oyster of pearl , and certain feather : and he lay down other bead , two fishhook , and more comfit , and the Indians come to take they up , and approach much near unto he , then at other time , and so near that a man may have touch they with a pike , and then they begin to talk together : and 7 or 8 moor come down , unto who Francis Preciado make sign , that they shall come down no low , and they incontinent lay their bow and arrow on the ground , and have lay they down come somewhat low , and there with sign , together with they which come first , they begin to parley with he , and require mariner breech and apparel of he , and above all thing a red hat please they high , which the say Francis wear on his head , and they pray he to reach it unto they , or to lay it in the place ; and after this certain of they make sign unto he to know whether he will have a harlot , signify with their finger those villainy and dishonest action , and among the rest they set before he a indian of great stature die whole with black , with certain shell of the mother of pearl at his neck , and on his head , and speak by sign to Francis Preciado touch the foresay act of fornication , thrust their finger through a hole , they say unto he , that if he will have a woman , they will bring he one ; and he answer , that he like well of it , and that therefore they shall bring he one . in the mean space 248 on the other side where the generali stand with his company , another squadron of Indians show themselves , whereupon the generali and his company make a stir , and put themselves in battle array : whereupon Francis Preciado be enforce to come down from they , to joy ne with the generali and his company : and here the Indians which come last begin to make sign that we shall lay down something to truck , and that they will give we some of their shell of mother of pearl , which they bring upon certain small stick , and herewithal they come very near unto we , wherewith we be not well content . and Francis Preciado say unto the captain , that if it please he , he will cause all the Indians to come together and to stay upon that high hill ; and he answer , that it be best to draw they all together , for by this time our man have take in all their water , and stay for the boat : whereupon Francis take a crown of bead go towards the valley , through which the water run towards the Indians , and . make sign unto they to call the rest , and to come all together , because he will go to the old place , to lay thing on the ground for exchange , as at the first ; and they answer that he shall do so , and that they have call the other , and that they will do , as he will have they , and so they do , for they cause they to come unto they , which they do , and Francis likewise go alone towards they , in which mean space the generali command his people to get into the boat . Francis come unto the place begin to lay down his merchandise of traffic , and afterward make sign unto they to stay there , because he will go to the ship to bring they other thing , and so he return to the place where the captain be , and find they all get into the boat , save the generali and three or four other , and the generali make as though he have give other trifle to Preciado to carry unto the Indians , and when he be go a little from he , he call he back again , and all this while the 249 Indians stand still , and be come unto he , we go fair and soft to our boat , and get into they at our ease , without any throng , and thence we come aboard our ship . the Indians see we thus go aboard come down to the strand where the brook of water be , and call unto we to come forth with our boat , and to come on shore , and to bring our bead , and that they will give we of their mother of pearl : but we be now set at [ three . 4.14 . ] dinner make no account of they : whereupon they begin to shoot arrow at the ship , and although they fall near we , yet they do not reach we . in the mean season certain mariner go out in the boat , to weigh the anchor , whereupon the Indians see they come towards they , 8c bring they nothing , they begin in scorn to show they their buttock , make sign that they shall kiss their bum : and these seem to be those that come last . the generali see this , command a musket to be once or twice shoot off , and that they shall take their just aim . they see these shot to be make ready , some of they rise and go to shoot their arrow at our mariner , which be go to weigh the anchor , than the generali command the great ordinance speedy to be shoot off , whereupon three or four bullet be discharge , and we perceive that we have slay one of they , for we assure see he lie dead upon the shore ; and i think some of the rest be wound . they hear this noise , and see he dead run away as fast as ever they can , some along the shore , and some through the valley , drag the dead indian with they , after which time none of they appear , save ten or twelve , which peep up with their head among those rock ; whereupon another piece of ordinance be discharge aloft against the place where they be , after which time we never see any more of they . 250 at the point of the Trinity they spend three day in fish , and in other pastime : after which set sail they discover pleasant country , and mountain void of grass , and a hand afterward call Isla de los cedros , or the he of cedar , near which they suffer sharp cold and rain , and to save themselves they return thither . immediate we set sail to join with the ship Santa Agueda , which be above half a league in the high sea from we , and this be on the Wednesday the seventeenth of December . be come together because the wind be contrary , we draw near to a headland , which we call Punta de la Trinidad , and here we stay fish , and solace our self two or three day , although we have always great store of rain . afterwards we begin to sail very slow , and at night we ride over against those mountain where we have leave our anchor , and upon knowledge of the place we receive great contentment see we have sail some five and thirty league from the place where we have take in water : neither be it any marvel that we so rejoice , because that the fear which we have of contrary wind cause we to be so well apay of the way which we have make . the day of the holy nativity of our lord , which be on the Thursday the five and twenty of the say month , God of his mercy begin to show we favour in give we a fresh wind almost in the poop , which carry we beyond those mountain , for the space of ten or twelve league , find the coast always plain : and two league within the land , which we coast along , and between these mountain , there be a great space of plain ground , which we may easy discern with our eye , although other be of another opinion . we begin from Christmas day to sail slow with certain small land-wind , and 251 great apparent of gold and silver . January 1540 forty league . [ Iii . 415. ] the english voyage sail from morning to night about seven or eight league , which we esteem no small matter , always pray to God to continue this his favour towards we , and thank he for his holy nativity , and all the day of this feast the friar say mass in the admiral , and the father Frier Raimund preach unto we , which give we not small comfort , by encourage we in the service of God . on Saturday at night be the 27 of the say month we ankor near unto a point which seem to be plain land all along the shore , and within the country be high mountain with certain wood , which wood and mountain run overthwart the country , and continue along with certain small hill sharp on the top , and certain little valley be between those mountain . and in truth to i which with diligent eye behold the same both in length and in the breadth thereof , it can not choose but be a good country , and to have great matter in it , as well touch the inhabit thereof by the Indians , as in gold and silver ; for there be great likelihood that there be store thereof . this night we see a fire far within the land towards those mountain , which make we think that the country be thorough inhabit . the next day be Sunday and innocent day , the 28 of the say month at break of day we set sail , and by nine or ten of the clock have sail three or four league , where we meet with a point which stretch toward the west , the pleasant situation whereof delight we much . from the eight and twenty of December we run our course until Thursday be newyeares day of the year 1540 , and we run some 40 league , pass by certain inlet and bay , and certain high mountain cover with grass in colour like rosemary : but towards the seaside very bare and burn , and towards the top be certain crag somewhat of a red colour , and beyond these appear certain white mountain , and so all the country show unto a point which appear beyond 252 those burn white and red mountain which have neither any grass nor tree upon they , whereat we marvel not a little . this newyeares day we see near the main two small hand , and rejoice great to see they ; for we stand in great fear , that contrary wind will drive we as far back in one day , as we have sail in ten , which if they have take we , we can not have withstand they . we run from the first of January until Monday which be five day , and the land always stretch northwest from the mountain aforesaid . and on the Sunday we see a far off " ahead of we a high land somewhat sever from the main shore , and all of we begin to dispute whether it be the land which trend towards the northwest , for that way the pilot hope to discover a better country : and the say Monday the five of Januarie we come to this high land beforesaid , and it be two hand the one a small one and the other a great one : we coast these two hand some six league , which be green , and have on the top of they many high slender tree ; and the great hand be twenty league in compass . we coast in 6 league in length without see or discover any other thing , but we see before we high land which stretch eight or ten league northward , where we ride on Monday at night . from Thursday be newyeares day until the next Monday we sail about 35 league . and in this course we feel great cold , which grieve we much , especial be assail by two or three windy shower which pinch we much with cold . we ride over against this land two or three night , have it near unto we , always keep watch by equal hour , one while mariner , and another soldier , all the night long with great vigilancy . on Tuesday be twelve day we come within two or three league of this land , which we have descry the day before , seem to we very pleasant for it show green with green tree of a ordinary bigness , and we see 253 two small islet near the main . Isla de id cedros mention in the 13 chapter the land trend here northwest 35 league . Thistle degree of northerly latitude . the english voyage many valley , out of which certain small mist arise , which continue in they for a long time , whereupon we gather , that they rise out of certain river . the same morning , to our great comfort we see great smoke , though we be above four league distant from they , and the captain make no great reckon to approach near unto they , nor to seek nor search what the matter be , and perchance because he be not then in the Santa Agueda , but be aboard the Trinity , as his manner be to come and stay there two or three day , as well to pass the time , as to give order for thing that be needful . in this country the winter and rain seem to be like that of Castille . we ride all night two or three league distance from shore , and towards evening we see five or six fire , whereat we all rejoice , but do not marvel thereat , because the situation of that country show to be habitable , be fair , pleasant , and all green , and likewise because the hand which we have leave behind we be ( as i have say ) twenty league in circuit , make show that it be well people . on the Wednesday we be 3 or 4 league at sea from the land , and begin to see two fire more , and therefore we assure our self that the country be very well inhabit ; and the far we sail , we always find it more civil . and for the space of fifty league before we come hither we always find swim on the sea certain float of weed of a ship length , and of the breadth of two ship , be round and full of gourd , and under these weed be many fish , and on some of they be store of fowl like unto white sea-meawes . we suppose that these float weed do grow upon some rock under the water . we be now in 30 degree of northerly latitude . we sail from the 7 of January until the 9 still with contrary wind : and on fry day about noon there rise a north and northeastern wind , which force we to return under the shelter of that hand which we leave behind we , from whence we have sail above 254 twenty league . and that Friday at night somewhat twenty late we have sail back above twelve league of the same , and because it be night we stay in the sea , ofqedar . where we and our ship be not a little trouble , so that all that night none of we sleep a wink , but watch every one . the next morning betimes be Saturday we proceed on our voyage , and gate under the shelter of the say hand , ride in thirty fathom water : and on that side where we ankor , we find high and close mountain , with heap of a certain earth which be all ash and burn , and in other place scorch and as black as coal , and like the rust of iron , and in other place whitish , and here and there small black hill , whereat we marvel exceed , consider that when we pass by , it seem unto we a habitable country full of tree , and now we see not a stick grow on this side . all of we suppose that on the other side towards the firm land the tree grow which we see , although ( as i have say ) we sail four or five league distant from the same . we stay here under the shelter of these mountain [ three . 416. ] Saturday , Sunday , and Monday , always have the northern wind so strong , that we think if it have catch we in the sea , we shall have be cast away . Chap. 12. they environ and land upon the hand of cedar , to discover the same , and to seek water and wood . they be assail of the Indians , and many of they wound with stone : but at length get the upper hand , they go to their cottage , and range far up into the island they find diverse thing which the Indians in their flight have leave behind they . on Friday the 13 of January the captain command we to hoist out our boat , and to go on shore , which be do accord , and we do row along the shore for the space of a good half league and 255 enter into a valley : for ( as i say ) all this country be full of high and bare hill , of such quality as i mention before : and in this and other small valley we find some water which be brackish , and not far from thence certain cottage make of shrub like unto broom ; likewise we find the footing of Indians both small and great , whereat we much marvel that in so rough and wild a country ( as far as we can discern ) there shall be people . here we stay all day , make four or five pit to take in water which we want , which though it be bad , and in small quantity we refuse not ; and so the evening be come , we return to our boat , and so come unto our ship which ride a good league from the shore . the next day be Wednesday the fourteenth of the say month our generali command we to set sail , and we sail about the say hand on the same side which we coast when we come from Nueva Espanna : for when we arrive on the coast we see five or six fire ; wherefore he desire to see and learn whether it be inhabit ; and at the far end of this inlet or bay where we ride there come out before we a Canoa , wherein be four indian which come row with certain small oar , and come very near we to see what we be : whereupon we tell our generali , that it be best to send some of we out with our boat to take these Indians or some one of they to give they something that they may think we to be good people : but he will not consent thereto , because he mind not to stay , have then a pretty gale of wind , whereby he may sail about this hand , hope that afterward we may find and take some other to speak with they , and give they what we will to carry on shore ; and as we sail near the land , we see a great hill full of goodly tree of the bigness of the tree and cypress of Castille . we find in this hand the foot of wild beast and cony , and see a piece of pine tree-wood , whereof we gather , that there be store 256 of they in that country . thus sail near unto the shore , we see another Canoa come towards we with other four Indians , but it come not very near we , and as we look forward , we see towards a point which be very near before we , three other canoas , one at the head of the point among certain flatte , and the other two moor into the sea , that they may descry we without come over near we . likewise between certain hill which be near the point , there appear here three and there four of they , and afterward we see a small troop of some twenty of they together , so that all of we rejoice great to behold they . on this side the land show green with piece of plain ground which be near the sea , and likewise all those coast of hill show green , and be cover with many tree , although they grow not very thick together . here at evening we ride near the shore hard upon the say point , to see if we can speak with those Indians , and likewise to see if we can get fresh water , which now we want , and still as soon as we be come to a anchor , we see the indian show themselves on land come likewise to in a Canoa , by six and seven at a time , whereat we marvel , because we never think that one of those canoas will hold so many man . in this wise we stay look still what will be the success , and in the place where we ride we be two small league distant from the shore , where we find these Indians in their canoas : whereupon we marvel not a little to see so great a alteration in so small a distance of country , as well because we still discover pleasant land with tree ( whereas on the other side of the isle there be none ) as also because it be so well people with Indians , which have so many canoas mad of wood , as we may discern , and not raft or Balsas , for so they Balsa be a call those float which be make all flat with cane . flat raft make the next day be Thursday the fifteen of the say cane ' month about break of day four or five Indians show ix 257 r near unto their lodging , themselves at the head of that point , who as soon as they have spy we retire behind the point , and hide themselves among the bush upon certain small hill that be there , from whence they issue forth , and cover all the green hill and mountain , which be along that coast ; whereupon we gather that they have their dwelling there , in regard of the commodity of the water and the defence against ill weather and the benefit of fish . at sunrising we see the indian appear in great company , go up unto the hill in small troop , and from thence they stand and behold we . immediate we see five or six canoas come out into the sea a good distance from we , and those which be in they stand often on their tiptoe , to view and descry we the better . on the other side we stir not at all for all these their gesture , but stand still ride at anchor ; and the generali seem not to be very willing to take any of they , but this day in the morning very early command the master mate to convey he to our other ship call the Trinity . thing pass in this sort , when about ten of the clock we see three canoas launch far into the sea to fish very near unto we , whereat we take great pleasure . at 12 of the clock the generali return from the Trinity and command the boat and man to be make ready , as well soldier as mariner , and that we shall go on shore to see if we can get any wood and water , and catch one of those Indians to understand their language if it be possible : and so all the man that be ready go into the admiral boat , and go towards the Trinity which by this time with the other ship have a small gale of wind , wherewith they enter far within the point , and we discover the lodging and house of the Indians , and see near the water side those five or six canoas which at the first come out to view we , draw on shore , and over against this place the ship cast anchor in 30 and 35 fathom water , and we be very near the land ; whereat we marvel much to find so great 258 depth of water so near the shore . be go aboard our boat , we make towards the shore over against a village of the Indians , who as soon as they see we village of about to come on land , leave a hill whereon they stand the indians-to behold what we do , and come down to the shore , where we be prepare to come on land : but before they come against we they cause their woman and child to fly into the mountain with their good , and then come direct towards we , threaten we with certain great staff which they carry in their hand some 3 yard long and thick than a man wrist : but perceive that for all this we cease not to come near the sea shore to come on land , they begin to charge we with stone and to fling cruel at we , and they hit skirmish of 4 or c man , among who they smite the generali with ilians two stone . in the mean while the other boat land stone . a little beneath , whereupon when they see that they be force to divide themselves to keep the rest of our company from come on land , they begin to be discourage , and do not assail the general boat so fierce , who begin to cause his people to go on shore with no small trouble ; for albeit he be near the land , yet as soon as they leap out of the boat they sink down , because they can find no fast foot ; and thus swim or otherwise as they can , first a soldier call Spinosa get on land , and next to he the general , and then some of the rest , and begin to make head against the Indians , and they come hasty with those staff in their hand , for other kind of weapon we see none , save bow and arrow of pinetree . after a short combat they break in piece the target of the generali , and of Spinosa . in the mean while those of the other boat be get on land , but not without much difficulty , by reason of the multitude of stone which continual rain down upon they , and they strike Terazzo on the head a use very shroud blow , and have it not be for our target , against arrow many of we have be wound , and in great distress , and stone . 2.59 although our enemy be but few in number . in this manner all our company come on shore with swim and with great difficulty , and if they have not help one another , some of they have be drown . thus we land , and within a while after those of the other boat be come on land , the Indians betake themselves to flight , take their way towards the mountain , whether they have send their woman , child and good : on the other side we pursue they , and one of those Indians which come to assail the general boat , be slay upon the strand , and two or three other be wound , and some say more . while we pursue they in this manner our mastive dog Berecillo overtake one of they not far from we ( who because we be so wet can not run very theuseofma - fast ) and pull he down , have bite he cruel , arr ” against and doubtless he have hold he till we have come , Indians . unless it have happen that another of his companion have not follow that Indian which the dog have pull down , who with a staff which he have in his hand give the dog a cruel blow on the back , and without any stay draw his fellow along like a deer , and Berecillo be fain to leave he for pain , neither have he scarce take the dog off on he , but the indian get up , and flee so hasty toward the mountain , that within a short while he overtake his fellow which have save he from the paw of the dog , who ( as it appear ) betake he lusty to his heal , and thus they come unto their fellow which descend not down to the shore be about some twenty , and they be in all about fifty or sixty . [ Iii . 418. ] after we have breathe our self a while , we view their house where they stand , which be certain cottage cover with shrub like broom and rosemary , with certain stake pight in the ground ; and the generali will we to march all together without disperse of our self , a little way up those mountain , to see if there be any water and wood , because we 260 stand in great need of they both . and while we march forward , we see in certain little valley the good which the woman have leave there behind they in their flight : for the Indians as soon as they see we pursue they overtake the woman , and for fear charge they to fly away with their child leave their stuff in this place . we go unto this booty , and find good store of freshfish , and dry fish , and certain bag contain above 28 pound weight full of dry fish ground to powder , and many seal-skin , the most part dress with a fair white grain upon they , and other very bad dress . there be also their instrument to fish withal , as hook make of the prick of certain shrub and tree . here we take the say skin without leave any one in the place , and then we return to the sea , because it be now night , or at least very late , and find our boat wait for we . Chap. 13. a description of the canoas of the Indians of the he of cedar , and how coast the same to find fresh water they find some , and desire to take thereof they go on shore , and be diverse molest with the weapon of the Indians . they christen a old indian , and return unto their ship . the canoas which they have be certain thick trunk of cedar , some of they of the thickness of two man , and three fathom long , be not make hollow at all , but be lay along and fasten together , they shove they into the sea , neither be they plain to any purpose , for we find no kind of edgetool , save that there be certain sharp stone , which we find upon certain rock that be very keen , wherewith we suppose that they do cut and flay those seal . and near the shore we find certain water , wherewith we fill certain bottle make of the skin of those seal , contain each of they above a great pail of water . the next day our generali command we to 261 seale-skws well dress with a white grain . Isla de id cedros , or the lie of cedar in 28 deg . and a quarter . the english voyage set sail , whereupon sail with a fresh gale about 2 league from the shore of this hand , trending about the same to see the end thereof , and also to approach near the firm land , to inform our self of the state thereof , because we have see 5 or 6 fire , we compass the same about : for by this mean we perform 2 or 3 good action , namely , we return to our right course , and search whether any river fall out of the coast of the firm land , or whether there be any tree there , or whether any store of Indians do show themselves or no . in this manner proceed on our way all the Friday be the 16 of January at evening , and seek to double the point of the hand , so fierce and contrary a northern wind encounter we , that it drive we back that night over against the lodging and habitation of the Indians , and here we stay all Saturday , what time we lose the Trinity again , but on sunday-night be the 18 we see she again , and begin to proceed on our way to compass that hand , if it please God to send we good weather . on Sunday , Monday , and Tuesday ( which be the twenty of the say month of Januarie ) we sail with scarce and contrary wind , and at length come to the cape of the point of the hand , which we call Isla de los cedros or the he of cedar , because that on the top of the mountain therein , there grow a wood of these cedar be very tall , as the nature of they be to be . this day the Trinity descry a village or town of the Indians , and find water : for on Sunday night we have new lose she , and have no sight of she until Tuesday , whenas we find she ride near the shore , not far from those cottage of the Indians . and as soon as we have descry she , we make towards she , and before we can reach she , we espy three canoas of Indians which come hard aboard the say ship call the Trinity , so that they touch almost the side of the ship , and give they of their fish , and our people 262 on the other side give they certain trifle in exchange , and after they have speak with they , the Indians go back to the shore , and at the same instant we come up unto the admiral and ride by they , and they all salute we , say that the indian be near they , and tell what have pass between they , whereat the generali and we receive great contentment . they tell we moreover , that they have find fresh water , whereby they increase our great joy , because we stand in much need thereof , for at the other place of the Indians we can get but a little . while we thus ride at anchor , we see a Canoa with 3 Indians put out into the sea from their cottage , and they go unto a fish place , among certain great and high weed , which grow in this sea among certain rock , the great part of which weed grow in 15 or 20 fathom depth ; and with great celerity they catch seven or eight fish , and return with they unto the Trinity , and give they unto they , and they in recompense give the indian certain trifle . after this the Indians stay at the stern of the ship , view the same above three hour space , and take the oar of our boat they try how they can row with they , whereat they take great pleasure ; and we which be in the admiral stir not a whit all this while , to give they the more assurance , that they shall not fly away , but shall see , that we mean to do they no harm , and that we be good people . as soon as we be come to anchor , and behold all that have pass between the Indians and those of the Trinity , after the indian be go to the shore in their canoas make of the body of tree , the general command the boat which be without to be these mighty deep and high weed be describe in the end of this treatise . [ Iii . 419. ] bring unto he : and when it be come , he , and Francis Preciado , and two other go into it , and so we go aboard the Trinity . the Indians see people come out of the other ship into the Trinity , send two canoas unto the stern of the ship , and bring we a bottle of water , and we give unto they certain 263 bead , and continue talk with they a little while ; but evening approach the air grow somewhat cold . the indian return on shore to their lodging , and the general and we to our ship . the next day be Wednesday in the morning , the general command certain of we to take the boat and go ashore , to see if we can find any brook or well of fresh water in the house of the Indians , because he think it unpossible for they to dwell there without any water to drink . the father friar Raimund likewise go out in our company , because the day before see the indian come to the stern of the ship and parley with we , he think he may have speak a little with they , with the like familiarity . in like sort many mariner and soldier go out in the boat of the Trinity , and go altogether with their weapon towards the shore , somewhat above the lodging of the Indians , very early in the morning they watch the boat , and perceive that we will come on land , whereupon they send away their woman and child with certain of they , who carry their good up into certain exceed steep mountain and hill , and 5 or 6 of they come towards we , which be excellent well make , and of a good stature . two of they have bow and arrow , and other two 2 bastinade much thick than the wrist of a man hand , and other two with 2 long staff like javelin with very sharp point , and approach very near we be now come on shore . And begin by sign very fierce to brave we , they come so near we , that almost they strike with one of those staff one of our soldier call Garcia a man of good parentage , but the general command he to withdraw himself , and not to hurt any of they . in the mean season the general and friar Raimund step forth , the friar lap a garment about his arm , because they have take up stone in their hand , fear that they will do they some mischief . then begin both of they to speak unto they by sign and word , to be quiet , signify , that they mean they no 264 1540-harme , but only be come to take water ; and the friar show they a drinking-cup ; but nothing will serve to make they leave that brag , and fling of stone : and the general continue still in a mind not to hurt they , command his man gentle to come near unto they , and that by sign they shall all show they , that they mean in no wise to hurt they , but that we be come on land only to take water . on the other side refuse utter to take knowledge of these thing they still insult more and more : whereupon Francis Preciado counsel the general to give he leave to kill one of they , because all the rest will flee away , whereby at our ease we may take water : but he reply that he will not have it so , but will they to looze the two mastiff Berecillo and Achillo : wherefore the dog be let loose , and as soon as they see they , they vanish immediate , betake they to their heal , and run up those cliff like goat . also other which come the great use from the mountain to succour they , betake they - °fmas^ve^^ self to flight . the dog overtake two or they , and indan . bit they a little , and we run after , lay hold on they , and they seem as fierce as wild and untamed beast , for 3 or 4 of we hold either of they , to cherish and pacific they , and to seek to give they some thing : but we avail not , for they bite we by the hand , and stoop down to take up stone for to strike we with they . we lead they a while in this manner , and come unto their lodging , where the generali give a charge , that no man shall touch any thing of they , command Francis Preciado to see that this order be observe , in not take any thing from they , although in very deed there be little or nothing there , because the woman and Indians which be flee have carry all away . here we find a old man in a cave so extreme age as it be wonderful , which can neither see nor go , because he be so lame and crooked . the father friar Raimund say , it be good ( see he be so age ) to make he a Christian ; whereupon we christen he . the captain 265 give the Indians which we have take two pair of earring , and certain counterfeit diamond , and make much of they , suffy they to depart at their pleasure , and in this sort fair and soft they return to the rest of their fellow in the mountain . we take the matter [ three . 420. ] of that village which be but a small quantity , and then the generali command we to return to our ship , because we have eat nothing as yet , and after our repast we sail towards a bay which lie beyond that village , where we see a very great valley , and those of the Trinity say , that they have see there good store of water , and sufficient for we ; wherefore we anchor near unto that valley . and the generali go on shore with both the boat , and the man that go on land in the morning with the two father friar Raimund , and friar Antony : and pass up that valley a crossebow-shot , we find a very small brook of water which nevertheless supply our necessity for we fill two butt thereof that evening , leave our vessel to take it with on shore until the next morning : and we rejoice not a little that we have find this water , for it be fresh , and the water which we have take up before be somewhat brackish , and do we great hurt both in our body and in our taste . Chap. 14. they take possession of the isle of cedar for the emperors majesty , and depart from thence they be great toss with a tempest of the sea , and return to the island , as to a safe harbour . the next day be the two and twenty of January very early the general command we to go on shore , and that we shall have our dinner bring we , and shall take in the rest of our water , which we do , and fill 17 butt without see any indian at all the next day go out to fill 8 or 9 vessel which be not yet fill , a great wind at northwest take we , whereupon they make sign to we from the ship , that with all haste we shall come on board again , for the wind grow 266 .... I54°‘ still high , and high , and the master be afraid that our cable will break , thus we be in the open sea . therefore be come aboard again not without great trouble , we return back over against the village of the Indians , * where we have slay the indian , and be - Cap. 12. cause the wind grow more calm about midnight , the pilot do not cast anchor , but hull under the shelter of this island , which ( as i have say ) be call the isle of isladehsge-cedar , and be one of the 3 isle of S. Stephan , the great and chief of they , where the general take possession . while we hull here , about midnight , the Stephan . next Friday be the 23 of the month , without our expectation we have a fresh gale of wind from the southeast , which be very favourable for our voyage , and the long it continue , the more it increase : so that between that night and the next day be Saturday the 24 of the say month we sail 18 great league . while read cap . 11. we be thus on our way , the wind grow so contrary a^out the end-and so tempestuous , that to our great grief we be constrain to coast about with our ship , and return twenty league back again , take for our succour the second time , the point of the lodging of the Indians , where the foresay Indian be slay , and here we stay Monday , Tewsday , and Wednesday , during which time the northwest and the north wind blow continual , whereupon we determine not to stir from thence until we see good weather , and well settle for our voyage : for in this climate these wind do reign so great , that we fear they will stay we long there than we will ; and we be so weary of stay , that every day seem a month unto we . under this shelter we ride Thursday , Friday , and Saturday until noon , which be the last of January in the year 1540 about noon the wind begin to blow soft at Southwest , whereupon the general tell the pilot , that we shall do well to put over to the main land , where with some wind off the shore we may by the grace of God sail somewhat far . thus we hoist our sail , February . 267 the english voyage and sail until evening three or four league , for the wind scant , and we remain becalm . the night be come there arise a contrary wind , and we be enforce of necessity to retire the three time to the same shelter of the isle of cedar , where we stay from the first of February until Shrovesunday , in the which mean time we take in two butt of water which we have spend . during the space of these eight day we seek to make sail two or three time , but as we go out a little beyond the point of this isle , we find the wind so boisterous and contrary , and the sea so grow , that of force we be constrain to return under the succour of the island , and often time we be in great fear that we shall not be able to get in thither again . during this time that we can not proceed on our journey , we employ our self in catch a few fish for the Lent. from Shrovesunday be the 8 of February , on which day we set sail , we sail with a very scant wind , or rather a calm , until shrove-tewsday , on which we come within ken of the firm land , from whence we be put back these twenty league ( for in these two day and a half we sail some 20 small league ) and we lay in sight of the say point of the firm land . and on the Tewsday we be becalm , wait till God of his mercy will help we with a prosperous wind to proceed on our voyage . on Shrovesunday at night , to make good cheer withal we have so great wind and rain , that there be nothing in our ship which be not wet , and a very cold air . on Ash-wednesday at sunrising we strike sail near a point which we fall somewhat short withal in a great bay run into this firm land : and this be the place where we see five or six fire , and at the rise of the sun be so near the shore that we may well descry and view it at our pleasure we see it to be very pleasant , for we descry as far as we can discern with our eye , fair valley and small hill , with green shrub very pleasant to 268 behold , although there grow no tree there . the situation show their length and breadth . this day be little wind , it be in a manner calm , to our no small grief : and the father friar Raimund say we a dry mass , and give we ash , preach unto we accord to the time and state wherein we be : with which sermon we be great comfort . after noontide we have contrary wind , which still be our enemy in all our journey , at the least from the point of the port of Santa Cruz. here we be constrain to anchor in five fathom water , and after we ride at anchor we begin to view the country , and take delight in behold how goodly and pleasant it be , and near unto the sea we judge that we see a valley of white ground . at evening so great a tempest come upon we of wind and rain , that it be so fearful and dangerous a thing that a great can be express ; for it have like to have drive we upon the shore , and the chief pilot cast out another great anchor into the sea , yet all will not serve , for both these anchor can not stay the ship . whereupon all of we cry to God for mercy , attend to see how he will dispose of we ; who of his great goodness , while we be in this danger , vouchsafe a little to slake the tempest , and with great speed the chief pilot command the mariner to turn the capsten , and the generali command and pray all the soldier to help to turn the capsten , which they be nothing slow to perform : and thus we begin to weigh our anchor , and in weigh of one which be far great than the other , the sea be so boisterous that it force the capsten in such sort , that the man which be at it can not rule the same , and it strike a negro of the general such a blow , that it cast he down along upon the deck , and do the like unto another mariner and one of the bar strike our fire-furnace so violent , that it cast it overboard into the sea . yet for all these trouble we weigh our anchor , and set sail , and albeit we have great tempest at sea , yet make we not 269 the point of Santa Cruz otherwise call Punta de balenas . account thereof in respect of the joy which we conceive to see our self free of the peril of be cast on that shore with our ship , especial see it fall out at midnight , at which time no man can have escape , but by a mere miracle from God . we sail up and down the sea all Thursday , and until Friday in the morning be then fourteen day of February , and the wave of the sea continual come rake over our deck . at length , on Saturday morning at break of day we can find no remedy against the contrary wind , notwithstanding the generali be very obstinate to have we keep out at sea , although it be very tempestuous , lest we shall be drive to put back again , but no diligence nor remedy prevail : for the wind be so boisterous and so contrary , that they can not be worse , and the sea go still high , and swell more and more , and that in such sort , that we great fear we shall all perish . whereupon the pilot think it our best course to return to the isle of cedar , whither we have repair three or four time before by reason of the self same contrary wind , for we take this island for our father and mother , although we receive no other benefit thereby save this only , namely , to repair thither in these necessity , and to furnish our self with water , and with some small quantity of fish . be therefore arrive at this island , and ride under the shelter thereof , the contrary wind do always blow very strong , and here we take water which we drink , and wood for our fuel , and great desire , that the wind will be more favourable for proceed on our journey . and though we ride under the shelter of the isle , yet feel we the great fury of those wind , and the rage of the sea , and our ship never cease roll . at break of day the twenty of February we find the cable of our admiral crack , whereupon , to our great grief , we be constrain to set sail , to fall down low the space of a league , and the Trinity come and ride in our company . 270 [ three . 422. ] they go on land in the isle of cedar , and take diverse wild beast , and refresh and solace themselves . they be strange toss with the northwest wind , and seek often to depart they be force , for the avoid of many mischief , to repair thither again for harbour . the two and twenty of February be the second Sunday in Lent , the general go on shore with the great part of his people and the friar , near unto a valley which they see before they . And hear mass on land , certain soldier and mariner , with certain dog which we have in our company go into the say valley , and we meet with certain deer , whereof we take a female , which be little , but fat , who hair be like the hair of a wild goat then of a dear , and we find she not to be a perfect dear , for she have four dug like unto a cow full of milk , which make we much to marveile . and after we have flay off her skin , the flesh seem more like the flesh of a goat , then of a dear . we kill likewise a grey conie , in shape like unto those of Nueva Espanna , and another as black as heben-wood . in the cottage at the shelter above , where we break our cable , we find many pinenut open , which ( in my opinion ) the Indians have gather together to eat the kernel of they . on Monday the 23 of the say month we ride at anchor , take our pleasure and pastime with fish . and than northwest wind begin to blow , which wax so great a little before midnight , as it be wonderful : so that although we be under the shelter of the island , and great defend from that wind , yet for all that it be so furious , and the sea become so rage and boisterous , that it great shake our ship , and we be in great fear of break our cable , whereof ( to say the truth ) we have very much need : for have spend long time in this voyage than we look for , we have break two , and 271 lose two of our best anchor . this furious wind continue until the next day be Tewsday the 24 when as we go on shore with the friar , who say we mass , recommend our self to God , beseech he to vouchsafe to succour and help we with some good weather that we may proceed on our voyage , to the advancement of his service . and still the wind be so high and outrageous , that the devil seem to be loose in the air . whereupon the pilot cause all the mast to be let down , lest they shall be shake with the wind , and take off all the shrowd , and likewise cause the cabbens in the stern to be take away , that the wind may have more free passage , for the safety of the ship : yet for all this they cease not to be in great trouble . on Tewsday the second of march , about midnight or somewhat after , ride under the island in this distress , there come a gust of northwest wind , which make the cable of the admiral to slip , and the Trinity break her cable , and have be cast away , if God of his mercy have not provide for we , together with the diligence which the pilot use , in hoist the sail of the trinket and mizzen , wherewith they put to sea , and ride by another anchor until day , when the man of both the ship go with their boat to seek the anchor until noon , which at length they find and recover , not without great pain and diligence which they use in drag for it , for they be till noon in seek the same , and have much ado to recover it . after this we set up our shrowd , and all thing necessary to sail , for to proceed on our voyage , if it please God , and not to stay always in that place , as lose and forlese . thus on the Wednesday two or three hour after dinner we set sail , with a scarce wind at southeast , which be favourable for our course and very scant ; and our pilot 8c all the rest of we be in no small fear , that it will not continue long . we begin therefore to set forward , although we seem to see before our eye , that at the end of the 272 island we shall meet with contrary wind at north and northwest . this day about evening when our ship have discover the point of this isle of cedar , we begin to perceive those contrary wind , and the sea to go so lofty , that it be terrible to behold . and the far we go , the more the wind increase , so that they put we to great distress , sail always with the sheate of our mainesaile and trinket wary in our hand , and with great diligence we loose the tie of all the sail , to save they the better , that the wind may not charge they too vehement . for all this the mariner think it best to return back , and that by no mean we shall run far into the sea , because we be in extreme danger . whereupon we follow their counsel , turn back almost to the place from whence we depart , whereat we be all not a little grieve , because we can not prosecute our voyage , and begin to want many thing for the furniture of our ship . the 8 of march be Monday about noon the generali command we to set sail , for a small gale of wind blow from the west , which be the wind whereof we have most need , to follow our voyage , whereat we be all glad for the great desire which we have to depart out of that place . therefore we begin to set sail , and to pass towards the point of the island , and to shape our [ three . 423. ] course towards the coast of the firm land , to view the situation thereof . and as we pass the island , and be betwixt it and the main , then northwest be a contrary wind begin to blow , which increase so by degree , that we be constrain to let fall the bonnet of our sail , to save they , strike they very low . and the Trinity see this bad weather return forthwith unto the place from whence we depart , and the admiral cast about all night in the sea , until the morning ; and the chief pilot consider that by no mean we can proceed far without danger , if we shall continue at sea any long , resolve that we shall retire our self again to that shelter , where we ride at ix 273 sister anchor until Thursday . and on Friday about noon we set sail again with a scarce wind , and in come forth unto the point of the island , we meet again with contrary wind at northwest : whereupon run all night with the firm land , on Saturday in the morning be saint Lazarus day and the 13 of march , we come in sight thereof , in view of the which we all rejoice , and we soldier will very willing have go on shore . this night fall great store of rain like the rain in Castilia , and we be all well wet in the morning , and we take great pleasure in behold the situation of Thefirmeland that firm land , because it be green , and because we very green and discover a pleasant valley and plain of good ^gomy valley largenesj which seem to be environ with a garland and plain . of mountain . at length for fear of misfortune , see the sea so high , we dare not stay here or approach near the land , and because we have great want of cable and anchor , we be again constrain to put to sea ; and be in the same , and find the say contrary wind , the pilot judge that we have none other remedy , but again to retire our self to our wont shelter . and thus we return , but somewhat above the old place . on Sunday we ride here to the great grief of all the company , consider what trouble we endure , and can not get forward ; so that this be such a corrasive , as none can be more intolerable . this day be come to a anchor we have a mighty gale of wind at northwest , which be our adversary and capital enemy , and when day be shut in , it still grow great and great , so that the ship roll much . and after midnight , towards break of day , the Trinity break she two cable , which hold the two anchor which she have , and see her self thus forlese , she turn up and down in the sea until day , and come and ride near we , by one anchor which she have leave . this day all of we go to seek these lose anchor , and for all the diligence which we use , we can find but one of they . we ride at anchor all day until night , when 274 than Trinity again break a cable , which certain rock have cut asunder : whereupon the general command that she shall ride no long at anchor , but that she shall turn up and down , as she have do before in sight of we , which she do all day long , and at night she come to a anchor over against a fresh water somewhat low , and we go and ride hard by she . on Palme-sunday we go on shore with the father , which read the passion unto we and say mass , and we go in procession with branch in our hand . and so be comfort , because we have receive that holy sacrament , we return to our ship . Chap. 16. return to the isle of cedar weather-beaten , and with their ship in evil case , they conclude , that the ship call Santa Agueda or Santa Agatha shall return unto Nueva Espanna . of the multitude of whale which they find about the point of California : with the description of a weed , which grow among the island of those sea . here we continue until the Wednesday before Easter be the four and twenty of march , on which day we consult together , that because the ship be ill condition , and want necessary furniture to proceed any further , it be best for we to return back to new Spain , as also because our clothes be consume : but the generali seem not willing to return , but to proceed on his voyage : and in fine it be resolve , that see both the ship can not proceed forward , as well because they have lose their necessary furniture , as also that the Santa Agatha have need of calk , because she receive much water , and be the worst furnish of the twain , that she shall return back to advertise the mark of our success in this voyage , and what hinder our proceed , and in what case we stand , and how we be bereave of our necessary furniture . and because the Trinity be 275 A.D. J54O . the swift ship , and better appoint than the other , it be conclude , that it shall be provide in the best manner that may be , and that the general shall proceed on his journey in she with such company as he shall make choice of , and that the rest shall return at their good leisure . wherefore upon this determination we go under a point of this island , because it be a fit place to carene the ship : and in recover the same we spend Wednesday , Thursday , and Friday till noon , and yet for all that we can not well double it , until Easter day about noon . here we anchor very near the shore , and in a valley we find very excellent fresh water , whereof we make no small account , and here stay all the easter-holiday , to set our self about the furnish up of the Trinity : and [ three . 424. ] after the work be take in hand by the two master which be very sufficient calker ( one of which be Juan castiliano chief pilot , and the other Peruccio de Bermes ) they finish the same so well in five day , as it be wonderful ; for no man can perceive how any drop of water can enter into any of the seam . afterwards they mend the other ship from Saturday till Monday , during which time all those be shrive that have not confess , and receive the communion , and it be resolve by charge of the confessor , that all those seal-skin which they have take from the Indians shall be restore again ; and the generali give charge to Francis Preciado to restore they all , charge he on his conscience so to do . thus they gather they together , and deliver they into the hand of the father , to be keep until they return to the place , the Santa where they be to restore they . after this manner on Monday before noon we take our leaf of the New-spaine generali Francis Ulloa , and of the people that stay the 5. of with he , who at our departure shed no small number April . of tear , and we choose for our captain in the Santa Agueda master Juan castiliano the chief pilot , as well of the ship , as of we all , and set sail the same day 276 be the five of April , have our boat tie at our stern , till we come over against the cottage , whence we have take the seal-skin . from the country of the °f the Christians and the port of Colima we be now distant some three hundred league , which be the first port where we determine to touch at . and have sail a league from the Trinity the captain Juan castiliano command we to salute they with three piece of great ordinance , and she answer we with other three , and afterward we answer one another with two shot apiece . we sail on Monday and * Tewsday till noon with ThesixtoJ contrary wind in sight of the island , and at noon we have a fresh gale in the poop , which bring we over against the cottage of the Indians where we take away those seal skin ; and there certain soldier and mariner with the father friar Antony de Melo leap on shore with the boat , carry the skin with they , and fling they into the say cottage out of which they be take , and so return to their ship . this day the then quoth of weather calm , whereupon we be drive to cast anchor , ^P^ fear that we shall forthwith be distress for want of victual , if we shall stay there any long time : but God which be the true helper provide better for we than we deserve or imagine ; for as we ride here , they sail after midnight the Wednesday follow before ten the clock we have a favourable gale of wind from they the point of southeast , which put we into the sea ; whither be santa Cruz drive , we have the wind at northwest so good and con - or California stant , that in six day it bring we to the cape of the tn stxe point of the port of Santa Cruz : for which so great blessing of God we give unto he infinite thanks . and here we begin to allow our self a great proportion of victual than we have do before , for we have eat very spare for fear lest our victual will fail we . before we come to this point of the haven of Santa Cruz by six or seven league we see on shore between certain valley diverse great smoke . and have pass 277 read more of these vieede cap . 13. Sant Iago de buena esfer-anza in 19 degree . Cabo deal en-gtinno in 30 degree in a half . the english voyage the point of this port , our captain think it good to launch forth into the main ocean : yet although we run a swift course , above 500 whale come athwart of we in 2 or 3 skull within one hour space , which be so huge , as it be wonderful , and some of they come so near unto the ship , that they swim under the same from one side to another , whereupon we be in great fear , lest they shall do we some hurt , but they can not because the ship have a prosperous and good wind , and make much way , whereby it can receive no harm , although they touch and strike the same . among these island be such abundance of those weed , that if at any time we be enforce to sail over they they hinder the course of our ship . they grow fourteen or fifteen fathom deep under the water , their top reach four or five fathom above the water . they be of the colour of yellow wax , and their stalk grow great proportionable . this weed be much more beautiful than it be set forth , and no marvel , for the naturali painter and creator thereof be most excellent . this relation be take out of that which Francis Preciado bring with he . after this ship the Santa Agueda depart from the generali Ulloa , and return back the 5 of April , she arrive in the port of Sant Iago de bvena esperan^a the 18 of the say month , and after she have stay there four or five day , she depart for Acapulco : howbeit until this present seventeenth of May in the year 1540 , i have hear no tiding nor news of she . Moreover after the departure of the Santa Agueda for Nueva Espanna , the general Francis Ulloa in the ship call the Trinity proceed on his discovery coast the land until he come to a point call Cabo deal Enganno stand in thirty degree and a half of northerly latitude , and then return back to Newspaine , because he find the wind very contrary , and his victual fail he . 278 