very good fortune , in that i find don Luis de Castilia , the port of and Augustine Ghenero in the port of Colima : for the Colima . Galiot of the adolantado come upon i , which be there with the rest of his fleet , and command i to strike sail , which seem a strange thing unto i , and not understand in what state thing be in Nueva Espanna , i go about to defend my self , and not to do it . in the mean while come don Luis de Castilia in a boat and confer with i , and i lay at anchor on the other side of the haven where the say fleet road , and i give unto he this relation ( and to avoid strife i determine to sail away by night ) which relation i carry about i brief write ; for i always have a purpose to send the same , as soon as i shall touch upon Nueva Espanna , to advertise your lordship of my proceed . a extract of a spanish letter write from Pueblo de los angel in Nueva Espanna in October 1597 , touch the discovery of the rich isle of California , be distant eight day sail from the main . e have see a letter write the eight of October 1597 , out of a town call Pueblo de los angel situate eighteen league from Mexico , make mention of the hand of California situate two or three hundred league from the main land of Nueva Espanna , in mar deal Sur : as that thither have be send before that time some people to conquer they : which with loss of some twenty man be force back . after that they have well visit and find those island or country to be very rich of gold and silver mine , and of very fair Orientali pearl , which be catch in good quantity upon one fathom and a half pass in beauty the pearl of the island Margarita : the report thereof cause the viceroy of Mexico to send a citizen of Mexico with two hundred man to conquer 318 ... I578 , the same . therein also be affirm that within eight day they can sail thither from the main . the course which sir Francis Drake hold from [ he . 440. ] the haven of Guatulco in the south sea on the back side of Nueva Espanna , to the northwest of California as far as fourty three degree : and his return back along the say coast to thirty eight degree : where find a fair and goodly haven , he land , and stay there many week , and discover many excellent thing in the country and great show of rich minerail matter , and be offer the dominion of the country by the lord of the same , he take possession thereof in the behalf of her majesty , and name it Nova Albion . i keep our course from the isle of canon ( which lie in eight degree of northerly latitude , and within two league of the main of Nicaragua , where we calk and trim our ship ) along the coast of Nueva Espanna , until we come to the haven and town of Guatulco , which ( as we be inform ) have but seventeen Spaniards dwell in it , and we find it to stand in fifteen degree and fifty minute . assoon as we be enter this haven we land , and go present to the town , and to the town house , where we find a judge sit in judgement , he be associate with three other officer , upon three negro that have conspire the burn of the town : both which judge , and prisoner we take , and bring they a shippeboord , and cause the chief judge to write his letter to the town , to command all the townsman to avoid , that we may safe water there . 319 