a letter write by the most honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy of Nueva Espanna , to the emperor majesty . of certain nobleman which seek to discover the end of the firm land of Nueva Espanna towards the north . the arrival of Vazquez de Coronado with Frier Marco at S. Michael of culiacan , with commission to the governor of those part , to pacific the Indians , and not to make they slave any more . n the ship that go last from hence ( whereof Michael de Usnago be admiral ) i write unto your majesty , how i have send two franciscan friar to discover the end of this firm land , which stretch to the north . and because their journey fall out to great purpose then be look for , i will declare the whole matter from the beginning . it may please your majesty to call to mind how often i write unto your highness , that i desire to know the end of this province of Nueva Espanna , because it be so great a country , and that we have yet no knowledge thereof . neither have i only this desire ; for Nunno de Guzman depart out of this city of Mexico with 400. horseman , and 14000. Indians footman bear in these India , be the best man , and the best furnish , which have be see in these part : and he do so little with they , that the most part of they be consume in the enterprise , and can not enter nor discover any more than already be discover . after this the say Nunno Guzman be governor of Nueva Galicia , send captains and horseman forth diverse time , which speed no better than he have do . likewise the mark de valle Hernando Cortes send a captain with 2. ship to discover the coast : which 2. ship and the captain perish . after that he send again 2. other ship , one of the which 121 this be the port of Santa Cruz , in the isle of California . [ HL 365 - ] the english voyage be divide from her consort , and the master and certain mariner slay the captain , and usurp over the ship . after this they come to a island , where the master with certain mariner go on land , the Indians of the country slay they , and take their boat : and the ship with those that be in it , return to the coast of Nueva Galicia , where it run on ground . by the man which come home in this ship , the mark have knowledge of the country which they have discover : and then , either for the discontentment which he have with the bishop of saint Domingo , and with the judge of this royal audience in Mexico , or rather because of he so prosperous success in all thing here in Nueva Espanna , without seek any far intelligence of the state of that island , he set forward on that voyage with 3. ship , and with certain footman and horseman , not thorough furnish with thing necessary ; which fall out so contrary to his expectation , that the most part of the people which he carry with he , die of hunger . and although he have ship , and a country very near he abound with victual , yet can he never find mean to conquer it , but rather it seem , that God miraculous do hide it from he : and so he return home without achieve aught else of moment . after this , have here in my company Andrew Dorantez , which be one of those who be in the voyage of Panphilo Narvaez , i often be in hand with he , suppose that he be able to do your majesty great service , to employ he with forty or fifty horse , to search out the secret of those part : and have provide all thing necessary for his journey , and spend much money in that behalf , the matter be break off , i wot not how , and that enterprise be give over . yet of the thing which be provide for that purpose , i have leave i a negro , which return from the foresay voyage of Narvaez , with Dorantez , and certain slave which i have buy , and certain Indians which i have gather together , who be bear in those north part , who i send with 122 friar Marco de Ni^a , and his companion a franciscan friar , because they have be long travel , and exercise in those part , and have great experience in the affair of the Indies , and be man of good life and conscience , for who i obtain leave of their superior : and so they go with Francis Vazquez de Coronado , governor of Nueva Galicia unto the city of saint Michael of culiacan , which be the last province subdue by the Spaniard toward that quarter , be two hundred league distant from this city of Mexico . assoon as the governor , and the friar be come unto that city , he send certain of those Indians which i have give he , home into their country , to signify , and declare to the people of the same , that they be to understand , that your majesty have command they shall not hereafter be make slave , and that they shall not be afraid any more , but may return unto their house , and live peaceable in they , ( for before that time they have be great trouble by the evil deal which be use towards they ) and that your majesty will cause they to be chasten , which be the cause of their vexation . with these Indians about twenty day after return about 400 man ; which come before the governor say unto he , that they come on the behalf of all their countryman , to tell he , that they desire to see and know those man which do they so great a pleasure as to suffer they to return to their house , and to sow maiz for their sustenance : for by the space of many year they be drive to flee into the mountain , hide themselves like wild beast , for fear lest they shall be make slave , and that they and all the rest of their people be ready to do whatsoever shall be command they . who the governor comfort with good word , and give they victual , and stay they with he three or four day , wherein the friar teach they to make the sign of the cross , and to learn the name of our lord Jesus Christ , and they with great diligence seek to learn 123 A.D. 1539 - valle de lot Corazones mention by Vazquez de Coronado cap . i . the english voyage the same . after these day he send they home again , will they not to be afraid , but to be quiet , give they apparel , bead , knife , and other such like thing , which i have give he for such purpose . the say Indians depart very well please , and say , that whensoever he will send for they , they and many other will come to do whatsoever he will command they . the entrance be thus prepare , friar Marco and his companion , with the negro and other slave , and Indians which i have give he , go forward on their voyage io . or 12. day after . and because i have likewise advertisement of a certain province call Topira situate in the mountain , and have appoint the governor Vazquez de Coronado , that he shall use mean to learn the state thereof ; he suppose this to be a matter of great moment , determine himself to go and search it , have agree with the say friar , that he shall return by that part of the mountain , to meet with he in a certain valley call Valle de los Corazones , be 120. league distant from culiacan . the governor travel into this province ( as i have write in my former letter ) find great scarcity of victual there , and the mountain so craggy , that he can find no way to pass forward , and be enforce to return home to saint Michael : so that aswell in choose of the entrance , as in not be able to find the way , it seem unto all man , that God will shut up the gate to all those , which by strength of humane force have go about to attempt this enterprise , and have reveal it to a poor and barefooted friar . and so the friar begin to enter into the land , who because he find his entrance so well prepare , be very well receive ; and because he write the whole success of his voyage , accord to the instruction which i have give he to undertake the same , i will not write any more at large , but send your majesty this copy of all such thing as he observe in the same . 124 