... I578 , the same . therein also be affirm that within eight day they can sail thither from the main . the course which sir Francis Drake hold from [ he . 440. ] the haven of Guatulco in the south sea on the back side of Nueva Espanna , to the northwest of California as far as fourty three degree : and his return back along the say coast to thirty eight degree : where find a fair and goodly haven , he land , and stay there many week , and discover many excellent thing in the country and great show of rich minerail matter , and be offer the dominion of the country by the lord of the same , he take possession thereof in the behalf of her majesty , and name it Nova Albion . i keep our course from the isle of canon ( which lie in eight degree of northerly latitude , and within two league of the main of Nicaragua , where we calk and trim our ship ) along the coast of Nueva Espanna , until we come to the haven and town of Guatulco , which ( as we be inform ) have but seventeen Spaniards dwell in it , and we find it to stand in fifteen degree and fifty minute . assoon as we be enter this haven we land , and go present to the town , and to the town house , where we find a judge sit in judgement , he be associate with three other officer , upon three negro that have conspire the burn of the town : both which judge , and prisoner we take , and bring they a shippeboord , and cause the chief judge to write his letter to the town , to command all the townsman to avoid , that we may safe water there . 319 which be do , and they depart , we ransack the town , and in one house we find a pot of the quantity of a bushel full of royal of plate , which we bring to our ship . and here one Thomas Moone one of our company , take a spanish gentleman as he be fly out of the town , and search he , he find a chain of gold about he , and other jewel , which we take and so let he go . at this place our generali among other Spaniards , set a shore his Portugal pilot , which he take at the island of cape Verde , out of a ship of saint marie port of Portugal , and have set they a shore , we depart thence . our general at this place and time think himself both in respect of his private injury receive from the Spaniard , as also of their contempt and indignity offer to our country and prince in generail , sufficient satisfy , and revenge : and suppose that her majesty at his return will rest content with this service , purpose to continue no long upon the spanish coast , but begin to consider and to consult of the best way for his country . he think it not good to return by the strait , for two speciali cause : the one , lest the Spaniard shall there wait , and attend for he in great number and strength , who hand he be leave but one ship , can not possible escape . the other cause be the dangerous situation of the mouth of the strait of the south side , with continual ! storm rain and bluster , as he find by experience , beside the shoal and sand upon the coast , wherefore he think it not a good course to adventure that way : he resolve therefore to avoid these hazard , to go forward to the island of the Malucos , and therehence to sail the course of the Portugal by the cape of bona speranda . upon this resolution , he begin to think of his best way for the Malucos , and find himself , where he 320 now be , becalm , he see that of necessity he must be enforce to take a spanish course , namely to sail somewhat northerly to get a wind . we therefore set sail , and sail 800 league at the least for a good wind , and thus much we sail from the 16 of April after our old stile till the three of June . the five day of June be in forty three degree toward the pole arcticke , be speedy come out of the extreme heat , we find the air so cold , that our man be pinch with the same , complain of the extremity thereof , and the further we go , the more the cold increase upon we , whereupon we think it best for that time to seek land , and do so , find it not mountainous , but low plain land , and we draw back again without land , till we come within thirty eight degree towards the line . in which height it please God to send we into a fair and good bay , with a good wind to enter the same . in this bay we anchor the sevententh of June , and the people of the country , have their house close by the water side , show themselves unto we , and send a present to our generali . when they come unto we , they great wonder at the thing which we bring , but our generali ( accord to his naturali and accustom humanity ) courteous entreat they , and liberal bestow on they necessary thing to cover their nakedness , whereupon they suppose we to be god , and will not be persuade to the contrary : the present which they send unto our generali be feather , and call of net work . their house be dig round about with earth , and have from the uttermost brim of the circle cliff of wood set upon they , join close together at the top like a spire steeple , which by reason of that closeness be very warm . their bed be the ground with rush straw on it , and lie about the house , they have the fire in the midst . the man go naked , the woman take bulrush and ix 321 ten sir Francis Drake sail on the back side of America , to 43 degree of northerly latitude . 38 degree . [ HL 441. ] a description of the people and country of Nova Albion . the english voyage kemb they after the manner of hemp , and thereof make their loose garment , which be knit about their middle , hang down about their hip , have also about their shoulder a skin of deer , with the hair upon it . Theise woman be very obedient and serviceable to their husband . after they be depart from we , they come and visit we the second time , and bring with they feather and bag of tobacco for present : and when they come to the top of the hill ( at the bottom whereof we have pitch our tent ) they stay themselves , where one appoint for speaker , weary himself with make a long oration , which do , they leave their bow upon the hill and come down with their present . in the mean time the woman remain on the hill , torment themselves lamentable , tear their flesh from their cheek , whereby we perceive that they be about a sacrifice . in the mean time our generali , with his company , go to prayer , and to read of the scripture , at which exercise they be attentive and seem great to be affect with it : but when they be come unto we they restore again unto we those thing which before we have bestow upon they . the news of our be there be spread through the country , the people that inhabit round about come down , and among they the king himself , a man of a goodly stature , and comely personage , with many other tall and warlike man : before who coming be send two ambassador to our generali , to signify that their king be come , in do of which message , their speech be continue about half a hour . This end , they by sign request our generali to send something by their hand to their king , as a token that his come may be in peace : wherein our generali have satisfy they , they return with glad tiding to their king , who march to we with a princely majesty , the people cry continual after their manner , and as they draw near unto we , so do they 322 strive to behave themselves in their action with comeliness . in the fore front be a man of a goodly personage , who bear the sceptre , or mace before the king , whereupon hang two crown , a less and a big , with three chain of a merveilous length : the crown be make of knit work wrought artificial with feather of diverse colour ; the chain be make of a bony substance and few be the person among they that be admit to wear they : and of that number also the person be stint , as some ten , some twelve , etc next unto he which bear the sceptre , be the king himself , with his guard about his person , clad with conie skin , and other skin : after they follow the naked common these be like chain of Esurnoy in Canada and hochelage . sort of people , every one have his face paint , some with white , some with black , and other colour , and have in their hand one thing or other for a present , not so much as their child , but they also bring their present . in the mean time , our generali gather his man together , and march within his fence place , make against their approach , a very warlike show . they be troop together in their order , and a general salutation be make , there be present a generali silence . than he that bear the sceptre before the king , be inform by another , who they assign to that office , with a manly and lofty voice , proclaim that which the other speak to he in secret , continue half a hour : which end , and a generali amen as it be give , the king with the whole number of man , and woman ( the child except ) come down without any weapon , who descend to the foot of the hill , set themselves in order . in come towards our bulwark and tent , the sceptre bearer begin a song , observe his measure in a dance , and that with a stately countenance , who the king with his guard , and every degree of person follow , do in like manner sing and dance , save only 323 [ three . 442. ] the king resign his crown and kingdom to sir Francis drake . great riches in Nova Albion . the english voyage the woman which dance and keep silence . the general permit they to enter within our bulwark , where they continue their song and dance a reasonable time . when they have satisfy themselves , they make sign to our generali to sit down , to who the king , and diverse other make several oration , or rather supplication , that he will take their province and kingdom into his hand , and become their king , make sign that they will resign unto he their right and title of the whole land , and become his subject . in which to persuade we the better , the king and the rest , with one consent and with great reverence , joyful sing a song , do set the crown upon his head , enrich his neck with all their chain , and offer unto he many other thing , honour he by the name of Hioh , add thereunto as it seem a sign of triumph : which thing our generali thought not meet to reject , because he know not what honour and profit it may be to our country . wherefore in the name , and to the use of her majesty , he take the sceptre , crown and dignity of the say country in his hand , wish that the riches and treasure thereof may so convenient be transport to the enrich of her kingdom at home , as it abound in the same . the common sort of the people leave the king and his guard with our generali , scatter themselves together with their sacrifice among our people , take a diligent view of every person ; and such as please their fancy , ( which be the young ) they enclose they about offer their sacrifice unto they with lamentable weep , scratch , and tear the flesh from their face with their nail , whereof issue abundance of blood . but we use sign to they of dislike this , and stay their hand from force , and direct they upwards to the live God , who only they ought to worship . they show unto we their wound , and crave help of they at our hand , whereupon we give they lotion , plaster and ointment agree to 324 ... I578 , the state of their grief , beseech God to cure their disease . Every third day they bring their sacrifice unto we , until they understand our meaning , that we have no pleasure in they : yet they can not be long absent from we , but daily frequent our company to the hour of our departure , which departure seem so grievous unto they , that their joy be turn into sorrow . they entreat we , that be absent we will remember they , and by stealth provide a sacrifice , which we mislike . our necessary business be end , our generali great herd with his company travel up into the country to their °f deer . village , where we find herd of deer by a thousand in a company , be most large and fat of body . we find the whole country to be a warren of a abundance of strange kind of cony , their body in bigness as be stran&conies-the Barbary cony , their head as the head of we , the foot of a want , and the tail of a rat be of great length : under her chin on either side a bag , into the which she gather her meat when she have fill her belly abroad . the people eat their body , and make great account of their skin , for their king coat be make of they . Oure generali call this country , nova Albion , and Nova Albion . that for two cause : the one in respect of the white bank and cliff , which lie towards the sea : and the other , because it may have some affinity with our country in name , which sometime be so call . there be no part of earth here to be take up , gold and wherein there be not some speciali likelihood of gold or silver in the silver earth of Nova at our departure hence our generali set up a monument of our be there ; as also of her majesty right and title to the same , namely a plate nail upon a fair great post , whereupon be engrave her majesty name , the day and year of our arrival there , with the free give up of the province and people into her majesty hand , together with her highness picture and arm , in 325 a piece of six penny of current english money under the plate , where under be also write the name of our generali . it seem that the Spaniard hitherto have never be in this part of the country , neither do ever discover the land by many degree to the southward of this place . the true and perfect description of a voyage perform and do by Francisco the gualle a spanish captain and pilot , for the viceroy of new Spain , from the haven of Acapulco in new Spain , to the island of the lu^ones or philippinas , unto the haven of manilla , and from thence to the haven of Macao in China , and from Macao back again to Acapulco , accomplish in the year of our lord , 1584. Chap. 1. he ten of march in the year of our lord 1582 we set sail out of the haven of Acapulco , lie in the country of new Spain , direct our course towards the island of the Lugones , or philippinas west Southwest , run in that manner for the space of twenty five league , till we come under sixteen degree , that so we may shun the calm by sail close by the shore . from thence forward we hold our course west for the space of 30 league , and be there , we run west , and west and by south , for the space of 1800 [ three . 443. ] league , to the hand call Isla deal Enganno , which be the further hand lie in the south part of you hand call des los ladrone , that be , the hand of rover , or Islas de las Velas , under 13. degree and in latitude septentrionali , and 164. degree in longitude orientali , upon the fix meridionali line , which lie 326 