the voyage of master Andrew Barker of Bristol , with two ship , the one call the ragged staff , the other the bear , to the coast of terra firma , and the bay of Honduras in the west Indies , in the year 1576. wherein the reason be premise which move he to set forth this voyage against the Spaniard : collect out of certain note and examination touch this enterprise by m. Richard Hakluyt . irst of all Andrew Barker have abode in one of the canary island call tenerif for a certain time , and return home left behind he Charles Chester ( the son of Dominic Chester merchant of Bristol ) to learn the language . now the say Andrew Barker forthwith upon his arrival in England , in November , 1574 , freight a small ship ( name the Speedwell of Bristol ) to go for the canary with cloth and other merchandise of a great value . he send also one John draw of Bastable - as his factor to make sale and dispose of the say good , who when he arrive at tenerif , land the merchandise , and send home the bark with some small quantity of wine , make account to sell the say ware to great advantage in provide wine and sugar for the lade of another ship , which Andrew Barker have appoint to send thither . also accord to this his purpose the say Andrew in march follow send a ship call the Christopher of Dartmouth , captain whereof be one Henry Roberts of Bristol : who when he have land in tenerif , and be in good hope to find the lade of his ship in a readiness , contrary to his expectation , be sudden cast into prison : the Spaniard allege that Andrew Barker be accuse to the inquisition by Charles 82 Chester , whereupon his good be confiscate , his factor John Drue be attach , and he also ( the say captain Roberts ) be as they suppose barkers partner , be in like sort to be imprison . in fine all the foresay commodity appertain to the say Andrew and his brother m. John Barker and other to the value of 1700 pound and upward ( as it do appear by proof of record in the admiralty ) be utter lose , be confiscate to the say inquisition . howbeit captain Roberts by the mean of a friar be deliver out of prison ( which cost he all the merchandise he bring with he in his ship ) and so return with dead fraught to the sum of 200 pound that afterward Andrew Barker discharge . in recompense of which injury ( for that no suit prevail against the inquisition of Spain ) and also to recover his loss of the Spaniard themselves , at his own charge with the help of his friend he furnish two bark for the west Indies , the great of which bark be call the ragged staff , himself be captain , and Philip Roche master thereof , the other name the bear have one William Coxe of Limehouse for her master and captain . and thus all our company be embark at Plimmoth on Whitsonday in the begin of June , we set forward , and in our course we meet with a ship of London , and afterward with another ship , but take nothing from either of they . our first arrival be at one of the island of cape Verde , name Del sal , vz . the isle of salt , where we take certain fish Isla del sal . call tortoise : and there we remain one night and half the day follow . and from thence we come to the isle of Maio , be distant from Isla del [ he . 529. ] sal , 14 or 15 league , where we take in fresh water and traffic with certain Portugal inhabit in it that place , of who we have some victual for knife and bead : and there we remain one day and one night : but our trumpeter be treacherous slay by those Portugal , in revenge of which murder we set two village on fire two of their small village . from this island urnt - we shape our course over the main ocean towards the isle of the west Indies , and arrive happy at the island of Tnmdad . Trinidad , and have conference with certain Indians inhabitant thereof , who give we very friendly and courteous entertainment : and here we set up a pinnace which we carry forth in the ragged staff , and traffic with the foresay Indians for victual . and after we have spend six day in this place we the isle of depart , and arrive next at the isle of Margarita , Margarita . where we take a small spanish ship have in her certain pitch and 30 tun of canary wine whereof we reserve 4 or 5 ton to our self , dismiss they without any further damage . Thence ( have the isle of remain there a day ) we set sail to the island of Curazao . Curazao , where we remain a day and a night , and take in fresh water , at what time by the inhabitant of that island ( be few of they Spaniard , and the most part Indians ) 14 of our man be treacherous hurt , but none slay . and from thence we depart for the main land southwards , to a certain bay , and there we abide 3 day , but nothing of any reckon be cape de la there achieve . from thence we arrive at cape de Vela ' la Vela , where grow a contention between our captain m. Andrew Barker , and his master Philip Roche , upon comparison make between they concern the knowledge of navigation , and about other quarrel , which quarrel afterward be a occasion of further mischief . Tulu . hence we sail to the bay of Tulu ( which be about 18 league southwestward from Carthagena ) where we take a frigate and certain treasure therein to the value of 500 pound , namely bar of gold , and lingot of silver , and some quantity of corriento or coin in rial of plate , and certain green stone call emerald , whereof one very great , be set in gold , be find tie secret about the thigh of a friar . here have stay three day , and now be pursue by spanish man of war , we depart with the say treasure , and leave the frigate behind we , all 84 Andrew Barker which treasure at that instant be commit to the keep of our captain Andrew Barker . from thence we pass to number de dios , and so forth to the mouth of the river of Chagre 18 league distant from number de dios towards the northwest . there we land io of our man , who travel up into the wood three or four day to seek the Simerons , ( which be certain valiant negro flee from their cruel master the Spaniard , arid be become mortali enemy , ready to join with the english and french against they ) but in their search they can find none of they . and though our man return all free from peril of the enemy , yet the most part of the say ten person present fall sick , and diverse other of our company : so that within 14 day 8 or 9 of our man die of a disease call there the Calentura , which be a hot and vehement fever . And pass between Chagre and Veragua , we take a frigate , and some Veragua . quantity of gold we find therein . in this frigate be 23 Spaniard who we set on shore , and two Fleming , they we bring into England with we : we have therein also four cast piece of ordinance , 3 harquebuss on crock , 16 spanish caliver , and a book of navigation : and in this frigate some of our company come homeward into England . thus pass forward in our course , we come to Veragua , where captain Barker , and Philip Roche his master , fight upon the foresay quarrel , in which combat the captain be hurt a little in the cheek . here we sink our admiral the ragged staff , because of her great leakage , and embark part of our company in the spanish frigate , which immediate before we have surprise . from hence ( by the direction of certain Indians ) we sail into the gulf of the Honduras : the bay of there we take a bark wherein be rial of plate , to honduras-the value of 100 pound , Maiz or indian wheat , hen , beef and other small thing . in this bark also be certain Spaniard , whereof one be the Scrivano or a conspiracy against the captain . [ he . 53O - ] m. Andrew Barker and 8 other slay by the Spaniard . the town of Truxillo sack by the english . the english voyage secretary of Carthagena , who ( be a man of some note ) be put to his ransom , which be pay in gold : the rest be dismiss free . and after pass by diverse island , we arrive at a island call S. Francisco , be in the mouth of the great bay , call the Honduras . and within two day next after our arrival there , William Coxe and diverse other ( which for certain cause shall|be nameless ) come aboard the ship wherein the captain then be , and dispossess he as well of the say ship , as of the treasure in the same , and forthwith put our captain with violence on shore , where he arid one germane Weiborne fight together , and be both wound . after this our captain desirous to come on board , be resist by the person aforesaid , who answer he that he shall not come on board till they be ready to depart . our man have appoint ten person of their company for the keep of this island of S. Francisco : but about break of the day , on a certain morning , sixty Spaniards arrive secret in the island , surprise our people on the sudden , what time there be thirty of our man on shore : in which surprise they slay our captain , m. Andrew Barker with eight other , namely , one wild of Bristol , and Michael our chirurgeon , Richard of Bristol , Thomas Sampoole , Thomas freeman , Thomas nightingale , Robert Jackson , Walter Newton ; and the captain boy and one other be hurt . now after that William Coxe , and the rest ( which be aboard the bark ) perceive that the captain , and some other be slay , he receive they that be live into the ship , have before that time refuse some of they . after this misfortune they go to a island distant from thence a league , where Coxe divide a chain of gold ( which be find in the captain chest after his death ) among the company . after this Coxe go in a pinesse ( which we take at the isle of Sant Francisco ) with certain other of our man in a skyffe , to the town of Truxillio , in the bay of Honduras , 86 which town they surprise , and have therein wine and oil as much as they will , and diverse other good thing , but no gold nor silver , nor any other treasure which they will confess . but before they can return to their company , those that be in the bark be have in chase by man of war , whereby they be enforce every man to shift for himself : so for haste they leave those that be in the skiff ( be 8 person ) in the bay of Honduras : what become of they afterward God know . hereupon we determine to sail for England , and be in the main sea homeward bind , about 60 league from the isle of S. Francisco , the frigate wherein be the treasure for the adventurer , and that which pertain to the captain to the value of 2000 pound , be overset with sail , with a flaw of wind be overthrow , and all the good therein perish : therein also be 14 person drown , and nine save , whereof William Coxe and William Gillam be two . after this fillip Roche , master of the the death of admiral call the ragged staff , die . and thus at p , ufy length , ( by the help of God ) we arrive in the isle of silly near Cornwall where we leave our frigate which their arrival we build new upon the shore of the Honduras , have the isle of in she at our land ten botisio of oil , and the four cast piece that be in John Oxnams frigate ( which the year before be take in the strait of Dariene ) three harquebuss on crock , certain caliver , and certame certain treasure : where William Cox and Andrew j^nQxnam Browne divide the treasure among their company , recover deliver to some five pound , to some six pound , to from the some seven pound , to some more , as every man be Spaniards . thought to have deserve . the bark and the rest of the ordinance be leave in the island , to the use of Andrew Browne . diverse of our company , upon our arrival at Plymouth be commit to prison at the suit of m. John Barker of Bristol , brother unto our captain m. Andrew Barker , as accessary to our captain death , and betrayer of he unto the enemy . and after straight examination of many of we , by letter of direction from her majesty privy counsel , the chief malefactor be only chastise with long imprisonment , where indeed before God they have deserve to die : whereof some , although they escape the rigor of man law , yet can they not avoid the heavy judgement of God , but short after come to miserable end . which may be example to other to show themselves faithful and obedient in all honest cause to their captain and governor . Parescer de don Alvero ba^an , mark de Santa Cruz , tocante la armada de Francisco draque , estando en las yslas de Vayona : Hecha en Lisboa a 26 de otubre , estilo de espanna de 1585. San Vincente . Islas de Madera , Canaria , y Cabo Verde , oh que paresce , que podra hacer el armada Inglese , en caso que quiere passar a las India , y entrar en el mar del sur , ( common lo ha hecho otra vez Francisco Draque ) con las treynta y do nave in galeone , y muchas lancha y vergantines deremo que trae , y cinco will hombre de guerra , que es el numero que a los de Vayona parescio que venian en el armada , es lo siguiente . Levera sum derotta all Rio de Jenero , que es en la costa del Brasil en 23 grado de la parte del sur de la linea . es puerto capaz de muchos navios y muy seguro , adonde se tiene agua , lenna , y carne : y tam bien podra tomar harina de maiz en un lugar do o tres leguas del dicho puerto , que se dize san Vincente . y por ser camino per las islas de la Madera , Canaria , y Cabo Verde , podra saquear estas islas , dandole el tiempo lugar a ello . desde Vaiona a la isla de Madera con los vientos Nortes , que aora correran ( passado loss viento de Vallee , 88 