San Vincente . Islas de Madera , Canaria , y Cabo Verde , the english voyage and after straight examination of many of we , by letter of direction from her majesty privy counsel , the chief malefactor be only chastise with long imprisonment , where indeed before God they have deserve to die : whereof some , although they escape the rigor of man law , yet can they not avoid the heavy judgement of God , but short after come to miserable end . which may be example to other to show themselves faithful and obedient in all honest cause to their captain and governor . Parescer de don Alvero ba^an , mark de Santa Cruz , tocante la armada de Francisco draque , estando en las yslas de Vayona : Hecha en Lisboa a 26 de otubre , estilo de espanna de 1585. o que paresce , que podra hacer el armada Inglese , en caso que quiere passar a las India , y entrar en el mar del sur , ( common lo ha hecho otra vez Francisco Draque ) con las treynta y do nave in galeone , y muchas lancha y vergantines deremo que trae , y cinco will hombre de guerra , que es el numero que a los de Vayona parescio que venian en el armada , es lo siguiente . Levera sum derotta all Rio de Jenero , que es en la costa del Brasil en 23 grado de la parte del sur de la linea . es puerto capaz de muchos navios y muy seguro , adonde se tiene agua , lenna , y carne : y tam bien podra tomar harina de maiz en un lugar do o tres leguas del dicho puerto , que se dize san Vincente . y por ser camino per las islas de la Madera , Canaria , y Cabo Verde , podra saquear estas islas , dandole el tiempo lugar a ello . desde Vaiona a la isla de Madera con los vientos Nortes , que aora correran ( passado loss viento de Vallee , 88 que aora reynan , por estar la costa de espanna llovida ) yra la armada en sei dias ; de alii a las Canarias en quatro , y de las Canarias a Cabo verde en ocho , que son per todo diez y ocho dias : y tardera lo que se tuviere en saquear alas islas . de Cabo Verde all rio de jenero tardera quarenta Rio de jenero . dias , que vernan a ser todo do mese : por manera , que estando el armada todo este mes en Galicia , podra ser en el rio de jenero en fin de Deziembre . a la entrada de la baia del Rio de jenero ay una baxa , [ he . 531. ] adonde con facilidad se hara un fuerte , en que pueden ^u&arpor estar mass que quimentos hombre : you ponendole sum juerte artilleria , guardera el puerto , y el fuerte quedara assalado , que por la una parte del sudueste y nordeste tiene los do canales , por donde entran los navios en el puerto : en el qual podra Francisco draque concertar sum armada , y dexar alii alguna gente , y partir con la que le paresciere , para entrar en el mar del Sur , y yr en seguimiento de sum viaje all estrecho de Magallanes ( que es quinientas estrecho de y cinquenta leguas de a quel puerto , y esta en cinquenta y Magallanes . do grados y medio de parte del Sur ) y entrar por el estrecho a la mar deal sur por todo el mes de Febrero ; mar deal sur . in yr a la ciudad de los Reys o Lima , que esta en la limaesciudad costa , y es de do will vezino : y por no ser gente de guerra , m puesta en milicia , y lugar abierto sin f^Uatomar fortaleza , ni artilleria , le podra tomar y saquear , y yr ' se apoderando de la tierra ; pue tornando los navios , que ay en aquella mar , no les podra entrar socorro de espanna . y es de creer que se preverra a tomar a Panama . Panama . no queriendo hacer este viaje , repartira sum armada la segunda en do vandas , y saqueare la isla de San Domingo , Puerto viaje . Rico , y la costa de tierra firma , hasta Cartagena y an Domingo . number de Dios. you desde el rio de Chagre , que es j^^czgre . xv . leguas de number de dios , podra meet la infanteria en lancha de remo , y en las varcas de carga y descarga en a quel rio , que son mass de cinquenta , y hegar hasta paMma la Venta de cruze , que es cinco leguas de Panama , que , a^ert0 yfaM por ser lugar abierto , sera facile a saquear . a saquear . la Havana . y tambien corre peligro la Havana ; que aunque tiene fortaleza , es chica y flaca , y sacando artilleria en tierra , la tomaran con facilidad . y de mass de los dannos que podran hacer , conform a este discorso , no sera el menor , cortar el hilo a la Tomar las navigation de las India , a tomar las flotas , si alii ^otas ' fueren . Lo que Convernia hacer para reparar estos dannos . DEspachar caravelas con grandissima diligencia a los virreys y governadore de las India , avertiendo les de la nueva de la armada Inglese , para que esten prevenidos , y se ponganen orden . aunque , segun el numero de las nave que han salido de inglatierra , tengo por sin duda , havran passado de aquellas part alguna banda dellas , hasta tierra nueva . porque la Reyna a tenido cuidado de embiar y tomar las naos de la pesqueria deal Baccalao : y assi es de creer sin duda lo de las India . y teniendo se consideration a que , por lo que se intiende de inglatierra , han solido mass de ochenta navios con los de armada : Convernia que sum magestad mandasse j untar otra para buscar la Inglese , y combatir con ella , ordinando que los galeones que tiene la corona deste Reino , y los que tiene sum magestad en el Rio de Sevilla se aderescan de yr opposito , dandole carena , para che estubiessen a punto a qualquier viaje , por largo que fuesse : y que assi mismo se embara^e un galeon del Duque de Florencia , que esta muy bien armado y artillado , in a partido de Alicante ara Cadiz , y quarenta naos complimiento hasta quarenta naos gruesas , que se hallaran gruesas . en Viscaia y Guiposcoa : y que adere^adas , artillada , y puestas en orden , como conviene , se avituallen por ocho meses , y que desde luego se levanten hasta will marineros de Catalunna y Genoa para departir en las nave , y se trayen , como se hizo para la armada de la ter^era : y que assi mismo se levanten sey will 90 soldado , dando condutas para mass gente , que esta , para que aya este numero de servicio . tambien convernia , que de Viscaia venga para esta armada 20 pataze , y veynte azabras de Castro . que las pataze sean the 50 hasta 60 tonelada : y las azabras , como las que vinieran a la Jornada de la tergera . que se porvea el artilleria , polvera , y cuerda , y plomo necessario , arcabuze , mosqueta , y picas de respite para la guardia de la costa . converne hacer otra armada de do naos cada 400 tonelada , y otras quatro de a dozientas , y quatro pataze , you will soldado , de mass de la gente de mar . aviendo visto y considerado , que en do mese han hecho tanto dannos los ingleses con los navios de mercantes que navegan por estos mere , y que es de creer que haran lo mismo en las flotas que fueren y vinieren de las India , convernia , que , como para la ordenan^a en tiempo de paz , lleva la armada las naos Capitana y Almirante , que llevassen aora otras do mass por lo menos en cada flota : y no por esto se ha de dexar de asegurar las con armada . Todas estas prevenciones , i paresce , se deuen hacer , para solo lo que toca la armada Inglese , y otros navios que han salido de aquel reyno . Pero en caso que don Antonio Veniese con la [ three . 532. ] armada , y quisiese intentar lo d’este reyno , seran menest las prevenciones siguiente . que se apercibiesen el conde de Benavente , Marques de Soria , conde de Altamira , conde de monte Rey , Marques de cerraluo , y los de mass senores y Cavalleros , a quien se dio orden que estubiesen a punto , quando se vino a este Reyno . que se exercibiese tarn bien la gente de las ciudades de Toro , Zamora , Salamanca , cuidar para socorrer a la part dentro Doro y minno . y alas de Estremadura y Sevilla para socorrer esta ciudad de Lisbona , y sum Comarca . the damage which may be do bypass by the river of Jenero into the south sea . the english voyage que se avituallen los castillos desta ciudad , ribera , y comarca , y provean de polvere , cuerda , y plomo , y lo demas tocante el artilleria , como lo he pedido en las relaciones , que he embiado a sum magestad en 7 de manjo deste anno 1585. que se provean las galera por quatro meses : y vengan otras sey de espanna a este Rio con 120 soldado por galera , para que los pueden repartir , en las ocho que estan aca . y en caso que esto se ay , que le armada inglesa no pass a las India , y se ocupen en lo deste reyno , porque havre navios de ingleses , que acuden a lo uno y a lo otro , sera formoso hacer otra armada para lo de las India , the dose naos , quatro patajes , y will in quinjento soldado . todo esto , i paresce , conviene all servicio de sum majestad , se prevega y apercibiese con mucha diligencia y cuidado , proveiendo del dinero necessario para ello , sin que se aguarde lo uno a lo otro , sino que todo se haga sin deserirlo : remitiendo i en todo a mejor parescer . Hecha en Lisboa a 26 de otubre de 1585. annos . the opinion of don Alvero ba^an , mark of Santa Cruz , and high admiral of Spain , touch the army of sir Francis Drake lie at the isle of Bayona in Galicia , write in Lisbon the 26 of October after the account of Spain in the year 1585. that which it seem unto i , that the english army may do , if they seek to pass unto the west Indies , and enter into the south sea ( as Francis Drake have do once before ) with their thirty ship and galleon , and many pinnace and shalop with oar , which they have with they , and 5000 man of war , which they of Bayona think to be in the fleet , be as follow . they may take their course to the river of Jenero , which be on the coast of Brasil in 23 degree to the 92 south of the equinoctial line . it be a haven capable of many ship and very safe , where there be water , wood and flesh : and likewise drake may have corn of Maiz in a town two or three league from the say haven , which be call saint Vincente . and because the course be by the isle of Madera , the canary , and cape verde , he may sack those island , the time serve he for that purpose . from Bayona to the isle of Madera , with the northern wind which now will begin to blow , when the western wind be pass , which present do blow because that it begin to rain on the coast of Spain , the fleet may run in 6 day , and from thence to the canary in four , and from the canary to the isle of cape Verde in eight , which all together make eighteen day : and he may stay as much time more as shall serve he to sack the island in . he may sail from cape Verde to the river of Jenero in 40 day , which in the whole amount unto two month . so that the fleet remain all this month of October on the coast of Galicia , it may come to the river of Jenero in the end of December . at the entry of the bay of the river of Jenero there be a flat low island where a fort may very easy be make , wherein above 500 man may be leave : and place his artillery therein , he may keep the haven , and the fort will be able to hold out all assault , because that on the southwest and Northeast side be two channel whereby the ship come into the haven : wherein Francis Drake may repair his army , and leave there some people , and depart with so much of the rest as shall seem good unto he to enter into the south sea , and go on upon his voyage to the strait of Magelan , which be 550 league from the foresay haven , and stand in 52 degree and a half towards the south , and may enter by the strait into the south sea all the month of February , and so may to go to the city of Lima , otherwise call the city de los Reys , which stand on the sea coast 93 Madera . canary . the isle of cape Verde . the river of Jenero . a fort may be build on a island in the mouth of the river of Jenero . the strait of Magelan . the city of Lima easy to be take , though it have 2000 inhabitant . 1585. have two thousand inhabitant in it . but in respect that they be no warlike people nor exercise in arm , and because the place be open and without fortress and artillery , he may take and sack it , and make himself the ship in the south sea may be burn . master on the land , and afterward take those ship which be in that sea , our people can have no succour of ship out of Spain , but by the strait of Magelan , which Panama may be take . the second course which indeed Drake take . be a long way about . it be also very credible that he will be able to take Panama . if he seek not to take this course he may divide his army into two part , and sack the isle of S. Domingo , Puerto Rico , the coast of Tierra firma unto Cartagena and number de Dios. [ he - 533 - ] and from the river of Chagre , which be fifteen league from number de dios , he may send his footman in shalop with oar and in the vessel which carry good up and down the river , whereof there be above fifty there , and pass up to the lodging of the cross , call Panama be a open place be easy to be take . Havana easy to be take . in spanish Venta de cruze , which be five league from Panama , which because it be a unwalled town may easy be take . and Havana also will be in great danger , which albeit it have a fortress , yet it be but little and weak , and bring his great ordinance on shore he may take the same with great facility . and beside these domage which he may do , accord to this discourse , it will not be the least to cut off the indian fleet may be take . the navigation of the Indies , to take the west indian fleet , if they chance to be there . what course be to be take to prevent these mischief . r i ' ' oh dispatch caravel with all possible diligence to the a viceroy and governor of the India , advertise they of the news of the english army , that they may be provide , and make themselves ready for they . albeit , consider the number of ship which have be set 94 1585. forth out of England , i assure my self , that some part sir Barnard of they be go out of those part unto Newfoundland Drake take for the queen have take careful order to send to intercept the ship of the fisherman that go to baccalaos . Jugali and it be likewise to be think that she have do fisher re-the like for the intercept of the fleet of the Indies , turningfrom and consider that accord to our intelligence out of England , above fourscore ship , and the army of drake his’lntm-have be set forth from thence , it be meet that his gence be too majesty shall prepare another army to seek the english as s‘me fleet , and to fight with it , command that the galleon which belong to the crown of Portugal , and those of his admiralty . majesty which lie in the river of Seville be prepare to send against they , and to give they the carena , that they may be in a readiness for any voyage how long soever it be : and likewise to arrest a Galeon of the duke of Florence , which be very well arm and furnish with great ordinance , and pass late from Alicante towards Cadiz , and to make up the number of forty great ship , forty great which be to be have in Biscay and Guipuscoa : and that be rig , arm and set in good order , they be r ' victual for eight month , and that forthwith there be levy a thousand mariner of Catalunna and Genoa to be divide among the fleet , and be conduct , as they be for the fleet of Ter^era : furthermore that six G8 ? - ter-thousande soldier be levy , give commandment mark to press a great number , to the end that these may ofSantaCruz . be able man for service . Moreover it be needful for this army that 20. patache be bring from Biscay , and 20. Azabras from Castro . that the patache be from 50. to 60. ton : and that the azabra be like those which be in the expedition to terse a. that sufficient provision be make of artillery , powder , match , and lead , and harquebuss , musket , and choose pike for the keep of the coast . it be also meet to provide another army of two ship another army of 400. ton apiece , and other four of 200. ton , sm es‘ and four patache and a thousand soldier , beside mariner . the indian have see and consider that the Englishman with hen merchant ship only that traverse these sea have with 4. ship make such havoc in two month , and that it be to be ofwarre . thought that they will do the like against the fleet which go and come from the Indies : it be expedient , that as by order in time of peace the fleet have a admiral and vice-admiral , that now it shall have two more at the least in each fleet : and nevertheless they be to be waft home with a army . in my opinion all these provision ought to be make only in regard of the english army , and the rest of the ship which have be set out of that kingdom . but in case that don Antonio shall come with a army , and shall seek to invade this kingdom , these provision follow will be needful . what pro - r ■ 5Hat warning be give to the conde de Beneventa , to ma^lf^on the mark de Soria , to the conde of Altamira , Antonio shall to the conde of Monterey , to the marquess of zerraluo , come with an and to the rest of the lord and knight , which be to have order to be in a readiness , against he come unto this kingdom . that the people also be train of the city of Toro , Zamora , and Salamanca , to be ready to succour the country between the river of Doro and minno : and [ three . 534. ] the people of Estremadura and Sivilla be likewise to be train to be ready to succour the city of Lisbon , and the country about the same . also that the castle of this city , river and territory be victual and provide of gunpowder , match and lead , and all thing else belong to the artillery , as i have a army of recluest in the relation which i send unto his majesty 14. galley to the 7. of march of this present year 1585. be provide . that the galley be furnish for four month : and that six more be bring from Spain to this river of Lisbon with a hundred and twenty soldier for each galley , that they may be divide among the eight galley which remain here . and in case it fall out that the army of the english go not for the Indies , but occupy themselves upon this kingdom , ( for there may be english ship , which may attend the one and the other ) we shall be enforce to make another army , beside that for the Indies , of twelve ship , four patache , and a thousand five hundred soldier . in my opinion all this be meet for his majesty service to be foresee to be make ready with great diligence and care , and to provide money needful for the same , without neglect the one or the other , but that all these thing be do without delay : refer my self in all thing to those of wise judgement . write in Lisbon the 26 of October , 1585. another army of 12. great ship , 4 patache , andi$oo soldier . a summary and true discourse of sir Francis drake West indian voyage , begin in the year 1585. wherein be take the city of saint Iago , Santo Domingo , Cartagena , and the town of saint Augustine in Florida ; publish by m. Thomas cate . his worthy knight for the service of his prince and country have prepare his whole fleet , and get they down to Plymouth in Devonshire , to the number of five and twenty sail of ship and pinnaces , and have assemble of soldier and mariner , to the number of 2300. in the whole , embark they and himself at Plymouth aforesaid , the 12. day of September 1585. be accompany with these man of name and charge , which hereafter follow : master Christopher carleil lieutenant general , a man ten 97 g 