seem to have be some secret factor for m. thorn and other english merchant in those remote part ; whereby it be probable that some of our merchant have a kind of trade to the west Indies even in those ancient time and before also : neither do i see any reason why the Spaniard shall debar we from it at this present . the first voyage of the right worshipful and valiant knight sir John Hawkins , sometime treasurer of her majesty navy royal , make to the west Indies 1562. receive some Aster John haukin have make diverse voyage to the isle of the canary , and there by his good and upright deal be grow in love and favour with the people , inform himself among they by diligent inquisition , of the state of the west India , whereof he have knowledge by the instruction of his father , but increase the same by the advertisement and report of that people . And be among other particular assure , that negro be very good merchandise in Hispaniola , and that store of Negros may easy be have upon the coast of Guinea , resolve with himself to make trial thereof , and communicate that devise with his worshipful friend of London : namely with sir Lionel Ducket , sir Thomas lodge , m. Gunson his father in law , sir William winter , m. Bromfield , and other . all which person like so well of his intention , that they become liberali contributer and adventurer in the action . for which purpose there be three good ship immediate provide : the one call the Salomon of the burden of 120. ton , wherein m. haukin himself go as generali : the second the swallow of 100 ton , wherein go for captain m. Thomas Hampton : and the three the Jonas a bark of 40. ton , wherein the master supply the captain 7 m. Thomas Hampton . the english voyage room : in which small fleet m. Hawkins take with he not above 100 man for fear of sickness and other inconvenience , whereunto man in long voyage be common subject . with this company he put off and depart from the coast of England in the month of October 1562. and in his course touch first at Teneriffe , where he receive friendly entertainment . from thence he pass to Sierra Leona , upon the coast of Guinea , which place by the people of the country be call Tagarin , where he stay some good time , and get into his possession , partly by the sword , and partly by other mean , to the number of 300. Negros at the least , beside other merchandise which that country yield . with this prey he sail over the ocean sea unto the hand of Hispaniola , and arrive first at the port of Isabel : and there he have reasonable utterance of his english commodity , as also of some part of his negro , trust the Spaniard no further , than that by his own strength he be able still to master they . from the port of Isabel he go to Puerto de plata , where he make like sale , stand always upon his guard : from thence also he sail to Monte christi another port on the north side of Hispaniola , and the last place of his touch , where he have peaceable traffic , and make vent of the whole number of his negro : for which he receive in those 3. place by way of exchange such quantity of merchandise , that he do not only lade his own 3. ship with hide , ginger , sugar , and some quantity of pearl , but he freight also two other hulk with hide and other like commodity , which he send into Spain . and thus leave the hand , he return and disemboque , pass out by the hand of the cayco , without further enter into the bay of Mexico , in this his first voyage to the west India . and so with prosperous success and much gain to himself and they aforesaid adventurer , he come home , and arrive in the month of September 1563. 8 