the Oviedo , who though it please he to call the captain of this great english ship a rover , yet it appear by the Englishman own word , that they come to discover , and by their traffiq'ue for pewter vessel and other ware at the town of saint germane in the hand of S. John de puerto rico , it can be deny but that they be furnish with ware for honest traffic and exchange . but whosoever be conversant in read the Portugal ! and Spanish writer of the east and west Indies , shall common find that they account all other nation for pirate , rover and thief , which visit any heathen coast that they have once sail by or look on . howbeit their passionate and ambitious reckon ought not to be prejudicial ! to other man chargeable and painful enterprise and honourable travel in discovery . a brief note concern a voyage of one Thomas Tison a english man , make before the year 1526. to the west Indies , and of his abode there in manner of a secret factor for some english merchant , which under hand have trade thither in those day : take out of a old ligier-booke of m. Nicolas Thorne the elder , a worshipful merchant of Bristol . t appear out of a certain note or letter of remembrance , in the custody of i Richard Hakluyt , write 1526. by master Nicolas Thorne the elder , a principali merchant of Bristol , unto his friend and factor Thomas midnail , and his servant William Ballard at that time remain at saint Lucar in Andaluzia : that before the say year one Thomas Tison a Englishman have find the way to the west Indies , and be there resident : unto who the aforesaid m. Nicolas Thorne send armour and other commodity specify in the letter aforesaid . This Thomas Tison ( so far as i can conjecture ) may seem to have be some secret factor for m. thorn and other english merchant in those remote part ; whereby it be probable that some of our merchant have a kind of trade to the west Indies even in those ancient time and before also : neither do i see any reason why the Spaniard shall debar we from it at this present . the first voyage of the right worshipful and valiant knight sir John Hawkins , sometime treasurer of her majesty navy royal , make to the west Indies 1562. receive some Aster John haukin have make diverse voyage to the isle of the canary , and there by his good and upright deal be grow in love and favour with the people , inform himself among they by diligent inquisition , of the state of the west India , whereof he have knowledge by the instruction of his father , but increase the same by the advertisement and report of that people . And be among other particular assure , that negro be very good merchandise in Hispaniola , and that store of Negros may easy be have upon the coast of Guinea , resolve with himself to make trial thereof , and communicate that devise with his worshipful friend of London : namely with sir Lionel Ducket , sir Thomas lodge , m. Gunson his father in law , sir William winter , m. Bromfield , and other . all which person like so well of his intention , that they become liberali contributer and adventurer in the action . for which purpose there be three good ship immediate provide : the one call the Salomon of the burden of 120. ton , wherein m. haukin himself go as generali : the second the swallow of 100 ton , wherein go for captain m. Thomas Hampton : and the three the Jonas a bark of 40. ton , wherein the master supply the captain 7 m. Thomas Hampton . 