that go up the say river , as also that do come down the say river . and therefore if it may please your majesty to command , that Puerto bello may be inhabit , and the town make near the river side , every thing will be a great deal better cheap , if the commodity be carry up the river : for it be a great danger to carry they up by land , for it be daily see that the mule do many time fall and break their neck with their lade upon their back , as well the treasure as other kind of commodity , because it be such a bad way . and your majesty may be at this charge and spend your revenue of number de dios and Panama , which do yearly yield 12 or 14 thousand pezo , and this be once do it will be a great aid and benefit to those , which do trade and traffic , and to those merchants which do send their good overland , and ease they much of pain and purse , because the-oth be a most filthy way , as any be in the world . a brief remembrance of a voyage make in the year 1589 by William Michelson captain , and William mace of Ratcliff , master of a ship call the dog , to the bay of Mexico in the west India . he aforesaid ship call the dog , of the burden of threescore and ten ton be furnish , and arm forth with the number of forty man : it depart from the coast of England in the month of May , direct for the west India : it fall with the bay of Mexico , and there meet with diverse spanish ship at sundry time , whereof three fall into her lapse and be force to yield unto the mercy of the english : the last that they meet within the bay be a spanish man of war , who the english chase , and after three several fight , upon three diverse 156 day , press he so far that he entreat a parley , by put out a flag of truce : the parley be grant , and certain of the Spaniard come aboard the english . where after conference about those matter that have pass in the fight betwixt they , they receive reasonable entertainment and a quiet farewell . the spanish , as if they have mean to requite the english courtesy , invite our man to their ship , who persuade themselves off good meaning in the spanish , go aboard : but honest and friendly deal be not their purpose , sudden they assault our man , and one with a dagger stabde Roger Kingsnod the english pilot to the heart and slay he , and other be serve with the like sauce , only William mace the master and other , notwithstanding all the prepare trap of the enemy , leap overboard into the sea , and so come safe to their own ship : and direct his course for England , arrive at Plymouth the ten day of September , 1589 , lade with wine , iron , roan , which be a kind of linen cloth , and other rich commodity , look for the arrival of the rest of his consort , whereof one and the principali have not long since obtain his port. thus much in generail term only i have as yet learned , and receive touch this voyage , extract out of letter send from the aforesaid William mace , to master Edward Wilkinson of towerhill in London . my principali intention by this example be to admonish our nation of circumspection in deal with that subtle enemy , and never to trust the spanish further , than that their own strength shall be able to master they : for otherwise whosoever shall through simplicity trust their courtesy , shall by trial taste of their assure cruelty . A.D. 1589. Spanish treason . [ certain spanish 157 