they double the cape of buena esperanza . a brief note of a voyage to the east Indies , begin the 10 of April 1591 , wherein be three tall ship , the Penelope of captain Raimond , admiral , the merchant royal , whereof be captain , Samuel Foxcroft , viceadmiral , the Edward Bonaventure , whereof be captain , m. James Lancaster , rear-admiral , with a small pinnace . write by Henry may , who in his return homeward by the west Indies , suffer shipwreck upon the isle of Bermuda , whereof here be annex a large description . he ten of April 1591 we depart from Plymmouth with the ship aforesaid . in May follow we arrive at grand Canaria one of the fortunate island . also towards the end of this month we take a Portugal ship be bind for Brasil , within three degree to the northward of the equinoctial , which serve great to our refresh . the 29 of July follow we come to Aguada Saldania a good harbour near the cape of Buona Speranza , where we stay about a month with the merchant royal , which by reason of sickness in our fleet be send home for England with diverse weak man . here we buy a ox for a knife of three penny , a sheep for a break knife or any other odd trifle , of the people which be negro , clad in cloak or mantle of raw hide , both man and woman . the 8 of September the Penelope and the Edward Bonaventure weigh anchor , and that day we double the cape of Buona Speranza . the 12 follow we be take with a extreme tempest or huricano . this evening we see a great sea break over our admiral the Penelope , and their light strike out : and after that we never see they 194 J592 ' any more . in October follow we in the Edward fall with the westermost part of the isle of saint Laurence about midnight , know not where we be . also the next day we come to a anchor at Quitangone a Quitangone place on the main land of Africa , which be two or three mozam-league to the northward of Mozambique , where the * ' Portugal of the isle of Mozambique fetch all their fresh water . here we take a pangaia , with a Portugal boy in it ; which be a vessel like a barge , with one mat-saile of Coco nut leave . the barge be sow together with the rind of tree , and pin with wooden pin . in this pangaia we have certain corn call millio , hen , and some fardel of blue Calicut cloth . the Portugal ! boy we take with we , and dismiss the rest . from this place we go for a island call Comoro , upon the °f coast of melinde , which stand about 11 degree to the ComonSouth of the equinoctial : in which island we stay all November , find the people black and very comely , but very treacherous and cruel : for the day before we depart from thence they kill thirty of our man on shore , among who be William Mace our master , and two of his mate it ; the one of they be in the boat with he to fetch water , the other be on shore against our ship ; they have first betray our boat . from hence we go for the isle of Zanzibar , on the coast of melinde , they winter whereas we stay and winter until the begin of of r t r n • ° ° Zanzibar . February follow . the second of February 1592 we weigh anchor , and set sail direct for the east Indies ; but have calm and contrary wind , we be until the month of June before we can recover the coast of India near Calicut ; whereby many of our man die for want of refresh . in this month of June we come to a anchor at the isle of Pulo pinaom , whereas we stay until the first °f day of September , our man be very sick , and die Pul° ptnmm-apace . this day we set sail , and direct our course for Malaca : and we have not be far at sea , but we take a ship of the kingdom of pegu of some fourscore 195 they return homeward . the english voyage ton with wooden anchor , and about fifty man in she , with a pinnace of some eighteen ton at her stern , both lade with pepper . but their pinnace steal from we in a gust in the morning . here we may have take two ship more of Pegu lade likewise with pepper and rice . in this month also we take a great Portugal ship of six or seven hundred tun , lade chief with victual , chest of hat , pintado , and Calicut clothes . beside this we take another Portugal ship of some hundred tun , lade with victual , rice , calico , pintado , and other commodity . Theise ship be bind for Malaca with victual : for those of goa , of saint Thomas , and of other place in the Indies do victuali iter , because that victual there be very scarce . in the month of November 1592 we shape our course for the island of Nicubar lie certain league to the northwest of the famous island of Sumatra ; whereas within short time we come to anchor : and here we have very good refresh : for after we arrive there , the people ( who we find in religion Mahumetans ) come aboard we in their canoas , with hen , coco , plantans , and other fruit : and within two day they bring unto we real of plate , give we they for Calicut cloth : which real they find by dive in the sea , which be lose not long before in two Portugal ship which be bind for China , and be cast away there . this be the further place that we be at to the southeast : and here because our company by this time be much waste and diminish , we resolve to turn back to the isle of Zeilan . wherefore we weigh anchor in the month of November , and arrive at Zeilan about the end of the same month . in this island grow great store of excellent cinamom , and the best diamond in the world . here our captain mean to stay to make up our voyage : whereof he conceive great hope , by certain intelligence which we have receive ; but the company , which be in all but 33 man and boy , be in a mutiny , and every day ready to go together by the ear ( the captain be sick 196 and like for to die ) will not stay , but will needs go home . the 8 of December 1592 we set sail homeward , but some 15 day before we have sight of the cape of good hope , we be force to share our bread , by reason we have certain fly in our ship , which devour most part of our bread before we be aware : so that when we come to share , we have but 31 pound of bread a man to carry we into England , with a small quantity of rice a day . the last of march 1593 we double the cape of bona Speranza . they double the cape of bona sper-anza . the isle of in April next ensue we come to anchor at the island of saint Helena , whereas we find a english man a tailer , which have be there 14 month before we come thither : Helena . so we send our boat on shore with some ten man , they find this english man in the chapel ; who by reason of the heat of the climate be enforce to keep himself out of the sun our company hear one sing in the chapel , suppose it have be some Portugal ! , thrust open the door , and go in unto he : but the poor man see so many come in upon he on the sudden , and think they to be Portugal , be first in such a fear , not have see any man in 14 month before , the strange and afterward know they to be Englishman , and fg^reand some of they of his acquaintance , in such joy , that what sudden joy . between excessive sudden fear and joy , he become this tract of his wit , to our great sorrow . here we find of his dry some 40 goat . the party have make he for want of apparel two suit of goat skin with the hairy side outward , like unto the savage of Canada . here we stay all this month . this man live until we come to the west Indies , and then he die . in the month of June 1593 we arrive at the island of Trinidad in the west Indies , hope there to find refresh : but we can not get any , by reason that the Spaniard have take it . here we be imbay between the island and the main ; and for want of victual the company will have forsake the ship : 197 Trinidad in the west Indies . whereupon the captain be enforce to swear everyman not to forsake the ship until we shall see further occasion . out of this bay , call Boca de Dragone , it please God to deliver we ; from whence we direct our course for the isle of saint Juan de Puerto rico , but fall with the small isle of Mona , where we abide some fifteen day , find in that place some small refresh . and here arrive a ship of Caen in Normandy , whereof be captain one Monsieur Charles de la Barbotiere , who great refresh we with bread and other provision , which we great want . and so we take our leaf the one of the other . in July have foul weather at Mona , we be force to weigh anchor , and to set sail , direct our course for CapeTiburon . cape Tiburon : and in double of the cape we have a gust from the shore , which carry away all our sail from the yard : so that we have leave but one new forecourse to help our self withal : which canvas the aforesaid Frenchman do help we withal . also have double the foresay cape in the distress aforenamed , the foresay capitan de la Barbotiere with his pinnace give chase unto we again ; who be come near unto we , i go aboard he , certify he what distress we be in . the gentleman reply to i again , that there be not any thing in his ship , but what he can spare he will help we withal . so to conclude , we agree with he for canvas . Moreover , he say that if we will go with Qr Guanaba . he to a harbour call * gonnavy , which be to the [ he - 573 - ] northward of cape Tiburon , that than he will help we with fresh victual enough . whereupon i return aboard our ship , and certify our captain of all : who make it know unto the company ; which no soon hear of it , but they will all go in . so here we stay with the aforesaid Frenchman 15 day : but small refresh we can get , because the Spaniard stand in some fear of the Frenchman of war , suppose our ship to be a Portugal , and that we be his prize : nevertheless he certify they to the contrary . and in stay 198 so long with he , and have little refresh , our company begin to be in a mutiny , and make report that the captain and i go aboard the Frenchman but to make good cheer , and have not any care of they : but i protest before God , that our care be to get victual whereby we may have be go from he . but in the mean time a great part of our company have conspire to take away the Frenchman pinnace , and with she to board the man of war . while these thing be in complot , one of their consort go aboard the Frenchman , and certify he of all the conspiracy . whereupon the captain of the french ship send for our captain and i to come aboard to dinner : and we stay with he all the afternoon , be invite unto supper : and be at supper , he himself will not a great while come to we : but at length he come . at his come we ask of he what news . who answer we , that either we must depart from he , or else he must go seek some other harbour . whereupon i tell captain Lancaster ; who pray i to tell he that rather than we will be any hindrance unto he , we will be go . but in the mean time , while we be thus talk together , the Frenchman weigh and set sail : which we perceive , and ask he what he mean by it . he reply to the captain and i , that he keep we for his security , and that our man have purpose as be aforesaid . when he come thwart our ship , it blow a pretty gale of wind : the boat be astern of they , have in her two moor and two man of Pegu , which we have give they , break away . then be the Frenchman worse than before , and do threaten we very sore that we shall pay his voyage . in the mean time the Edward see we past , weigh and set sail to go for England : and they do share among they all the captain victual and i , when they see the Frenchman keep we as prisoner . So the next morning we go to seek out the Frenchman pinnace : which be at Laguna we shoot off a piece , and so she come to we , have in her three moor of 199 they wrack upon Bermuda the 17 of December 1593. the english voyage our company , Edmund Barker our lieutenant , and one John west , and Richard Lucland one of the mutinous crew . the which i tell the Frenchman off ; and he can not deny , but that there be such a thing pretend . than i be put into the french pinnace to seek their boat : and in the mean time they will go to see if they can overtake our ship . and the next day we shall meet again at cape S. Nicolas : so the next morning we meet together all three of we , but hear no news of his boat . so he have Spaniard and negro aboard of we , request to have they . our captain desire he to send his boat aboard our ship , and he shall have they with all his heart . so with much ado he send his boat and have they . than he demand of they , if his boat be not aboard the ship . they answer no . so that than Monsieur de la Barbotiere be satisfy : and then we be great friend again , to all our joy . the 12 of August 1593 our captain be send aboard our ship : but before his departure he request the captain of the french ship that he will give i passage home with he , to certify the owner what have pass in all the voyage , as also of the unruliness of the company . and this day we take our leaf the one of the other ; the Edward for England : and we bear in for gonnavy , where afterward we find the Frenchman boat . the last of November 1593 Monsieur de la Barbotiere depart from a port call Laguna in Hispaniola . the 17 of December next ensue it be his fortune to have his ship cast away upon the northwest part of the isle of Bermuda about midnight ; the pilot make themselves at noon to be to the southward of the island twelve league , certify the captain that they be out of all danger . so they demand of he their wine of heighth : the which they have . And be , as it shall seem , after they have their wine , careless of their charge which they take in hand , be as it be drunken , through 200 their negligence a number of good man be cast away : and i be but a stranger among 50 and odd Frenchman and other , it please God to appoint i to be one of they that be save , i hope to his service and glory . we make account at the first that we be cast away hard by the shore , be high cliff , but we find our self seven league off : but with our boat and a raft which we have make and tow at our boat stern , we be save some 26 of we ; among who be no more english but my self . now be among so many stranger , and see not room for the one half , i dare neither press into the boat , nor upon the raft , for fear lest they shall have cast i over board , or else have kill i : so i stay in the ship which be almost full of water , until the captain be enter the boat , call i unto he be at hand , for that it stand upon life or death : and so i present enter , leave the better half of our company to the mercy of the sea . after this we row all the day [ three . 574. ] until a hour or two before night year we can come on land , tow the raft with the boat . when we come T& descrip-on shore , be all the day without drink , every man * ™ < > ftheisle take his way to see if he can find any : but it be i r u ‘ long before any be find . at length one of the pilot dig among a company of weed find fresh water to all our great comfort , be only rain water : and this be all the fresh water that we find on shore . but there be in this island many fine bay , wherein if a man do dig , i think there may be find store of fresh water . this island be divide all into break island : and the great part i be upon , which may be some 4 or 5 mile long , and two mile and a half over ; be all wood , as cedar and other timber , but cedar be the chief . now it please God before our then save of ship do split , that we save our carpenter tool , or tkwptnur else i think we have be there to this day : and have l^atim ' recover the aforesaid tool , we go roundly about they a bark cut down of tree , and in the end build a small strange build bark of some 18 tun , for the most part with tronnel and fatvuhed . 201 good harbour in you east part of Bermuda . a excellent fish for pearl in Bermuda . the people near cape Briton use traffic of rich fur . the english voyage very few nail . as for tackle we make a voyage aboard the ship before she split , and cut down her shrowd , and so we tackle our bark , and rig she . in stead of pitch we make lime , and mix it with the oil of tortoise ; and assoon as the carpenter have calk , i and another , with each of we a small stick in our hand , do plaster the mortar into the seam , and be in April , when it be warm and fair weather , we can not soon lie it on , but it be dry , and as hard as a stone . in this month of April 1594 , the weather be very hot , we be afraid our water shall fail we ; and therefore make the more haste away : and at our departure we be constrain to make two great chest , and calk they , and stow they on each side of our main mast , and so put in our provision of rainwater , and 13 live tortoise for our food , for our voyage which we intend to Newfoundland . in the south part of this island of Bermuda there be hog , but they be so lean that you can not eat they , by reason the island be so barren : but it yield great store of fowl , fish and tortoise . and to the eastward of the island be very good harbour , so that a ship of 200 tun may ride there landlocked , without any danger , with water enough . also in this island be as good fish for pearl as be any in the west Indies , but that the place be subject to foul weather , as thunder , lightning and rain : but in April and part of may we have very fair and hot weather . the 11 of may it please God to set we clear of the island , to the no little joy of we all , after we have live in the same almost the space of 5 month . and the 20 of may we fall with the land near to cape Briton , where we run into a fresh water river , whereof there be many , and take in wood , water , and ballast . and here the people of the country come unto we , be clothe all in fur , with the fur side unto their skin , and bring with they fur of sundry sort to sell , beside great store of wild duck : so some of our company have save some small bead , buy 202 some of their duck . here we stay not above four hour , and so depart . this shall seem to be a very good country . and we see very fine champion ground , and wood . from this place we run for the bank of Newfoundland , whereas we meet with diverse , but none will take in a man of we , until it please God that we meet with a bark of Falmouth , which receive we all for a little time ; and with she we take a french ship , wherein i leave capitan de la Barbotier my dear friend , and all his company , and stay my self aboard the english bark : and have passage in the same , in the month of August i arrive at Falmouth 1594. a voyage of the honourable gentleman m. Robert Duddeley , now knight , to the isle of Trinidad , and the coast of Paria : with his return home by the isle of Granata , Santa Cruz , Sant Juan de puerto rico , Mona , Zacheo , the shoald call Abreojos , and the isle of Bermuda . in which voyage he and his company take and sink nine spanish ship , whereof one be a armada of 600 ton . write at the request of m. Richard Hakluyt . ave ever since i can conceive of any thing be delight with the discovery of navigation , i foster in my self that disposition till i be of more year and better ability to undertake such a matter . to this purpose i call to i the advice of sufficient seaman , and principal undertake a voyage for the south sea ; but by reason that many before have miscarry in the same enterprise , i can not be suffer to hazard more of her majesty subject upon so uncertain a ground as my desire : which make i by constraint ( great charge already by i defray ) to prepare another 203 