a libel of spanish lie write by don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , generali of the king of Spain armada , concern some part of the last voyage of sir Francis drake ; together with a confutation of the most notorious falsehood therein contain , and a declaration of the truth by m. Henry Savile esquire : and also a approbation of both by sir Thomas baskefvil generali of her majesty armada after the decease of sir Francis Drake . to the courteous reader . Hereas don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , generali of the spanish fleet , have by his print letter publish to the world diverse untruth , concern our fleet and the commander thereof , seek thereby his own glory , our disgrace ; i have take upon ( though of many least able ) to confute the same , rather for that the print copy come first into hand , have my self be captain of one of and i then my her majesty ship in the same voyage . take this therefore ( gentle reader ) as a token of my duty and love to my country and countryman , and expect only a plain truth , as from the pen of a soldier and navigator : which if you take in good part , you may draw i hereafter to publish some great labour . Henry Savile . the true copy of a letter find at the sack of Cadiz , write by don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , generali of the king of Spain his navy in the west Indies , send unto doctor Peter Florez , precedent of the contractation house for the Indies , and by he put in print with privilege : wherein be declare 246 many untruth , and false report , tend to the disgrace of the service of her majesty navy , and the commander thereof , late send to the west Indies , under the command of sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins general at the sea ; and sir Thomas Baskervill generali at land : with a confutation of diverse gross lie and untruth , contain in the same letter : together with a short relation of the fight , accord to the truth . [ Iii . 591. ] Copia de una carta , que ernbio don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general de la armada de sum magestad , embiada all doctor Pedro Florez Presidente de la casa de la contratacion de las India : en que trata del sucesso de la armada de ynglatierra , despue que partio de Panama , de que fue por general Francisco Draque , y de sum muerte . e Cartagena di cuenta a vuestra Merced como sali del puerto de la ciudad de Lisbona , en busca de la armada ynglesa , aunque por la mucha priessa , no se pudieron reparar tanbien los galeones como fuera necessario , y con el tiempo se perdio uno , y por desgracia se quemo un filibote , y aviendo andado muchos dias en busca deal enemigo , hasta que llegue a Cartagena , donde aviendo tornado el parece de don Pedro de Acunna governador y capitan general de aquella ciudad , porque tenia mucha necessidad de agua , y reparar los Navios por que venian falto della , i detuve en aquel puerto , adonde tuve noticia por un Aviso , que Francisco draque murio en number de dios , de pena de aver perdido tanto baxeles y gente , aunque despue se supo mass por estenso . y aviendo dado a vuestro Merced cuenta de lo que hasta alii a sucedido , agora la doy de que sali de aquel puerto a do the Marzo , y tome la derrota de la Havana , donde entendi hallarlo : y aviendo hecho la diligencia ’247 possible , lune a onze deal dicho mes , alas do despue de medio dia , all salir de la Ysla de Pinos , en la ensenada de Guaniguanico , tope con el , que yva con catorze Navios muy buenos : fueme arrimando a el , aunque tenia el viento por suyo , y el Almiranta que yva mass all viento con otros do Navios commenzo arrimarsele , y aunque vino sober ella con todo los suyo tres veze , no fue part acercarsele paraque quisiesse envestir : los que estavamo mass apartado fuymos dando bordos acercan-donos hasta jugar la artilleria , Mosqueteria , y arcabuzeria de los mass dello , en lo qual el recibio muy conocido danno , el lo hizo con el artilleria como suele , you particularment el Almiranta , y en reconociendo la voluntad con que a el nos arrimavamo , con mass diligencia de lo que se puede creer se desembarazo de todo , poniendose en huyda , dando las velas , dexando en la mar todas las lancha que traya . the le segui con nueve Navios toda la noche , y con quatro mass todo el dia , hasta hazerle doblar el cabo de Sant Anton , y tomar la derrota de la canal de Bahama , conform a las instruciones de sum magestad : sirvio de poco el for i con menos numero de Navios , ni todas las diligencias que se hizieron , para que se inclinase ah esperar ni abordar , ni tirar un arcabuz , ni una pieza , porque el se dio la diligencia que pudo , porque sus Navios los avia reduzido a la mitad , y los mejores , y estos acabava de reparar en Puerto bello , donde se estuvo mass de quarenta dias , y ansi venian muy reparados ; in the saque los mios desbaratado , que no i dio el tiempo lugar para aderezarlos . a que navego do mese y medio , y traygo la capitana , que desde que parti de Cartagena no a parado las bombas , y el dia que sali se i Io arrimo una zabra con esta necessidad ; la almiranta y los demas Navios vienen con el mismo trabajo , pero sin embargo , por lo que you vi en los enemigo ; era muy conocida la ventaja que nos hazia , y mucha dicha seria apoderarse del , sino es hallarlo sober el Ferro . Con todo esso i a dexado un Navio muy bueno en las manos con muy bvena 248 gente , la qual dize como murio el draque en number de dios , y que va por general de la dicha armada ynglesa el colonel Quebraran , y por el poco lugar que se a dado not a podido tomar Agua , lenna , ni carne , y van de manera que no se como an de hegar a ynglatierra . enter la gente deven de ser ciento y quarenta , y quinze noble capitanes de lo mejor de alii , y algunos ricos , segun se echa de ver en eHos . no se ofrece otra cosa : nuestro sennor guard a vuestra Merced , como puede , y the desseo . de la Havana . 30 de Marzo , the 1596. annos . don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda . el Licenciado don Juan Bermudes y Figueroa , teniente mayor de assistente desta ciudad de Sevilla y sum tierra , que hago officio de assistente della por ausencia de sum Sennoria del Conde de Priego , Doy licencia a Rodrigo de Cabrera , para que pueda imprimir la Relacion de la muerte de Francisco draque . la qual haga por do mese , y por ello no lo imprima otro alguno . So pena de diez will maravedi para la camara de sum magestad . Fecha en Sevilla a quinze de Mayo , de will y quinientos y noventa y sey annos . el Licenciado don Juan Bermudez y Figueroa . por sum mandado , Gregoria de Gutierez , Escrivano . [ in . 592. ] 249 [ the spanish the copy of a letter which don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , generali of the king of Spain his army , send unto doctor Peter Florez , precedent of the contractation house for the Indies , wherein he make mention of the success of the english army , after they depart from Panama , whereof be generali Francis Drake , and of his death . Rome Cartagena i give relation unto your worship how i depart from the city of Lisbon , in the pursuit of the english army : although for the great haste the galleon can not be so well repair as be needful , and with foul weather one be lose , and a flyboat be burn . and have sail many day in pursuit of the enemy , until i arrive at Cartagena , and there take the advice of don Pedro de Acunna , governor of the city , and captain generail ( for we have great need of water , and to repair our ship ) we stay in that port : whereas i have intelligence by a indian that Francis Drake die in number de dios , for very grief that he have lose so many bark and man , as be afterward more manifest know . thus have give you a relation of all that happen hitherto , now i let you understand , that i leave this port the second of march , and take our course towards Havana , where i think to have find the english fleet . and have use all the diligence possible , upon Monday the eleven of the say month , about two of the clock in the afternoon , at the end of they he of Pinos , in the entrance of Guaniguanico , i meet with the english fleet , be fourteen very good ship : i draw towards they although they have the wind of we , and our 250 admiral who bear up towards the wind , with other two ship begin to draw near they , and although we set thus upon they , three time with all their ship , yet will they not set again upon we , and those of our man which be far off cry to they amain , be both within shot of artillery , musket , and caliver , whereby they receive evident hurt by we : they ply their great ordinance accord to their manner , and especial their vice-admiral , and see our resolution how sharp we be bend towards they , they with all expedition and speed possible prepare to fly away , hoist sail and leave their boat for haste in the sea : but i follow they , with nine ship all the night follow , and with four more the next day , till i make they double the cape of S. Antony , and to take the course towards the channel of Bahama , accord to the instruction from his majesty . it little avail we to be see , with less number of ship , neither yet all the diligence we can use , can cause they to stay or come near we , nor to shoot off one harquebus or piece of artillery , for they flee away as fast as they can , and their ship be half diminish , and that the best part of they : the rest they repair in Puerto bello , whereas they be about forty day , and so by that mean they be all well repair ; and our ship be very foul , because the time will not permit we to trim they : i have sail 2 month and a half in the admiral , since we depart from Cartagena , we have not repair their pump nor cleanse they : and the same day i depart thence , there come unto i a small pinnace in the like distress : our vice-admiral and the rest of our ship have the like impediment , but no great hindrance unto we , for aught i can perceive by our enemy : it be manifest what advantage they have of we , and by no mean be it possible for we to take they , unless we can have come to have find they at a anchor . nevertheless they leave we one good ship behind for 251 our share , well man , which tell i that drake die in number de dios , and that they have make for generali of the english fleet the colonel Quebraran : and also by mean of the small time , be straight follow by we , they have no opportunity to take either water , wood or flesh , and they be also in such bad case , that i know not how they will be able to arrive in England . the number of man we have take be about a hundred and forty , and fifteen e noble captain of their best sort , and some of they rich , as well may appear by their behaviour : i have no other thing to write at this time . our lord keep you who best can , and as i desire . from Havana the 30 of march , 1596 ’ do Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda . the licenciat don John Bermudes of Figueroa lieutenant of the assistant of the city of Seville , and the province thereof , who do supply the office of the assistant in the absence of the right honourable the earl of Priego , give licence to Roderigo de Cabriera to imprint the relation of the death of Francis Drake , which only he may do for two month , and no other to imprint the same within the say term , upon pain of ten thousand maravedi for his majesty chamber . give in Seville the 15 of May 1596. the licenciat don John Bermudes of Figueroa . by his assign Gregory Gutierez notary . this letter of the generali don Bernaldino send into Spain declare the death of sir Francis drake and their suppose victory , be altogether receive for a undoubted truth , and so please be this news unto the Spaniarde , that there be present commandment give to publish the letter in print , that all the people of Spain may be partaker of this common joy : the which letter print in Seville , bear date the 15 of may , 1596 come to the hand of Henry Savile 252 esquire , who be employ in that service for the west Indies , and captain of her majesty good ship the adventure , under the conduct of sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins , have cause the say print letter to be translate into english . and that the impudency of the spanish generali May the more plain appear , the say Henry Savile do answer particular to every untruth in the same letter contained , as hereafter follow . the answer to the spanish letter . First the generali do say , that Francis Drake die at number de dios , as he have intelligence by a indian . he generali send this news into his then general country confirm with his hand and first news , and ■ * - 0 .. - - his best news seal of arm : it be the first news in his letter , and it be the best news that he can send into Spain . for it do ease the stomach of the timorous Spaniard great to hear of the death of he , who life be a scourge and a continual plague unto they : but it be a point of great simplicity , and scarce beseem a generali , to tie the credit of his report local to any place upon the report of a silly indian slave . for it have be sufficient to have'sayd , that Francis Drake be certain dead , without publish the lie in print , by name number de dios : for it be most certain sir Francis Drake die betwixt the hand of Escudo , and Puerto bello : but the generali be ravish with the sudden joy of this report as a man that have escape a great danger of the enemy , do break out into a insolent kind of brag of his valour at sea , and heap one lie upon another , do not cease until he have draw they into sequence , and so do commend they unto Peter the doctor , as censor of his learned work . 253 be in part lie news . second , the generali do write unto the doctor , that Francis Drake die for very grief that he have lose so many bark and man . a thing very strange that the generali or the indian who he do vouch for his lie , shall have such speculation in the body of he who they never see , as to deliver for truth unto his country , the very cause or disease whereof he die : and this second report of he be more gross than the first . for admit the mistake of the place may be tolerable ; notwithstanding , this precise affirm the cause of his death do manifest prove that the generali do don Bernal - make no conscience to lie . and as concern the < rno m lie loss of any bark or man in our navy , by the impudent . valour of Spaniard before sir Francis Drake his death , we have none ( one small pinnace except ) which we assure know be take by chance , fall single into a fleet of five frigate ( of which be generali Don Pedro Telio ) near unto the hand of Dominica , and not by the valour of don Bernaldino : the which the success five frigate of the king afterwards have but ill success , of the king for one of they we burn in the harbour of saint Juan [ three 594 ] de Puerto rico , and one other be sink in the same harbour , and the other three be burn among many other ship at the take of Cadiz . this i think in wise man judgement , will seem a silly cause to make a man sorrow to death . for true it be , sir the certain Francis Drake die of the flux which he have grow ‘ sirtrmcis^ upon eight day before his death , and yield drake die up his spirit like a christian to his creator quiet in his cabin . and when the generali shall survey his loss , he shall find it more than the loss of the english , and the most of he , destroy by the bullet : but the death of sir Francis Drake be of so great comfort unto the Spaniard , that it be think to be a sufficient amends , although their whole fleet have be utter lose . 254 third , the generali do say of his own credit , and not by intelligence from any indian or other , that on the eleven of march last he meet the english fleet at the he of Pinos , be fourteen good ship : who although they have the wind of he , yet he set upon they three time with all their ship : but the english fleet flee , and refuse to fight , shoot now and then a shot , but especial the vice-admiral . this three lie of the generali don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda ( who name for the prolixity thereof may be draw somewhat near the length of a cable ) have not colour of protection , but it have a just proportion in measure to the lie of old Bernardino de Mendoza his countryman , concern the A payee of overthrow of her majesty navy in the year one spanish she thousand five hundred eighty and eight . for except don Bernaldino the generali do purpose to win the whetstone from don Bernardino de Mendoza the old spanish Iyer ; i can conjecture why he shall write to his country for a truth , that he chase the english navy with nine ship , and do three several time give the onset to the english fleet , who be fourteen good ship ( as he say ) do fly and refuse to fight ; consider that the spanish vice-admiral ( if he be live ) the spanish and many other can witness the contrary : who fight vice-admiral like a true valiant man , depart from the fight with a turn and batter ship to save she from sink . it neither can i imagine that there be any one in the spanish fleet ( don Bernaldino except ) that will say they be less than twenty sail of ship when they meet the english fleet : and the spanish navy can witness that they receive such store of bullet from the english fleet , that they be glad to depart , and in despite of they the english navy do hold their determine course : and take a view of the spanish fleet the next day , their number be not above thirteen after the fight . 255 ’ * the translation of the spanish word lancha be here mistake . this lie be make in the general own forge . the english voyage ship , which do argue that they be either sink or flee to harbour to save themselves . four , the general say , that the english fleet flee away , and leave their * oar for haste behind they in the sea . it be strange that they shall leave behind they oar in the sea , since there be not in the english fleet either galley or galliass , which require the use of oar : as for the oar of their ship-boat and other such small vessel , they have stow they aboard their ship , and be not impediment unto they , but most necessary for they to use , and therefore not likely they will cast they overboard : but it be more likely , that the generali fall into some pleasant dream at sea , wherein he do see a false apparition of victory against the english , and for lack of matter do set this down in his letter for news to his country : it be sin to belie the devil , and therefore the generali shall have his right : the letter be so well contrive , and yet with no great eloquence , but with such art , that there be not many more line , than there be lie , which show that there be wonderful and extraordinary gift in the generali : but i be persuade if don Bernaldino have think that his letter shall have be print , he will have omit many thing contain in the letter : for the doctor do use he somewhat hardly in show the letter open , and more in suffer it to be print : for friend may like good fellow send lie one to the other for recreation , and feed their friend with some small taste thereof , so it be keep close , without danger to incur the title of a lie generali : but as the matter be now handle through the simplicity of the doctor , i can see but the generali don Bernaldino be like to carry the title equal betwixt both his shoulder . 256 five , the generali do say in his print letter , that [ hl 595 - ] notwithstanding all the diligence he can use , he can not cause the english fleet to stay nor come near they , nor discharge one harquebus or piece of artillery , but flee away as fast as they can . a nd this lie also he do not receive by intelligence from any other , but himself be a eyewitness in the action , which make he bold to send this with the rest into his country for current news : but herein don Bernaldino be more bold than wise , for the turn and batter side of his galleon , be compare the tomb side with her majesty ship , and other that serve in of the spanish that fight , do declare , that his ship receive at least two bullet for one . neither can it be conceal but Bernaldino oj he own countryman ( if any do favour truth ) may lie . easy see the loss , and late reparation , do unto the king fleet , since they do encounter with the english navy , whensoever they that remain shall arrive in Spain . but the generali seem to be a very good proficient in his profession , and wax somewhat bold , tread the true step of old Bernardino de Mendoza : and yet Mendoza be somewhat more wary in his lie , for he have sometime the colour of intelligence to shadow they : but the generali grow from boldness to impudency make no scruple to say , that the english navy flee as fast as they can without discharge any harquebus or piece of artillery , when as the batter side of his ship do return the lie to his face : for in this conflict don Bernaldino do behave himself so valiant , that he be always far off7 in the fight , and have so great care of his own person , that he stand clear from the danger of musket or any small shot , and dare not apprpch ; whereas our the order of generali be the foremost , and so hold his place , the english until by order of fight other ship be to have naw . their turn , accord to his former direction : who wise and politic have so order his vangarde , ten 257 r and rearward , that as the manner of it be altogether strange to the Spaniarde , so may they have be without all hope of victory , if their generali have be a man of any judgement in sea-fight : i know no reason why the english navy shall fly from he ; the Spaniard for the Spaniarde may put all the gain in his eye that can brag ever he do win from the english : peradventure some of his gain . novice of our country meet the generali in Spain , and hear a repetition of so many syllable in one name , as don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , may think they to be word of conjuration , and for fear of raise a spirit , may fly from he as from the devil : or some simple indian slave hear the like repetition of his long and tedious name , may suppose it to be a army of Spaniards , and for fear run away : but the commander and captain of the english navy spanish brag be man of such resolution , that no spanish brag can be of no value dismay they ( for they have often meet they with their ^ent^ pike in their spanish beard ) nor the countenance of it don Bernaldino quail they , although he be acowtre in his gild leather buskin , and his Toledo rapier . six the generali say in his letter , that notwithstanding their fly away so fast , the english leave they one good ship well man , who tell he that Drake die in number de dios : in which ship be one hundred and forty man , and fifteen noble captain of the best sort . the generali don Bernaldino , like a resolute Spaniarde have already go over his shoe , make no danger to wade over his boot also : and as he have begin , so he do conclude . i marvel that he do not in write his discourse remember this old say : that be , a liar ought to have a good memory : it be much better for he in my opinion to revoke the testimony which he say he have from the Englishman , concern sir Francis Drake his death at number de dios , and stand to the intelligence receive from 258 the silly indian slave , as it appear in his first lie : for without all doubt there be no english man that will say ( if he have his right sense ) that he die at number de dios , for they all know the contrary : neither can the general avouch that he receive intelligence from any english man , that after the death of sir Francis drake they do elect for generali colonel Quebraran don Bernal - ( as he do most false affirm in the latter end of ra ™ his vain and frivolous letter ) see that this name new^nd^ be strange and unknown to any in the english navy . Grange name . neither do i imagine that any of those which the generali say he have take , be so forgetful , as not to remember their general name . but without all doubt this addition of so new and strange a name to the english generali , do prove that don Bernaldino be not unfurnish of a forge and storehouse of lie , from whence as from a everflow fountain , he send forth lie of all sort sufficient for his own store , and great plenty to furnish his friend : the generali be much behold to his godfather who give he the name Bernaldino , which we in english do take to be plain Barnard , which name have as it be a kind of privilege from be sharp reprehend , when the party be think to err : for it be a common say among the schoolman that Bernardus non videt omnia , viz. Barnard see not all thing , ( when he do dissent from their opinion ) the which favour we can be content to yield to Bernaldino for the name sake , if he be not take with so many manifest and impudent lie : neither do i think that signior Bernaldino will say , that he see all that he have write , be it speak in council for shame the generali : for be there any man so void of reason as to think , that any Englishman be demand of his general name , will write or speak Quebraran for Baskervil . so much difference there be in the sound of the syllable , as there be no affinity at all , or likelihood of truth . but such be the general rare gift , ( be it speak to 259 [ three . 596. i the schoolman of modesty do use this kind of reprehension , when they do think the author to err . the difference betwixt Quebraran and basker-vill . his small praise ) that we Englishman must of force confess , that the generali have give a proud onset to carry the whetstone from signior Bernaldino de Mendoza : neither will the hundred and forty man and fifteen noble captain ( which he say he do take , of who he may have be right inform of their general name ) acquit he of lie forgery , for give the name of Quebraran to the english generali . as for the good ship well man , which he say the english leave they after the fight , i be persuade he have no man to witness that lie , for the ship be separate by weather from the english fleet in the night , thirteen day before the fight with the spanish navy , and never to any man knowledge come more in sight the generali of the english fleet . if the spanish ship by chance make great do take the say well man ship ( as they call she ) ^ “ di^si^ 1 doubt not but they have the ship , the hundred and ship which be forty man , and the fifteen noble captain to show : suppose not to but evermore i guess the spanish reckon will fall strike one short when it be examine , for the fifteen noble Capi noble ta'ne prove , ( as i take it ) but three , who loss captain ™ ‘ i grieve to think on : neither do the Spaniard gain contrary to the they by valour , or we loose or leave they for cowgeneral lie ardise , as most untrue this brag liar have certify . wi^rme but ®ut tbe generali like a provident man , to make his ‘ ‘ three ™ ** fame and credit the great with his prince and country , take upon he ( among other his miracle perform before the english fleet ) by way of amplification to make small matter seem great , as a little shoe to serve a great foot , and find that it can hardly be bring to pass , he do so stretch the leather with his tooth that it be ready to break : and yet notwithstanding all this will not serve his purpose ; for the print of the letter do mar the play , and bring such matter in question , as the generali do wish might be conceal , and be he not of so dry and choleric a complexion , as common Spaniards be , he will blush for very shame in publish so impudent 260 such manifest untruth . for sithence his meeting with the english fleet at the he of Pinos , there have be by the worthy english general a honourable expedition from England into the continent of Spain , where among other exploit have take the city of Cadiz , in the sack thereof be find some of don the first Bernaldino his print letter : which come to the hand of a captai ne that serve in sir Francis drake last voyage to the west Indies , he have think very fit ( in regard of the slander to the english navy contain in the say letter ) to quote the error , that the truth only may appear , to all such as have a desire to be right inform of such accident as befall they in this late voyage to the west Indies : and this may suffice to show don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda his great judgement in amplify small matter , or of nothing to make in show somewhat . and now have thus far inform you of the truth in reproof of the slanderous , false , and untrue report of this glorious lie generali , with a true disproof to some of the gross of his lie , i will leave he with the rest of his lie letter , and the circumstance therein contain to your censure : who in discretion may easy discern the same : and have here follow plain and true set down the course and order of our whole fight after we meet . the meeting of our english navy and the spanish fleet , and the order of our encounter . Unday the first of march , accord to our computation , we descry the hand of Pinos , where hale in for the western part thereof , think there to have water , be within four league off it southerly , we send in three of our pinnace to discover the harbour , and to sound afore we , about one of the clock in the afternoon ; the same day we discover a fleet of twenty 261 the first discovery of the spanish fleet . [ « i - 597 - ] hie incoimt betwixt the english and the spanish ship . the english voyage sail , and deem they to be the spanish fleet , we keep our loof to get the wind , but their vice-admiral with diverse other ship go about to cut off our pinnaces : so that our generali with some other of our ship , be force to tack about upon the larbourd tack , and so run in towards the land keep the wind , so as we recover our pinnace ; which force the enemy ship to tack about , and to take the aid of their fleet , and be come near unto they they shoot at we ; we still approach , have our close fight up , our flag , ensign and streamer display , our man orderly place in each quarter , but forbear our fight until our generali begin , and give we warning to come in and fight , by shoot off " a great piece , accord to his former direction : so be within musket shoot , the vice-admiral of the spanish fleet come near unto we , to who our vice-admiral John Traughton captain of the Elizabeth bonadventure give fight , betwixt who there be the great volley of small shot change that light have be hear at sea , which continue a long half hour . in which time the spanish fleet come in to fight . Oure generali sir Thomas Baskervill be in the garland ( whereof Humphrey Reignolds be captain , be the next ship unto the Elizabeth bonadventure ) bear up to the enemy , play with his great ordinance hot until he come within musket shoot . Jonas boden-ham captain of the defiance , and Henry Savile captain of the adventure , come likewise in to fight with they . after the garland be within musket shot play her part , and make good fight for the space of a hour . the defiance bear up likewise and have her turn : after come the adventure again within musket shoot , who have change many a great bullet with they before , renew his fight , and continue it a hour with small shot . then come Thomas Drake captain of the hope , who last of all have his turn . thus have all the queen ship their course : the 262 merchant ship with other small vessel be without the queen ship , shoot when they see opportunity . after the enemy find no good to be do ( be well beat ) fall from we , the adventure play upon they with her great ordinance , make three of the last shoot at they : their vice-admiral with diverse other of their ship , be so beat that they leave off the fight , and be force to lie in the wind , for that they dare not lie of either board by reason of their many and great leak , which they have receive by our great shot . the generali with the rest of their fleet tack about , fall in our wake , think to get the wind , which in the beginning we seek to hinder . but our generali see that in hold the wind we shall shoot our self into the bay , give they the wind . all that night they keep themselves upon our broad side , notwithstanding our admiral carry his cresset-light all night , have great care of our small ship . this fight continue about four hour till it be near night , in the which fight , thanks be to God , there be slay so few person of our english fleet , as i think the like conflict have not be perform with so little loss of man : what harm befall the Spaniard in their fleet i leave to your judgement . yet our eye can witness their ship be sore beat and rack through , whereby there be such fall back and lie by the lee to stop their leak , as some of they be drive to haste away , and rather to run on shore to save themselves then sink in the sea : beside within two hour after our fight with they , we see one of their great ship on fire which burn into the sea , and all the stern of another of their ship blow up : and in the morning a ship of our fleet be run so near the land , that to double the cape de los Corrientes he must of necessity tack about and fall in the wake of the enemy , which cause our generali in the garland and the defiance to tack about ; which two ship force the three ship of the 263 the spanish vice-admiral can witness , what stucesse they have in this fight . the english admiral carry his cresset light , notwithstanding the enemy be upon his broad side . the english receive little loss in this conflict . enemy ( which be put forth to take our ship , or else to cause she run on ground ) to return to their fleet to save themselves , hoist all their sail the remain - for haste : this morning they be fair by we have derofthe the wonderful [ n ( je of USj be but thirteen sail of their werehut^ to be see : than we stroke our top sail thirteen think to have fight with they again , which they sail . perceive tack about from we , and after that never dare nor will come near we : what become of the rest of their fleet we know not , but true it be that they be in great distress mighty beat and tear , by have receive many bullet from we . all this day we have sight of they , but they show little will to fight or come near we , so we keep our course west , and by north , about six of the clock at night lose the sight of they . and this be a true discourse of our fight with the spanish fleet . the which the author hereof will justify with the adventure of his life , against any Spaniarde serve in that action , that shall contradict the same . Henry Savile . [ Iii . 598. ] Thomas Baskervil knight , his approbation to the former twofold discourse of captain Savile . Thomas Baskervill knight , generali ot her majesty late indian armada in the late conflict have between the spanish fleet and we , have peruse the spanish letter write by don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , generali of the king of Spain navy , and also have peruse captain Henry Savile his answer unto the six exception in the general letter , with his discourse of the manner of our fight with the spanish fleet , do say that the say Henry Savile have answer the letter , and set down the order of the fight sincere accord to truth , for testimony of which i have hereunto set my hand . 264 and if don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda the generali shall take any exception to this my approbation , or stand in the justification of his lie letter write to doctor Peter Florez , precedent of the contractation house for the Indies , and by he for bernaldinos glory late put in print : i then say that he false lie , and that i will maintain against he with whatsoever arm he shall make choice of . and because the kingdom wherein we abide be enemy ( by reason of which there be no mean in either of they , to maintain that i have write ) let he make choice of any indifferent kingdom of equal distance from either realm , and i will there be ready to maintain as much as i have write : but if by my employment into France i be so stay by her majesty commandments , that i can out of that realm meet he in any other , i can see why he shall take any exception to that , consider the equality of the place , and that the army of both our prince be there resident . Thomas Baskervile . 265 [ a true 