which we likewise take , where we find champeche-wood good to dye withal , with wax , and honey . this do we leave this coast , and turn up to cape de Cotoche again , and ankor every day at noon , because of the brize , and in turn up i lose my bark call the adventure , which be take by 2 frigate of war , which be man out from campeche : wherein captain hen and thirteen of my man be take , and afterward execute , as since we understand by some spanish prisoner that be take in those part . after we have stay five week on this coast , we shape our course for Havana , where find nothing , we disemboqued , and come along by the isle of Bermuda , and cross over to the bank near cape race in 22 fathom : and from thence sail for England , we fall with silly about the first of July , and within two day after arrive at Plymouth , where we find the right honourable the earl of Essex set forth with a great fleet for the isle of the azore . a excellent ruttier for the island of the west Indies , and for Tierra firma , and Nueva Espanna . f a man depart from the bar of saint Lucar in summer time , he must steer southwest until he have sight of Punta de Naga , which be in the isle of tenerif . the mark to know it be these . a high point slope to the sea , and at the easter point it have two down fall like partition , and they show to be separate from the main of the island and stand in 28 degree and a half . and if thou will have sight of the grand Canaria , and find thy self with Punta de Naga , thou shall then steer Southwest and by south , and so thou shall have sight of Canaria which stand in 28 degree . and thou must come to anchor on the southeast side 280 of the island . but i advise thou , if it be in winter time , that thou keep another course , and that as follow . the course that a man must keep depart in winter for the Indies from Sant Lucar . depart from Sant Lucar in winter thou shall go west and by south keep along the coast , because if thou go far from the coast , thou shall meet with the wind off the sea until thou be as high shot as cape Cantin , which be a low flat cape with the sea . cape Cantin . and thou shall see a great wood before thou come at a great wood this cape , call Casa deal Cavallero . and from thence before you thou shall steer thy old course , that be southwest and by south for the isle of Alegranza , and Lancerota ; and ' when thou be north and south with Alegranza , thou shall steer thence Southwest , and so thou shall see the Canaria , which be a round high land , and stand in twenty eight degree . what thou must do if a contrary wind take thou fifty league off the shore . when thou be fifty league shoot on thy way into the sea Southwest off , and there thou chance to meet with a contrary wind off the sea , and if it force thou to put room , than thou shall steer Northeast and by east , and shall hall with sight of Cabos del plata , which show when thou be a seaboord so far as thou may descry they , to be like two point of white sand : and if it be clear thou shall see within the land certain high hill lie northwest and by west call las Sierras de Zahara , and be three league from land thou shall have thirty fathom water , and sand : and from thence to the bay of Cadiz thou shall go along northwest by the coast : and if thou be in thirty or forty fathom , thou shall have oaze ; but if thou be in less than thirty fathom , thou shall have other sound ; which if it chance , than thou be against saint 281 the bay of Cadiz . San Pedro Pedro and if it be by day thou shall see the ermi-san Sebastian . tage of gaunt Sebastian , which seem to be a ship under sail . and thou shall go into the bay take los Puercos . heed of the Puercos , give they a good birth off . and if thou chance to be benight when thou fall with the bay , and will go into the bay , thou shall carry thy lead in thy hand , and be sound : and find thy self in rocky ground , thou shall steer north because of shun the puercos : and yet give they not thediamant . too great a birth because of the diamant , and so thou may go in , sound when thou think good . And be benight and then not east and west with the bay , and if thou do not go into it , then make the large board thou can keep off till day . the canary . if thou be at the canary and will sail to Nueva Espanna , thou shall sail four and twenty hour south because of the calm of Fierro . and from thence thou shall go westsouthwest , until thou find thy self in twenty degree . and than thou must go west and the isle de - by south , which be the course for the isle Deseada . and seada in the from Deseada thou shall go west and by north , be-westcause of the variation of the compass . And fall with * degree of Deseada , thou shall find it to rise low with the sea : latitude . and it stand in 15 degree . and the eastermost part be the sharp , and small than the west point . and if thou be go for Tierra firma , thou shall go west and by south until thou come to Dominica , and there on the northwest side be a river , where thou mark to may water . the mark to know it be a certain know domi - high land full of hill . And see it when thou be mca by . far ogr to the it make in the midst a partition ; so that a man will think it divide the island in two part . and this island stand in 14 degree and a half . i advise thou that if thou will go for Nueva Guadalupe . Espanna , and so do pass between Guadalupe and monserate . monserate to the westward , that be thus open off the entrance betwixt they thou shall go westnorthwest , 282 and so shall have sight of Santa Cruz , which stand Santa Cruz. in seventeen degree and a half . and the mark to know it be these . it be a island not very high , and lie east and west , and at the east end it be low than at the west end . And go forward on thy course thou shall run westnorthwest , and so thou shall go to have sight of the isle of San Juan de Puerto rico , which be a island S. Juan the lie east and west , and stand in eighteen degree . P^to rico . and the mark be these . that on the west end it be low , and the eastermost be the high . and if thou fall with the midst of the island , than thou shall go a long it to the west unto Cabo Roxo , which be cape roxo . the end of the isle . and from thence the coast run [ ill . 605. ] north to Punta Aguada . Cape roxo have certain red cliff . thou must steer west and by south from cape Roxo to find Mona , and so thou shall have sight of Mona . Mona . and the mark thereof be these , it be a low land lie east and west : and on the east end it be high , it have a slope towards the sea , and stand in 18. degree , rather less than moor . and if it be by day , than thou shall run west and shall see Saona : Saona . which be a island lie without Hispaniola , and lie east and west , and be full of tree ; and have certain sandy bay . and if it be clear weather thou shall see within the land of Hispaniola certain high hill call las Sierras the yguey . And be benight upon Mona , alas Sierras de than thou shall steer west and by south , because of certain shoald that lie off Saona : but have day light and no sight of land , thou shall loose up northwest and so pass by it , and as thou go along the coast of Hispaniola , and see the sea to be cast up into the air , than thou shall be about 10 league off the harbour of Santo Domingo , and these mounting up be call the spout . be the spout . but i advise thou , that if thou be benight when Santo thou fall with Santo Domingo , than thou must keep Domingo . the hill call Sierras de las mina viejas to the north - 283 Puerto hermosa . west . and if thou will go into Santo Domingo , and meet there with a forcible northerly wind , than the best way be to run east till it be day . and have daylight thou shall cast about , and so thou must ply to windward until the northerly wind be do : and when it be past , make all the sail thou can to hale with the sight of Calle de las i Damas : and when thou have sight thereof thou shall lie with thy stem with a sandy bay , which lie on the other side : and thou must take in thy main sail , and go so till thou bring thy self open with the midst of the river ; and so have open the river , thou must go with great care in the midst of the same , with all thy sail up , except thy main sail , and thou must have thy boat out , if it be needful to sound or to tow thy ship , if she cast too much to the loof , for the current will cast here to the loof : wherefore be sure to have thy boat out to help thy steerage : and this be the way whereby thou must work . the course from Santo Domingo to go for Nueva Espanna . i advise thou that if thou will go from Santo Domingo for Nueva Espanna , thou shall go Southwest and by south , and so thou shall have sight of Punta de Nizao , which be a low point , and be the end of the hill call Sierras de las mina viejas , and towards the northwest of they thou shall see a low land , and to go into Hocoa thou shall stir from this point of Nizao westnorthwest , and thou shall see the point of Puerto Hermoso , and the bay that it make : and thou must be sure to keep near the shore to find a good road , and fear not to go near the land : for all be deep water , and clear ground , and let not fall thy anchor till thou be past all the river ; and beware of the land , for if thou ride much without , thy anchor will come home , because it be rocky and flat ground . and thou must be ready , that when thy anchor come home , 284 thou have thy moaring ready in thy boat to carry on shore with four or five man , and if thou think good , thou may let they fall on land with a rope . and when thou be come to ’ anchor thou may send on shore to moare , so shall thou be best moar . the course from Hocoa to Nueva Espanna . go from Hocoa to Nueva Espanna thou shall stir Southwest : and this way thou shall find the isle Beata , and Alto velo : Beata have these mark : Beata , and than it be a low land with the sea , and full of tree : and mar^s of-on the east side a high land or cliff ; and Alto velo alto velo , and have these mark . a black round land , and the easter - ma^s most part thereof be high , and it have a downfall . when thou be north and south with * than thou shall go west , until thou be so far shoot as the frail : and from thence go west and by north , frail . and keep this course thou shall have sight of cape Tiburon . and if by keep this course thou have sight of a little island , thou may make account it be the isle of Baque : and it be hard to the land , and the isle of from thence thou shall go west , keep thy self out until thou double a point that make as it be a great bay , and than thou must go west and by north , till thou come to cape Tiburon , that have a round black cape de land , and in some part thereof certain white cliff . Tiburon . i advise thou that when thou be against cape de Tiburon , thou stir northwest , and so thou shall have sight of Cuba , which lie east and west : and thou Cuba . shall see certain hill which be call Sierras deal Cobre , and in the high of they be the harbour of saint Iago de S. Iago de Cuba : and find thy self so , thou may run west unto cape de Cruz. and before thou see cape de Sierras de tarquino . [ he . 606. ] self . and if thou chance to have the water trouble , as though thy ship do raise up the sand from the 285 Cruz thou shall see the hill call Sierras de tarquino , and from these hill to cape de Cruz the land wax low and low , and it be low of all at the cape it cape de Cruz in 19 , deg . and better . los Jardines . the isle de Pinos . Cape de Corrientes . Cape de Sant Anton in 22. degree . ground , be not afraid : for this place be call the nine fathom : for thou shall find no less water upon it , and it be the shallow water that thou shall have . thou must mark that cape de Cruz make a end of the coast that come from the east to the west , and begin the course that go north and south , and stand in 19 degree , rather more then less . from cape de Cruz thou must stir westnorthwest : and this way thou shall have sight of the isle de Pinos , and if thou have fair weather , than thou must go northwest , and by west , because of the current that will set thou out to sea . And keep this course thou shall have sight of a high land . i tell thou it be the mark of the isle call los Jardines , and be common call the land of Zagueio : and than thou shall go west and by south : and if it be by night , then go westsouthwest until thou have bring thy self out from the Jardines . And be by day thou shall keep off the land , and shall go westnorthwest , and so thou shall see the isle de Pinos . the mark to know the cape de Santo Antonio . the headland call Capo de Santo Antonio be a low land , and full of tree , and upon the cape it self it have two or three thick wood , and the coast lie northwest and southeast . and thou must also take good heed that thou have sight on the same coast of a white sandy bay ; and it be on the same coast that lie northwest and southeast . and these be the mark from Punta de las Arenas , or the point of the sand , to the cape of saint Anthony , and from the cape de Corrientes to Punta de las Arenas thou shall have a great bay , be so long , that if thou be not very near the shore thou can not see land , it be so low . and if thou see not the land well , it will show to be a tuft of tree . and the cape of S. Anthony stand in 22. degree . 286 a rutty that a man must keep from Dominica to Martinino , and so to Tierra firma . i advise thou that go from Martinino or Dominica , if thou will go for Margarita , that thou stir south and by west , because of the great current that go here , and set northwest . and by this course thou shall find the testigo , which be 4 or 5 island : and the testigo . if thou will not go so much to windward , than thou shall see frail , which be three small island . and frail . if thou will go into the harbour of Manpater , it be present in double of the point on the east side to the southward . And be mind to go for puerto de Puerto de Juan Griego , which lie on the northside , then go Juan g ™ ? . 0-neere the land , and along the coast of the west , and present thou shall have sight of puerto de Juan Griego ; it stand in 11. degree . i advise thou that go from Matalino , which stand in 13. degree , if thou will go to Cartagena , thou shall go west and by south , and by this way thou shall have sight of the isle of Curazao and Aruba , Curasao . which stand in 12. degree : from these island thou aruba-shalt go west ; and when thou be north and south with Monjes , thou shall see they to be three little Monjes three white hand , and they be white because of the multitude an^s‘ of bird that be there : they stand in a triangle . from thence thou shall go west , if it be by day , and so shall have sight of Coquebacoa that stand in 12. Coquebacoa . degree . And be by night , then go northwest : and by day thou shall cast to go for the land again westsouthwest . Coquebacoa have a certain point not very high , and within this point thou shall see in the inland certain hill which be call las Sierras de Avite . go from this point of Coquebacoa thou shall run west , and shall run along the coast , and shall go to have the sight of Baya honda and Portete , which be a low honda . land even with the sea . Portete . 287 Rio de palominos . morn hermoso . Rio grande . Isla de Arenas . Samba or hamba . the cape de la Vela lie with a red show not very high ; and without this cape about a league there be a little copple rock . a man may be bold to go betwixt this rock and the main . And go from this cape to have sight of cape deal Aguja thou must stir Southwest , and thou shall have sight of the Ancones which lie at the end of the hill call Sierras Nevadas . and then present thou shall see the cape deal Aguja : the mark whereof be these : it be a low cape , and upon it be a copy not very high , and there begin the high land of the Sierras Nevadas , or snowy mountain . take this for a warning that if thou go for cape de la Vela by night by the course abovesaid , and come into a whitish water , then sound and thou shall find 40. fathom , and thy sound will be certain small sandy white oaze , and some small weed . and than thou may make account that thou be north and south with the river call Rio de Palominos , which come out of the midst of the Sierras Nevadas . And be benight thou shall go westnorthwest , or west and by north until day : and be day then thou may hale in with sight of the land Southwest , because thou may be sure to come right in with it . if thou go from cape deal Aguja for Cartagena , if it be by day , thou shall go west and by south , and shall go to have sight of Morro Hermoso , that be the fair mountain , which lie to the westward of Rio grande . And be alone , and with a good ship of sail , and draw towards night , than thou must come to anchor behind Morro hermoso : and after the first watch thou must set sail , and go out west and by north , because thou must be sure to keep a seaboord from the island de Arenas , which lie 2 league to seaward right against Samba . and if thou go from cape deal Aguja by night , thou shall go west and by north : and so thou shall go without the force of the water of Rio Grande . and 288 being by day thou shall go along the coast , and shall see Morro hermoso , which , as i have say , lie to the west of Rio Grande , and have for mark , a face of a black land not very high , and it be round . and if thou depart by day from Morro hermoso , thou must go west , and must take heed , as i say before , of the isle de Arenas , which lie north and south of Samba . Samba have for a mark as it be a galley tow . And go this way by day , thou shall see el buio del Gato , which be a high el buio < kl land with certain white cliff to the seaward : and also Gat0‘ moor to the west thou shall see the point call Punta Punta de la de la Canoa , which be a low land even with the water : cmoa ' and there end the coast which lie east and west . and the bay that go to Cartagena begin here , Cartagena . and lie north-east and Southwest . and take this for a warning , that if thou be benight against Samba , thou shall take in thy sail , and lie off to the offward until midnight without any sail abroad until midnight : and from midnight forward thou shall lie so into the land without sail : and if in the break of day thou see no land , then go Southwest , and if this way thou have sight of certain white cliff , make account it be buio deal Gato . take this for a warning , if thy ship be great come not nigh the land in the bay : i mean thou may not with a great ship come nigh the land from the point de la Canoa until thou come to Cartagena , because in many place there be not above 3 or 4 fathom at the most . in all this bay there be no high land but the galley , which be right over the harbour of Cartagena . and if it chance that any man come for this place that the land never be here before , then let he look for a little °f hill like a tow galley lie east and west , and all carta&na-the land be low , and seem to be full of tree . have these sight , then make account thou be against Cartagena , and to go in thou have nothing to be afraid of : but keep thyself hard aboard the point the point of of ycaco : and then when thou come to double the Acatos . ten 289 t a shall half a league to the sea . the isle of care . Sal Medina . Cabeza de Cativa . Rio de Francisco . the isle of Cativa . Punta de samblas . Sierras de Santa Cruz. [ Iii . 608. ] the english voyage point del judeo , give a breadth off , because there be a shall . i advise thou that if thou be benight , when thou be at the point de la canoa , and will enter into Cartagena by night , that thou take good heed of a shall that lie half a league to the sea , and so thou shall go in 8 fathom , and sandy ground . and when thou find thy self in deep water , as in 30 fathom and more , than the harbour will be open before thou . and if thou have any fresh northern wind , then loof up to the seaward , and lie with thy stem eastsoutheast , and so thou may go in east through the midst of the channel : and though it be by night , yet thou may go in safe , because it be all clear . and if the night be clear thou shall have sight of the island call care , and it be a high land . come from Cartagena to go for number de dios in the time of the northern wind , thou must bring thy self to the offward of sal medina : and thence stir west till thou bring thy self north and south with Cabeza de Cativa ; and then go Southwest and by west , and thou shall so fall with Rio de Francisco . it have for mark a certain land not very high , and within the land certain high hill lie east and west . and on the west of the river of Francisco thou shall see certain cliff that bee six league from number de dios , incline towards the sea . i advise thou that go this course above write ; if thou see 3 or 4 isle lie low with the sea , and also lie east and west , thou may make account that they be the island de Cativa , and then run west , and so thou shall go along the coast . and if thou see by this way a point of low land , make account it be Punta de samblas : and upon it thou shall see a row of high rocky hill , and they be the mountain of Santa Cruz. if thou come from Cartagena to go to number de dios in the time of the sea wind , when thou be out from sal Medina , thou shall go west and by north , that thou 290 may have sea-room , and take the Brisas or northern wind when they come : and go till thou be north and south with the harbour of number de dios : and from thence go Southwest , and if by this way thou see a row of high hill on a coast that lie north-east and Southwest , make account they be Sierras de las mina Sierras de las viejas , which mina vieja lie north and south with the mina vtejas-harbour of velo alto . have keep this course abovesaid , Puerto de and have sight of the former mark , thou may a^0 ' account that thou be on the west side of number de number de Dios. Dios - furthermore when thou have sight of a high land , and thou be north and south with it , and in the top thereof thou see as it be a little table , if it be high towards the east , then make account that thou be north and south with number de dios , i say , with the harbour of number de dios , and this hill be call Sierra de sierra de Capira . and if thou will go into the harbour , thou must keep thy prow right against this hill , and come near to the shore , thou shall see a ledge of rock , and °f it be without , and thou may go in what depth thou rocks-think good , or at which place thou find most water in . and to the west of the harbour thou shall see two or isla de hs three island call Islas de los bastimentos . Bastimentos . take this for a warning , if thou come out of number Tbe course to de dios in the time of the Brisas or northern wind , and will go for Cartagena , thou shall come out in the dios to morning , and shall go northnorthwest until 3 of the Cartagena . clock at afternoon , and then cast about to the land , until thou be hard aboard the shore , and so thou must go turn until thou have double Cabeza de Cativa : and have double it then ply to windward all that thou may : and if thou be eastnortheast off it , than thou shall have sight of the hand of Baru , which be 3 or 4 island Islas de Baru . lie low , and be all full of tree : and then present thou shall have sight of the galley that be over Cartagena , and it be like a galley tow . i advise thou , that if thou come for Cartagena in the 291 time abovesaid , and come from Cabeza de Cativa , if the wind will not suffer thou to lie but west , then go thus if thou see a great high island full of mountain , and on the north side thereof thou see a ledge of rock two league into the sea , thou may be islafuerte . sure it be Isla fuerte : but if thou see not the rock , give they a good breadth : and if thou will come to nc s' anchor , thou may ride well on the west side of they , betwixt the main and they in fifteen fathom ; and the sound be clay . and if thou will go between this and Islas de San the island of saint Barnardo to go into Cartagena , thou bat nardo . may go safe . and if any man ask thou how thou know the island of Baru and San Barnardo , thou may answer true , that the isle of San Barnardo be full of high hill , and certain sandy bay to seaward ; and the say isle have a good depth two or three league la Bacilla , to the sea : and this depth be call the Bacilla . and these be all the mark for the island of San Barnardo . And touch the isle of Baru , they be 3 or 4 little island and very even with the sea , and full of tree , and there be no good depth about they , but hard aboard they . the shoald ofSerrana . Seranilla . a rutty from Cartagena to Havana in Cuba . come from Cartagena to go to Havana , thou must go northnorthwest until thou be in fourteen degree : and then forwards thou shall go with great care to anchor every night , and when it be day set sail . and this be to be do in this place because of the shoald of Serrana : and so thou may proceed with a care to anchor when thou come about Seranilla , or near to it , which be in fifteen degree and a half . and upon it thou shall see a low flat land lie north-east and Southwest : and the sea beat upon it round about , except that on the southeast part it have certain shelf of sand , and on the west side it have a certain little copy , which from sea seem to be a ship under sail : and 292 being Northeast and Southwest off it , scant a league from they shall come out on the west side a certain shall , whereupon the sea do always beat . i advise thou that if thou can not pass on the west side , than thou must go betwixt the say little copy that it be like a sail and then shall : for the passage be good . but if thou depart from the serranilla to the northwest , and see a low land with the sea , and certain white sandy bay , and on the west side see a low land , and on the Eastside a little coast lie east and west , thou may make account it be cape de Corrientes . and if thou go from cape de Corrientes for cape de Santo Antonio , thou must go westnorthwest , and so thou shall go with the cape . the mark be a low land full of tree with certain white sandy bay : and upon the cape it self thou shall see two thick grove of great tree , and they be upon the cape it self . to go from the cape de Sant Antonio for Havana in the time of the north wind , thou shall go northwest until thou be clear of all the shoald of the cape , and then hale thy bowlines , and go as near the wind as thou can possible , until thou bring thy self unto 24. degree , and there sound , and thou shall find it the Tortugas , and thy sound will be white sand . thou must take heed what be say in the chapter before : for he that write the same have see it , and be witness to this : that come from Seranilla , and stir north and by east he have sight of a island stand in 16. degree , and it be on the shoald of cape de Camaron . and from thence , if thou have the wind large , go Northeast and by east , because of the variation of the compass , and thou shall make thy way Eastnortheast , and thou shall fall with Isla de Pinos . this i say , because the current set sometime west : and so it fall out to be true in march , anno domini 1582. i tell thou far , that we come out from this aforesaid isle stir north 293 case the corriente . Cape de San Antonio . [ Iii . 609. ] the Tortugas . Seranilla . a island in 16. degree . Baxos de Cabo de Camaron . the variation of the compass . Isla de Pinos . the current set here sometime west . the latitude of Cozumel in 19 deg . and one tierce . Las Tortugas . the little isle call Vermeja . Marks of Villa Rica . the english voyage and by east , for the wind will not suffer we to lie near the east , and one evening at sun go down we fall with a land , that have the same mark to our judgement with the cape de Corrientes : and because night be at hand , we wrought to double cape de Sant Antonio , stir west : and about midnight we have land all high right a head , and the coast lie southwest : and then we cast and lie Northeast till day : and be day , we see the land all a head , and we ply to windward to the east , and keep it a larboard till we have bring it southwest . and to be short , we go here on land in the same place that we first fall with in the evening before : and it be a island call Cozumel , lie on the coast of Yucatan . and this island be the land which we see first , seem by the mark to be the cape de Corrientes . we come to a anchor about the midst of the island , rather to the norther then the Souther part : there we find a town of Indians , who give we all thing which we need for our money : and we carry our astrolab on shore and take the height in 19 degree and one tierce . a man may go between this island and the coast of Yucatan , and the cape de Catoche at pleasure Northeast ; and the water will set in thy favour : and thou must go till thou be in 24. degree , and so thou shall have the sound of the Tortugas . the course to be keep from the cape de Santo Antonio for Nueva Espanna . if thou go from the cape de Santo Antonio for Nueva Espanna , and be late , thou shall stir westnorthwest till thou be in the height of 24. degree : and from thence thou shall stir something to the west , until thou bring thy self north and south with the little hand call Vermeja : and when thou be so , thou shall go Southwest , and by this way thou shall find villa Rica , which be in 19 degree and a half , and the sign be these . thou shall find a 294 ledge of high hill lie north-east and Southwest . but if thou chance to fall with a coast that lie north and south , than thou may account , that it be about the low ground of Almeria which have these mark . the it be a land not very high , and it be full of little copy . and if thou have clear weather , thou shall see within the land certain high hill which be call the hill of Papalo . and i advise thou that be so far shoot as the point call Punta delgada , which be the end of all those hill of villa Rica , thou may stir thence south and by west , and thou shall go along the coast , and shall see a low land , and with this land thou shall fall , go for saint Paul , and be so far shoot as saint Paul , if thou will go into the harbour , thou must stir Southwest : and this be the course that thou must keep be shot into the bay and thou shall go along the coast of the low land in sight thereof : and keep this course thou shall see on the other side a black hill , and it be call Monte de Carneros . take this for a note , that it lie over the house of buytron : and as thou do come near to the point of rock , thou must be sure to keep thy lead go , and shall have four fathom and a half or five fathom , and so thou may go through the midst of the channel . And come against the castle , thou shall give it some breadth off towards the arrecife or rock : and have double the castle , thou shall go from thence and shall bring thy self to a anchor hard by the Herreria , which be a clean bay , and thou shall ride against the hospitali . i advise thou that if thou be benight when thou be near to saint Paul , and meet with a northerly wind after midnight , that then thy best way be to bring thy self into thy corpse , and lie by , ply to windward , and to seaward in 20. fathom which depth thou shall have near the shore , to the northward : and be day , then go in with the harbour as thou can best , observe what be abovesaid . 295 Las Sierras de Papalo . saint Paul . Monte de Carneros . Casa de buytron . the castle of saint Juan de ullua . the hospitali . and i advise thou that if thou come from Villa Rica , and find thy self in 20. degree and a half , and see not land , and see that the water do alter , [ three . 610. ] thou shall sound 60. fathom water : and if in this depth thou have oaze , make account thou be east the river of anJ west with the river of Almeria . this course be mena . from the cape of Santo Antonio to Nueva Espanna without or aseaboord the alacrane or scorpion . now follow how to work , if a man come betwixt the alacrane and the main . if thou go from the cape de Santo Antonio and will go for Nueva Espanna within the alacrane or Alacranes , thou must stir west and by south , and scorpion . wa^ thou shall bring thy self in 20. fathom ; and if thou keep this course find less water , then go west and by north , and that way thou shall bring thy self into 20. fathom again , until thou have bring thy self north , and south with they the triangle , triangle . And be north and south with the triangle , Surta or than thou shall be also north and south with Surta : Zarza . from thence thou shall go Southwest : and by this the high hill coarse thou shall have sight of the high hill of saint of . Martin . Martin , which be certain high hill lie northwest and southeast , and they have a partition in the midst , and to the northwest they be high : and on the southeast part within the land , thou shall see something a high land , call pan de Minsapa , that be , the loaf of Minsapa , which be a round loaf not very high . the hill of saint Martin stand in 18. degree less one five part . i advise thou that when thou fall with saint Martin , and will go with saint John de ullua , than thou shall go westnorthwest : and this be the course that thou must keep , if thou be far off at sea , i mean so far off as thou may well descry the hill of saint Martin . 296 but if thou be near to the land , than thou must go northwest and by west , and thou shall so come along the coast , and thou shall find the coast to be low land : and come this course thou shall have sight of certain little hill not very high : than thou shall fall with the point call Punta de Antoni Serro : and these hill lie over the river of Medelin . and if when thou be east and west , with the Volcan or hill that cast out fire , any man do ask thou , where the harbour of Sant Juan de ullua be , thou may true answer , west and by south , and it stand in 18. degree and a half . the course to be keep from Nueva Espanna to the main of Spain in Europe . come from saint Juan de Ullua to go for Spain , thou shall stir north-east until thou be in 24. degree : and so be thou shall go east until thou bring thy self in the sounding of the Tortugas , and thy ground will be white sand . i advise thou , that if it be by night , thou go east ; and find the water to wax shoalder , then go Southwest , with a care to keep thy lead go , until thou loose ground , and come into great depth , because thou may fall to the north of the Tortugas . And go from this sound for Havana thou must stir southsoutheast , because of the current that carry thou to the east . and if by this way thou have sight of a high land , that seem to be like a loaf , make account it be the loaf of Cabanas . and to the east of this loaf thou shall see a land that have a plain . it show to be low , even with the sea , and as smooth as the sea : and from this land to the east the land be low and low . and from thence to Havana thou must go east . and if the wind will not let thou go that course , thou must turn up till thou be upon the harbour of Havana . the mark of the point of Havana be these , that on the east side it have a high black land , which be slope 297 Rio de Medelin . S. Juan de ullua in 18. deg . and a half . the Tortugas . the current to the east . Pan de Cabanas . Havana . the shold of mimbre , that be , ofosiar . the chattel ! reachethtozi . degree . the english voyage to the sea , with a little white tower on the top thereof : and as thou go into the port , thou must keep near the high black land , and when thou be hard to it , strike thy top sail in sign of peace to the castle , lest it shoot at thou . what course the Spaniard keep from Havana to Spain . if from Havana thou will set thy course for Spain , thou must go Northeast , and shall so have sight of the martyr , which stand in 24. degree and a half . and the coast lie east and west . the mark be these , it show like head of tree , and in some place certain rock with white sandy bay . and if the wind be large , thou may go east and by south until thou see the coast to lie Northeast and Southwest : and if the wind be scant , then go turn up : and take good heed that every evening at sun go down thou have sight of the land , and so thou must do be in the channel , until thou bring thy self into the midst of the channel : and thou must lie off from the go down of the sun , until the end of the first watch with thy corpse alone , without any more sail ; and from midnight forward cast about , and lie the other way with the like sail until day : and thus thou must do until thou bring thy self into the chanel . and if be in the chanel thou find the wind large , thou shall stir Northeast , with a care to go clean off the shold of the mimbre or the osiar . and if be in the chanel thou meet with the wind at north , than thou must turn with a little sail 4. glass one way , and 4. another , as thou think good . and if thou can not bear sail , than thou may go with all thy sail down , except when thou will cast about , thou may loose some small sail to wind thy ship . i advise thou , that when thou be come out of the chanel , thou shall be in 28. degree . and if it be 298 in summer , thou shall go north-east until thou be in 39 degree and i , which be the height of Flores : and thou shall go to the northward of Bermuda . and if la Bermuda . thou think good to go in more degree , to have the seawind , thou shall go by the same height , as i have say : and if thou shall find the wind off the sea , thou have no need to go in more height : and from thence thou shall go east and by south : and thou must go thus because of the variation of the compass . the variation and thus thou shall find the isle of Flores and Cuervo , °ft , u which stand in 39 degree i , and in 40. large . Theise ' mark be these . * thou may go from betwixt Flores and Cuervo , Flores and and must go east southeast , and so thou shall have cuerv0-sight of the island of sail , which be the island of S. saint George . George . And be at the land thou shall go along it , and when thou have double a certain little Headland that lie in the east point , than thou shall stir east and by north , and east . and thus go , thou shall have sight of Terzera , which be in 39 degree . the Terzera . mark be these . * and behind a certain black land something high , which be call el Brasil , stand the city call Angra . go from Terzera , thou shall run east Northeast , until thou bring thy self northwest , and southeast with the cape of saint Vincent . the cape of and thou may work thus be in summer : for s-vincent-alwayes thou shall have the wind at northwest . And be northwest and southeast with this cape , thou shall stir southeast and by east , and thou shall so fall with the land 6. or 7. league to the windward off they the wind cape on the coast , which lie north and south : than thou shall go along the coast to the south , until thou ,1 . see the cape . and the cape stand in 37. degree : themarke of the mark be these . it be a cape not very high , and be cape . black , slope to the sea . and from thence thou shall Vincent . double they asagresal southeast : and so run , thou shall then go east unto the cape of saint mary : and thfcape of from this cape go east Northeast , and so thou shall saint marry . 299 the course in winter from the chanel of Bahama . the variation of the compass . many lose upon Bermuda by negligence . the isle of saint marie . faial . the bar of saint Lucar . Sierras de Monchico . run to have sight of Arenas Gordas : and than thou shall see present a little hill towards the east which be call Cabeza de Pedro Garcia . and if thou be benight , and come into 8. or 9 fathom , than i wish thou to come to anchor , until it be day , and then call for a pilot , that may by some mean carry thou into harbour . i advise thou , if in the winter time thou be shoot out of the narrow of the chanel of Bahama , and will go for Spain , that thou must go east Northeast , until thou be in 30. degree rather less than moor ; and than thou may go east and by south , because of the variation of the compass . And stir hence east southeast , thou shall go on the southside of Bermuda : and must go with great care , because many have be lose here about this island , because of their negligence . and when thou be sure thou be past this island , then go east Northeast , until thou be in the height of seven and thirty degree : which be in the height of the island of saint marie . And go thus , and not see land , but see the sea to break , make account it be the rock call las Hormigas . and if thou think good to go to faial , thou shall go till thou be in 38. degree scant , and than thou shall go east , and so shall have sight of faial . the mark of it be these . * come out from faial , and leave all the island , than all go east and by south until thou bring thy self in 37. degree , which be the height of cape saint Vincent : and then go east , and thou shall see the cape have the mark aforesaid . and from cape S. Vincent thou must go east southeast , till thou be Northeast , and Southwest , with the bar of saint Lucar : and then go Northeast for the bar . take this for a warning , that if go in 37. degree thou have not sight of cape S. Vincent , and haste sight of certain high hill , make account they be Sierras de Monchico . 300 i advise thou , that if thou stand in fear of man off to avoid war about the cape of S. Vincent , then go in 36 man tf^arre . degree | . And find thy self within the cape , if thou see many sign of green weed , then cast about to the north Northeast , and by this way find land , and the same show white , be sure it be the castle of the castle of Aimonte . Aimmte ' a rutty for the old chanel from the east point of [ he . 612. ] Cuba by the north side thereof to Havana . go from the cape of S. Nicolas , thou shall go the cape of north northwest , but thou must keep to windward off - the point , that thou may weather it , and it be call the point of Mayaci : and it be a very low land Punta de and smooth : and above up within the land about a Mayaci . league it have a long hill , which be not very high but flat . and from that point to Baracoa be 7. league . And be dispose to go into Baracoa , keep the Baracoa . weather-shore all along , until thou open the harbour . and to know if thou be open of the harbour , look upon the south side ; and thou shall see a hill by it self , which make as it be a crown upon it . and if thou come along , it make as it be a fort with port about it : and this be the mark if thou come out of the sea and this hill be north and south of the harbour , over the harbour of Baracoa . and if thou will go in , thou must take heed of a shall which asholdonthe lie on the east side , and thou must keep the west east side °f side : and go not much from the shall , because the baracoa-foote of they shall that shoot westward have 5. fathom water . and when thou be within the shoalds , thou must go a little within they , and then let fall a anchor : and look that thou come not much on the east side , for it be shoaldie . And come out from Baracoa , be to pass through the old chanel , you shall set your course northwest until you come with the Cayo de Moa , or Cayo de Moa . then shall of Moa , until you think you be Northeast 301 this word Cayo in the Biskayne tongue signifies a flat or a shall . Pracellas . the mosowes . Camoloquea . the flat of i ala to be avoid . Cropeda a flat island . z . rock of stone . Punta de Caucus . Matanzas . and Southwest with it , or till you think you be go 12. league : and you shall know that you be upon Cayo de Moa . for before you come at it by 2. league or more , you shall understand that it have a point of low land , and upon the point it have a palm tree ; which tree you shall see always , before you see the point : and it be like a sail . from thence to the pracella or flat you shall stir northwest two part of your way , that you have to run from Cayo de Moa to the say Pracellas or flat , and the one half part of the way north northwest and by west . and this way you shall see the pracella or flat in a clean place of they shall above the water , for all the breach of the sea . the mosowes be from the Pracell west , and you shall leave they to windward . and if you will go with the pracella or flat , you shall find 4. or 5. fathom : and you may go sure without danger a northwest course until you come in 7. fathom . and if you will go upon they shall , you shall go upon that depth , until you have run 40. or 45. league : and from thence you shall set your course Southwest , till you see the flatte of the main land . you shall then see to the westward a rock divide into 3. part , which be call the camoloquea . and look that when you come from the pracellas southwest , you have certain flat before you : take heed of they that you fall not by night with they by four league , for fear of the Mecala : and you shall set your course west northwest until day : and when it be day , you must bear close aboard the shore , and than you shall see a flat island with many break sand , which be call Cropeda , and lie but a little out of the trade way , somewhat to the northward . off that you shall see 2. rock of stone , which be the point of all the flat : and two league from they on the main land you shall see a point which show like break land . this be call the point of Caucus . and from that point to Matanzas 302 on the northside of Cuba be 12. league , and your course lie west and by north : and than you must borrow upon the land all that you can , because of the current : for the current will carry you into the channel . And be at Matanzas , you must run all along the shore , because of the current . Remember that when the current . you see one league before you a rock , and a shall , that have upon it but 2. fathom water ; and your mark if you come out of the sea be a hill , and the hill be not very high , it stand east and west , and upon it be some little rise and they be not very high , and upon these rise stand two round hammock close together , you shall see the teat of Havana . the teat of to know along the shore when you be against the ^avana-harbour of Xaroca , the mark be these . a little to the harbour the westward one league , you shall see along the shore °fxanca-a hill that be break , and that break hill be over the harbour of Xaroca : and then a little more to the westward a league , there be another break hill and you shall see that north and south from these break hill be a flat off . and from that to Havana be 7. league : and it be all clean ground , and you may go along the shore till you come to Havana . to know mark to the harbour of Havana , you shall see before you come ttie - at it one little rock ot stone not very high , and smooth Havana . towards the sea : upon the rock stand a little white tower , wherein they keep watch . and then if you have the wind large , you shall see the harbour open , and than you may bear in with it . your ship be of great burden , when you be within , then keep on the west side , because on the east [ three . 613. ] side , on the west end of the rock aforesaid , there lie a ledge to the westward which have but three or four fathom i upon it . if your ship be of small burden , you may run along the weather shore , until you come right against the castle ; and then half the bay over you may come to a anchor . [ how to 3°3 how to work come through the old channel , if you be not mind to go over the pracella or shoald . if you will come through the old chanel , when you come as high as the shoalds , come upon your caio de Moa . course from the Caio de Moa , as i tell you , keep 2. league from the pracel or shall : and then set our course west unto the low island of the firm land . and upon this course you shall ken the flat on the Caio Romano , point of Caio Romano : and within it be one flat high than the other , and smooth upon , and in the midst it make as it be break land ; and when you be in the chanel in the day time , you must take heed you come not near the shore by 2. league , and by your sound no near than 3. fathom . and you must take heed still when you night come to keep 2. or three league off for fear of the shoald . and in the night you must go northwest as be aforesaid . and also you must take heed that you keep in the middle of the chanel , as near as you can towards they shall . And find much wind and be benight , from midnight till day stir west northwest , and when it be towards day , than you may edge towards the flat as be aforesaid . Alcane de Barasoga . Savano . Basque . the flat of Mecala . and as you stir hence one day and one night from Caio Romano to the inward of the channel , you shall see the firm land of Cuba , and other mark ; and among the rest , a round hamocke , which you may easy know . it be call Alcane de Barasoga . and from thence to Savano and to Basque be 6. league , and likewise Havana 6. league . and from thence to cross under the fort be 45. league . and stir hence upon your course aforesaid . and if you have go from Barasoga 30. league , you shall see none of the flat of Mecala : and give they a breadth off two or three league , and keep your course west northwest , as 3°4 aforesaid , until it be day , and present you may edge round to the flat . and thus stir , keep your course until you see the hill of Camaloqua . and look that when you come from Caio de Moa , along the pracel or shall by night close by it , you shall not see what land it be , till it be day : and in the morning you shall set your course as be aforesaid until you see the shall , and in see it , you may stir on your course as be above mention , until you come to Havana . for to set your course from the point of Mance to Caio Romano , when you be north and south with the point of Mance , you shall stir thence west northwest , until you think you be Northeast and Southwest with the hill of Hama . and this hill be a high hill and smooth to the seaside . and from this hill to Caio Romano you shall stir northwest and by west : and upon this course you may be bold to see Caio Romano . and the mark of this flat be , that it make a high land and smooth upon the top : and in the midst of it , it show as it be break . and when you come to it , you must take heed you come not near it by 2. league , because it be foul . and look that you bring not yourself too near the hill of Hama by night . for you must take heed of Caio Romano to keep off it until morning : in the morning you may go your course until you see it , and then set your course , as be abovesaid . take heed of that which be here say , for it have title reason . Sierras de Camahquea . Caio de Moa . Pracellas . Havana . Punta de Mance . Sierra deal Hama . Caio Romano . the mark of the flat of Caio Romano . ten 3°5 [ a principal u 