cruelty upon their borderer and other of the Indians elsewhere : at their next come , there be ten of they send and employ for a far discovery , they be provide to receive and entertain they in a other manner of sort than they have do before ; that be to say , they slay they and bury they in the country so much seek . they give they by that mean a full and complete possession , the which before they have but begin . and so they be mind to do , to as many Spaniard as come after . other possession they have have none since . neither do the Indians mean , as they protest , to give they any other . one other thing to be remember be that in these letter the Spaniard seem to call Guiana and other country near it , border upon the river of Orenoque , by the name of Nueva Dorado , because of the great plenty of gold there in most place to be find . allude also to the name of el Dorado which be give by Martinez to the great city of Manoa , as be in the former treatise specify . this be all i think good to advertise . as for some other matter , i leave they to the consideration and judgement of the indifferent reader . W. R. letter take at sea by captain George Popham . j594 - Alonso his letter from the grand Canaria to his brother be commander of saint Lucar , concern el Dorado . there have be certain letter receive here of late , of a land new discover call Nuevo Dorado , from the son of certain inhabitant of this city , who be in the discovery : they write of wonderful riches to be find in the say Dorado , and that gold there be in great abundance : the course to fall with it be fifty league to the windward of Margarita . [ Alonsos letter ten 433 2 e alonsos letter from thence to certain merchant of Sant Lucar concern el Dorado . Sirs , we have no news worth the writing , save of a discovery late make by the Spaniard in a new land call Nuevo Dorado , which be two day sail to the windward of Margarita : there be gold in such abundance , as the like have not be hear of . we have it for certain in letter write from thence by some that be in the discovery , unto their parent here in this city . i purpose ( God will ) to bestow ten or twelve day in search of the say Dorado , as i pass in my voyage towards Carthagena , hope there to make some good sale of our commodity . i have send you therewith part of the information of the say discovery , that be send to his majesty . part of the copy that be send to his majesty , of the discovery of Nuevo Dorado . in the river of Pato otherwise call Orenoque , in the principali part thereof call Warismero , the 23 of April 1593 Domingo de vera master of the camp , and generali for Antonio de Berreo governor and captain generail for our lord the king , betwixt the river of Pato and Papamene alias Orenoque , and mar-rannon , and of the hand of Trinidad , in presence of i Rodrigo de Caranza register for the sea , command [ three . 664. ] all the soldier to be draw together and put in order of battle , the captain and soldier , and master of the camp stand in the midst of they , say unto they : sir , soldier , and captain , you understand long since that our general Antonio de Berreo , with the travel of eleven year , and expense of more than a hundred thousand pezo of gold , discover the royal province of Guiana and Dorado : of the which he take possession to govern the same , but through want of his people health , and necessary munition , he issue out at the hand Margarita , and from thence people Trinidad . 434 but now they have send i to learn out and discover the way most easy to enter , and to people the say province , and where the camp and army may best enter the same . by reason whereof i intend so to do in the name of his majesty , and the say governor Antonio de Berreo , and in token thereof i require you Francis Carillo , that you aid i to advance this cross that lie here on the ground , which they set on end towards the east , and the say master of the camp , the captain and soldier kneel down , and do due reverence unto the say cross , and thereupon the master of the camp take a bowl of water and drink it off , and take more and throw abroad on the ground : he also draw out his sword and cut the grass off the ground , and the bough off the tree say , i take this possession in the name of the king don Philip our master , and of his governor Antonio de Berreo : and because some make question of this possession , to they i answer , that in these our action be present the cassique , or principali don Antonio , otherwise call morequito , who land this be , who yield consent to the say possession , be glad thereof , and give his obedience to our lord the king , and in his name to the say governor Antonio de Berreo . and the say master of the camp kneel down be in his liberty , and all the captain and soldier say , that the possession be well take , and that they will defend it with their life , upon whosoever will say the contrary . and the say master bf the camp have his sword draw in his hand say unto i : register , that be here present , give i a instrument or testimoniali to confirm i in this possession , which i have take of this land , for the governor Antonio de Berreo , and if it be needful i will take it a new . and i require you all that be present to witness the same , and do further declare that i will go on , take the possession of all these land wheresoever i shall enter . Signed thus . Domingo de vera , and underneath , before i Rodrigo de Caranza , register of the army . 435 a nd in prosecution of the say possession , and the discovery of the way and province , the 27 of April of the say year , the master of the camp enter by little and little with all the camp and man of war , more than two league into the inland , and come to a town of a principali , and confer with he do let he understand by mean of Antonio Bisante the interpretor , that his majesty and Antonio de Berreo have send he to take the say possession . and the say friar Francis Carillo by the interpretor , deliver he certain thing of our holy catholique faith , to all which he answer , that they understand he well and will become Christians , and that with a very good will they shall advance the cross , in what part or place of the town it please they , for he be for the governor Antonio de Berreo , who be his master . thereupon the say master of the camp take a great cross , and set it on end toward the east , and request the whole camp to witness it , and Domingo de vera firm it thus . it be well and firm do . and underneath . before i Rodrigo Caranza , register of the army . the first of May they prosecute the say possession and discovery to the town on Carapana . from thence the say master of the camp pass to the town of Toroco who principali be call Topiawary be five league far within the land then the first nation , and well inhabit . and to this principali by mean of the interpretor they give to understand that his majesty and the say corregidor command they to take the possession of that land , and that they shall yield their obedience to his majesty , and to his corregidor , and to the master of the camp in his name , and that in token thereof he will place a cross in the middle of his town . whereunto the say cassique answer they shall advance it with a very good will , and that he remain in the obedience of our lord the king , and of the say governor Antonio de Berreo who vassal he will be . 436 the four of May we come to a province above five league thence , of all side inhabit with much people , the principali of this pedple come and meet we in peaceable manner : and he be call revato , he bring we to a very large house where he entertain we well , and give we much gold , and the interpreter ask he from whence [ three . 665. ] that gold be , he answer , from a province not pass a day journey off , where there be so many Indians as will shadow the sun , and so much gold as all yonder plain will not contain it . in which country ( when they enter into the Borracheras or their drunken feast ) they take of the say gold in dust and anoint themselves all over therewith to make the brave show ; and to the end the gold may cover they , they anoint their body with stamp herb of a gluey substance : and they have war with those Indians . they promise we that if we will go unto they , they will aid we ; but they be such infinite number , as no doubt they will kill we . And be ask how they get you same gold , they tell we they go to a certain down or plain , and pull or dig up the grass by the root : which do , they take of the earth , put it in great bucket , which they carry to wash at the river , and that which come in powder they keep for their Borracheras or drunken feast : and that which be in piece they wrought into eagle . the eight of may we go from thence , and march about five league : at the foot of a hill we find a principali call Arataco with three thousand Indians , man and woman all in peace with much victuali , as hen and venison in great abundance , and many sort of wine . he entreat we to go to his house , and to rest that night in his town , be of five hundred house . the interpreter ask whence he have those hen : he say they be bring from a mountain not pass a quarter of a league thence , where be many Indians , yea so many as grass on the ground , and that these man have the point of their shoulder 437 high than the crown of their head , and have so many hen as be wonderful ; and if we will have any , we shall send they Jew harp , for they will give for every one two hen . we take a indian , and give he five hundred harp ; the hen be so many that he bring we , as be not to be number . we say we will go thither ; they tell we they be now in their Borracheras or drunken feast , and will kill we . we ask the indian that bring the hen , if it be true ; he say it be most true . we ask he how they make their Borracheras or drunken feast ; he say , they have many eagle of gold hang on their breast , and pearl in their ear , and that they dance be all cover with gold . the indian say unto we , if we will see they , we shall give he some hatchet , and he will bring we of those eagle . the master of the camp give he one hatchet ( he will give he no more because they shall not understand we go to seek gold ) he bring we a eagle that weigh 27. pound of good gold . the master of the camp take it , and show it to the soldier , and then throw it from he , make show not to regard it . about midnight come a indian and say unto he , give i a pickeaxe , and i will tell thou what the Indians with the high shoulder mean to do . the interpreter tell the master of the camp , who command one to be give he : he then tell we , those Indians be come to kill we for our merchandise . hereupon the master of the camp cause his company to be set in order , and begin to march . the eleven day of may we go about seven league from thence to a province , where we find a great company of Indians apparel : they tell we that if we come to fight , they will fill up those plain with Indians to fight with we ; but if we come in peace , we shall enter and be well entertain of they , because they have a great desire to see Christians : and there they tell we of all the 438 i594 ’ rich that be . i do not here set it down , because there be no place for it , but it shall appear by the information that go to his majesty : for if it shall here be set down , four leaf of paper will not contain it . the letter of George Burien Britton from the say the canary unto his cousin a Frenchman dwell in saint Lucar , concern el Dorado . sir , and my very good cousin , there come of late certain letter from a new discover country not far from Trinidad , which they write , have gold in great abundance : the news seem to be very certain , because it pass for good among the best of this city . part of the information of the discovery that go to his majesty , go enclose in Alonsos letter ; it be a thing worth the see . the report of Domingo Martinez of Jamaica concern el Dorado . he say that that in 1593. being at Carthagena , there be a generali report of a late discovery call Nuevo Dorado , and that a little before his come thither , there come a frigate from the say Dorado , [ three . 666. ] bring in it the portraiture of a giant all of gold , of weight 47. kintal , which the Indians there hold for their idol . but now admit of Christianity and obedience to the king of Spain , they send their say idol unto he in token they be become Christians , and hold he for their king . the company come in the say frigate , report gold to be there in most abundance , diamond of inestimable value , with great store of pearl . [ the report 439 