the report of a Spaniard , captain with Berreo in the discovery of el Nuevo Dorado . that the information send to the king be in every point true say , that the river Orenoque have seven mouth , or outlet into the sea , call Las Siete bocas de dragon , that the say river run far into the land , in - many place very broad , and that a th . de Berreo lie at Trinidad , make head to go to conqu and people the say Dorado . a relation of the second voyage to Guiana , perform and write in the year 1596. by Laurence Keymis gentleman to the approve , right valorous , and worthy knight , sir Walter Ralegh , lord warden of the stannery , captain of her majesty guard , and her highness lieutenant generail of the county of Cornwall . have here brief set down the effect of this your second discovery without any enlargement of make word : for in this argument , single speech best beseem a simple truth . where the affinity of the matter with your person , lead i to write of your self , unto your self , that small liberty which i have therein use , shall , i doubt not , without offence or sinister construction , be give to the cause in hand : which , whether it suffer not detriment , by attribute less than of right belongeth ; the judgement be they , that upright and indifferent shall weigh the consequent of their evil purpose , who in seek to detract from the author of these discovery , do so much as in they lie , wound , deface , and tread under foot the thing it self . but this be no novelty , nor proper only to these our day . for long since it have be say , laudes eo usque sunt Pericles . tolerabiles , donec ea dicuntur , quse auditores se quoque 441 facere posse existimant : simajora proferantur , invident , non credunt . the fervent zeal and loyalty of your mind in labour with this birth of so honourable expectation , as it have deserve a recompense far different , so need it not my poor suffrage to endear the { three . 667. ] toil , care , and danger that you have willing undergo for the good and advancement of our weal public . the praiseworthiness thereof do approve it self , and be better read in your live do , then in my dead unregarded paper . all that i can wish , be that my life be a sufficient pledge , to justify , how much more easy , and more materiali , the course for Guiana will be then other , which require great charge , yield not so large benefit , and be subject to more doubtful event . if unto their wisdom who sit in place and authority , it shall appear otherwise , and that in follow of other attempt there be less difficulty , certain profit , and needfull offence unto the enemy : the cost and travail which you have bestow , shall not , i hope , be altogether lose , if unto your honour i can prove how , and where the amends be to be have , maugre the force and prevention of all Spaniard . your lordship to be command in all service , Laurence Keymis . to the favourer of the voyage for Guiana . n thing earnest desire , though never so likely , we be still suspicious : think it more credit to our common wisdom , to discredit most noble and profitable endeavour with distrust , then touch to our valour and safety , to lie wilful idle . so that howsoever a action well and judicial attempt , be esteem half perform ; yet be this my jealous conceit concern Guiana , that nothing be begin , before all be end . in this regard ( gentle reader ) i have presume to burden thy ear with the weak plea of a good 442 cause , and in stead of open it thorough to thy prudent consideration , to note only i own unsatisfy affection : hope that because i do name Guiana unto thou , thou will vouchsafe hoc nomine , to veil and cover all other my defect in the desert of a good meaning . in publish this treatise , my labour principal tend to this end ; to remove all figleaves from our unbelief , that either it may have cause to shake off the colourable pretence of ignorance : or if we will not be persuade ; that our selfwill may rest inexcusable . they that shall apply , and construe this my do , to serve the Spaniard his turn so well as our own ; in so much as it may seem to instruct , warn , and arm he : for their satisfaction herein , they must not be ignorant , that his eye , in see our ship there , do as effectual inform he , that many of our heart be towards that place , as if it shall be credible advertise by some corrupt hireling , that we think , write , and discourse of nothing else . neither can i imagine , that to conceal our knowledge herein ( which to conceal may perhaps prove , 8c be hereafter take for worse than parricide ) will be of better purpose , then to hood wink our self , as who will say , no man shall see we . beside , if the action be whole to be effect at her majesty charge ; then may it at her highness pleasure be shadow with some other drift , and never be discover , until it be act . but since it crave the approbation and purse of many adventurer , who can be so prodigal both of their possession and life , as voluntary to run themselves out of breath , in pursue they know not what : great reason it be , that where assistance be to be ask , due cause be yield to persuade 8c induce they unto it . the Spaniard be not so simple , unsettle , 8c uncertain in his determination , as to build they on our breath , or to make our paper his bulwark ; nor so slow as to expect a precedent of our forwardness . his proceed be suffi - 443 cient strengthen with the travail , report , and substantial proof of his own man , that have above 60. year beat round about this bush . and to say a truth , the expedition that he have use in send so many ship in February last to people this country , and disappoint we ; as it do consequent show , that he find his chief force and sinew to consist in gold : so do he thereby plain to our face exprobrate our remissness and long deliberation , that in 12. month space have do , or seek to do nothing worthy the ancient fame and reputation of our English in June 1^6 . nation , interest in so weighty business . * he late provision of a new supply of whole family to the number of 600. person , bind for Guiana , but that it please God , that by mean of that right honourable service most resolute perform in the sea-fight , and sack of Cadiz , the ship wherein they shall have be convey , be convert into ash : what may it signify ? certes , as it do evident prove , that el Dorado have undoubted credit and account in their judgement : so point it at we , while we only to entertain idle time , sit listen for Guiana news , and instant forget it , as if it be nought else , but a please [ three . 668. ] dream of a golden fancy . if we with our self shall expostulate , how this come to pass , that the advantage whole rest on our side , in respect that Berreo be this last year beat out , the country thorough discover , and the inhabitant make desirous of her sacred majesty happy government ; they notwithstanding by enter before we , have now get you start of we : what may we think ? shall we judge that their native country be less dear , or more wearisome unto they , than we be unto we ? their Peruleri , who go bare and empty out of Spain , do again within 3. or 4. year return from Peru , rich and in good estate , do apparent disprove all such conceit of they . shall we say that they have more spare man to be employ in such action ? it be no secret to 444 know the contrary . be they subject to penury ? in all part of Christendom , where money be not scant , all other thing be plentiful . or be their land not able to sustain their number of people ? they buy many slave to follow their husbandry , and themselves disdain base idleness and beggary , do all honour military profession , high esteem it in their mercenary and stranger . be it then want of ability , in those that be willing , lack of encouragement , or default of speedy order and direction for those that do voluntary offer themselves , their substance , and best endeavour to further this cause ; that make we to be thus coated of the Spaniard ? the first be no question . the late need no answer . the profit then by their example to be gather , be , not to loose opportunity by delay , or to seem fearful and dismay , where there be no cause of doubt . for as yet their posthaste do not way prejudice our advise leisure in set forward , since their preparation of negro to work in the mine , their horse , cattle , and other necessary may ( by the favour of God ) at our first come , both store we with quantity of gold oar , and ease we of much trouble , pain , and travail . if we shall suppose our self now to live in the day of king Henry the seven of famous memory , and the strange report of a west Indies , or new world abound with great treasure shall entice we to believe it : perhaps it may be impute for some blame to the gravity of wise man , light to be carry with the persuasion and hope of a new find Utopia , by such a one as Columbus be , be a alien , and many way subject to suspicion . but since the penance of that incredulity lie even now heavy on our shoulder ; the example forethreatn , i know not what repentance : and that we have the personal trial of so honourable and sufficient a reporter , our own countryman : let it be far from we to condemn our self in that , which so worthy we reprove in our predecessor ; and to let our idle 445 knowledge content it self with naked contemplation , like a barren womb in a monastery . we can deny that the chief commendation of virtue do consist in action : we true say , that Otium be animae vivae sepultura : we believe , that perfect wisdom in this mobility of all human affair , refuse not with any price to purchase safety : and we just do acknowledge that the castilian from bare legged mountainer have attain to their greatness by labour and industrie* to sleep then , because it cost nothing ; to embrace the present time , because it flatter we with deceitful contentment ; and to kiss security , say , what evil happen unto we ? be the plain high way to a fearful downfall : from which the lord in his mercy deliver we , and give we a understand heart , in time to see , and to seek that , which belong unto our peace . de Guiana carmen epicum . [ in . 669. ] hat work of honour and eternal name , for all the t’atchieve , fill i with hand to my heart world t’envie and we fury , and give arm peace , that else will glad turn my limb and every sense into my thought rapt with the thirst action of my mind ? o Clio , honour muse , sing in my voice , tell the attempt , and prophecy th’exploit of his eliza-consecrated sword , that in this peaceful charm of England sleep , open most tender her age throat , offer to power fresh youth through all her vein , that flesh of brass and rib of steel retain . riches , and conquest , and renown i sing , riches with honour , conquest , without blood , enough to seat the monarchic of earth , 446 