his man murder he , and afterward the say rebel behead lady anes he wife , who forsake not her lord in all his travel unto death . 20 Frier Francis Montesino be in the province of Maracapana with 100 soldier bind for Guiana , when Lopez Aguirri the tyrant make insurrection in all those part of the Indies . what become of this intend journey be not express . in this discovery of Guiana you may read both of Orellana , who discover the river of Amazones An. 1542. and of Berreo , with other that have tread this maze , and lose themselves in seek to find this country . a advertisement to the reader . in this breviary , the name only be comprise of such , as be lead with the generali fame of Guiana , have endeavour to discover and possess it . the whole history be long and can sudden be translate or english at large , as we in these elegy find they . it may perhaps seem strange and incredible , that so many cavallero shall all fade in this one attempt , since in many part of the Indies , far small number in short time have perform as great matter , and subdue mighty kingdom : i have therefore think it good here to allege those reason , which by circumstance may be gather to have be chief impediment to the Spaniard in this intend search and conquest . the first may be the remoteness or distance of their place of rendezvous , from el Dorado : which appear to be four , Nuevo reyno , the mouth of Amazones or Orellana , Cubagua or the coast of the Caracas , and Trinidad . 1 from Moiobamba , where Orellana have his headspring , to his mouth , the Spaniard account it 2000 league . Raleana rise near the say mountain in Moiobamba , and tribute his water to the sea , not far from the other : Guiana be environ with these 2 fresh - 499 A.D. 1596. water-sea , where their distance be great from their rise , and be beside guard with impassable mountains which enclose and defend it on all part , except topiawaries country . it be no marvel then , if the vigour , heart , and life of those Spaniard , who seek it from Nuevo Reyno , be allay and spend , before they come near to it , in those long , desolate and uncomfortable way . 2 from Cubagua to seek it by sea in vessel of any burden , be a work of far great labour , than to sail direct from Spain . and to pass over land be a matter of great difficulty , by reason that the indian nation inhabit between the coast of the Caracas and Guiana , be weary and harry with the daily incursion of the Spaniard , have now turn their abuse patience into fury , refuse to suffer any force of man to be lead through their country . for the Spaniard travel in those part , when they find not gold answerable to their expectation , overlay they with cruelty , tyrannic , and thraldom : forbear neither man , woman , friend , nor foe . which manner of deal , though in some part it satisfy their desire of present profit ; yet have it otherwise do they much harm , in harden and drive those nation to desperate resolution . 3 from the mouth of Orellana to seek entrance with any number of man , and to bear a hole through the mountains be all one . neither find we , that any seek it that way , have at any time boast of their gain or pleasurable journey . 4 from Trinidad , as the course be short , so do it promise best likelihood of success . howbeit , impossible it be with any vessel of ordinary burden by that way to recover the river of Raleana . the second , the Spaniard have be so far from help and further one another , or admit partner or coadjutor in the guiana-cause , that among so many [ three . 692. ] attempt , from the beginning to the last , i can find any one , when they be otherwise likely to prevail , 500 free from discord , mutiny , and cruel murder among themselves . third . the Spaniard in this place have miss that advantage , which elsewhere have steed themselves in all their conquest : namely , the dissension and mutual war of the Indians . which of that force it be , may be gather by the example Arauco in Chili . for the Indians of that one province contain in circuit not above 20. league , have maintain war above these 30. year against all the Spaniard , and in despite of they have keep their own country , oftentimes discomfit their enemy in many set battle , burn and destroy some of their strong town . the chief reason whereof i take to be , because no indian nation be enemy unto they . and howsoever the Spaniard vaunt of their redoubt exploit in the Indies : yet do their own write in effect testify , that without the aid of the indian divide among themselves , Mexico , Peru , and the rest , have never be spanish . last . i can impute it to no cause so right , as immediately to the divine providence : for by he prince reign . and in my belief ( except we will look to be warn by miracle from heaven ) we need no further assurance , than we already have to persuade our self , that it have please God of his infinite goodness , in his will and purpose to appoint and reserve this empire for we . end of volume x. 