the river of Amana by which sir Walter Ralegh first enter , call by Diego de Ordas via - . pari : and by Barth , de Casas ivia-pari . the english voyage here follow the name of those worthy Spaniard that have seek to discover and conquer Guiana : extract out of the write of Juan de Castellanos clerigo , who compile the book entitle , primera part de las Elegias de varone illustre the India . the enterprise of Guiana be undertake by Diego de Ordas of the kingdom of Leon , in the year 1531. he be one of the captain of Cortes in the conquest of Mexico . This Ordas make his entrance by the river of Amana , by which we enter , and spend fifty day before he come to the river of Orenoque , which we pass in fifteen . he name the river by which he enter , Viapari ; which name it still retain in the spanish description . it lie south from Trinidad some five league . he transport out of Spain a thousand soldier . he die afterward at sea in return for Spain . 2 Juan Corteso arrive at the river of Amazones or Orellana with three hundred man : he march up into the country . but neither he nor any of his company do return again . 3 Gaspar de Sylva , with his two brother , depart from Teneriff , accompany with two hundred man to assist Diego de Ordas . they seek el Dorado by the river of Amazones : but stay there a short time , they fall down to Trinidad , where they all three be bury . 4 Juan Gonsales set sail from Trinidad to discover Guiana . he repose himself more on the faith of his guide , then on his small number of man . he by trial find the confine of Guiana , so far as he enter , to be populous , plentiful of victuali , and rich in gold . upon such proof as he bring with he , to make good his report , many other adventure to follow his step . 496 5 . 6 Philip de Uren , and after he Pedro de Limpias , who both successive command the alman , be leader in this action . Limpias be slay by a indian casique name porima . 7 Jeronimo the ortal undertake it by the way of Maracapana . after great travel and his substance all spend , he die on the sudden at saint Domingo . 8 . 9 Ximenes , brother of don Ximenes de Quesida the adolantado , and Pedro de Orsua be both at sundry time in the same conquest . 10 father lala , a friar , take with he only one companion , and some indian guide pass into the province of Guiana . he return with good intelligence , and bring with he eagle , idol , and other jewel of gold , An. 1560. he assay the second time to pass in like manner , but be slay by the Indians . 11 Hernandez de Serpa also undertake it . the Indians of Cumanawgoto kill he , and defeat his army . 12 afterwards , Diego de Vargas , and his son don Juan follow this enterprise , and at their first set out , be slay by the Indians . 13 Caceres undertake this discovery from Nuevo Reyno de Granada . he come no near to it than matachines , which border upon the say kingdom of Granada . he rest there and people that place . 14 it be also attempt by Alonzo de Herera , at two several time . he endure great misery , but never enter one league into the country . he seek it by Viapari or Amana , and be at last slay by a nation of Indians call Xaguas . 15 it be also undertake by Antonio Sedenno , with who Herrera and Augustine Delgado join in the conquest of Trinidad , against bawcunar a famous king of that place . he pass by Maracapana in the year 1536 to discover el Dorado with 500 choose man . in this journey he get much gold , and take many indian prisoner , who he manacle in iron ; and many of ten 497 21 they die as they be lead in the way . the tiger be flesh on those dead carkeiss , assault the Spaniard , who with much trouble hardly defend themselves from they . Sedenno be bury within the precinct of the empire near the head of the river tinado . most of his people perish likewise . 16 Augustine Delgado search the country to the southward of Cumanawgoto with 53. footman , and three horseman . the war that be then between the Indians of the vale , and those of the mountain , serve well for his purpose . by which occasion he find mean to pass so far , until he come to a indian casique , name garamental , who entertain he with all kindness , and give he for a present some rich jewel of gold , six seemly page , ten young slave , and three nymph very beautiful , which bear the name of three province from whence they be send to garamental chief commander of all that country . their name be Guanba , Gotoguane , and maiarare . Theise province be of a excellent temperature , very healthful , and have a admirable influence in produce fair woman . the Spaniard afterwards to requite the manifold courtesy that they receive in that country , take and carry away , beside all the gold that they can get , all the Indians that they can lay hold on : they convey they in iron to Cubagua , and sell they for slave . Delgado afterward be shoot in the eye by a indian : of which hurt he die . 17 Diego de Losada succeed in his brother place . he have many more man ; who in the end waste themselves in mutiny : those that live return to Cubagua . 18 Reynoso undertake this journey : but have endure exceed trouble , in the discomfort of his mind , he give it over , and be bury in Hispaniola . 19 Pedro de Orsua , in the year 1560. seek it with 400. Spaniards by the river of Orellana . he embarked his man in the country of the Motijones . as they pass down the river , they find synamom tree . 498 his man murder he , and afterward the say rebel behead lady anes he wife , who forsake not her lord in all his travel unto death . 20 Frier Francis Montesino be in the province of Maracapana with 100 soldier bind for Guiana , when Lopez Aguirri the tyrant make insurrection in all those part of the Indies . what become of this intend journey be not express . in this discovery of Guiana you may read both of Orellana , who discover the river of Amazones An. 1542. and of Berreo , with other that have tread this maze , and lose themselves in seek to find this country . a advertisement to the reader . in this breviary , the name only be comprise of such , as be lead with the generali fame of Guiana , have endeavour to discover and possess it . the whole history be long and can sudden be translate or english at large , as we in these elegy find they . it may perhaps seem strange and incredible , that so many cavallero shall all fade in this one attempt , since in many part of the Indies , far small number in short time have perform as great matter , and subdue mighty kingdom : i have therefore think it good here to allege those reason , which by circumstance may be gather to have be chief impediment to the Spaniard in this intend search and conquest . the first may be the remoteness or distance of their place of rendezvous , from el Dorado : which appear to be four , Nuevo reyno , the mouth of Amazones or Orellana , Cubagua or the coast of the Caracas , and Trinidad . 1 from Moiobamba , where Orellana have his headspring , to his mouth , the Spaniard account it 2000 league . Raleana rise near the say mountain in Moiobamba , and tribute his water to the sea , not far from the other : Guiana be environ with these 2 fresh - 499 