navigation and traffic both ancient and of late , to diverse place upon the coast of Brasil : together with a rutty for all that coast , and two intercept letter which reveal many secret of the state of that country : the rest of our voyage to Brasil which have be either intend or perform to the river of plate , the strait of Magellan , the south sea , or far that way , be reserve for the generali head next ensue . a brief relation of two sundry voyage make by the worshipful m. William haukin of plymouth , father to sir John haukin knight , late treasurer of her majesty navy , in the year 1530 and 1532. I|have m. William haukin of Plymouth , a man for his wisdom , valour , experience , and skill in sea cause much esteem , and belove of king Henry the 8 , and be one of the principali sea-captaine in the west part of England in his time , not content with the short voyage common then make only to the know coast of Europe , arm out a tall and goodly ship of his own of the burden of 250 ton , call the Paul of Plymouth , wherewith he make three long and famous voyage unto the coast of Brasil , a thing in those day very rare , especial to our nation . in the course of which voyage he touch at the river of Sestos upon the coast of Guinea , where he traffic the second voyage ofM . William haukin to Brasil . a king of Brasil bring into England . [ Iii . 701. ] the english voyage with the negro , and take of they elephant tooth , and other commodity which that place yield : and so arrive on the coast of Brasil , he use there such discretion , and behave himself so wise with those savage people , that he grow into great familiarity and friendship with they . insomuch that in his second voyage , one of the savage king of the country of Brasil , be content to take ship with he , and to be transport hither into England : whereunto m. haukin agree , leave behind in the country as a pledge for his safety and return again , one Martin cockeram of Plymouth . This Brasilian king be arrive , be bring up to London and present to king Henry the 8 , lie as then at Whitehall : at the sight of who the king and all the nobility do not a little marvel , and not without cause : for in his cheek be hole make accord to their savage manner , and therein small bone be plant , stand a inch out from the say hole , which in his own country be repute for a great bravery . he have also another hole in his nether lip , wherein be set a precious stone about the bigness of a pease : all his apparel , behaviour , and gesture , be very strange to the beholder . Having remain here the space almost of a whole year , and the king with his sight full satisfy , m. Hawkins accord to his promise and appointment , purpose to convey he again into his country : but it fall out in the way , that by change of air and alteration of diet , the say savage king die at sea , which be fear will turn to the loss of the life of Martin cockeram his pledge . nevertheless , the savage be full persuade of the honest deal of our man with their prince , restore again the say pledge , without any harm to he , or any man of the company : which pledge of they they bring home again into England , with their ship freight , and furnish with the commodity of the country . 24 