[ in . 698. ] certain brief testimony concern the mighty river of Amazones or Orellana , and of the most wonderful downfall or cataract of water at the head thereof , name by the Spaniard el Pongo : together with some mention of the rich and stately empire of Dorado , call by sir Walter Ralegh and the natural inhabitant Guiana , and of the golden country of paytity near adjoin , with other memorable matter : take out of Josephus de Acosta his naturali and moral history of the west Indies . the first testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 2. cap . 6. ut when we entreat of river , that which some man call the river of Amazones , other Marannon , other the river of Orellana , do just put to silence all the rest , whereunto our Spaniards have go and sail . and i stand in doubt , whether i may call it a river or a sea . this river run from the mountain of Piru , from which it gather infinite store of water , of rain , and river , which run along , gather it self together , and pass through the great field and plain of Paytiti , of Dorado , and of the Amazon , and fall at length into the ocean sea , and enter into it almost over against the isle of Margarita and Trinidad . but it grow so broad , especial towards the mouth , that it make in the midst many and great isle : and that which seem incredible , sail in the middle chanel 16 1590. of the river , man can see nothing but the sky and the river , although man say that there be hill near the bank thereof , which can not be ken , through the greatness of the river . we understand by very good mean the wonderful breadth and largeness of this river , which just may be call the emperor of river , to wit by a brother of our company , which be a boy be there , and sail it whole through , be personal present in all the success of that strange entrance , which Pedro the Orsua make , and in the mutiny and perilous conspiracy of that wicked Diego de Aguirre , out of all which trouble and danger the lord deliver he , to make he one of our society . the second testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 3. cap . 20. a among all the river not only of the west Indies but also of the whole world , the chief be the river of Marannon or of the Amazon , whereof i have speak in the second book . the Spaniard have diverse time sail along this river , with determination to discover country , which , accord to report , be of great riches , especial that which they call Dorado , and Paytiti . the adolantado or admiral Juan de Salinas make a very notable entrance , although to small profit . it have a salt or fall of water which they call el pongo , which el pongo . be one of the most dangerous place in the world : for be restrain between two exceed hie divide mountain , it make a fall of terrible depth where the water with the great descent make such whirlpool that it seem impossible but that it shall sink it self there into the ground . for all this the boldness of man have attempt to pass the say el Pongo for the greediness to come to that so famous renown Dorado . they suffer themselves to be carry from aloft , be throw down headlong with the fury of the river , and sit fast in their canoas or boat in which they sail , although they be overturn in the fall , and they and xi 17 b their canoas sink down to the bottom , yet they rise up again above the water , and at length with their hand , and force get out of the whirlpool . the whole army in a manner escape , save a very few which be drown : and which i most marvel at , they handle the matter so well , that they lose not their victual and powder which they carry with they . in their return ( for after great travel and danger they return that way again ) they climb up over one of those aforesaid exceed high mountain , creep up upon their hand and foot . captain Pedro de Orsua make another entrance by the self same river , and after he be slay by a mutiny of his people , other captain follow the discovery , by the arm that fall into the north sea one of our company tell i ( who while he be a secular man be in all that expedition ) that they enter up the river almost a hundred league with the tide , and that when the fresh water and the salt meet , which be either almost under or very near the equinoctial line , the river be 70 league broad , a thing incredible , and which exceed the breadth of the Mediterran sea . howbeit other in their description make it not past 25 or 30 league broad at the mouth . [ in . 699. ] the three testimony out of Josephus de Acosta , lib . 3. cap . 25. in that part of America , whereof the coast be thorough know , the great part of the inland be not know , which be that which fall between Piru and Brasil , and there be diverse opinion of some , which say , that it be all sink land full of lake and bog , and of other , which affirm that there be great and flourish kingdom there , and there they place the country of paytity , and Dorado , and great emperor , and say , that there be wonderful thing there . i hear of one of our company my self , a man of credit , that he have see great town , and high way as 18 testimony of the Amazon broad and as much beat , as the way between Salamanca and Validolid : and this be when the great entrance or discovery be make by the great river of the Amazon or Marannon by Pedro de Orsua , and afterwards by other that succeed he : and they suppose that Dorado which they seek , be far up in the country , do not inhabit there , and afterward return without discover Dorado ( which they never find ) and without that great province which they leave . a short description of the river of Marannon or Amazones , and the country thereabouts , as also of the sea of freshwater , take out of a ancient discourse of all the port , creek , and haven of the west Indies , write by Martin Fernandez de Enciza , and dedicate to Charles the emperor , anno 1518. Arannon lie in seven degree and a half northward of the equinoctial , it be a great river , and have more than fifteen league in breadth eight league within the land . it have many island , and in this river within the land forty league there be near to the say river a mountain , whereupon grow tree of incense , the tree be of a good height , and the bough thereof be like to plumtree , and the incense do hang at they , as the ice do at the tile of a house in the winter season when it do freeze . in this river be take four Indians in a small boat , call in the indian language a Canoa , that come down by the river , and there be take from they two stone of emerald , the one of they be as great as a man hand . they say that so many day journey go upward by the river , they find a rock of that stone . likewise there be take from they two loaf make of flower , which be like to cake of soap , and it seem that 19 A.D. 1518. 