the sun be in - in < virgo no current . Libra ’ Scorpio ' in • sagittarius Capricorn ' Aquarius " the tide have his course southeast . pisces Aries ► no current . a rutty or course to be keep for he that will sail from Cabo Verde to the coast of Brasil , and all along the coast of Brasil unto the river of plate : and namely first from Cabo Verde to Fernambuck . he ship that go from Cabo Verde to Brasil , must go southsoutheast : and when she be within 5 or 6 degree of the equinoctial she must go southeast and by south . and if she have the ternado , that be thundering and lightning , than thou must go altogether south , or that way and by that board that do profit thou most . and take this for advise , that have the general wind , and if the wind be at south or southeast , then go Southwest , or westsouthwest . and if the wind you that toitt be south , then go Southwest , and by this way sa3le toBrasil , but little , for it be not a way for thy profit , because thin^ow-the moor thou go this way , the more will be thy 70 league of trouble , because thou may not come near than the coast of coast of Guinea then 60 or 70 league unto they shall Gmnea . call os baixos de santa Anna . And be this distance from the same , thou shall cast about the other way towards Brasil , and the wind will be large . thou shall understand that the ship that keep this course to Fernambuck , and go in October or after , and chance to go to windward of the isle 73 of Fernando de Loronha , when thou come to 8 * of Souther - degree , or 8 and than thou shall go west and lie latitude . bear with the land . thou must take this for a warning , that if go west in 8 degree thou see land , then look to the northward , and thou shall see certain white cliff . than i advise thou that thou go well to the southward . and this be to be understand from October forward , for than the time be most subject to Northeast and Eastnortheast wind . and if thou find thy self in the say height above mention , and see cliff , and see a cape to the southward , and see not more land to the south , then make account that thou be at Capiguoari : and from thence to Fernambuck thou have six league , and haste a good port . thou shall take this for a warning , that if in 8 degree and a half thou see land lie all flat , thou may go near it , and be bold till thou come in ten ne or twelve radome : and than thou shall see a great gross land along the sea-coast which be call Capitagua : and be east and west with this land , and , as i have say , in ten or twelve fathom water ; and the time be from October to February , than thou need not to fear any thing : but look to the south and thou shall see the cape of saint Augustine : and look to the north and thou shall see a point , and to the southeast a point call Punta de Olinda , where aponiquay stand . and the land from the cape to the point call Punta de Olinda lie north and south . [ Iii . 720. ] i advise thou that if thou be east and west with the cape of saint Augustine , thou shall see within the land a high hill , have as it be a saddle upon it like to a camel : and thou shall see to the southward three hill along the sea , and then present thou shall see the coast to lie Northeast and Southwest . the height of thou shall understand that from this cape of saint Augustine , to the town of Olinda , thou have nine of Olinda^ league to the north . and this cape stand in eight fernambuck . degree and two three part , and Olinda stand in eight 74 degree and a quarter , and fernam buck stand in eight degree . and this course be to be understand to be observe and keep , if thou depart from Lisbon in October or November . take this advise , that if thou depart in February or march from Lisbon , than thou shall go to bear in what height with the land in nine degree , because that from worse march forward reign most common southeast and art Southwest wind . and if by this height and course from Lisbon thou bring thyself nigh to the shore , fear not to in February bring thy ship into 18 or 20 fathom , for all the °r march . •coast be clean : and there be no more danger , but such as the sea do break upon . and if after thy fall with the land thou have occasion to go to the northward , and so go see - certain sholde , doubt not to come for the north , and he ) i0 kncm thou shall see the cape of saint Augustine , which lie as it be slope to the seaward , and have as it be ’ ' a whale head , and have upon it a round hill , with many hill round about it . and if thou come along the sea ■ coast much about the depth above mention , thou shall see a little island call saint Alexio : and from this A& the Santo island to the cape of saint Augustine be four league , Xi° ' - and it stand in eight degree and three quarter . the course that a man must keep to the bay call a Bahia de todo os santos , that be to say , the bay of all saint , which lie on the foresay coast of Brasil . f thou go for Bahia de todo os santos , thou must keep the course which i have already set down , and shall observe the time from march forward , as also from October forward . thou shall understand that the Bahia de todo os santos stand in 13 degree and i : and if thou go in October or after October , then go to fall with the land in 12 degree or 12 and a half . and take this for a warning , that when thou see a 75 the height of Bahia de todo os Santos in 13 degree and one three part . white land , and long bank of white sand , which show much like linen cloth when it be in whiting , than thou must go along from the north to the south until this white land do end : and thou need not to fear to go along the coast , for there be no shold . before thou be clean past the white land or white sand , thou shall have sight of a island that stand along the bay , i say on the northside of the bay , which be call the situation Tapaon : and here the land lie west and by south . of the isle of when thou be so far shoot as Tapaon , thou shall a*wm " see a certain great tree which be round , and stand near the sea upon the very point of the entrance into Bahia on the northside . and mark well that if thou look to the southward , and see no white ground such as i write of before , but that they be all behind thou to the northward : when a man then when thou see none to the southward , thou ^th^balia1 may be bold to bear in with Bahia . and if when ' thou go into Bahia to the northwest , and see the sea to break , fear nothing : for it be the breach of a certain bank , whereon thou shall have always 5 or 6 fathom water : and this be sure of . thou shall understand that if thou come for this place from march to the end of April , i will wish thou not to fall to the southward of 13 degree and a half . And fall with the land , and not see the white sand , thou shall strive to go to the northward . And see the land in 13 degree and a half , thou shall have sight of a hill along the sea : and if thou be nigh the land , and can make it certain what land it be : thou shall mark if it be a round high hill the distance along the sea , that it be o morro de san Paulo , or , the Paulo hill saint p^l : and it lie black and bare on the from Bahia . top . and from thence to Bahia be ten league . and here along this hill on the northwest side Pio de tin - there be a great river call Tinsare : and it be a very sare a very good river . and in the entrance of Bahia there be ’ six or seven fathom water in the channel . and i advise thou that be in the height of 13 degree and a half , thou come not near the land , for it have a bay very dangerous . and if thou go from Bahia to Fernambuck , than i advise thou that thou take good heed of the coast on the north-east and Southwest , and thou shall go east , if the wind will suffer thou to go east : and so go thirty or forty league off to the sea . i advise thou that thou bear not in with the land of Fernambuck , but in the height of 9 or 10 degree , because that in 11 degree thou shall fall with the bay call a enseada de Vazabaris . also if thou come from Portugal and fall with the land in eleven degree , bear not in with it , neither come near it , for thou may hurt thy self in so do : but thou shall shun it , and go to the southward . for if thou lie to the north thou shall bring thy self into some trouble . this bay of all saint stand in thirteen degree . and from thence to Fernambuck thou have a hundred league : and the coast lie north-east and Southwest . and from thence to Rio das ilhas , that be , the river of the island the coast run north-east and Southwest , i mean take a quarter of the north and south . the course for Baia das ilhas , that be , the bay of the island , which lie on the say coast of Brasil , and the mark for the find of they . f thou go for Baia das ilhas thou must look for it in fifteen degree lack a quarter . if thou be mind as i say to go for these isle , if it be from march forward , thou shall fall with the land in 15 degree and a half , and though it be in 15 degree and f , it be all the better . and if thou have sight of certain high hill , that seem to reach to the sky , these hill be call as serras Raiemores . then have sight of these hill , 77 a dangerous bay in 13 degree and a half . [ Iii . 721. ] the height of the bay call a enseada de Vazabaris . Baia de todo santos in 13 degree . Baia das ilhas lie in 15 degree lack a quarter . in what height a man must fall with this place in time of the north-east wind . Giemana . Mangues . thou shall go dung the coast ; and fear nothing , for there be no sholde along to the north . and when thou see the island , thou may make account they be these which thou seek , for there be no other on all this coast , and thou shall see a round hill along the sea . thou shall understand that on the north side of this hill be the go in of the river . but if it chance that thou find thy self in a time that will not suffer thou to go in , then go along the island give they a breadth off . and thou may well come to a anchor hard aboard they , for all be clean ground . and thou shall find eight or nine fathom , and from thence thou may go into the river hard aboard the shore . and if it chance that thou go from the north to the south all along the great island , thou must keep thy self from the land : and when thou have bring it eastnortheast , than thou may anchor two cable length from the shore : for all be clean ground . if thou chance to arrive on this coast in the time of the north-east wind , thou shall seek to fall with the land in fourteen degree . and if thou see a low land , thou may make account it be the land call Ciemana , and than thou shall see mangue : and also thou shall come along this coast to the south : and when thou see a end of the low land , than thou shall find a high land along the sea like the other that i have make mention of before , that be , all sandy along the sea coast . and thou must understand , that where the high land begin , there be a little river call Rio das Contas , but enter not into it : it have for a mark to be know by as it be a white mouth . and from thence to the island thou have nine league . and at the end of this high land to the southward of it thou shall find a great bay within the land , and than thou shall look to the westsouthwest , and shall see another high land , which lie as it be in the midst of the bay , and thou shall there see certain white house 78 •which be the ingenios or house wherein they make the white sugar of Lucas Giraldo . from thence thou shall see sugar house the isle be so far shoot as Rio de Contas . and thou shall see within the land a round hill which it be like monte de laud , and it have another copy on the south side . the course to sail to porto seguro , that be to say , the safe haven , lie on the foresaid coast of Brasil , and the mark to know the same by . in thou go for porto seguro and go in the time of the southeast wind , which be from march forward , i advise thou that thou fall not in more degree than sixteen and a half , because of the sholde call os baixos do Abrolhos , which be very dangerous , and stretch very far into the sea . and also go west from they , that thou keep thy lead go and be often sound . and if thou chance to see the land , and a high hill and long withal , much like to the pike , it be the hill that be call Monte Pasqual . and from thence thou must go to the north , and when thou have bring it southwest of thou , than thou may bear with the land , but with great care to look about thou . mark when thou see the land and come to see a red cliff , then look to the southward , and thou shall see a great smooth coast along the sea , and then on the north side thou shall descry porto seguro . And go along the coast thou shall see the town of porto seguro stand upon the top of a hill ; which hill be a white rock : and on the north side of the say rock there be a very high land . i advise thou that when thou be east and west with the say land , i mean with this rock , that than thou look to the northward , and 79 to avoid os baixos do Abrolhos . Monte Pasqual . [ Iii . 722. ] the place of thou shall see certain rock lie two league off into r a th® sea > whereon the sea do break , and to the south-ptrto seguro , ward of they thou may come to a anchor against which stand the town , and haste a good place to ride in thirteen in 16 deg . and fathom in sight of the town . one three . and if it be thy chance to arrive in the time of the north-east wind , and come in the height of fifteen degree and two three part , and see not certain hill , 16 degree . than thou must go along the coast be in 16 degree , and under the first high land that thou shall descry , thou a dangerous shall see certain sandy bay along the sea coast : and if rwer in 16 thou have sight of a river in this height , put not thy self saint ' into it , neither bear with the land , for it have many sholde . and off they lie certain sink ground , Baixos de call os Baixos de Santo Antonio . and from hence Santo Antonio . to southward lie porto seguro . i advise thou that go along the coast to the southward , and see such sholde , and the sea to break upon they , as the other which i last speak of , thou shall run along they a sea board of they : and when thou be at the end of they , than the town will bear west of thou : and than thou may go to thy anchoring place as be abovesaid , give these shold a good birth . the course to the haven name Baia do Spirito Santo , that be to say , the bay of the holy ghost , lie on the say coast of Brasil , and the mark thereof . how shall understand that the ship go for Spirito Santo , when it double the sholde os Baixos that have do monzmn be certain set wind with which the tide set . Abrolhos , and have bring it self in 20 or 19 degree and a half , than it may hall with the land in 18 or 19 degree and a half , and in twenty . and the say ship must go in this height , because on this coast there be no monzoin . if thou chance to come in the height of 19 degree market on they and see low land to the northwest off thou , than north s , e thou be on the north side of Spirito Santo , and thou SPmt° ant0‘ may make account that it be the land lie over criquare , and over the river call Rio dolce , that be the river of sweet or fresh water . if thou come along the land thou shall find certain high hill : but trust not the first that thou see only . for beside the rest thou shall see a round high hill which be at the cape end , which be call la Sierra de mestre Alvero . take heed that the situation go for this land thou look to the north and thou shall see a river call Rio do Reyes Magos : that be , Aharo . the river of the three king . And come to the Rio do Reyes southward thou shall see present the mouth of the bay to open . at the end of this hill on the south side , thou have a point of a rock , which be call a punta do tubaron . and on the south side of the bay it have two or three black high hill , and in the midst of the bay thou shall go in westward . i advise thou that in go in thou take heed of a shall which lie in the mouth of the bay : thou must leave it to the southward of thou , and then ply to double a certain island which lie within , and thou must leave it to the northward of thou : and when it bear on the north or Northeast , thou may come to a anchor : for all be clean ground . and if thou chance to come by this course , and fall in 20 degree , and see many hill , and one among the rest very high and craggy : it be call a Sierra de Guari - sierra de parim , that be , the hill of guaraparim , and see another inzo^degrees hill on the north side , which be call a Sierra de Pero a Sierra de cam : both these lie on the south side of Spirito Santo . Pero Cam. and from these hill thou shall see a little hill name guaipel . and when thou see these hill , thou shall see three little island together , lie to the southward : and then from these thou shall see another rocky , bare , and round island : and to the land off this island thou shall see a great bay . if thou will thou may anchor xi 81 f here safe . and if thou will go in , thou shall bring thy self east and west with the hill , and so thou may go in . and thou shall leave a low land to the north a ilha de of thou , which be call at ilha de Repouso , that be , the Repouso . isle open rest . anj thjs jsje jietaiong the coast : and thou may be bold to ride betwixt it and the main , give it a breadth off . from these three island to Spirito Santo be 12 SpiritoSanta league : and run northwards to come to Spirito stand in 20 gantoj thou shall see another island , and shall go a sea-egrees . board of it , and by and by the mouth of the bay will open towards thou . and this bay stand in 20 degree . [ Iii . 723. ] the course from the bay de Spirito Santo to the bay of saint Vincent , and the mark thereof . also the course from saint Vincent to the river of plate . Baia de Salvador 12 league north from Cabo frio . two small island . the height of cape Frio in 23 degree . Rio de jenero . Ailing from Spirito Santo for saint Vincent , thou may go along the coast , keep seven or eight league off , and must go to seek Cabo Frio , that be , the cold cape . and as thou come towards Cabo Frio , thou have a very great bay call Bahia de Salvador , that be , the bay of our saviour . and from thence thou have twelve league to Cabo Frio . and before thou come to Cabo Frio , thou have two small island . thou may go safe either a sea board of they , or else between they . thou shall understand that Cabo Frio have as it be a island in the midst of the face or show thereof , that do cut off the cape . thou may ride safe on the west side thereof ; for all be clean ground . understand that Cabo Frio stand in 23 degree : and from it to Rio de Jenero be twelve league . and this river of Jenero have in the mouth thereof 3 or 4 island . and if thou will go into this river de jenero , thou 82 may well go in between two island which stand in the entrance of the river on the south side : near unto this river there be a great hill seem to be a man with long hair . and take this for advise , that if thou be in the height of this river , thou shall see certain high hill within the land , which be like unto organ . and when thou see these organ , then make account thou be right against the river : and come near the land thou shall see a certain island very round , which lie to the southward , and be high and bare in the top . thou must know that the mouth of this river stand in 23 degree and one three part . and from this river to Angra , that be to say , the open haven , thou have 15 league . go not near the land there , except necessity compel thou . i advise thou , that from this river that i speak of , i mean from the entrance thereof , thou must go westsouthwest , and Southwest , and west and by south . and thou shall see a great island call Isla de San Sebastiano , and to the southward thereof another small island very high , call the island of Alcatrarzas , that be to say , the island of pelican : but come not near it , for it have dangerous shoald . and from hence thou may go west , and so thou shall fall right with the mouth of saint Vincent , and thou shall see a island . and if thou mean to go into saint Vincent thou must leave this island to the westward . and understand that saint Vincent lie in four and twenty degree . and when thou be in the mouth of this bay , or art near the mouth of it , than thou shall see many other island , and one among the rest to the seaward . and have these sight , thou have the best mark that be for these island , that i have tell thou of : and this island lie northwest and southeast with the mouth of saint Vincent . the situation of a hill like a man with long hair by Jenero . the organ certain high hill . Angra . a llha de san Sebastiano .. the isle of Alcatrarzas . saint Vincent in 24 degree . many island about you mouth of . Vincent , y one out to the seaward . 83 [ the course Porto de pato . Porto de don Roderigo . Laguna . Rio de Martin de Sousa . Cananea . Rio de San Francisco . the course from saint Vincent to the river of plate . Rome S. Vincent to Cananea thou have 40 league : and the coast lie north-east and by east , and Southwest and by west . from Cananea to the river of saint Francisco be fifteen league , and the coast lie north-east and Southwest . there be a little island , which have as it be two bay , and a good road , and be in 26 degree and a quarter , and towards the main it be high and craggy . from San Francisco to Boca de Overniron be 26 league , and the coast lie north and south . also thou must mark that the river of San Francisco have a great entrance , and 3 small island , and to seaward it have a good road ; and the main be high and craggy . from this Boca the overniron to ilha de Arvoredo thou have no great mark be observe : but this Boca be a very great bay , and this bay be deep within the island , and be a good road , and have many island , and stand in 28 degree . and to the north of this island under the point there be a good road : and there be no other road hereabout but this , and it be under the island . from hence thou shall have sight of the isle call Santa Catharina , which be a great island about eight or nine league long , and lie north and south . and hard by even with this hand be porto de pato , which stand in 29 degree . and from porto de pato to Porto de don Roderigo be ten or eleven league : and the coast lie north and south . and from porto de don Roderigo to Laguna be 5 league . and this be a good harbour for all wind , except the north-east wind . from the Laguna to the river call Rio de Martin de Sousa be 42 league . and the coast be something 84 high , and lie north-east and by north , and Southwest and by south : and it have a island 2 league into the sea , pn 72+ j where ship may ride well . and from the river of Martin de Sousa to Rio de San Pedro be 52 league , Rio de S. and the coast lie north-east and Southwest . Pedro from this river of San Pedro there lie a point of sand a good league off and more , and it lie on the southwest side of the port . and from thence to Cabo Caio de santa de santa Maria be 42 league : and the coast lie Maria . Northeast and Southwest , and all be low land . also on the southeast side of Cabo de Santa Maria there lie a isle two league off into the sea , and it have a good harbour betwixt it and the main . and note that the main be low land . the cape of Santa Maria stand in 35 degree , and at the point thereof it have a island a league into the sea . hereafter follow a rutty from the say river of plate to the strait of Magelane . he cape of Santa Maria be in 35 degree . from thence to the cape de Santo Antonio , which be on the other side of the river , be 30 league northnortheast , and southsouthwest . and this be the broad place of the river . and this cape be in 36 degree and a half , and it be a black gross land . and thou must mark that 25 league a seaboord the mouth of the river there lie certain sand , which be call Baixos de los Castellanos . he that fall with the cape of Santa Maria must take good heed to go southeast until he be in 36 degree , and from thence southsoutheast until 36 degree and a half , give the say shold de los Castellanos a breadth : and also take heed of the flat of the cape . and when he find 40 or 45 fathom , and russet sand , than he must go southwest and by south , until he be in 40 degree : where he shall find great store 85 Baixos de los Castellanos . 