there be certain rock that lie off between the isle of Alcatrarzas and S. Sebastian , about two league , theyleof which be to be take heed of , which a far off in fair Alcatrarzas weather show like the sail of ship . there be other rock that lie off saint Catelina also five league to the east and by south into the sea off the island . at our come up to Santos we find four fathom and a half water in the shallow place , and the like we find within a league after we be depart from saint Catelina , little more or less , but after you have run in the depth of four fathom and a half , about a mile or less , than you shall have it deep again more and more . before the town of Santos we ride in eight and ten fathom water . a letter of Francis Suares to his brother Diego snare dwell in Lisbon , write from the river of Jenero in Brasill in June 1596. concern then exceed rich trade new begin between that place and Peru , by the way of the river of plate , with small bark of 30. and 40. ton . ir , we set sail from Lisbon the four of April 1596. and arrive here in this river of Jenero the twenty seven of June next ensue . and the same day the visitadore do visit our ship with great joy , think that those commodity which we bring with we , have be for the merchant of this country : but it prove to the contrary . the pilot bring with he in the say ship two [ he . 707. ] pipe of wine which be take from he , and sell wine sell at by the justice for four and twenty real every gallon . a excessive but i sell i for two and thirty and six and thirty iate ' a rich trade from the river of Jenero by the river of plate into Peru , iac . the english voyage real the gallon . if i have bring any great store of wine , i shall have make a great gain of it : for i shall have get eight real for one . the next day in the morning we go all on shore , and give God thank for our prosperous voyage , and good success which he have send we . and because the governor of this country be go from this town to another house of he , three league up into the river beyond the place where we ride at anchor , i desire the captain of our ship after dinner , that we may take the ship boat , and go to the place where the governor do lie . and so go up the river , we meet with a canoa which be come down the river , and go aboard our ship ; which canoa be lade with fresh victual , and in the same be one Portugal , which meet we , and tell we that the governor of that captain ship have send we a present , which we receive very thankful , and send it aboard . and we go up the river , to the place where the governor do dwell ; and come to the place where we land , hard by the river side , the governor come thither and receive we very courteous . so we remain at his house two day , talk of many matter of Portugal : than we depart from he , and come down the river . three day after , i hire a warehouse by my self , and land my commodity . and now i be sell they as fast as i can ; and sell they very well , and to great profit : for i have sell all our hat . i will i have bring forty or fifty dozen , by reason of the great utterance of they up into Peru , and into the new kingdom of Granada , by the way of the river of plate . for here be passage every three or four month with bark of thirty and forty ton a piece , which be lade with sugar , rice , taffeta , hat , and other kind of commodity of this country , which be carry up the say river of plate in the say bark , and thence be convey up into Peru. and these bark be but ten or twelve day go up the say river to Peru. and within four and 40 five month after , the say bark come down this river again lade with real of plate , and bring down from those place no other commodity but treasure . it be a wonder thing to behold the great gain and profit which be get in this river and in this country . i be ashamed to write it , fear that i shall not be believe . for the employment of one hundred ducat in Spain , be bring hither , will yield twelve hundred and fifteen hundred ducat profit . this trade have be use but within this year . for we can go up to the mine of Potosi , which be the best and the rich mine in all Peru. if the merchant of Spain and Portugal do know this trade , they will not send nor venture so much merchandise to Cartagena as they do . for up this river be a great deal the near way , and the easy to go to Peru. for the perulero or merchant of Peru , which dwell there , come down to this harbour and river of Jenero , and bring with they fifteen thousand and twenty thousand ducat in real of plate and gold , and employ it here in this river in commodity : and when here be no commodity to be have for money in this place , than these merchant of Peru be constrain to go to Baia and Fernambuc , and there to employ their money . i will i have bring good store of silk , and not these kind of commodity which i do bring . for here be more profit to be have a great deal than in the voyage of Angola . for here with five hundred ducat in five month space a man may get six thousand ducat . and this be no fable , but most true , and a great deal more than i can express . for a rapier which do cost in Spain four and twenty and six and twenty real , be sell here for forty and fifty ducat : a bridle for a horse be sell for fifteen ducat : a lock of a door and the key be sell for ten ducat : a pound of benjamin be sell for fifteen ducat : a yard of velvet be sell for twenty and five and twenty ducat : taffeta be sell for six and seven ducat the vare : a ounce of musk be sell for forty ducat : and all kind of commodity after this rate . so one 41 A.D. 1596. the shortness of the retume of the voyage to Peru. this rich trade be begun in the year 1595. the voyage of Angola in Africa . gain often thousand ducat for the lay out of one thousand . a trade of buy negro in Angola . broad cloth excellent well sell . vinegar . [ Iii . 708. ] olive . taffeta . velvet . the english voyage thousand ducat of spanish commodity will gain ten thousand ducat . thus i hope in God to make more profit and gain this voyage , then in two voyage to Angola : for i have sell most of my hat for two ducat and a half and for three ducat . the rest i will carry to Angola , to help to sell the rest of my commodity , which i can sell in this river . and i have sell a hundred cubit of broad cloth for five hundred and five hundred and fifty and six hundred rey the cubit . if i will have sell all my cloth for ready money tell down for four hundred and fifty and five hundred reye , the merchant will have buy it all of i : but i will sell no more , because i mean to exchange it in Angola for Negros . howbeit with ready money in hand in Angola a man shall buy better negro , and better cheap . the captain of our ship sell all his cloth for ready money for four hundred 8c fifty rey the cubit , and think that he have make a good market : but he have deceive himself . i sell six broad clothes for five hundred and fifty rey the cubit : and i be offer thirty thousand rey for a cloth . vinegar be sell for two and thirty , and six and thirty , and forty real a jar , by reason there be great store of limmons and orange in the country : but in Angola it be more worth . olive be sell for half a real a piece : wherefore i hope to sell the hogshead for twenty thousand rey . in taffeta and velvet there will be get two hundred and fifty and three hundred for one hundred . if i have bring great store , i can have sell it all at this rate . i have already get good store of real of plate : for it be tell i that money be a good commodity in Angola . but i must employ some in meal , which be in the grind . all the rest of my money i will send you by bill of exchange , and some part i will employ in sugar : for i have send order to Baia for that purpose . for from this place there be no ship that do go that way . so these letter i do send by the way of Fernambuc , and have direct they to my cousin : for i do determine to settle my self here in this country . there be come down from Peru , by this river of plate , a merchant call Alonso Ramires , and he have bring down with he ten or twelve thousand ducat in real of plate , and be come down to this place to build he a ship to return into Spain ; and there be come in his company a bishop . and thus Jesus Christ send you long health . your love brother Francis Suares . the well govern and prosperous voyage of m. James Lancaster , begin with three ship and a galley-frigat from London in October 1594 , and intend for Fernambuck , the port-town of Olinda in Brasil . in which voyage ( beside the take of nine and twenty ship and frigate ) he surprise the say port-town , be strong fortify and man ; and hold possession thereof thirty day together ( notwithstanding many bold assault of the enemy both by land and water ) and also provident defeat their dangerous and almost inevitable firework . here he find the cargazon or freight of a rich east indian carrack ; which together with great abundance of sugar , brasil-wood , and cotton he bring from thence ; lade therewith fifteen sail of tall ship and bark . n September 1594 the worshipful m. John wat , aiderman , m. Paul Banning , aiderman , and other of worship in the city of London , victual three good ship ; to wit , the consent , of the burden of 240 ton or thereabouts , the Salomon , of 170 ton , and the virgin , of 60 ton : and appoint for commander in this voyage , m. James Lancaster of London , 43 