and dwell place , and so do some of the friar , because they can be suffer to rule and govern . also the Indians have complain against i , because i have burn their village in this last rebellion . wherefore if your majesty do not send some order for this country and see into these case , it will breed great dissension and rebellion among we , and we shall be ready to cut one another throat before it be long . thus i think good , accord to my humble bind duty , and for the service of your majesty and quietness of this realm , to certify your majesty the truth of the whole matter ; hope in short time that your majesty will send some good order to qualify these broil : for there be great hatred and malice among we . Jesus Christ preserve and keep the royal person of your majesty with long health , as it please he . from the captainship of Parajua this present 20 of August . 1597. Feliciano Cieza de Carvalsho . [ he - 719 ] a special note concern the current of the sea between the cape of buena esperanza and the coast of Brasilia , give by a french pilot to sir John York knight , before Sebastian cabote ; which pilot have frequent the coast of Brasilia eighteen voyage . Emorandum , that from Cabo de bvena esperanza unto Brasilia the sun have the like dominion over the tide there , as the moon have over our tide here . and that whensoever the sun be in any of these sign he govern the tide as follow . Taurus the sun be in < gemini Cancer the tide have his course northwest . the sun be in - in < virgo no current . Libra ’ Scorpio ' in • sagittarius Capricorn ' Aquarius " the tide have his course southeast . pisces Aries ► no current . a rutty or course to be keep for he that will sail from Cabo Verde to the coast of Brasil , and all along the coast of Brasil unto the river of plate : and namely first from Cabo Verde to Fernambuck . he ship that go from Cabo Verde to Brasil , must go southsoutheast : and when she be within 5 or 6 degree of the equinoctial she must go southeast and by south . and if she have the ternado , that be thundering and lightning , than thou must go altogether south , or that way and by that board that do profit thou most . and take this for advise , that have the general wind , and if the wind be at south or southeast , then go Southwest , or westsouthwest . and if the wind you that toitt be south , then go Southwest , and by this way sa3le toBrasil , but little , for it be not a way for thy profit , because thin^ow-the moor thou go this way , the more will be thy 70 league of trouble , because thou may not come near than the coast of coast of Guinea then 60 or 70 league unto they shall Gmnea . call os baixos de santa Anna . And be this distance from the same , thou shall cast about the other way towards Brasil , and the wind will be large . thou shall understand that the ship that keep this course to Fernambuck , and go in October or after , and chance to go to windward of the isle 73 