towreson with letter , after dine at m. blaccoller , and make many salutation with diverse gentleman . 1583. the 31. i wrought aboard all day , and put our ship , and thing in order : afternoon i have pity of some poor man of Milbrooke , which be rob the night before by a pirate name Purser , which ride in Cawson bay , i consent to go out with the Edward in company of a small ship which they have furnish to be their master , so about five of the clock in the afternoon , come a hundred man of they aboard of i : about twelve a clock we set sail , and by three afore day we be get to the windward of he , than he set sail , and go hence to the eastwards , and outsail we , because our consort will not come near he : after a small chase which we give he to no effect , we return into our old road , and there moar the ship about nine of the clock in the forenoon , and hence go all the Milbrooke man again ashore from i . and thus i end a troublesome voyage . [ ill . 769 ] the voyage set out by the right honourable the earl of Cumberland , in the year 1586. intend for the south sea , but perform no far than the latitude of 44. degree to the south of the equinoctial , write by m. John Sarracoll merchant in the same voyage . he 26. day of June , in the year 1586. and in the 28. year of the queen majesty reign , we depart from Gravesend in two ship ; the admiral call the red dragon , and the other the bark Clifford , the one of the burden of 260. ton , with 130. man , and the other of the burden of 130. ton , with 70. man : the captain of the admiral be m. Robert Withrington , of the viceadmiral m. Christopher Lister , both be furnish out at the cost and charge of the 202 1586. right honourable the earl of Cumberland , have for their master two brethren , the one John Anthony , and the other William Anthony . the 24. of July we come into the sound of plymouth , and be there constrain by westerly wind , to stay till the 17. of August , we then depart with another ship also for our rear-admiral call the roe , whereof m. Hawes be captain , and a fine pinnace also call the Dorothy , which be sir Walter ralegh . we four being out in the sea , meet the 20. of August , with 16. sail of hulk in the sleeve , who name themselves to be man of Hamborough , lade and come from Lisbon . our admiral hail their admiral with courteous word , will he to strike his sail , and to come aboard to he only to know some news of the country , but he refuse to do so , only strike his flag and take it in . the vice-admiral of the hulk be a head , will neither strike flag nor sail , but pass on without budge , whereupon our admiral lend he a piece of ordinance , which they repay double , so that we grow to some little quarrel , whereupon one of the sternemost hulk , be as i suppose more afraid than hurt , strike amain , our admiral be near he , lay he aboard , and enter with certain of his man , how many i know not , for that we be give chase to the windermost man , think our admiral will have come up again to we , to have make they all to have stroke : but the weather grow to be very thick and foggy , with small rain , he come not up but keep with another of the hulk which captain Hawes have board and keep all night , and take out of her some provision that they best like . they learn of the man that be in the hulk , that there be 7. hulk lade in Lisbon with Spaniards good , and because their lade be very rich , they be determine to go about Ireland , and so they let she go again like a goose with a break wing . the next day after be the 21. day , we espy 5. sail more , which lie along to the eastwards , but by 203 reason of the night which then be near at hand , we can hardly come to they . yet at last we hail one of the big of they , and they tell we that they be all of Hamborough : but another say she be of denmark , so that indeed they know neither what to say , nor what to do . our admiral be more desirous to follow his course , than to linger by chase the hulk , call we from pursue they with his trumpet , and a piece of ordinance , or else we will have see what they have be , and wherewith they have be lade . the 22. day because of contrary wind we put into Dartmouth all 4. of we , and tarry there seven day . the 29. we depart thence and put out to sea , and begin our voyage , think at the first to have run along the coast of Spain , to see if we can have meet with some good prize to have send home to my lord : but our captain think it not the best course at the last , but rather keep off in the sea from the coast . and upon Saturday the 17. of September we fall with the coast of Barbary , and the 18. hail in with the road of Santa Cruz. the 21. day we fall with one of the island of the canary , call Forteventura . in run alongst this island , we espy upon a hill by the water side , one wave with a white flag , whereupon we man both our boat , and send they towards the shore , to understand what news . they find they to be two ragged knave and one horseman , and they Lanzarota tell we that Lanzarota be take , and spoil in August spoil by the Turk : when we see they have nothing else to menoj gie / s . we anj proceed on our course , and fall again with the coast of Barbary . the 25. day of September about 10. of the clock we riodelqro , ' ™ feH with Rio del oro , stand just under our Tropike : nda^alfe we ancker in the mouth of it in 8. fathom , the entrance ' of it be about 2. league over . and the next day our captain with the boat search the river , and find it to be as broad 14. or 15. league up , as at the entry of it , ’ but find no town nor habitation , save that there 204 come down two poor man , and one of they speak good spanish , and tell our captain , that certain Frenchman use to come thither , and jade some ox trade of the hide , and goat hide , but other commodity there be none . we depart thence the 27 day , and the last day pjj 77o j ' of the month be calm we go aboard our general , and there consent to go for Sierra Leona , to wood and water . from thence till the 10. of October we be much becalm with extreme hot weather , much lightning , and great store of rain . this 10. day we sound , find a great current as we suppose by the rippling water , which after we find to be a ordinary tide , the flood set to the northwest , and the ebb southeast , and here we have but 18. fathom water , and no land to be see : it be on the southermost part of the showle that lie in about 11. degree , but hail south off again , it present deep unto 50. fathom , and after hail southeast and by east , and east southeast , we sound , but have no ground in 120. fathom . the 21. of October we fall with land upon the coast of Guinea , in the height of 8. degree , a very high land , but of no great length : it be the high land over sierra sierra Leona . Leona . we draw in to the land , and find near the shore more water than in the off : at the northern end of the high land our ancker about a mile , and somewhat more from the shore in 11. fathom . to go into the harbour of Sierra Leona we do borrow upon the south side , have no ground in 10. fathom , half a mile from the shore . upon the northside of this harbour be very shoal water , but on the southside no fear , more than be to be see . the 23. day be Sunday we come to a anchor in the bay of fresh water , and go ashore with our boat , we speak with a Portugal , who tell we that not far off there be negro inhabit , and that in give to the king a Botija of wine , and some linen cloth , he will suffer we to water and wood at our pleasure . but 205 our captain think it not good to give any thing for that which they may take free , land , and certain of our man with they , whereupon the Portugal and the negro run all away into the wood . than we return again into our boat , and present go and land in another place , think to have fetch a walk , and so to come to our boat again . but wander through a little wood , we be sudden and unaware a ton of they upon a town of the negro , whereupon they strike up negro . their drum , give withal a great shout , and off go their arrow as thick as hail . we be in number about 30. caliver , and 20. with our weapon , which we also let fly into the wood among they , and what hurt we do , we know not . than we return to our boat , and take wood and water at our pleasure , and reasonable store of fish , and a strange among the rest we hail up a great foul monster , monster . who head and back be so hard , that no sword can enter it : but be thrust in under the belly in diverse place , and much wound , he bow a sword in his mouth , as a man will do a girdle of leather about his hand , and likewise the iron of a boar spear . he be in length about nine foot , and have nothing in his belly , but a certain quantity of small stone , to the value of a pottle . another great the four of November we go on shore to a town “ oh / thne ™ ™ Negros , which stand on the southeast side of er egro . the harbour , about a sacar shoot from the road , which we find to be but late build : it be of about two hundred house , and wall about with mighty great tree , and stake so thick , that a rat can hardly get in or out . but as it chance , we come direct upon a port which be not shut up , where we enter with such fierceness , that the people flee all out of the town , which we find to be fine build after their fashion , and the street of it so intricate , that it be difficult for we to find the way out , that we come in at . we find their house and street so fine and clean keep , that 206 it be a admiration to we all , for that neither in the house nor street be so much dust to be find , as will fill a egg shell . we find little in their house , except some matt , goard , and some earthen pot . our man at their departure set the town on fire , and it be burn ( for the most part of it ) in a a town quarter of a hour , the house be cover with burnt-reed and straw . after this we search the country about it , where we find in diverse plain good store of rice in stack , rice in stack . which our man do beat out , and bring a board in the husk , to the quantity of 14. or 15. ton in both our ship . the 17. day of November we depart from Sierra Leona , direct our course for the strait of Magellan . in this harbour diverse of our man fall sick of a disease in the belly , which for the time be extreme , but ( God be thank ) it be but of small continuance . we find also in diverse place of the wood , image set idol . upon pin , with diverse thing before they , as egg , meal , rice , round shoot of stone , and diverse other thing , such as the barbarous people have to offer up . when we come near to the line , we find it nothing so hot as it be at Sierra Leona , by reason of the great wind and rain . about the 24. day of November one or two of our man die , and other also be sick of a Calentura . the second day of January we have a little sight of land , be about the height of 28. degree to the southward of the line . the 4. day we fall with the shore high and bold , in 30. degree , and a terse , little more or less . all of it to the northward be a high land , but to the southward it do present fade , and be a very low land , and all sandy . about six league from the shore we sound , and have about fifteen or sixteen fathom water , and black sandy oz . we think to have go to the shore , and to have water , but we 207 [ in . 771. ] they fall with a highland in 30. degree | . a Portugal ship take , wherein be for pilot Abraham Cocke a Englishman , leave there before by the minion of London 1581. five town upon the river of plate . the english voyage can not discern any good harbour , and therefore we cast off to seaward again . the 12. day we find our self in 32. degree and 27. minute . from the day of the nativity of Christ , till the 13. day of this month , although the sun be very near unto we , yet we find no want of wind but variable as in England , and not so hot but that a man shoulder may well digest a freeze gown , and his belly the best Christmas cheer in England , yet we for our part have no want , but such as may content honest man . the ten day be about 8. league from the shore , and a little short of the river of plate , it be my good hap to espy a sail , which be a small Portugal bind for the river to a town call Santa fee : and from thence by horse and cart , the merchant , and part of their good be to be transport into Peru. this ship be about the burden of 45. or 50. ton , we take that day about three of the clock , wherein there be for master or pilot a Englishman call Abraham cock bear in Lee. we examine he and the rest concern the state of the river , and they tell we that there be in the river five town , some of 70. households , and some of more . the first town be about 50. league up the river call Buenos Ayres , the rest some 40. some 50. league one from another , so that the uppermost town call Tucaman be 230. league from the entrance of the river . in these town be great store of corn , cattle , wine , and sundry fruit , but no money of gold or silver : they make a certain kind of slight cloth , which they give in truck of sugar , rice , marmalade , and sucket , which be the commodity that this ship have . they have aboard also 45. Negros , whereof every one in Peru yield 400. ducat a piece , and beside these , there be as passenger in she , two Portugal woman and a child . the 11. day we espy another sail , which be the 208 consort of this Portugal , and to he also we give chase , another and take he the same day : he be of the burden PortHZ , als^p of the other , and have in he good store of sugar , Mar - take ' malade , and succat , with diverse other thing , which we note down our book . in this ship also we find about 35. negro woman , and four or five friar , of which one be a irish man , of the age of three or a irish friar four and twenty year , and two Portugal woman ta^ew also , which be bear in the river of Jenero . both these ship be buy in Brasil , by a young man which be factor for the bishop of Tucaman , and bishop of the friar be send for by that bishop to possess a tixaman ™ new monastery , which the bishop be then a build - p^ king . the book , bead , and picture in she , cost ( as one of the Portugal confess ) above 1000 ducat . of these ship we learn , that m. John Drake , who the news go in consort with m. Fenton , have his bark cast away a little short of the river of plate , where they ’ be take captive by the savage , all save they which be slay in the take : the savage keep they for a time , and use they very hardly , yet at the last John drake and Richard Faireweather , and two or three Richard moor of their company with they get a Canoa , and ^aireweathei . escape , and come to the first town of the Spaniard . Faireweather be marry in one of the town , but John Drake be carry to Tucaman by the pilot of this ship , and be live , and in good health the last year . concern this voyage of the Portugal they tell we that it be the third voyage that be make into the river of plate these 30. year . the 12. of January we come to seal island , and the seale-fands 14. day to the green island , where go in our find and green-hard aboard the main 8. fathom , 7. and 6. and never less than five fathom . there lie a ledge of rock in the fair way , betwixt the island and the main , so that you must be sure to borrow hard aboard the main , and leave the ledge on the larboard side . xi 209 oh one of the Portugal which we cane along with we in our ship seem to be a man of experience , and i enter into speech with he concern the state of Buenos Ayres , the river : he tell i that the town of Buenos Ayres be from the green island about seventie league , stand on the southside of the river , and from thence Santa fee . to Santa fee be ioo . league , stand on the same side also . at which town their ship do discharge all their good into small bark , which row and tow up the river to another town call ascension , which [ three . 772. ] be from Santa fee 150. league , where the boat discharge on shore , and so pass all the good by cart and horse to Tucaman , which be in Peru. the town of ascension stand in a very fertile place , reap corn twice in the year , with abundance of wine , cattle , and fruit . in the town of ascension and tucaman a rapier of 20. rial of plate be worth 30. ducat , a box of marmalade 20. ducat ; a look glass a foot over be worth 30. livre . picture in table of 14. inch , 30. and 40. livre . a piece . the 16. day we go from green island to the water place , which be about a league to the westward , where we take in about 18. ton of water , and the 22. day come again to seal island to make provision of seal , where a storm arise , which put we in some danger , by the break of our anchor and cable , and the wind blow so cold , that we much marveil at it , consider the height of the place . i must needs in this place find fault with our self and the whole company , that ride in this river 16. day , the channel be not sound , nor the way make perfect . the 29. day we take into our ship one mile Philips , which be leave in the west Indies by m. Hawkins . the first of February i take the sun in 38. degree . and the 3. day of February i take it again and find it to be in 41. degree . 210 the 7. day of February our captain master Lister be in one of the prize , hoist over board his gondola , and go aboard the admiral , and be there they send their gondola aboard we , for our master , master Collins , and my self , and at our come we be call into the captain cabin , where be set in counsel for matter touch the state of our voyage , these man who name be under write . ' master Robert Withrington captain of the admiral . master Christopher Lister captain of the bark Clifford . John Anthony , master of the admiral . Thomas hood , pilot for the strait . William Anthony , master of the bark Clifford . David Collins . } { Tristan Gennings . master William Withrington . " master Beumond Withrington . master wasne . } { master Norton . master Wilkes . } { master Harris . Thomas Anthony . Nicholas porter . the master gunner : and Alexander Gundie , his mate . John Sarracol . this company be all assemble together , the master m. John an-of the admiral declare that the cause of our assembly t^onie . be to determine after good advice , what course or way be best and most likely to all man judgment to be take . first for the good preferment of my lord voyage , than the health of our man , and last the safeguard of our ship , and further show his mind to we all in these word , as near as i can carry they away . my master , my lord determination touch this our voyage be not unknown unto you all , have appoint it to be make , and by the grace of God to be perform by we for the south sea . but for as much 211 as we do all see the time of the year to be far spend , as also the wind to hang contrary , the weather draw on cold and cold , the night long and long , our bread so consume that we have not leave above two month biscuit , our drink in a manner all spend , so that we have nothing but water , which in so cold a country as the strait , if we shall get in , and be force there to winter , will no doubt be a great weaken to our man , and a hazard of the overthrow of the voyage : these thing consider , both our captain , master hood , and i do rather think it good for the wealth of our voyage , the health of our man , and safety of our ship , to go room with the coast of Brasill , where by God grace we shall well victuali our self , both with wine which be our great want , and other necessary . beside , it be give we here to understand by the Portugal which we have take , that there be no doubt but that by god help and our endeavour , we shall be able to take the town of Baya , at our pleasure , which if we do put in practice , and do not perform it , be somewhat advise by they , they offer to loose their life . and have by this mean victual our [ three . 773. ] self , we may there spend upon the coast some three or four month , except in the mean time we may happen upon some good thing to content my lord , and to purchase our own credit : otherwise , we may take the spring of the year , and so proceed , accord to my lord direction . and assure your self ( by the assistance of God ) we will not return without such benefit by this voyage , as may redound to my lord profit , and the honour of our country . now if there be any of you that can give better course and advise , than this which i have deliver , let he speak , and we will not only hear he , but thank he for his a resolute and counseH ( anJ follow it . captain thi® speech of m. Anthony , m. Lister our captain Lister . answer in this sort : m. Withrington , and m. Anthony , 212 both , you know , that the last word that my lord have with we in such a chamber be , that in any case we shall follow our voyage only for the south sea , except by the way , we may perchance meet with such a purchase , as that we may return with 6000 pound : and therefore i see no safety , how we may dare offer to go back again , be so near the strait as we be : for my part i neither dare nor will consent unto it , except we be further force , then yet we be . my account be this , that he that die for this year be excuse for the next , and i rather choose death , than to return in disgrace with my lord . hereunto both the captain and master of the admiral reply that they be all of that mind : yet notwithstanding , that in go room the voyage be in better possibility to be perform , then in winter either in the strait , or at port S. Julian , all thing consider and so agree , and conclude all in one , they be determine present to bear up . the next day be the 8 of February , there fall out many and diverse speech on each part concern the alter of our course , some will continue for the strait , and other some will not . whereupon a view be take in both ship of victual , and reasonable store be find for both company : and the wind withal come to the north , we determine to take out of the prize the best necessary that be in they , and so cast they off , and to ply for the strait . all this time we hold on our course , and the 15 day we find our self in the height of 44 degree , but then the wind come to the south , with much rain , wind , cold , and other untemperate weather , continue in that sort five or six day , in which time we hull back again into the height of 42 degree . Sunday be the 20 of February , our admiral be something to the leeward of we , and the storm somewhat cease , put aboard his flag in the mizzen shrowd , as a token that he will speak with we , and there-213 they return be in the latitude of degree . upon we bear room with he , and have hail one another , captain Withrington show the disposition of all his company , which be rather to go room with the coast of Brasil , than to lie after that sort in the sea with foul weather and contrary wind . our captain on the other side show the contrary disposition of his man , and company , will notwithstanding to proceed : but in the end , both the ship fall asunder , and our captain say , see then there be no remedy , i must be content , though against my will . the 21 day the weather grow fair , and the wind good at the south for the strait , yet our admiral bare room still , we suppose he will have take the benefit of the time : whereupon our whole company begin to think of the inconvenience that will arise by divide our self , and lose our admiral , be very willing to continue their course , and yet not without the company of the admiral . and then we begin to cast about after he , and at the last bear with he , and he tell we , that upon a second view of the victual , he find their store so slender , and their want so great , that there be no remedy for they but to seek some mean to be relieve , which be the only cause that he bear northward . this speech make we of the bark to enter into a new consultation : and we find many of our man weak , and all our caliver not serviceable , and the smith that shall mend they to be in the admiral . we consider also , that by break of company , each ship shall be the more weaken : we continue in this consultation till the four and twenty day , and in all that time find master captain Lister more desirous to accomplish , and to fulfil the voyage , and not willing in any case to turn his ship , but that the desire which we all have to continue in consort with our admiral , make we to think well of his company , and in fine a agreement and conclusion be thus make on all side , to follow the admiral , without any more talk of the strait till the spring . 214 the io day of march , it fall out so unfortunate , that Samuel Teller our master mate , fall overboard , and so perish , we be not able by any mean to recover he . the eight and twenty day be in the height of one and twenty degree , we espy a sail , which we judge came out of the strait , and have rich lade , but the night be at hand , we lose she very unlucky , and the next day can have no sight of she . the five day of April we fall with the land of Brasilia , in the height , as i judge , of sixteen degree and a tierce , and our captain go then aboard the admiral , where they conclude to send the pinnace and our boat on shore for fresh water , because we stand in need of it , which do so with eighteen good man , and three or four ton of water cask . they be from we till the eight day in the morning , at which time we espy they again , and that day we come all together into the road of Camena , where there come a Canoa aboard we , and one of the chief Portugal that belong to the place . here we take in beef , hog , water and wood at our pleasure , have almost no man able to resist we , but some of our Portugal steal from we in the Canoa . the 11 day we enter into the haven of Baya , where we be receive at the point come in , with two great piece of ordinance , which discharge bullet at we five time a piece , but they lose shot and powder , and do we not harm . after we have pass the point , we hail in for the road as close as the wind will permit we , but can not come so near as we desire , and therefore we come to a anchor a fair birth off the town , not without great store of shot from thence , but yet our harm be none at all for ought they can do . at our come in , we find in the road eight ship and one caravel , of the which one be a hulk or double fly boat of the burden of two hundred and fifty ton , have in her 24 piece of good ordinance : she with the 215 A.D. 1587. march . [ HL 77+ - ] the road of Camena . they come into the river of Baya . they take 4 ship out of the harbour of Baya , notwithstanding the shot of the enemy . a hulk of Flushing . the english voyage rest of the ship , together with the town , give we shot , and shoot , but not one touch so much as any of our sail . and lest we shall seem in the mean time to be idle , we repay for every shot of they , two or three sometime at the ship and the town together . the next day at night we think to have hail in with the ship , and to have fetch out some of they : but the wind blow then off the shore , so that we can not possible do it . and again the next day at night we conclude to go with our own two boat , and two other boat of the country which we have take before , which go with caravel-saile , into the road , and accord perform the same , notwithstanding the shot of the enemy . the moon do shine , and give very good light , and in we go with our caravel and boat , and the shot come about our ear as thick as hail : but the Portugal and the rest perceive we no whit at all to shrink or be dismay , forsake their ship , and begin to provide to save themselves , some with their boat , some by swim , and so we enter the ship with a great shout , and find few to resist we : but yet the shore not be a cable length from we , they do so ply both their great and small ordinance at we , that it much annoy we : but yet for all that we make light of their shot , and our man of the bark Clifford enter the admiral and vice-admiral , and our admiral man enter two other ship of the like burden , and present every one cut the cable in the house , and so by the help of God in despite of they all , we bring away four of they . the least whereof be of the burden of 130 ton . in this broil the hulk shoot at we many time , but do no hurt at all : but at the last come by the hulk tow our new prize , we hail they and demand whence they be , they answer we of Flushing , and then we command he to weigh anchor , and to come after we : and not dare to refuse it , he do so , and bring with he a caravel with forty or fifty butt of wine in she , and 216 another small bark which have little or nothing in she : and ride by we as one of our company , and be a ship of the burden of two hundred and fifty ton . our hard hap be to find no great matter , either of merchandise or victual in these ship , save in one of they we find four butt of wine , in another two , in another one , and some fish , and all the rest of their lade be on shore . all this be do upon easter eeve , and we give thank to God , that we have speed so well : and that very night there come a boat from the town , with a dutch merchant , and one Portugal , to offer some ransom for the ship , as they say , but as i judge rather to espy our strength : we keep they that night aboard , and the next day we send they to our admiral . the next day be easter day arise a very great storm insomuch that our caravel which we first take brake from we , and one of our new prize also , by mean of the break of her cable , slip away : whereupon , although the wind be great , and the sea troublesome , yet we send certain of our man in our boat , to recover they if they may , but we fear , that the rage of the weather have cause we to lose both our man and prize . in the midst of this storm , our two Spaniard which we take in the river of plate , see we all busy about our prize , begin to think how they may escape our hand , and sudden slip both out of one of the cabin window , and by swim get a shore , a thing which seem to we impossible , consider the outrage of the weather . this storm continue long , and prevent we of make our intend attempt against the town , have as much to do as possible we may , in keep our ship and prize from run ashore ; and fall into the hand of those that stand gape greedy for our ruin . the 19 day the storm be a little cease , we all weigh and come to a island that lie next northwest 217 [ three . 775. ] the english voyage from the bay , and the twenty day we go on , shore , and our carpenter set up our pinnace . the 23 day the people of the country come down amain upon we , and beset we round , and shoot at we with their bow and arrow , but in short time we cause they to retire , and many of they be carry away by the help of their fellow , although we have some of our man hurt with some of their arrow . the 24 day we receive out of the caravel twelve butt of wine and four barrel of oil , and half a quarter . the 26 of April our pinnace be launch : and the same day come down unto we a great number of Portugal and Indians , with who we skirmish the space of two hour to their cost . the second day of may the admiral boat go a shore with 14 man to fill water , and present be on shore , they be entrap with two or three hundred Indians which assault they , and slay one or two of our man , but the rest escape notwithstanding the number of the enemy , and come safe again with water to the ship . we suffer this loss by mere negligence , and want of circumspection . the 5 day the captain of the admiral himself take a small bark , his own little caravel , our pinnace and the dutchmans boat , and at night go on shore to get victual , among the bullock which be in the field : and in the morning they be go so far , that they be out of sight . which be perceive by the enemy , they present make ready their galley for admiral , with four caravel , with as many man in they as possible can thrust in and stand one by another : and they bear over with the north shore to meet with our pinnace and boat : whereupon our man fall into great danger , although m. Lister our captain dissuade m. Withrington from that attempt , by lay before he the danger both of himself and we also , be so far one from the other . but be once go , there be no remedy but they be to abide whatsoever may happen : we in the bark Clifford , 218 although we be weak leave , yet perceive the galley to make after our man , weigh and pursue the galley , as near the shore as we can convenient come for want of water : the hulk also weigh and come after we to follow the enemy , but the enemy with his oar get sight of our pinnace and boat before we can , and bear direct with they : which be espy of our man , and they see no way to avoid they , make themselves ready ( notwithstanding the great odds ) to fight it out like man , and to live and die together . the course that they take for their best advantage upon the sudden , be this : they go all into the pinnace , and make fast the dutchmans boat to one side , and the small caravel to the other side , and so wait the come of the enemy , give they first of all a piece of ordinance for their welcome , which they present repay again with a piece out of the prow of the galley , and present after , with three or four small brass piece , charge with hailshot , and so give a mighty shout , come all aboard together , cry , entrad , entrad : but our man receive they so hot , with small shot and pike , that they kill they like dog . and thus they continue aboard they almost a quarter of a hour , think to have devour our man , pinnace and all . and sure to man judgement , no other thing be likely in regard of their great number , and the fewness of our man , and they at the first think all be their own : but God , who be the giver of all victory , so bless our small company , and so strengthen their arm and mind to fight , that the enemy have receive a mighty foil , be glad to rid himself from their hand : and whereas at their marvellous entrance , we esteem they to be no less than betwixt two hundred and three hundred man in the afewofour galley , we can scarce perceive twenty man at their man . departure stand on their leg , but the great part of they be slay , many deadly wound , their oar break , and she depart from our man , hang upon one side ( as a sow that have lose her left ear ) with 219 above 360 Portugal and Indians slay . the english voyage the number of dead and wound man that lie one upon another . and whereas their come aboard be in a great bravado , with drum , shout , and cry , they depart without either noise of drum or speech . we lose in this conflict of our man , three only , which be Alexander the master Gunners mate , Laurence Gambrel , a proper young man of Hampton , and another that be master benman man . some also be hurt with the arrow of the enemy , but the wound be curable : and thus it please Almighty God , of his great goodness , to give victory to 50 or 60 Englishman , against six or seven hundred Portugal and Indians , for which we cease not to give such dutiful thank to his majesty , as so miraculous a victory require . now touch the purpose of our man , who make that attempt for fresh victual , their labour be nothing lose , but in despite of the enemy they bring to our ship 16 or 17 young bullock , which be to our great comfort and refresh . as for we that be in our ship , we can not come near they by two mile , or more , to give they any aid , yet we suppose that the countenance of our ship be a encouragement to our man , and some manner of fear to the enemy . now whereas our opinion concern the number of the Portugal and Indians which be slay , as aforesaid , be ground at that time upon our probable conjecture , not be able otherwise to come to the knowledge thereof : you shall understand that the next night after the fight there come aboard we two Indians upon a Gyngatho , who be run away from their master , and they tell we for a very good truth , that the galley go out from the town with four hundred man in she , but there come not back to the town again alive above thirty of they all : and i among the rest be desirous to know of one of they , what the news be at the town , he answer i with great laughter : todo esta cacado en tierra . 220 the twelve day i be send for to come aboard the admiral , about the hulk : where upon the complaint of the Dutchman , master Withrington enter into bond to they for the payment of their fraught , but how my lord will like that bond of debt at our return , i know not . i give he my advice and counsel to get his bond again into his hand . the thirteenth day our captain send out of our ship certain victual unto the admiral , as one butt of dight rise , two chest of clean rise , one barrel of oatmeal , one barrel of peason , and one barrel of oil , because they be somewhat scant of victual , and we at this time be to have out of the admiral our part of five and twenty chest of fine sugar , and more , of eight chest , and six chest that be take in the bay of todo santos , at the ingenios , more of one hundred and thirty hat , and other diverse pillage , which be take in the prize , and at the shore . the fourteen day be Monday , it be conclude among we all , not to leave the town of Baya so , but notwithstanding the time that they have to strengthen themselves and the town , yet to give a attempt for the win of it : and therefore we provide our pinnace , caravel , and boat for the enterprise : and as we be depart from our ship , the wind turn direct contrary to our course , so that our determination for that time be break , and we return again to our ship : and to say the truth , if the weather and wind have serve , our attempt have be very desperate , consider the number of Portugal and Indians which be then gather together , to the number of seven or eight thousand , and their artillery upon the shore , play upon we : but nevertheless we have proceed , if the wind have favour we . the 16 day we go to certain ingenios of the Portugal , where we find the people flee and we enter their house without resistance . we find 221 A.D. I587 . in their purge house 1000 pot of sugar , some half purge , some a quarter , and some new put into the pot : so that every man take his pot of sugar for their provision , and set all the rest on fire . the 17 day we all weigh to go to another ingenio , to see if we can find there better sugar , and in the way we meet with a prize , which be a caravel , which we find drive with the weather , and enter she , and have in she only three falcon of iron , which our pinnace bring away , and set the ship on fire . dalamor in the small prize run so far in , that he bring his ship on ground , where she lie three or four hour , till such time as there come from the town five caravel full of man , which be perceive of we , our captain with our man go to he to aid he . the caravel come within falcon shoot of we , but dare come no near , lest they may have taste of the like banquet , that they receive the last time . about half flood come the galley again , and three caravel more , but before they come , the bark be a float , and set sail : and then they all go to guard their ingenios , which we have purpose to visit : but the night come on , persuade we to the contrary . the 19 day we set sail to go into the road of Baya again , with our pinnace , and a flag of truce , to see if we can recover our four man , which remain alive of those ten , that perish in our boat , of who we speak before , which four be unfortunate fall into their hand : but they at our approach near the town , shoot at we , and we as ready as they , give they in all 27 shot , and so ankor a little from the town , to see what they will do . the 20 day ride still before the town , our admiral send a negro ashore , with letter from the Portugal , that we have prisoner aboard : the effect of which letter be , that if we may have our man release and deliver we , they shall have they from our ship . 222 the next day in the morning , in stead of their [ three . 777. ] bloody flag , they put up two white flag , and send a Gingatho off to we with two Indians , with letter of answer from the governor ; but they will not consent in any case that we shall have our man , and will their Portugal to take their captivity patient , for they will not redeem they : a motion they make in their letter , to buy again one of their prize , which we have take out of the road : but our admiral answer they , no , see they detain our man , we will keep both their man , and ship too . the same evening we weigh , and come out of the haven , half a league to seaward . the 22 we set sail to sea , and the 23 come to a a island \z island twelve league to the southward of Baya , to wood , tesgustothe j ten 6 7 > > south of Bata . and water . i the 24 day be aboard with our pinnace , we meet with a Canoa , wherein be one Portugal , and six Indians : we shoot at the Canoa , and kill a indian , and take the Portugal , and one of the Indians , and bring they aboard our ship : we there examine they , and the Portugal confess that there be a ship lade with meal , and other victual , bind for Fernambuck , but put into a creek , because she dare not go along the coast , hear of our ship . whereupon we man both our pinnace , and take the Portugal with we , to go and seek the same ship , but that night we can not find she . the 26 day we go again , and find she , be hail up into a creek , where a man will have think a ship boat can not have enter : we find she indeed lade with meal principal : but she have also in her fourteen chest of sugar , of which two be in powder , and twelve in loaf . this ship be of the burden of one hundred and twenty ton , and a new a new portu-ship , this be the first voyage that ever she make , ^s^ . ete^een and as the Portugal confess , she be freight for ' Fernambuck , but the man of Baya have great want 223 a good warn fir we to be circumspect in land . June . a offer of captain Lister to go with his one ship only for the south sea . the english voyage of bread , buy both they ? ship and her lade , and so think to stay she in this creek , till we be go off the coast : but it be our good hap to disappoint their pretense , and to fetch she from thence , where they think she as safe as if she have be at Lisbon . the 28 day we divide the meal among we , accord to the want of every ship . the 30 day , 16 or 17 Dutchman go with their boat from the hulk to shore , to fill water : and upon a sudden they be assault with fifty or sixty Portugal , and so many more Indians arm with shot and other weapon , and they slay their master and Purser , and the rest be hurt , but yet escape with their life : a good warn for we to be circumspect , and careful in our land . the last day of may we cast off one of our prize , which we call the George , and our admiral and the hulk take the man and other necessary out of she , into they . the same day the Portugal which have hurt the Dutchman come to the shore , and dare we to come on land : whereupon we go into our pinnace with forty shot : but the cowardly villain run all away to the hill , from the water side : but master Lister with nine man follow they , and they flee still before they , and dare not stay their approach : so they come back again , and we fill water quiet , and at our pleasure . the three day of June our captain master Lister , have a great desire for the performance of this voyage , accord to my lord direction , go to our admiral , and request he to give he six butt of wine , one barrel of oil , three or four barrel of flesh , and to have Thomas hood and seven or eight seaman for some of our landman , and by God help he with the bark Clifford , will alone proceed for the south sea : but admiral mighty withstand his motion , and will grant no jot of his particular request . 224 the 7 of June , have no use at all of our prize , we burn one , and cast off another , and fill our own ship with the necessary of they . the 8 day we put off to sea , but yet with much ado come again to our anchor place , because of the weather . the 10 day the admiral send for we to come aboard he , and be come , he open a card before all the company , and tell we that my lord voyage for the south sea be overthrow for want of able man , and victual , and that therefore he think it best to ply for some of the island of the west India , or the azore , to see if they can meet with some good purchase , that may satisfy my lord . Theise word be take heavy of all the company , and no man will answer he , but keep silence , for very grief to see my lord hope thus deceive , and his great expense and cost cast away . the common sort see no other remedy , be content to return as well as he . the 16 day we espy a sail , whereupon our pinnace and dalamor give her chase , and put she ashore upon the island , where the man forsake she , and run away with such thing as they can convenient carry : [ Hi. 778. ] our pinnace board she , and find little in she ; they another pin-tooke out of her nine chest of sugar , and one hog , ness taken-and 35 piece of pewter , and so leave she upon the sand . from this time forward we begin to ply northwards , july-and the first of July fall with the land again , where we they return fish , and find reasonable good store . i take the °ri war ' latitude that day , and find our self in 10 degree and 22 minute . the 7 day we determine to fall with Fernambuck , and we come so near it , that dalamor ( as he tell we ) espy some of the ship that be in the harbour : yet notwithstanding we all fall to leeward of the river , and can not after that , by any mean recover the height of it again : but we cease not on all part to xi 225 p fernambuck in the southerly latitude of 7 deg . 50 min. a low island in 3 degree and 49 minute . August . the english voyage endeavour the best we can , and oftentimes lose company for a day or two , one of another , but there be no remedy , but patience , for to Fernambuck we can not come , have so much overshoot it to the northward , and the wind keep at the south and Southwest . the 20 day i take the sun in 5 degree 50 minute , which be 2 degree to the northward of Fernambuck , and the further we go , the more untoward do the rest of our ship work , either to come into haven , or to keep company one with another . and true i suppose , that by reason of the froward course of the admiral , he mean of purpose to lose we : for i know not how the near we endeavour to be to he , the further off will he beef from we , and we see that , keep on our own course , and look to our self as well as we can . the 24 day our whole company be call together to consultation , for our best course : some will go for the west India , some direct north for England ; and in conclusion , the great part be bend to ply for our own country , consider our necessity of victual and fresh water , and yet if any place be offer we in the way , not to omit it , to seek to fill water . the 26 day in the morning , we espy a low island , but we lose it again , and can descry it no more . this day we find our self in 3 degree and 49 minute . the 27 day we search what water we have leave we , and find but nine butt only , so that our captain allow but a pint of water for a man a day , to preserve it as much as may be , wherewith every man be content , and we be then in number fifty man and boy . the first of August we find our self 5 degree to the northward of the line , all which month we continue our course homeward , without touch any where : towards the end whereof , a sorrowful accident 226 1572-87 . fall out in our hulk , which be divide from we in thehulkeof a calm , fall afire by some great negligence , and per - ^s^ngJ > urnt ish by that mean in the sea , we be not able man ne^ any way to help the ship , or to save the man . gence . the 4 day of September , we have bring our self into the height of 41 degree and 20 minute , somewhat to the northward of the island of the azore : and thus bult up and down with contrary wind , the 29 of the same month , we reach the coast of England , and so make a end of the voyage . a discourse of the west Indies and South sea write by Lopez Vaz a Portugal , bear in the city of Elvas , continue unto the year 1587. wherein among diverse rare thing not hitherto deliver by any other writer , certain voyage of our Englishman be true report : which be intercept with the author thereof at the river of plate , by captain Withrington and captain Christopher Lister , in the fleet set forth by the right honourable the earl of Cumberland for the south sea in the year 1586. Rancis Drake a Englishman be on the sea , and have knowledge of the small strength of the town of number de dios , come into the harbour on a night with four pinnace , and land a hundred and fifty man : and leave one half of his man with a trumpet in a fort which be there , he with the rest enter the town without do any harm till he come at the market place : and there his company discharge their caliver , and sound their trumpet ( which make a great noise in the town ) be answer by their rellowe in the fort , who discharge and sound in 227 this voyage vias make in the year 1572. 