sea-charts of the south sea take . they arrive at Guatuko . a prill 13. Stilo novo . Nuno da Silva set on land . [ he - 748. ] the english voyage the which be the letter of the king of Spain , send to the governor of the philippinas , as also the sea-card wherewith they shall make their voyage , and direct themselves in their course . and so sail until the sixth of April , about evening they discover a ship that hold two league to seaward from the land : and before the next day in the morning they be hard by she , and sudden fall upon her while her man sleep , and present make the man enter into their ship , among the which be one don Francisco Xarate . which do , they follow on their course with the say ship , out of the which they take certain pack and other ware , but i know not what it be . they likewise take a negro out of it , and three day after they both let the ship and man go whether they will , set therein the two sailor that shall go for China , which they have take in the frigate , keep only one sailer to show they where they shall find fresh water , to the which end they take the empty vessel with they to fill with water , and so keep on their course to the haven of Guatulco , where they put in , be upon Monday the thirteenth of April , and have anchor , they stay there till the six and twenty of April : and about three or four hour within the night , they set sail , hold their course westward , and a hour or two before they let Nuno da Silva go , put he into another ship , that lie in the haven of Guatulco . from thence forward the Englishman pass on their voyage , to the island of Malucos , and from thence they pass by the cape de buena esperanza , and so to England , as it be well know , so that thjs be only the description of the voyage that they make , while the say pilot Nuno da Silva be with they . hereafter follow the copy of a letter write by sir Francis Drake ( be in the south sea of new Spain , in his ship call the pelican or the golden hind with the ship of Sant John de Anton , which he have take ) to his companion in the other ship that be of his company , 146 and by foul weather separate from he , as i say before : the content whereof be these : master winter , if it please God that you shall chance to meet with this ship of Sant John de Anton , i pray you use he well , accord to my word and promise give unto they , and if you want any thing that be in this ship of Sant John de Anton , i pray you pay they double the value for it , which i will satisfy again , and command your man not to do she any hurt : and what composition or agreement we have make , at my return into England i will by God help perform , although i be in doubt that this letter will never come to your hand : notwithstanding i be the man i have promise to be : beseech God , the saviour of all the world , to have we in his keep , to who only i give all honour , praise and glory . what i have write , be not only to you m. winter , but also to m. Thomas , m. Charles , m. Caube , and m. Anthony , with all our other good friend , who i commit to the tuition of he that with his blood redeem we , and be in good hope , that we shall be in no more trouble , but that he will help we in adversity , desire you for the passion of Christ , if you fall into any danger , that you will not despair of God mercy , for he will defend you and preserve you from all danger , and bring we to our desire haven , to who be all honour , glory , and praise for ever and ever . amen . your sorrowful captain , who heart be heavy for you : Francis drake . > 47 [ the voyage 