so many of our man more : to who Matthew hawlse reply that it be not material , for that he have make choice of a company for the very same purpose , who name be Emmanuel dornel , Richard Hungate , Paul carry , John Davis , Gabriel Valerosa , a Portugal , and Peter a Britain , and the Spaniard which we have take in at the same place , at our first time of water . and thus we end , desire God to send we well into our native country . in witness whereof we have subscribe our name . Thomas brown , gunner , John Morrice , etc the last voyage of the worshipful m. Thomas candish esquire , intend for the south sea , the philippinas , and the coast of China , with 3. tall ship , and two bark : write by m. John Jane , a man of good observation , employed in the same , and many other voyage . he 26. of August 1591 , we depart from Plymouth with 3. tall ship , and two bark , the Galeon wherein m. Candish go himself be admiral , the roebuck vice admiral whereof m. Cocke be captain , the desire rear-admiral whereof be captain m. John Davis ( with who and for who sake i go this voyage ) the black pinnace , and a bark of m. Adrian Gilbert , whereof m. Randolfe Cotton * be captain . the 29. of November we fall with the bay of Salvador upon the coast of Brasil 12. league on this side Cabo Frio , where we be becalm until the second of December : at which time we take a small bark bind for the river of plate with sugar , haberdash ware , and negro . the master of this bark bring we unto a isle call Placencia thirty league west from Cabo Frio , where we arrive the five of December , and rifle six or 3^9 A.D. 1591. the Spaniard take in at port famine . Baya de Salvador . abarketaken . Cabo Frio . Isla de Placencia . seven house inhabit by Portugal . the 11. we depart from this place , and the fourteenth we arrive Isla de S. se - at the isle of saint Sebastian : from whence m. cock and bastian . captain Davis present depart with the desire and the black pinnace , for the take of the town of Santos . the 15. at evening our ancker at the bar of Santos , from whence we depart with our boat to the town ; and the next morning about nine of the clock we come to Santos , where be discover , we be enforce to land with 24. gentleman , our long boat be far a stern , by which expedition we take all the people or the town at mass both man and woman , who we keep all that day in the church as prisoner . the cause why master Candish desire to take this town be to the town of supply his great want : for be in Santos , and have santos take . jn quje^ possession , we stand in assurance to supply all our need in great abundance . but such be the negligence of our governor master cock , that the indian be suffer to carry out of the town whatsoever they will in open view , and no man do control they : and the next day after we have win the town , our prisoner be all set at liberty , only four poor old man be keep as pawn to supply our want . thus in three day the town that be able to furnish such another fleet with all kind of necessary , be leave unto we naked bare , without people and provision . eight or ten day after master candish himself come thither , where he remain until the 22. of January , seek by intreaty to have that , whereof we be once possess . but in conclusion we depart out of the town through extreme want of victuali , not be able any long to live there , and be glad to receive a few canister or basket of Cassavi meal ; so that in every condition we go worse furnish from the town , then when we come unto it . the 22. of the town of January we depart from Santos , and burn Sant Vincent to the ground - than 24. we set sail , shape our course it for the strait of Magellan . 390 last voyage of Thomas candish a.d. 1592. the seven of February we have a very great storm , and the eight our fleet be separate by the fury of the tempest . than our captain call unto he the master of our ship , who he find to be a very honest and sufficient man , and confer with he he conclude to go for port desire , which be in the southerly latitude of 48. degree ; hope that the generali will come thither , because that in his first voyage he have find great relief there . for our captain can never get any direction what course to take in any such extremity , though many time he have entreat for it , as often i have hear he with grief report . in sail to this port by good chance we meet with the roebuck , wherein master Cocke have endure great extremity , and have lose his boat , and therefore desire our captain to keep he company , for he be in very desperate case . our captain hoist out his boat , and go aboard he to know his estate , and return tell we the hardness [ three . 843. ] thereof , and desire the master and all the company to be careful in all their watch not to loose the roebuck , and so we both arrive at port desire the six they arrive at of march . port desire . the 16. of march the black pinnace come unto we , but master gilbert bark come not , but return home Adrian to England , have their captain aboard the roebuck gilbert bark without any provision more than the apparel that he England wear , who come from thence aboard our ship to remain with our captain , by reason of the great friendship between they . the 18. the Galeon come into the road , and master Candish come into the harbour in a boat which he have make at sea ; for his long boat and lighthorseman be lose at sea , as also a pinnace which he have a pinnace build at Santos : and be aboard the desire he tell our build at Santos . captain of all his extremity , and speak most hardly of his company , and of diverse gentleman that be with he , purpose no more to go aboard his own ship , but to stay in the desire . we all sorrow to hear such hard speech of our good friend ; but have speak with the 391 gentleman of the Galeon we find they faithful , honest , and resolute in proceed , although it please our generali otherwise to conceive of they .. the 20. of march we depart from port desire , master Candish be in the desire with we . the eight they fall with of April 1592 , we fall with the strait of Magellan , endure many furious storm between port desire and an . the strait . the 14. we pass through the first strait . the 16. we pass the second strait be ten league distant from the first . the 18. we double cape froward , which cape lie in 53. degree and J. the 21. we be enforce by the fury of the weather to put into a small coove with our ship , 4. league from the say cape , upon the south shore , where we remain until the 15. of May . in the which time we endure extreme storm , with perpetual snow , where many of our man die with curse famine , and miserable cold , not have wherewith to cover their body , nor to fill their belly , but live by muscle , water , and weed of the sea , with a small relief of the ship store in meal sometime . and all the sick man in the Galeon be most uncharitable put a shore into the wood in the snow , rain , and cold , when man of good health can scarce endure it , where they end their life in the high degree of misery , master candish all this while be aboard the desire . in these great extremity of snow and cold , doubt what the end will be , he ask our captain opinion , because he be a man that have good experience of they northwest part , in his 3. several discovery that way , employ by the merchant of London . our captain tell he , that this snow be a matter of no long continuance , and give he sufficient reason for it , and that thereby he can not much be prejudice or hinder in his proceed . notwithstanding he call together all the company , and tell they , that he purpose not to stay in the strait , but to depart upon some other voyage , or else to return again for Brasil . but his resolution be to go for the cape of 392 last voyage of Thomas candish a.d. .. wonderful - buena esperanza . the company answer , that if it please he , they do desire to stay God favour for a wind , and to endure all hardness whatsoever , rather than to give over the voyage , consider they have be here but a small time , and because they be within fourty league of the south sea , it grieve they now to return ; notwithstanding what he purpose that they will perform . so he conclude to go for the cape of buena esperanza , and to give over this voyage . than our captain , after master Candish be come aboard the desire from talk with the company , tell he , that if it please he to consider the great extremity of his estate , the slenderness of his provision , with the weakness of his man , it be no course for he to proceed in that new enterprise : for if the rest of your ship ( say he ) be furnish answerable to this , it be impossible to perform your determination : for we have no more sail than mast , no victual , no ground-tackling , no cordage more than be over head , and among seventie and five person , there be but the master alone that can order the ship , and but fourteen sailor . the rest be gentleman , servingman , and artificer . therefore it will be a desperate case to take so hard a enterprise in hand . Theise persuasion do our captain not only use to master candish , but also to master cock . in fine upon a petition deliver in write by the chief of the whole company , the generali determine to depart out of the strait of Magellan , and to return again for Santos in Brasil . So the 15. of may we set sail , the generali then 234^ return be in the Galeon . the eighteenth we be free of . the btreight , but at cape broward it be our hard hap Magellan . to have our boat sink at our stern in the night , and to be split and sore spoil , and to loose all our oar . the twenty of May be thwart of port desire , in the occasion of the night the generali alter his course , as we suppose , by which occasion we lose he : for in the evening he it stand close by a wind to seaward , have the wind at 393 northnortheast , and we stand the same way , the wind not alter , can not the next day see he : so that [ three . 844. ] we then persuade our self , that he be go for port desire to relieve himself , or that he have sustain some mischance at sea , and be go thither to remedy it . whereupon our captain call the general man unto he , with the rest , and ask their opinion what be to be do . every one say , that they think that the generali be go for port desire . then the master be the general man , and careful of his master service , as also of good judgement in sea-matter , tell the company how dangerous it be to go for port desire , if we shall there miss the generali : for ( say he ) we have no boat to land our self , nor any cable nor anchor that i dare trust in so quick stream as be there : yet in all likelihood conclude that the generali be go thither , we stay our course for port desire , and by chance meet with the black pinnace , which have likewise lose the fleet , be in very miserable case : so we both conclude to seek the generali at port desire . they come the six and twenty day of may we come to port again to port desire , where not find our generali , as we hope , ? fmathe2 ( > be most slender victual , without sail , boat , five ay it oar , nail , cordage , and all other necessary for our relief , we be strike into a deadly sorrow . but refer all to the providence and fatherly protection of the almighty , we enter the harbour , and by god quiet road , favour find a place of quiet road , which before we know not . have more our ship with the pinnace boat , we land upon the south shore , where we find a pool of a stand pool of fresh water , which by estimation may fresh water on ho [ de some ten ton , whereby we be great portde^ire comfort . from this pool we fetch more than forty ton of water , and yet we leave the pool as full as we find it . and because at our first be in this harbour we be at this place and find no water , we persuade our self that God have send it for our relief . also 394 last voyage of Thomas candish a.d. j592-there be such extraordinary low ebb as we have never scene , whereby we get muscle in great plenty . likewise God send about our ship great abundance of abundance of smelt , so that with hook make of pin every man ms^^s ani catch as many as he can eat : by which mean we ' preserve our ship victual , and spend not any during the time of our abode here . our captain and master fall into the consideration of our estate and dispatch to go to the generali , find our want so great , as that in a month we can not fit our ship to set sail . for we must needs set up a smith forge , to make bolt , spike , and nail , beside the repair of our other want . whereupon they conclude it to be their best course to take the pinnace , and to furnish she with the best of the company , and to go to the generali with all expedition , leave the ship and the rest of the company until the general return ; for he have vow to our captain , that he will return again for the strait , as he have tell we . the captain and master of the pinnace be the general man be well content with the motion . but the generali have in our ship two most dangerous pestilent fellow , when they hear of this determination mutm3-they utter mislike it , and in secret deal with the company of both ship , vehement persuade they , that our captain and master will leave they in the country to be devour of the cannibal , and that they be merciless and without charity : whereupon the whole company join in secret with they in a night to murder our captain and master , with my self , and all those which they think be their friend . there be mark take in his caben how to kill he with musket through the ship side , and bullet make of silver for the execution , if their other purpose shall fail . all agree hereunto , except it be the boatswain of our ship , who when he know the matter , and the slender ground thereof , reveal it unto our master , and so to the captain . then the matter be 39s call in question , those two most murderous fellow be find out , who name be Charles Parker and Edward smith .. the captain be thus hardly beset in peril of famine , and in danger of murder , be constrain to use lenity , and by courteous mean to pacific this fury : show , that to do the generali service , unto who he have vow faith in this action , be the cause why he purpose to go unto he in the pinnace , consider , that the pinnace be so necessary a thing for he , as that he can not be without she , because he be fearful of the shore in so great ship . whereupon all cry out with curse and swear , that the pinnace shall not go unless the ship go . then the captain desire they to show themselves christian , and not so blasphemous to behave themselves , without regard or thanksgiving to God for their great deliverance , and present sustenance bestow upon they , allege many example of god sharp punishment for such ingratitude ; and withal promise to do any thing that may stand with their good like . by which gentle speech the matter be pacify , and the captain and master at the request of the company be content to forgive this great treachery of Parker and Smith , who after many admonition conclude in these word : the lord judge be - [ three . 845. ] between you and i : which after come to a most sharp revenge even by the punishment of the almighty . thus by a generail consent it be conclude not to depart , but there to stay for the general return . than our captain and master , see that they can not do the generali that service which they desire , make a motion to the company , that they will lay down under their hand the lose of the generali , with the extremity wherein we then stand : whereunto they consent , and write under their hand as follow . 396 