between the land of Maluco , and the cape of buena esperanza , in the latitude of 34 degree to the south of the line . item , from the 20 day of may unto the 11 day [ three . 837 - ] of July , we find the wind for the most part between the south and the southeast , be then between the cape of buena esperanza , and 15 degree unto the southward of the line . item , from the 11 day of July unto the 18 day of August , we find the wind for the most part between the north-east and Eastnortheast , be then between the latitude of 15 degree to the southward of the line , and 38 degree unto the northward of the line . a letter of m. Thomas candish to the right honourable the lord Hunsdon , lord chamberlain , one of her majesty most honourable privy council , touch the success of his voyage about the world . ight honourable , as your favour heretofore have be most great extend towards i , so i humble desire a continuance thereof : and though there be no mean in i to deserve the same , yet the uttermost of my service shall not be want , whensoever it shall please your honour to dispose thereof . i be humble to desire your honour to make know unto her majesty the desire i have have to do her majesty service in the performance of this voyage . and as it have please God to give she the victory over part of her enemy , so i trust year long to see she overthrow they all . for the place of their wealth , whereby they have maintain and make their war , be now perfect discover : and if it please her majesty , with a very small power she may take the spoil of they all . it have please the almighty 376 to suffer i to circompasse the whole globe of the world , enter in at the strait of Magellan , and return by the cape de buena esperanza . in which voyage i have either discover or bring certain intelligence of all the rich place of the world that ever be know or discover by any christian . i navigate alongst the coast of Chili , Peru , and Nueva Espanna , where i make great spoil : i burn and sink 19 sail of ship small and great . all the village and town that ever i land at , i burn and spoil : and have i not be discover upon the coast , i have take great quantity of treasure . the matter of most profit unto i be a great ship of the king which i take at California , which ship come from the philippinas , be one of the rich of merchandise that ever pass those sea , as the king register and merchant account do show : for it do amount in value to * in Mexico to be sell . which good ( for that my ship be not able to contain the least part of they ) i be enforce to set on fire . from the cape of California , be the uttermost part of all Nueva Espanna , i navigate to the island of the philippinas hard upon the coast of China ; of which country i have bring such intelligence as have not be hear of in these part . the stateliness and riches of which country i fear to make report of , lest i shall not be credit : for if i have not know sufficient the incomparable wealth of that country , i shall have be as incredulous thereof , as other will be that have not have the like experience . i sail along the hand of the Malucos , where among some of the heathen people i be well entreat , where our country man may have trade as free as the Portugal , if they will themselves . from thence i pass by the cape of buena esperanza , and find out by the way homeward the island of saint Helena , where the Portugal use to relieve themselves : and from that island God have suffer i to return into 377 England . all which service with my self i humble prostrate at her majesty foot , desire the almighty long to continue her reign among we : for at this day she be the most famous and victorious prince that live in the world . thus humble desire pardon of your honour for my tediousness , i leave your lordship to the tuition of the almighty . Plymouth this nine of September 1588. your honour most humble to command , Thomas candish . certain note or reference take out of the large map of China , bring home by m. Thomas candish 1588. he great kingdom of the Mogores be upon the northwest , and fall upon Tanassarin beyond Malaca , and join upon Bengala : they be man of war , and use no fight but on horseback : they go in their apparel like Portugal . 2 a city , wherein be captain a chinian , a man very deform , have under he many man of war : he make war both against the tartarian and the Mogores ; lie between they : and lie without the circuit of the wall . 3 certain hill , beyond which the tartarian do inhabit , who heretofore be great friend with the chinians , and now maintain continual war against they , so great , that sometime there be slay in a battle 100000 of man adjoin upon Moscovie : and they have in their war all kind of armour . 4 the province of Cansas have 4 great city , and 20 small city , and 77 town and castle : it contain in length 55 league , it have 362000 house of great man that pay tribute , and 13900 man of war : and 378 