Jezi a nation of ‘ Tartar dweuingonthe continent to the north of China use cloth . the master . the japonians for food , with other such like commodity . on the other side the say Jezi Tartari buy of the japonians , cloth to make they garment , with weapon and other instrument . Theise Tartars ( they say ) be a most barbarous kind of people , of a brown colour , with long hair on their head and beard like the moscovite : they live by hunt and fish , and neglect husbandry . this northerly princedom of Zuegara ( as the say governor report to our father ) abound with excellent grape both black and white , which without the labour of man grow natural in all place , and he promise the father to bring some of these vine to Miac6 , that they may be plant there . advertisement touch the ship that go from Sivil to the Indies of Spain ; together with some note of the contractation house in Sivil . the pilot our pilot must be examine in the contractation house , and allow by such as be appoint for the examination of pilot , that he be a sufficient man to take the charge in hand , and that which belong thereunto , and to govern and lead the same ship direct by his only command - ment to such port as be convenient for the voyage that he take in hand . you must have a master , that must give in surety to the value of 6000 ducat : and such as be his surety must be land man , and their land worth to the value of that sum aforesaid , if the say ship be between three or four hundred ton . and if she be more or less of burden , than he must give surety of a great sum or less , accord to the proportion of her burden . he shall in all his voyage give a just and true account of all such good , and merchandize , as shall in all that 442 voyage come into the ship : as also of such plate and money , as shall register in the king register , appertaining to the king , or any other particular merchant : and if any default be , he or his surety be to pay all such loss as thereof shall grow : as also to see the mariner pay well and true , the three part of all such freight , as the say ship shall get go and come . the ship be freight by her merchant , the master shall take order that there be sufficient mariner aboard she to take in such lade from time to time , as the merchant shall send to she : and also the purser must be the purser . a man sufficient of ability to take , and to give account of all such good , merchandise , silver and gold , as shall come in and out of the say ship that present voyage , as also give surety of 1500 ducat at the least to come back from the Indies in the say ship , and not to tarry there , if he live . the master must provide a perfect mariner call a romager , to range , and bestow all merchandise in such a romager . place as be convenient : and that it be not put in place , where it may perish for lack that it be not fast , sure , and dry , accord to the quality and form of the say merchandise . when it be all bestow , and the ship able to bear no more , than a mariner call the countermaster , or master mate , have charge to lock fast the hatch , that the master none of the merchant wine , or oil , or any other kind mate-of merchandise be rob or spoil by the mariner . and if it fortune that any be so spoil , than the mariner be to pay for it out of the three part of all the whole fraught of the ship that do appertain to the say merchant . the ship be lade , go to the port wherehence she sail to go towards the Indies call S. Lucar , and there one of the chief judge of the contractation house the chief come down to dispatch the ship that go together i " d£es in that fleet . and that judge go aboard every ship , and with he he do carry a expert mariner or two ' 443 visitor be call visitor of the ship , to know whether the say ‘ nen^man ' s^’ppe or ship he well tackle : whether they have man thenamesand sufficient : and in every ship every man name be take , mark of man and if he have any mark in the face , or hand or arm , it take , be write by a notary ( as well as his name ) appertain to the contractation house , appoint for these cause . also the master be bind to bring back every mariner again , and to leave none behind he there , upon great pain , unless he be a passenger appoint by the king at the court , and bring his licence from thence for the same purpose . the pragma - the ship must be well appoint with ordinance of tic or order brassCj anc [ iron , accord to the order of their house , tractatio^ there must want nothing , and every ship be house . appoint accord to her burden in all kind of artillery , as piece of brass and iron , handgun , crossbowe , pike , sword , dagger , target , and for all ordinance double shot , with powder , with new cable and anchor sufficient for the voyage . and moreover it be ordain , that the ship have double sail , that be , that they be thorough sail , and moreover all new sail of fore - [ three . 863. ] sail , and maine-sail , of coarse , and bonnet new make , and keep in some driefat or chest in the same ship ; that if the weather take the one from they , the other may be in readiness . provision of every ship must have their master swear before the victual upon sayj judge of the Contratacion , that all this be in oath ' a readiness in the ship , as also so many new pipe of fresh water , so many buttes of good rack wine , so many kintal of bread , so many jar of oil , so many jar or botija of vinegar , so much flesh , so much fish , and such quantity of every kind of victuali , as the burden of the ship require , wherein every ship accord to her greatness be appoint by the ordinance of the house : also so many gunner , so many mariner , so many gromette , so many page , and so many soldier . than all these aforesaid matter be under register by the notary and all thing prepare for the voyage , the 444 judge do command the master to hoist up the yard across unto the hound of the mast ; and many time , if they perceive the ship to be walty and overlade , as many covetous master do , than he hang the boat in the fore and main tackle , to see whether the say ship will make any hold downward , in lay down her side : if she do hold , he command bark aboard , to discharge she of such lade , as be think to be too much in she : and there can no ship depart before they carry the register of the say judge , how that she go register by their order : and every ship carry her own register , and in the register the quantity of all the good that be lade in she , and if there be any more good , they be forfeit in the Indies , both ship and good . the master be bind to keep the course that the tie two admiral do lead , and every ship to follow she , and she must go always in the sea before all the rest of the qf fleet , and by night carry light , that all may know where peace . she go . the viceadmiral must come behind all , and so every ship in the fleet before she : if any be ill of sail , all be bind to fit their sail in such order , that they go no fast than she do . the admiral and the viceadmiral go never but half lade , but very well arm of man , and artillery , three time double and more than any of the other have : because they may help to defend all the rest , if need do require : and the dead freight of these two ship be always bear upon the whole good that be lade in the fleet , as also at the least there be two hundred soldier in every of these two ship beside the mariner , great gunner , gromette , and other officer . the voyage be so appoint , that always they go note . and come in the best of summer , and be there all the winter in the port to discharge their lade and recharge back again . the ship that be admiral and viceadmiral be neither the great nor the small ship , but of 3 hundred or 4 hundred ton at the most : but they be very good 445 sailor , and strong choose for the purpose , to sail well and to bear good store of ordinance . in these two ship be always go and come , two good knight man of war , and captain and soldier expert in the war . a captainein and in every other ship be a captain , which rule in every ship . cause of controversy , or fight in the sea ; the pilot direct only in government and lead the ship to her port . all the captain , master , pilot , mariner , and passenger , and all other be obedient to the two ship , so appoint to pass : they do , as in all other commandments what be by they appoint , have power to hang , or do any justice upon any man , as to they seem good at sea , and this be the last commandment upon pain of death , if the general please . concern the contractation house , there be therein six judge , six judge of the high sort . four visi - there be visitor of ship , as it be say before , to see whether the ship go in order well , and sufficient in the art of thing : and what manner of man the master of the navigation , ship and pilot be , whether they be able to answer to all such article , as the reader be able to object unto they , in matter of navigation : if they be not find sufficient , they be not admit to take charge . the master must know whether the ship be sufficient calk , tackle , and furnish in all thing accord , as with mast , sail , cable , anchor , and all other necessary furniture : that at such time as any of the high judge with their ordinary visitor appoint for such cause do come , there be nothing find out of order or lack , rders^alud accorchng to the book of order , which every ship °in spanish proportionable to her burden ought to have , which be not pragmatic , unknown to any of the master , be in writing common common in among they : and all the charge give to the master and writing among pnot serve only to conduct the ship from port to port . the counter master , or master mate be obedient in all thing whereunto he shall be command by the master 446 and pilot , and at his commandment be all the mariner of the ship . the ship common go deep lade from Spain , than our ship do in any voyage . the order of the Catena give to the ship that [ he . 864. . ] go out of Spain , to the Indies . he ship of what burden soever she be must give a carena , as they call it in the spanish tongue , which be in english , she must be thorough calk , and fortify , as well with carpenter to set knee into she , and any other timber appertain to the strengthen of a ship , as with calk : which be to put occam into her side ; and that kind of calk be not use , as we be here in England ; but first before they put in any thread of occam , they with certain crooked iron , with a hammer in one hand , and the crooked iron in the other , do forcible pull out all the old thread that have be in the ship the voyage before , and so drive in new . if the seam of the ship be wear to any breadth , as many old ship be , by reason of often rake they , upon that seam there be clap a piece of cast lead , nail upon the calk , and seam with speciali nail , which lead be cast a hand breadth , and as thin ne as may be for the same purpose , and at every voyage it be take off and renew , and by that mean their ship be very staunch a year or two . the carenero or the calker do give in surety , that if the ship so cast over , as they do common use to cast they , in such sort as any man may go dry upon the keel , as i have do , and without any butt , pipe , or any other kind of timber under her side , more than with counterpoise of stone in she , make within certain timber as though it be a chest ; and with the stone the carenero do bring she as he will , high and low , lean , or rise : and if she miscarry in her carena , Calking with thin ■ plate of lead . the calker or Carenero . 447 