then be the carenero bind , if it be either by fire , water , or sink , or any other misfortune , to pay for the value of the ship . the carena of a ship of one hundred ton be do so substantial as they use to do it , will cost two hundred ducat , of two hundred ton , four hundred ducat , of three hundred ton , six hundred ducat , and so accord to the greatness of the ship . it will be do here in England for one three part of the money , by reason that the necessary that go to it be better cheap here by much , and the calker far better cheap by two part . This carena may not be give at any hand but in a river where no tempest can arise , as in this river of London in such a place , where at all time the say ship may ride aflote : it may not be do in any dangerous harbour , where the wind may bring up the wave of the sea , neither where the sea may heave and set . the calk of Seville be so substantial do , that in one day one calker do not thorough calk past one yard and a half in one seam , or two yard at the most , and to that he do , the master calker be at hand to oversee he , and this do , the carenero do with his ballast set she upright , and so she begin to lade . Examen de los maestros y Pilotos , que navegan en las flotas de espanna para las India deal mar oceano , escrito por Pedro Dias piloto , natural de la Isla de la Palma , 1586. Alonn de chiavez Piloio mayor . Rimeramente pied all piloto mayor , que es all present Alonso de chiavez , que lo admita all examan , por quanto es natural y sufficient para ello . Manda el piloto mayor , que haga enformacion , de como es marinero , y platico de aquella parte , de que se quiere examinar . luego presenta cinco o sei testigos de los pilotos examinado , de como es buen marinero , y suf-448 ficiente para ser piloto , y como es natural de los reynos de Espanna ; y que no es de casta de moro , ni judeo , ni negro . y hecha la enformacion , presenta la all piloto mayor . y visto el piloto mayor la enformacion ser bvena , manda que el Cathedratico Rodrigo Zamorano lo admita a la Cathedra . y alii se j untan a vezes quatorze oh quinze que pretenden examinarse , y acuden alii a una casa , que el Cathedratico tiene para aquello efeto , a las ocho de la mannana , y estan do oras , y otras do a la tarde . el cathedratico tiene por costumbre de leer en la Cathedra una ora , y otra ora ocupan en preguntarse los unos a los otros muchas cosas conveniente a la art de navegar en presencia del Cathedratico . y el que no respond a proposito , el Cathedratico le emienda , y le dize de la manera que es cade cosa . y este estudio dura nos meses , en los quales no ha de faltar de ir do vezes all dia , como tengo dicho . y despue thou aver oido la Cathedra estos do mese , van a la Sala del examen , que es en la Contratacion . y alii esta el piloto mayor , y los de mass pilotos , qui son por lo menos veinte cinco : y alii estando todo assentado por sum orden , manda el piloto mayor , que lean las enformaciones ; viceroy despue thou aver leidas las enformaciones o testimonios , pregunta el piloto mayor all piloto y maestro , que se quiere examinar , de que part de las India se quiere examinar ? y luego el piloto respond , que de nueva espanna , o de number de Dios. y otros , que no son platico de estas tierras , dizen , que de Santo Domingo , y Puerto rico , y Cuba y luego demanda el piloto mayor , que tienda la carta en la mesa , y en presencia de los demas pilotos parta de la barra de San Lucar para las Islas de Canaria , y de alii para las India , hasta Hegar a aquella parte de donde se examina , y buelve para Espanna , a tornar , a la barra de San Lucar , de donde partio . y el piloto mayor le preguntas que si yendo nave-gando por la mar le diese un viento contrario , que xi 449 2 f Rodrigo Zamorano Cathedratico . [ Iii . 865. ] la Sala deal examen . remedio haria para que sum nao no trabajasse tanto en la mar ? y el le respond lo mejor que entiende . luego le pregunta uno de los pilotos por las reglas del sol , y de la Estrella deal norte , y que cuenta le hara en todo tiempo del anno ? a lo qual ha de responder el piloto que se examina a todo aquello que le preguntaren . y luego le pregunta otro por las senna de las tierras que estuvieren en el camino , hasta llegar all puerto de donde se examina . y luego pregunta otro , que si con tormenta se le quebrasse los arbole , que remedio haria ? y otros le preguntan , que si la nao abriesse un agua , a donde peligrassen las vidas , que remedio haria para tomaria con menos riesgo ? y otros le preguntan , que si le faltasse el timon , que remedio haria ? y otros le preguntan por la cuenta de la luna , y de las mareas . y otros le preguntan , que si lo tornasse un corsario , y lo dexasse sin carta y sin astrolabio , y otros instrumentos para tomar la altura del sol y de la Estrella deal norte , que orden tendria para hacer los ? otros le preguntan otras preguntas necessarias a un marinero , que quiere ser piloto . a todo esto esta attento , respondiendo a todo . y despue que todo le a preguntado todo lo necessario , le mandan , que saiga fuera de la sala , paraque a solas de cada uno sum boto debaxo de juramento en un libro , que prometen la manera de j jezir verdad . y luego ponen dentro de un vaso de maestros , y piata , que alii esta para aquel ereto , tanta nava , y pilotos . tanto garvanzo , common ai pilotos dentro de la sala : y va cada uno por sum orden ; y el que le parece que es sufficient , saca una have , y el que le parece , que no lo es , saca un garvanzo . y despue que todo an sacado , mira el piloto mayor los botos que tiene ; y si halla que tiena tantos botos en sum favour common en contrario , manda que haga otro viaje : y si tiene mass botos en sum ex~ favour , que en contrario , luego le dan una carta del ' examen firmada del piloto mayor , y del Cathedratico , y del Escrivano , y sellada con el sello de la Contratacion . y teniendo esta carta , luego da de present all piloto 45° mayor , in all cathedratico para guante y gallina , conform que cada uno puede , que es de ordinario do o tres ducado . y luego se puede concertar por piloto en qualquier navio que quisiere , para aquella parte dedonde se examino . y si hallare en las India algun navio que tenga piloto no examinado , lo puede botar fuera , y venir el piloto examinado en el navio por el mismo concierte , que el otro piloto tenia hecho . Suelen llevar los pilotos de partido y concierte por un viaje de yr y bolver , conform que es el navio . si es de ciento tonellada , doziento ducado , y dozientos y cinquenta ; y si es de quatrocientas o de quinientas , lleva de partido ; y mass , todo los dias que estuviere en tierra , quatro reales para sum comida . y alas naos grandes siempre llevan los pilotos mass viejos , porque el son mass experimentado in mejores pilotos que los manzebos , que comienzan a navegar , in a ser pilotos . el piloto no tiene mass trabajo ni mass cuidado que en la navegacion : porque los maestros de los navios tienen cuidado de fretar , y aderezar sus naos , y pagar a los marineros , y hacer todo lo que es menest para sum nao : porque el piloto no viene a la nao , si no es quando los visitadore vienen a visitaria , si tiene todo lo necessario para el voyage . los visitadore son quatro hombre qui estan puestos por el rey , y estos son hombre muy entendidos , y vienen a visitar los navios , ant que tomen carga , por ver si estan bien aderezado para hacer el voyage . y despue que estan los navios cargados , buelven otra vez a visitarlos , por ver si tienen todas las cosas necessarias , conform a la prematica ; y si tienen todo los marineros , y bastimentos , y polvere , y artilleria , y balas , y todo lo de mass necessario para el viaje . y si alguna cosa les falta , les mandan con grave pena que lo compren , ant que salgan deal puerto . Suelen llevar los navios que van a las India un escrivano que tiene cargo de tomar por memoria todas las mercaderias que se cargan en la nao , y tomar las 451 sueldo de los pilotos . maestros y sus officios . los quatro visitadore , y sum officio . Prematica . Escrivano y sum officio . Segundo navis de aviso . do nass de guerra . the english voyage marcas , para por ellas entregar la carga a sus duennos , despue thou aver acabado sum viaje : y sirve tanbien , si un hombre caesse enfermo , para hacer testamiento y otros recaudos que se suelen hacer delante un escrivano : y gana por sum sueldo en un viaje tanto common do marineros . tiene el general de las flotas por costumbre , despue que llega a las India , the embiar un navio de aviso , para dar relation all rey , de como ha llegado . y despue que estan prestas para partir despacha otrio navio de aviso , para hacer relation , de como estan ya prestas para partir , con otras particularidades . Van en las flotas do nao grandes , la una por Capitana , y la otra por Almiranta , cada una de seiscientas y de sietecientas tonellada , que no llevan mass que bastimentos y soldado para defensa de la defensa de la demas flota : y lleva cada una common dociento soldado : y estas se pagan de las mercaderias que vienen en la flota a uno por ciento , y algunas veze a uno y medio por ciento . ay en la casa de la Contratacion de Sevilla una tabla que sirve de Aranzel , escrita con letras de oro ; en que stan avaliada todas las mercaderias que se embarcan para las India . en esta tabla se puede saber quanta botija hazen una tonellada de vino y quantos quintales y quantos bariles , y quantos coffres sea una tonellada . y todas mercaderias estan alii taxada , para pagar los derecho all rey , y el fleet all maestro . y alii esta puesto que ningun maestro puede Uevar a las India ningun passagero , ni frail , ni clerigo , ni otras personas , ni estranieros de los reynos de espanna , sin licencia del Rey. y mass , que no puerde llevar mercaderias fuera de la prematica , y todo lo que llevaren , lo lleven registrado , so pena de la vida . y mass , que ningun maestro ni piloto puede llevar 452 examination of spanish pilot a.d. .. 1586. instrumento que no sean firmado por el piloto mayor Alonzo de chiave , y el cosmografo Cathedratico Roderigo Zamorano : common son la carta , el astrolabio , la balestilla , y el regimiento . y mass , que yendo en la compannia de la flota , obe-descan all general , y no hagan mass de lo que el mandare , so pena de la vida . the same in english . the examination of the master and pilot which sail in the fleet of Spain to the west Indies : write in the spanish tongue by Pedro Dias a spanish pilot take by sir Richard Grinville 1585. first they make suit unto the pilot major ( who at this present be call Alonzo de chiavez ) that he will admit they to examination , because they be naturali Spaniards , and sufficient for the same . hereupon the pilot major command the party to the witness be examine , to give information that he be a mariner , °ffive or , ixe and well practise in those part , about which he desire ° x‘ to be examine . and then immediate he bring five or six pilot before examine to give testimony that he be a good mariner , and sufficient to become a pilot , that he be a Spaniard bear , and that he be not of the race of the moor , Jew or negro . have make this information , he present it unto the pilot ad-the pilot major . and the pilot major see the information to be good , will the king public reader king reader . of navigation ( who be now Roderigo Zamorano ) to admit he to his lecture . whither there do resort fourteen or fifteen person that desire to be examine : and they they hear the come to a certain house which the king reader have rea^eri appoint unto he for the same purpose , at eight of the clock in the morning : and then they stay two hour , for two and two hour likewise in the afternoon : in one of mrneth . 453 their disputation of the art of navigation before the king reader who be their moderator . the hall of examination . [ Iii . 867. ] the manner oj the young pilot examination . the english voyage which hour Zamorano read unto they , and in the other they ask one another many particular concern the art of navigation in the presence of the say king reader : and he that answer not to the purpose the say reader instruct more perfect , and tell he how everything be . and this exercise continue two month , during which time the examinate must not fail to be present twice in a day , as be aforesaid . and have hear the king reader those two month , they resort then unto the hall of examination which be in the contractation house , where there be assemble the pilot major and diverse other pilot , to the number of 25 at the least ; who all sit there in order , the pilot major demand of he that will be examine , of what part of the Indies he desire to be examine : whereto the examinate answer , that he will be examine concern Nueva Espanna , or of number de dios and Tierra firma . and other that be not experience in those part , crave to be examine of Santo Domingo , Puerto rico , and Cuba . then the pilot major command the examinate to spread a sea-chart upon the table , and in the presence of the other pilot to depart or show the course from the bar of Sant Lucar to the canarie-island , and from thence to the Indies , till he come to that place whereof he be to be examine , and then also to return back to the bar of Sant Lucar in Spain , from whence he depart . also the pilot major ask he , if when he sail upon the sea , he be take with a contrary wind , what remedy he be to use , that his ship be not too much turmoil upon the sea ? and the examinate answer he aswell as he can . than one of the other pilot oppose he about the rule of the sun and of the north-star , and how he ought to use the declination of the sun at all time of the year : who the examinate be bind to answer in every thing that he demand . then another ask he of the sign and mark of those 454 land which lie in his way to that haven whereof he be examine . and then another demand , that if his mast shall be break by tempest , what remedy he will use ? other ask he , if his ship shall take a leak , to the hazard of the life of himself and his company , what remedy he will find to stop the same with least danger ? other ask he , what remedy , if his rudder shall chance to fail ? other oppose he about the account of the moon and of the tide ? other ask he if a pirate shall take he and leave he destitute of his chart , his astrolabe , and his other instrument serve to take the height of the sun and of the star , what course he will take in that extremity ? other demand other question needful for a mariner to know , which desire to be a pilot . unto all which the examinate be very attentive , and answer to every particular . after they have all ask he so much as they think expedient , they bid he depart out of the hall , to the end that every one of they may several be swear upon a book , that they will speak the truth . than they put into a certain vessel of silver stand there for the same purpose so many bean , and so many peason as there be pilot within the hall : and every one put his hand into the vessel in order , he that think the party examine to be sufficient , take up a bean , and he that think he not sufficient , take up a pease . and after that all have take out what they please , the pilot major look what voice the examinate have : and if he find he to have as many voice for he as against he , he command he to make another voyage : but if he have more voice for he then against he , than they give he letter testimoniali of his examination sign by the pilot major , by the1 king reader , and the secretary , and seal with the seal of the contractation house . and upon the receipt of these letter testimoniali , the new pilot give a present unto the pilot major , and the king reader , for their glove and hen , every one 455 the manner of their election . Letters testimoniali of every new pilot examination and approbation , under the hand of the pilot major , the king reader , and the secretary , and seal of the contractation house . the order of the contracta-tion house . [ Iii . 868. ] the english voyage accord to his ability , which be ordinary some two or three ducat . # and than he may take upon he to be pilot in any ship whatsoever , unto that place for which he be examine : and if he find in the Indies any ship under the charge of a pilot not before examine , he may put he out of his office , and may himself take charge of that ship for the same wage that the other pilot agree for . the pilot wage for make a voyage outward and homeward be accord to the burden of the ship . if she be of 100 ton , he have 200 or 250 ducat : and if she be of 400 or 500 ton , he take for his wage 500 or 550 ducat : and if she be big , he have a great allowance : over and beside all which , he have every day while he remain on land , four real for his diet . and the great ship be always commit unto the more ancient pilot , because they be of great experience and better skill , than the young sort which new take upon they to be pilot . the pilot undertake no far travel nor care , but in direct the course or navigation : for the master of the ship take charge of the freight and prepare their ship , and to pay the mariner , and to do all thing needful for the ship ; for the pilot come not unto the ship , until the visitor come to visit the same , to see whether he have all thing necessary for the voyage . the visitor be four man which be appoint by the king , and these be man of great understanding : and they come to visit the ship before they take in their lade , to see whether they be well prepare to make the voyage . and after the ship be lade , they return again to visit they the second time , to see whether they have all thing necessary , accord to the order , of the contractation house : and whether they have all their mariner , victual , powder , shot , and ordinance , and all other thing necessary for the voyage . and if they want any thing , they charge they upon grievous penalty , , to provide the same before they set out of the haven . 456 examination of spanish pilot A.D. .. 1586. the ship that go to the Indies be wont each of they to have with they a notary , who charge be to keep a note of remembrance of all the merchandise which be lade in the ship , and to take the mark thereof , thereby to deliver the commodity in the ship to their particular owner , after they have finish their voyage , and he serve likewise to make will , and other instrument , which be wont to be make by a notary , if any man chance to fall sick . and his wage in each voyage be as much as the wage of two mariner . the generali of the fleet use continual , after thefirstbarke he be arrive in the Indies , to send into Spain a bark °f Aviso . of Aviso , to advertise the king of the state of his arrival ; and after the fleet be ready to come home , he dis-patcheth another pinnace of Aviso to certify they how secon^ the fleet be now ready to set sail , with other particularity . there go with the fleet two great ship , ' the one as admiral , the other as vice-admiral , of the burden of 400 or 500 ton , which carry nothing but victual and soldier for the waft of the rest of the fleet , and these be pay out of the merchandise which come in the fleet , after the rate of one in the hundred , and sometime at one and a half in the hundred . there be in the contractation house of Sivil a table which serve for a Aranzel , or table of rate or taxation , write in letter of gold , wherein the value of all kind of merchandise , which be embark for the Indies , be set down . lie this table a man may know how many botija g® or jar make a ton of wine , or how many pack , or how many quintal , or how many barrel , or how many chest make a ton . and all merchandise have their rate set down , to pay the king his custom and the master his due fraught . a table of rate , etc set up in the contractation house . 457 and therein be set up in write that no master may carry any passenger to the Indies , without licence , especial not learn man , nor any fryer , or clergyman , nor any body else without licence of the king : nor any stranger not bear in the kingdom of Spain . Moreover , that they may not carry away any merchandise not comprise in the foresay order , under pain of death : and that all good which they carry with they , they ought to carry the same register ; under pain of death . Furthermore , that no master nor pilot may carry any chart , nor astrolabe , nor cross-staff , nor regiment , without they be sign and seal by the pilot major Alonzo de chiavez , and the cosmographer the king reader Rodrigo Zamorano . Moreover , that go in company with the fleet , they do and obey all such thing , as their generali shall command they , under pain of death . write by i Pedro Dias bear in the isle of it Palma one of the canary , upon the request and gratification of m. Richard Hakluyt , in February 1586. end of volume xi . 