the ten and last be , for that he have bring his yearly revenue to two million of gold . by these course and mean , we be in good hope that firm peace will be establish in all these kingdom , and also that a fit way will be prepare , for the conversion of all the great lord unto christian religion . a brief note concern a extreme northern province of Japan call Zuegara , situate thirty day journey from Miac6 , which argue the isle of Japan to be of great extension northward , than it be ordinary describe in map , or suppose to be : together with mention of a certain nation of Tartar call Jeza inhabit on the main to the north of China , never hear of in these part before : take out of a epistle write 1596 from Japan by friar Luis Frois unto Claudius Aquaviva , etc print in latin at Mentz in germanic 1599 ot many day ago be baptize a certain honourable personage call John Vongui the son of taigarandono , who be governor of a certain princedom situate on the border of Japan towards the north , be distant from Miac6 thirty day journey . and after a few line it follow . this taigorandono be the most northerly governor in all Japan have traffic with the Jezi , who be a nation of Tartar , which from the main continent resort unto the isle of Mateumai , be about twelve or bf fifteen league distant from the foresay northerly mateumai-princedome of Zuegara ; where they sell fish , the skin of beast , and certain herb of the sea use by [ three . 862. ] 441 Jezi a nation of ‘ Tartar dweuingonthe continent to the north of China use cloth . the master . the english voyage the japonians for food , with other such like commodity . on the other side the say Jezi Tartari buy of the japonians , cloth to make they garment , with weapon and other instrument . Theise Tartars ( they say ) be a most barbarous kind of people , of a brown colour , with long hair on their head and beard like the moscovite : they live by hunt and fish , and neglect husbandry . this northerly princedom of Zuegara ( as the say governor report to our father ) abound with excellent grape both black and white , which without the labour of man grow natural in all place , and he promise the father to bring some of these vine to Miac6 , that they may be plant there . advertisement touch the ship that go from Sivil to the Indies of Spain ; together with some note of the contractation house in Sivil . the pilot our pilot must be examine in the contractation house , and allow by such as be appoint for the examination of pilot , that he be a sufficient man to take the charge in hand , and that which belong thereunto , and to govern and lead the same ship direct by his only command - ment to such port as be convenient for the voyage that he take in hand . you must have a master , that must give in surety to the value of 6000 ducat : and such as be his surety must be land man , and their land worth to the value of that sum aforesaid , if the say ship be between three or four hundred ton . and if she be more or less of burden , than he must give surety of a great sum or less , accord to the proportion of her burden . he shall in all his voyage give a just and true account of all such good , and merchandize , as shall in all that 442 