60 league fifty or sixty league to the southwest of Cape briton . to t e out . we foum ( i ( he current between this cape Briton and Cape Rey to set out towards the eastsoutheast . in our west of cape course to the west of cape Briton we see exceed Briton . great store of seal , and abundance of porpoise , whereof seal spor - we kill eleven . we see whale also of all sort pose ' , whale aswell small as great : and here our man take many and cod . beard cod with one teat underneath , which be like to the north - east cod , and better than those of Newfoundland . they continue from our arrival at the haven of saint Francis in new - on the coast foundland , ( which be as be aforesay the eleven of JBriton west we continue beat up and down on the coast ward full of Arambec to the west and southwest of Cape briton eleven week . until the twenty eight of September , full by the space of eleven week : and then by the persuasion of our master and certain other we shape our course homeward by the isle of the azore , and come first to Corvo and Flores , where beat up and down , and miss of expect prey , we sail by Tercera , and from thence to saint Michael , where we seek to board a Portugal ship , which we find too well appoint for we to bring along with we , and so be force to leave they behind and have waste all our victual , we be constrain against our will to hasten home unto our narrow sea : but it be the two and twenty of December before we can 160 get into the down : where for lack of wind we keep our Christmas with dry bread only for drop of our clothes . one thing very strange happen in this voyage : to wit , that a mighty great whale follow our ship by the space of many day as we pass by cape Razo , which by no mean we can chase from our ship , until one of our man fall overboard and be drown , after which time she immediate forsake we , and never afterward appear unto we . A . D . * 593 * a huge whale pursue their ship by the space of many day , till one of their man fall overboard .