. George we run Northeast the bay of and by east some 18 or 19 league . 5amt georse - in this bay of saint George , we find the wrack of 2 great biskaine ship , which have be cast away three year before : where we have some seven or eight hundred whale fin , and some iron bolt and chain of their main shroud and before shroud : all their train be beat out with the weather but the cask remain still . some part of the commodity be spoil by tumble down of the cliff of the hill , which cover part of the cask , and the great part of those whale fin , which we understand to be there by four Spaniard which escape , and be bring to saint John de Luz . here we 163 they land on the isle of Natiscotec . find the house of the savage , make of fir tree bind together in the top and set round like a dovehouse , and cover with the bark of fir tree , we find also some part of their victual , which be dear flesh roast upon wooden spit at the fire , and a dish make of a ryne of a tree , sow together with the sinew of the deer , wherein be oil of the deer . there be also fowl call cormorant , which they have pluck and make ready to have dress , and there we find a wooden spoon of their make . and we discern the track of the foot of some forty or fifty man , woman and child . when we have dispatch our business in this bay of saint George and stay there ten day , we depart for the northern point of the say bay , which be nine or ten league broad . then be inform , that the whale which be deadly wound in the grand bay , and yet escape the fisher for a time , be wont usual to shoot themselves on shore on the isle of Assumption , or natiscotec , which lie in the very mouth of the great river that run up to Canada , we shape our course over to that long isle of Natiscotec , and we find the distance of the way to the estermost end thereof to be about forty four league : and it stand in the latitude of 49 . here we arrive about the midst of June at the east end , and ride in eighteen fathom water in fair white sand and very good ankerage , and for trial heave a line overboorde and find wonderful fair and great cod