How after the departure of the two ship which be send back into Britain , and that the fort be begin to be build , the captain prepare two boat to go up the great river to discover the passage of the three fault or fall of the river . the say captain have dispatch two ship to return to carry news , accord as he have in charge from the king , and that the fort be begin to be build , for preservation of their victual and other thing , determine with the viscount of Beaupre , and other gentleman , master , and pilot choose for counsel , to make a voyage with two boat furnish with man and victual to go as far as Hochelaga , of purpose to view and understand the fashion of the fault of water , which be to be pass to go to Saguenay , that he may be the ready in the spring to pass far , and in the winter time to make all thing needful in a readiness for their business . the foresay boat be make ready , the captain and Martine de Painpont , with other gentleman and the remnant of the mariner depart from the say place of Charlesburg royal the seven day of September in the year aforesaid 1540 and the viscount of Beaupre stay behind for the guard and government of all thing in the fort and as they go up the river , the captain go to see the lord of hochelay , which dwell between Canada and Hochelaga : which in the former voyage have give unto the say captain a little girl , and have oftentimes inform he of the treason which Taignoagny and Domagaya ( who the captain in his former voyage have carry into France ) will have wrought against he . in regard of which his courtesy the say captain will not pass by without visit of he , and to let he understand that the captain think himself behold unto he , he give unto he two young boy , 269 the viscount of Beaupre and the rest of their council . the rich country of Saguenay situate beyond the fault which be in 44 . deg . they depart from Charlesburg royal the 7 . of Septem . the town oftutonaguy . bid ground and a great current . a town of friendly people . another village of good people which dwell over against the second salt . and leave they with he to learn their language , and bestow upon he a cloak of Paris read , which cloak be set with yellow and white button of tin , and small bell . and withal he give he two basin of Laton , and certain hachet and knife