a relation of the second voyage to Guiana , perform and write in the year 1596 . by Laurence Keymis gentleman to the approve , right valorous , and worthy knight , sir Walter Ralegh , lord warden of the stannery , captain of her majesty guard , and her highness lieutenant generail of the county of Cornwall . have here brief set down the effect of this your second discovery without any enlargement of make word : for in this argument , single speech best beseem a simple truth . where the affinity of the matter with your person , lead i to write of your self , unto your self , that small liberty which i have therein use , shall , i doubt not , without offence or sinister construction , be give to the cause in hand : which , whether it suffer not detriment , by attribute less than of right belongeth ; the judgement be they , that upright and indifferent shall weigh the consequent of their evil purpose , who in seek to detract from the author of these discovery , do so much as in they lie , wound , deface , and tread under foot the thing it self . but this be no novelty , nor proper only to these our day . for long since it have be say , laudes eo usque sunt Pericles . tolerabiles , donec ea dicuntur , quse auditores se quoque 441 facere posse existimant : simajora proferantur , invident , non credunt . the fervent zeal and loyalty of your mind in labour with this birth of so honourable expectation , as it have deserve a recompense far different , so need it not my poor suffrage to endear the { three . 667 . ] toil , care , and danger that you have willing undergo for the good and advancement of our weal public . the praiseworthiness thereof do approve it self , and be better read in your live do , then in my dead unregarded paper . all that i can wish , be that my life be a sufficient pledge , to justify , how much more easy , and more materiali , the course for Guiana will be then other , which require great charge , yield not so large benefit , and be subject to more doubtful event