foe . which manner of deal , though in some part it satisfy their desire of present profit ; yet have it otherwise do they much harm , in harden and drive those nation to desperate resolution . 3 from the mouth of Orellana to seek entrance with any number of man , and to bear a hole through the mountains be all one . neither find we , that any seek it that way , have at any time boast of their gain or pleasurable journey . 4 from Trinidad , as the course be short , so do it promise best likelihood of success . howbeit , impossible it be with any vessel of ordinary burden by that way to recover the river of Raleana . the second , the Spaniard have be so far from help and further one another , or admit partner or coadjutor in the guiana - cause , that among so many attempt , from the beginning to the last , i can find any one , when they be otherwise likely to prevail , 500 free from discord , mutiny , and cruel murder among themselves . third . the Spaniard in this place have miss that advantage , which elsewhere have steed themselves in all their conquest : namely , the dissension and mutual war of the Indians . which of that force it be , may be gather by the example Arauco in Chili . for the Indians of that one province contain in circuit not above 20 . league , have maintain war above these 30 . year against all the Spaniard , and in despite of they have keep their own country , oftentimes discomfit their enemy in many set battle , burn and destroy some of their strong town . the chief reason whereof i take to be , because no indian nation be enemy unto they . and howsoever the Spaniard vaunt of their redoubt exploit in the Indies : yet do their own write in effect testify , that without the aid of the indian divide among themselves , Mexico , Peru , and the rest , have never be spanish . last . i can impute it to no cause so right , as immediately to the divine providence : for by he prince reign . and in my belief ( except we will look to be warn by miracle from heaven ) we need no further assurance , than we already have to persuade our self , that it have please God of his infinite goodness , in his will and purpose to appoint and reserve this empire for we .