a letter write to m . Richard staper by John whithal from Santos in Brasil , the 26 . of June 1578 . orshipfiill sir , and well - beloved friend m . staper , i have i most hearty commend unto you , wish your health even as i own . these few word may be to let you understand , that whereas i write unto you not many day pass by the way of Lisbon , how that i determine to be with you very short , it be in this country offer i to marry , and to take my choice of three or four : so that i be about three day ago consort with a this my friend and father in law italian gentleman to marry with his daughter within these four day . This my friend and father in law Signor loffo door be bear in the city of Genua in Italy : he kindred be well know among the italian in London : also he have but only this child which be his daughter , which he have think better bestow upon i then on any Portugal in all the country , and do give with she in marriage to i part of a ingenio which he have , that do make every year a thousand rove of sugar . This my manage will be worth to i two thousand ducat , little more or less . also Signor loffo door my father in law do intend to put into my hand the whole ingenio with sixty or seventie slave , and thereof to make i factor for we both . i give my live lord thank for place i in such honour and plentifulness of all thing . also certain day past i talk with the Provedor and the captain , and they have certify i , that they mine of gold have discover certain mine of silver and gold , and look every day for master to come to open the say " weredats . Mines : which when they be open will enrich this Vincent . country very much . this place be call saint Vincent , 26 and be distant from you two thousand league , and in 24 . degree of latitude on the south side of the equinoctial line , and almost under the Tropike of Capricorn . a country it be very healthful without sickness . moreover , i have talk with the captain and provedor , and my father in law , who rule all this country ,