: which friar tell he of two great it ! iese English ship , and a pinnace , which have take they , ers ' but take nothing from they , nor do they any harm , but only ask they for the king of Spain ship . hereupon Diego Flores know that these english ship will go for the streit , determine to go thither , although it be in the month of February , and choose 10 ship of the 15 that be leave , he leave two ship which be not in case to go to sea at the island , and into the other three ship which be old , and shake with the storm he put all the woman and sick man in all the fleet , and send they to the river of Jenero , and he with the other 10 return again for the streit . fight betwixt our 2 english ship and three spanish ship . they victual at spirit » Santo . richardfaire - vieath remaineth in the river of plate . John Drake proceed on to the river of plate . the three ship in which the sick man and woman be , go to Brasil , and there they find within the port of saint Vincent the two ship before mention . they will have have the english man to have go out of the harbour , and thereupon they fall to fight , and because that these three ship be weak with the storm , and the man that they have be the worst in all the fleet , the Englishman easy put they to the worst , and sink one of they , and may have sink another , if the Englishman will : but they mind not the destruction of any man : for that be the great virtue that can be in a man , that when he may do hurt , yet he will not do it . So the Englishman go from this port to Spirit © Santo , where they have victual for their merchandise , and so they go back for England , without do of any harm in the country . the cause why these english ship under the conduct of m . Fenton go not to the streit , i know not : but some say that they be put back by foul weather : other some say that it be for fear of the king ship . but the pinnace of these two ship go from they , in which be captain John Drake : the cause why they part i know not , but the pinnace come into the river of plate , and within five league of seal island