near for new seat , drive thereunto through the necessity of their need make cold and miserable country ) will in all this time have the old we t0 find the way to America , and enter the same , have the ’ passage be never so strait or difficult ; the country be so temperate , pleasant and fruitful , in comparison of their own . but there be never any such people find there by any of the Spaniard , Portugal , or Frenchmen , who first discover the inland of that country : which Spaniards , or Frenchmen must then of necessity have see some one civil man in America , consider how full of civil people Asia be : but they never see so much as one token or sign , that ever any man of the know part of the world have be there . 4 furthermore it be to be think , that if by reason of mountain , or other craggy place , the people neither 165 motum fluxus y refluxus . 3 motum circularem . ad coeli motum elementa omnia ( excepta terra ) moventur . the english voyage of Cataia or Tartary can enter the country of America , or they of America have enter Asia if it be so join : yet some one savage or wander beast will in so many year have pass into it : but there have not any time be find any of the beast proper to Cataia , or Tartary etc in America : nor of those proper to America , in Tartary , Cataia , etc or any part of Asia . which thing prove America , not only to be one island , and in no part adjoin to Asia : but also that the people of those country , have not have any traffic with each other . 5 moreover at the least some one of those painful traveller , which of purpose have pass the confine of both country , with intent only to discover , will as it be most likely have go from the one to the other : if there have be any piece of land , or Isthmos , to have join they together , or else have declare some cause to the contrary . 6 but neither Paulus Venetus , who live and dwell a long time in Cataia , ever come into America , and yet be at the sea coast of Mangia , over against it where he be embark , and perform a great navigation along those sea : neither yet Verarzanus , or Franci scus Vasques de Coronado , who travel the north part of America by land , ever find entry from thence by land to Cataia , or any part of Asia . 7 also it appear to be a island , insomuch as the sea run by nature circular from the east to the west , follow the diurnal motion of primum Mobile , which carry with it all inferior body movable , aswell celestial as elemental : which motion of the water be most evident see in the sea , which lie on the southside of Africa , where the current that run from the east to the west be so strong ( by reason of such motion ) that the Portugal in their voyage eastward to Calicut , in pass by Cap . de buona speranda be enforce to make diverse course , the current there be so swift as it strike from thence all along westward 166 1576 . upon the fret of Magellan , be distant from thence , near the four part of the longitude of the earth : and not have free passage and entrance through the fret towards the west , by reason of the narrowness of the say strait of Magellan , it run to salve this wrong ( nature not yield to accidentali restraint ) all along the eastern coast of America , northwards so far as cape Fredo , be the far know place of the same continent towards the north : which be about 4800 league , reckon therewithal ! the trending of the land . 8 so that this current be continual maintain with such force , as Jaques Cartier affirm it to be , who meet with the same be at baccalaos , as he sail along the coast of America , then either it must of necessity have way to pass from cape Fredo , through this fret , westward towards Cataia , be know to come so far , only to salve his former wrong , by the authority before name : or else it must needs strike over , upon the coast of island , Norway , Finmarke , and Lappia , ( which be east from the say place about 360 league ) with great force than it do from cape de Posita causa , buona speranda , upon the fret of Magellan , or from effec - the fret of Magellan to cape Fredo , upon which coast ' Jaques Cartier meet with the same , consider the shortness of the cut from the say cape Fredo , to island , Lappia , etc and so the cause efficient remain , it will have continual follow along our coast , through the narrow sea , which it do not , but be digested about the north of Labrador , by some through passage there through this fret . the like course of the water in some respect happen in the mediterrane sea ( as affirm Conterenus ) whereas Conterenus . the current which come from Tanais , and Pontus Euxinus , run along all the coast of Greece , Italy , France , and Spain , and not find sufficient way out through Gibraltar , by mean of the straitness of the fret it run back again along the coast of Barbary , by Alexandria , Anatolia , etc 167 a objection answer . the sea do evermore per - fbrme this circular motion , either in Suprema , or concava superficie aqua . the ice set westward every year from island . Auth . Jona arngrimo . the english voyage it may ( peradventure ) be think that this course of the sea do sometime surcease , and thereby impugn this principle , because it be not discern all along the coast of America , in such sort as Jaques Cartier find it : whereunto i answer this : that albeit , in every part of the coast of America , or elsewhere this current be not sensible perceive , yet it have evermore such like motion , either in the uppermost or nethermost part of the sea : as it may be prove true , if you sink a sail by a couple of rope , near the ground , fasten to the nethermost corner two gun chamber or other weight : by the drive whereof you shall plain perceive , the course of the water , and current , run with such course in the bottom . by the like experiment , you may find the ordinary motion of the sea , in the ocean : how far soever you be off the land . 9 also there come another current from out the north - east from the scythian sea ( as m . Jenkinson a man of rare virtue , great travail and experience , tell i ) which run westward towards Labrador , as the other do , which come from the south : so that both these current , must have way through this our fret , or else encounter together and run contrary course , in one line , but no such conflict of stream , or contrary course be find about any part of Labrodor , or terra nova , as witness our yearly fisher , and other sailor that way , but be there digest , as aforesaid , and find by experience of Barnard de la Torre , to fall into mar deal Sur . 10 furthermore , the current in the great ocean , can not have be maintain to run continual one way , from the begin of the world unto this day , have there not be some thorough passage by the fret aforesaid , and so by circular motion be bring again to maintain it self : for the tide and course of the sea be maintained by their interchangeable motion : as fresh river be by spring , by ebb and flow , by rarefaction and condensation . 168 so that it rest not possible ( so far as my simple reason can comprehend ) that this perpetuali current can by any mean be maintain , but only by continual reaccess of the same water , which pass through the fret , and be bring about thither again , by such circular motion as aforesaid . and the certain fall thereof by this fret into mar deal Sur be prove by the testimony and experience , of Bernard de la Torre , who be send from P . de la Natividad to the Moluccae , anno domini 1542 . by commandment of Anthony Mendoza , than viceroy of Nova Hispania , which Bernard sail 750 . league , on the northside of the aequator , and there meet with a current , which come from the north - east the which drive he back again to Tidore . wherefore , this current be prove to come from C . de buona speranda to the fret of Magellan , and want sufficient entrance there , by narrowness of the strait , be by the necessity of nature force , bring to terra de Labrador , where Jaques Cartier meet the same , and thence certain know , not to strike over upon island , Lappia , etc and find by Bernard de la Torre in Mar del Sur , on the backside of America : therefore this current ( have none other passage ) must of necessity , fall out through this our fret into mar deal Sur , and so trending by the Moluccae , China , and C . de buona speranda , maintain it self by circular motion , which be all one in nature , with motus ab orient in occidentem . A . D . 1576 . the flow m occasion by reason that the heat of the moon boil , and make the water thin by way of rarefaction . a experience to prove the fall of this current into mar deal Sur . so that it seem , we have now more occasion to doubt of our return , than whether there be a passage that way , yea or no : which doubt , hereafter shall be sufficient remove . wherefore , in my opinion , reason it self , ground upon experience , assure we of this passage , if there be nothing else to put we in hope thereof . but least these may not suffice , i have add in this chapter follow , some further proof hereof , by the experience of such as have pass some part of this discovery : and in the next adjoin to that the authority 169 of those , which have sail whole , through every part thereof . to prove by experience of sundry man travel , the open of some part of this northwest passage : whereby good hope remain of the rest . [ Iii . 16 . ] Alcatrani be pelican . Baros lib . 9 of his first decas cap . 1 . Chap . 3 . PAulus Venetus , who dwell many year in Cataia , affirm that he sail 1500 mile upon the coast of Mangia , and Anian , towards the north - east : always find the sea open before he , not only as far as he go , but also as far as he can discern . 2 also Franciscus Vasques de Coronado pass from Mexico by Cevola , through the country of Quivira , to Siera Nevada , find there a great sea , where be certain ship lade with merchandise , carry on their prowess the picture of certain bird call Alcatrarzi , part whereof be make of gold , and part of silver , who signify by sign , that they be thirty day come thither : which likewise prove America by experience to be disjoined from Cataia , on that part by a great sea , because they can not come from any part of America , as native thereof : for that , so far as be discover , there have not be find there any one ship of that country . 3 in like manner , John Baros testify that the cosmographers of china ( where he himself have be ) affirm that the sea coast trend from thence Northeast , to 50 degree of septentrional latitude , be the further part that way which the Portugal have then knowledge of : and that the say cosmographer know no cause to the contrary , but that it may continue further . by who experience America be prove to be separate from those part of Asia , direct against the same . and not content with the judgement of these learned man only , i have search what may be further say for the confirmation hereof . 170 4 and i find that Franciscus Lopez de Gomara affirm America to be a island , and likewise Gronland : and that Gronland be distant from Lappia 40 league , and from terra de Labrador , 50 . 5 Moreover , Alvarus Nunnius a Spaniard , and learned cosmographer , and Jacobus Cartier , who make two voyage into those part , and sail 900 mile upon the north - east coast of America do in part confirm the same . 6 likewise Hieronymus Fracastorius , a learned italian , and traveler in the north part of the same land . 7 also Jaques Cartier have do the like , hear say at Hochelaga in Nova Francia , how that there be a great sea at Saguinay , whereof the end be not know : which they presuppose to be the passage to Cataia . Furthermore , Sebastian Cabota by his personal ex - write in the perience and travel have set forth , and describe this discourse of passage in his Charts , which be yet to be see in the 1 avl ^ a wn ' queen majesty privy gallery at Whitehall , who be send to make this discovery by king Henry the seven , and enter the same fret : affirm that he sail very far westward , with a quarter of the north , on the northside of Terra de Labrador the eleven of June , until he come to the septentrionali latitude of 67 degree and a half , and find the sea still open , say , that he may , and will have go to Cataia ,