, and the northermost next , north Northeast , or Northeast . the master account that the southeast point of Frisland be from he at that instant when he first descry this new island , northwest by north , 50 . league . they account this island to be 25 . league long , and the long way of it southeast , and northwest . the southern part of it be in the latitude of 57 degree and 1 . second part , or there about . they continue in sight of it , from the 12 . day at a 11 . of the clock , till the 243 the island in length z 5 . league . this hand be in the latitude of ^ . degree and 1 second pars . the english voyage 13 . day three of the clock in the after noon , when they leave it : and the last part they see of it , bear from they northwest by north . there appear two harborough upon that coast : the great of they seven league to the northward of the southermost point , the other but four league . there be very much ice near the same land , and also twenty or thirty league from it , for they be not clear of ice , till the 15 . day of September after noon . they ply their voyage homeward , and fall with the west part of Ireland about Galway , and have first sight of it on the 25 . day of September . Notes frame by m . Richard Hakluyt of the middle temple esquire , give to certain gentleman that go with m . Frobisher in his northwest discovery , for their direction : and not unfit to be commit to print , consider the same may stir up consideration of these and of such other thing , not unmeet in such new voyage as may be attempt hereafter . hat the first seat be choose on the seaside , so as ( if it may be ) you may have your own navy within bay , river or lake , within your seat safe from the enemy : and so as the enemy shall | be force to lie in open road abroad without , to be disperse with all wind and tempest that shall arise . thus seat you shall be least subject to annoy of the enemy , so may you by your navy within pass out to all part of the world , and so may the ship of England have access to you to supply all want , so may your commodity be carry away also . this seat be to be choose in a temperate climate , in sweet air , where you may possess always sweet water , wood , seacole or turf , with 244 fish , flesh , grain , fruit , herb and root , or so many of those as may suffice very necessity for the life of such as shall plant there . and for the possess of mine of gold , of silver , copper , quicksilver , or of any such precious thing , the want of those needful thing may be supply from some other place by sea , etc stone to make lime of , ' slate stone to tile withal , or such clay as make tile , stone to wall withal , if Brycke may not be make , timber for building easy to * be convey to the place , reed to cover house or such like , if tile or slate be not . be to be look for as thing without which no city may be make nor people in civil sort be keep together . the people there to plant and to continue be either to live without traffic , or by traffic and by trade of merchandise . if they shall live without sea traffic , at the first they become naked by want of linen and woollen , and very miserable by infinite want that will otherwise ensue , and so will they be force of themselves to depart , or else easy they will be consume by the Spaniard , by the Frenchman , or by the natural inhabitant of the country , and so the enterprise become reproachful to our nation , and a let to many other good purpose that may be take in hand . and by trade of merchandise they can not live , except the sea or the land there may yield commodity . and therefore you ought to have most speciali regard of that point , and so to plant , that the natural commodity of the place and seat may draw to you access of navigation for the same , or that by your own navigation you may carry the same out , and fetch home the supply of the want of the seat . such navigation so to be employ shall , beside the supply of want , be able to encounter with foreign force . 245 and for that in the ample vent of such thing as be bring to you out of England by sea , stand a matter of great consequence , it behoove that all humanity and courtesy and much forbear of revenge to the inland people be use : so shall you have firm amity with your neighbour , so shall you have their inland commodity to maintain traffic , and so shall you wax rich and strong in force . diverse and several commodity of the inland be not in great plenty to be bring to your hand , without the aid of some portable or navigable river , or ample lake , and therefore to have the help of such a one be most requisite : and so be it of effect for the disperse of your own commodity in exchange into the inland . Nothing be more to be endeavour with the inland people than familiarity . for so may you best discover all the natural commodity of their country , and also all their want , all their strength , all their weakness , and with who they be in war , and with who confederate in peace and amity , etc which know you may work many great effect of great consequence . and in your plant the consideration of the climate and of the soil be matter that be to be respect . for if it be so that you may let in the salt sea water , not mix with the fresh into flat , where the sun be of the heat that it be at rochel , in the bay of Portugal , or in Spain , then may you procure a man of skill , and so you have win one noble commodity for the fish , and for trade of merchandise by make [ three . 46 . ] or if the soil and climate be such as may yield you the grape as good as that at Bordeaux , as that in Portugal , or as that about Sivil in Spain , or that in the island of the canary , then there rest but a workman to put in execution to make wine , and to dress resign of the sun and other , etc or if you find a soil of the temperature of the south part of Spain or Barbary in the which you 246 find the olive tree to grow : than you may be assure of a noble merchandise for this realm , consider that our great trade of clothing do require oil , and weigh how dear of late it be become by the vent they have of that commodity in the west Indies , and if you find the wild olive there it may be graft . or if you can find the berry of cochenile with which we colour stammelle , or any root , berry , fruit , wood or earth fit for die , you win a notable thing fit for our state of clothing . this cochenile be natural in the west Indies on that firm . or if you have hide of beast fit for sole leather , etc it will be a merchandise right good , and the savage there yet can not tanne leather after our kind , yet excellent after their own manner . or if the soil shall yield fig , almond , sugar cane , quince , orange , lemon , potato , etc there may arise some trade and traffic by fig , almond , sugar , Marmelade , sucket , etc or if great wood be find , if they be of cypress , chest may be make , if they be of some kind of tree , pitch and tar may be make , if they be of some other , than they may yield rosin , turpentine , etc and all for trade and traffic , and cask for wine and oil may be make , likewise ship and house , etc and because traffic be a thing so materiali , i wish that great observation be take what every soil yield natural , in what commodity soever , and what it may be make to yield by endeavour , and to send we notice home , that thereupon we may devise what mean may be think of to raise trade . now admit that we may not be suffer by the savage to enjoy any whole country or any more than the scope of a city , yet if we may enjoy traffic , and be assure of the same , we may be much enrich , our navy may be increase , and a place of safety may there be find , if change of religion or civil 247 war shall happen in this realm , which be thing of great benefit . but if we may enjoy any large territory of apt soil , we may so use the matter , as we shall not depend upon Spain for oil , sack , resign , orange , lemond , spanish skin , etc nor upon France for woad , baysalt , and Gascoyne wine , nor on Eastland for flax , pitch , tar , mast , etc so we shall not so exhaust our treasure , and so exceed enrich our doubtful friend , as we do , but shall purchase the commodity that we want for half the treasure that now we do : and shall by our own industry and the benefit of the soil there cheap purchase oil , wine , salt , fruit , pitch , tar , flax , hemp , mast , board , fish , gold , silver , copper , tallow , hide and many commodity : beside if there be no flat to make salt on , if you have plenty of wood you may make it in sufficient quantity for common use at home there . if you can keep a safe haven , although you have not the friendship of the near neighbour , yet you may have traffic by sea upon one shore or other , upon that firm in time to come , if not present . if you find great plenty of timber on the shore side or upon any portable river , you be best to cut down of the same the first winter , to be season for ship , bark , boat and house ; and if near such wood there be any river or brook upon the which a saw mill may be place , it will do great service , and therefore consideration will be have of such place . and if such port and choose place of settle be in possession and after fortify by art , although by the land side our Englishman be keep in , and may not enjoy any traffic with the next neighbour , nor any victual : yet may they victuali themselves of fish to serve very necessity , and enter into amity with the enemy of their next neighbour , and so have vent of their merchandise of England and also have victual , or by mean hereupon to be use , to force the next neigh - 248 hour to amity . And keep a navy at the settle place , they shall find out along the tract of the land to have traffic , and at diverse island also . and so this first seat may in time become a stapling place of the commodity of many country and territory , and in time this place may become of all the province round about the only governor . and if the place first choose shall not so well please our people , as some other moor late find out : there may be a easy remove , and that may be raze , or rather keep for other of our nation to avoid a ill neighbour . if the soil adjoin to such convenient haven and settle place be find marshy and boggy , than man [ three . 47 . ] skilful in drain be to be carry thither . for art may work wonderful effect therein , and make the soil rich for many use . to plant upon a island in the mouth of some notable river , or upon the point of the land enter into the river , if no such island be , be to great end . for if such river be navigable or portable far into the land , then will arise great hope of plant in fertile soil , and traffic on the one or on the other side of the river , or on both , or the link in amity with one or other petty king contend there for dominion . such river find , both barge and boat may be make for the safe passage of such as shall pierce the same . these be to be cover with double of course linen artificial wrought , to defend the arrow or the dart of the savage from the rower . since every soil of the world by art may be make to yield thing to feed and to clothe man , bring in your return a perfect note of the soil without and within , and we shall devise if need require to amend the same , and to draw it to more perfection . and if you find not fruit in your plant place to your like , we shall in five drifat furnish you with such kind of plant to be carry thither the winter after your plant , as shall the very next summer follow yield you some fruit , and 249 the year next follow , as much as shall suffice a town as big as Calais , and that short after shall be able to yield you great store of strong durable good sider to drink , and these tree shall be able to increase you within less than seven year as many tree present to bear , as may suffice the people of diverse parish , which at the first settle may stand you in great stead , if the soil have not the commodity of fruit of goodness already . and because you ought greedy to hunt after thing that yield present relief , without trouble of carriage thither , therefore i make mention of these thus special , to the end you may have it special in mind .