that be hard freeze , as pleasant as we will do sugar Candie , or other sugar . if they for necessity sake stand in need of the premise , such grass as the country yield they pluck up and eat , not dainty , or salletwise to allure their stomach to appetite : but for necessity sake without either salt , oil or wash , like brute beast devour the same . they neither use table , stool , or table cloth for comeliness : but when they be imbrue with blood knuckle deep , and their knife in like sort , they use their tongue as apt instrument to lick they clean : in do whereof they be assure to loose none of their victual . dog like they frank or keep certain dog not much unlike unto wolf . wolf , which they yoke together , as we do ox and horse , to a sled or trade : and so carry their necessary over the ice and snow from place to place : as the captive , who we have , make perfect sign . and when those dog be not apt for the same use : or when with hunger they be constrain for lack of other victual , 224 > 577 - they eat they : so that they be as needful for they they eat dtp in respect of their bigness , as our ox be for we . fresh - they apparel themselves in the skin of such beast as they kill , sew together with the sinew of they . all the foul which they kill , they skin , and make thereof one kind of garment or other , to defend they from the cold . they make their apparel with hood and tail , which hood and . tail they give when they think to gratify any friend - tatle ship show unto they : a great sign of friendship a " be ’ with they . the man have they not so side as the woman . the man and woman wear their hose close to their leg , from the waste to the knee without any open before , as well the one kind as the other . upon their leg they wear hose of leather , with the fur side inward two or three pair on at once , and especial the woman . in those hose they put their knife , needle , and other thing needful to bear about . they put a bone within their hose , which reach from the foot to the knee , whereupon they draw their say hose , and so in place of garter they be hold from fall down about their foot . they dress their skin very soft and souple with the hair on . in cold weather or winter they wear the fur side inward : and in summer outward . other apparel they have none but the say skin . those beast , fish , and fowl , which they kill , be their meat , drink , apparel , house , bed , hose , shoe , thread , and sail for their boat , with many other necessary whereof they stand in need , and almost all their riches . their house be tent make of seal skin , pitch up with 4 . fir quarter four square meeting at the top , and the skin sew together with sinew , and lay thereupon : they be so pitch up , that the entrance into they be always south or against the sun . they have other sort of house which we find not their house of seal skin and fir . Vii 225 to be inhabit , which be raise with stone and whale bone , and a skin lay over they , to withstand the rain , or other weather : the entrance of they be not much unlike a oven mouth , whereto i think they resort for a time to fish , hunt , and foul , and so leave they until the next time they come thither again . their weapon their weapon be bow , arrow , dart , and sling . of defence . their bow be of wood of a yard long , sinew at the back with strong sinew , not glue too , but fast gird and tie on . their bow strings ' are likewise sinew . their arrow be three piece nocked with bone , and end with bone , with those two end , and the wood in the midst , they pass not in length half a yard or little moor . they be feather with two feather the pen end be cut away , and the feather lay upon the arrow with the broad side to the wood ; insomuch [ three . 38 . ] that they seem when they be tie on , to have four three sort of feather . they have also three sort of head to those head to their arrow . one sort of stone or iron , proportion like to ’ a heart : the second sort of bone , much like unto a stop head , with a hook on the same : the three sort of bone likewise make sharp at both side , and sharp point . they be not make very fast but light tie to , or else set in a knock , that upon small occasion the arrow leave these head behind they : and they be of small force , except they be very near when they shoot . two sort of their dart be make of two sort : the one with many rt ' fork of bone in the fore end and likewise in the midst : their proportion be not much unlike our toast - ing iron but long : these they cast out of a instrument of [ wood , very ready . the other sort be great than the first aforesaid , with a long bone make sharp on both side not much unlike a rapier , which i take to be their most hurtful weapon . two sort of they have two sort of boat make of leather , set out ather ^ on * nner s ^ e quarter ° f wood , artificial tie together with thong of the same : the great sort be not much unlike our wherry , wherein sixteen or 226 twenty man may sit : they have for a sail dress the gut of such beast as they kill very fine and thin , which they sew together : the other boat be but for one man to sit and row in with one oar . their order of fish , hunt , and foul be with these say weapon : but in what sort , or how they use they we have no perfect knowledge as yet . i can suppose their abode or habitation not to be here , for that neither their house or apparel , be of such force to withstand the extremity of cold , that the country seem to be infect with all : neither do i see any sign likely to perform the same . those house or rather den which stand there , have no sign of footway , or any thing else tread , which be one of the chief token of habitation . and those they use ft foul , fish , and hunt . it be to be suppose that their inhabit be elsewhere .. tent which they bring with they , when they have sufficient hunt and fish , they remove to other place : and when they have sufficient store they of such victual , as the country yield or bring forth , they return to their winter station or habitation . this conjecture do i make , for the infertility which i conjecture to be in that country . they have some iron whereof they make arrow head , t ^ ir ttse it knife , and other little instrument , to work their boat , bow , arrow , and dart withal , which be very unapt to do any thing withal but with great labour . it seem that they have conversation with some other people , of who for exchange they shall receive the same . they be great delight with any thing that be bright , or give a sound . what knowledge they have of God , or what idol anthropophagi . they adore , we have no perfect intelligence , i think they rather anthropophagi , or devourer of man flesh then otherwise : for that there be no flesh or fish which they find dead ( smell it never so filthy ) but they will eat it , as they find it without any other dress . a loathsome thing , either to the beholder or hearer . there be no manner of creep beast hurtful , except 227 signet of gold some spider ( which as many affirm , be sign of great eure - store of gold ) and also certain sting gnat , which bite so fierce , that the place where they bite short after swell and itch very sore . sign of gold they make sign of certain people that be bright from other plate of gold in their forehead , and other place of ' their body . description of the country on both side the strait lie very the country . high with rough stony mountain , and great quantity of snow thereon . there be very little plain ground and no grass , except a little which be much like unto moss that grow on soft ground , such as we get turffe in . there be no wood at all . to be brief there be nothing fit or profitable for the use of man , which that country with root yield or bring forth : howbeit there be great quantity of deer , who skin be like unto ass , there head or horn do far exceed , as well in length as also in breadth , any in these our part or country : their foot likewise be as great as our oxen , which we measure to be seven or eight inche in breadth . there be also hare , wolf , fish bear , and sea foul of sundry sort . as the country be barren and unfertile , so be they rude and of no capacity to culture the same to any perfection : but be content by their hunt , fish , and foul , with raw flesh and warm blood to satisfy their greedy paunch , which be their only glory . a sign oj there be great likelihood of earthquake or thunder : earthquake £ or t ^ at there be huge and monstrous mountain , who great substance be stone , and those stone so shake with some extraordinary mean that one be separate from another , which be discordant from all other quarry . [ Iii . 39 ] there be no river or run spring , but such as uchatlhe111 trough heat of the sun , with such water as sun do descend from the mountain and hill , whereon cause to come great drift of snow do lie , be engender . of mow . it argue also that there shall be none : for that the earth , which with the extremity of the winter be so 228 1577 - frosen within , that that water which shall have recourse probability within the same to maintain spring , have not his . motion , whereof great water have their originali , as by er experience be see otherwhere . such valley as be riser in the capable to receive the water , that in the summer time ground . by the operation of the sun descend from great abundance of snow , which continual lie on the mountain and have no passage , sink into the earth and so vanish away , without any runnell above the earth , by which occasion or continual stand of the say water , the earth be open , and the great frost yield to the force thereof , which in other place four or five fathom within the ground for lack of the say moisture , the earth ( even in the very summer time ) be freeze , and so combine the stone together , that scarce instrument with great force can unknit they . also where the water in those valley can have no such passage away , by the continuance of time in such order as be before rehearse , the yearly descent from the mountain fill they full , that at the low bank of the same , they fall into the valley , and so continue as fish pond or stagne in summer time full of water , and in the winter hard freeze : as by scar that remain thereof in summer may easy be perceive : so that the heat of summer be nothing comparable or of force to dissolve the extremity of cold that come in winter . nevertheless i be assure that below the force of the frost within the earth , the water have recourse , and empty themselves out of sight into the sea , which through the extremity of the frost be constrain to do the same : by which occasion the earth within be keep the warm , and spring have their recourse , which be the spring nou - onely nutriment of gold and mineral within the same . there be much to be say of the commodity of these country , which be couch within the bowel of the earth , which i let pass till more perfect trial be make thereof . 229 gur departure from those country . how when we lose our i . Barks , which God nevertheless restore . the conclusion . the english voyage the 24 . of August , after we have satisfy our mind with fraught sufficient for our vessel , though not our covetous desire with such knowledge of the country , people , and other commodity as be before rehearse , we depart therehence . the 17 . of September we fall with the land end of England , and so sail to Milford haven , from whence our general road to the court for order , to what port or haven to conduct the ship . we lose our two bark in the way homeward , the one the 29 . of August , the other the 31 . of the same month , by occasion of great tempest and fog . howbeit God restore the one to Bristol , and the other make his course by Scotland to Yermouth . in this voyage we lose two man , one in the way by god visitation , and the other homeward cast over board with a surge of the sea . i can declare unto the reader , the latitude and longitude of such place and region as we have be at , but not altogether so perfect as our master and other , with many circumstance of tempest and other accident incident to sea fare man , which seem not altogether strange , but i let they pass to their report as man most apt to set forth and declare the same . i have also leave the name of the country on both the shore touch , for lack of understand the people yet to be declare . country new discover where commodity be to be look for , do better accord with a new name give by the discoverer , than a uncertain name by a doubtful author . our general name sundry island , mountain , cape , and harborough after the name of diverse noble man and other gendeman his friend , aswell on the one shore as also on the other .