the letter patent of king Henry the seven grant unto John Cabot and his three son , Lewis , Sebastian , and Sancius for the this — coverie of new and unknown land . Enricus dei gratia rex angliae , and francia , and dominus hiberniae , omnibus , ad quos praesente literae nostrae pervenerint , salutem . notum sit and manifestum , quod dedimus and concessimus , ac per praesente damus and concedimus pro nobis and haeredibus nostris , dilectis nobis Joanni caboto civi venetiarum , Lodovico , Sebastiano , and Sancio , filiis dicti Joannis , and eorum ac cujuslibet eorum haeredibus and deputatis , plenam ac liberam authoritatem , facultatem and potestatem navigandi ad omnes part , regione , and sinus maris orientalis , occidentalis , and septentrionalis , sub ban - neris , vexilli , and insigniis nostris , cum quinque navibus sive navigiis , cujuscilnque portiturae and qualitatis existant , and cum tot and tantis nauti and hominibus , quot and quanto in dictis navibus secum ducere voluerint , suis and eorum propriis sumptibus and expensis , ad inveniendum , discooperiendum , and investigandum quascunque insulas , patrias , regiones sive provincias gentilium and infidelium quorumcunque , in quacunque parte mundi positas , quae Christianis omnibus ante haec tempora fuerint incognitae . 141 concessimus etiam eisdem and eorum cuilibet , eorumque and cujuslibet eorum haeredibus and deputatis , ac licentiam dedimus ad affigendum praedictas bannera nostras and insignia in quacunque villa , oppido , castro , insula seu terra firma a se noviter inventis . et quod praenominatus Joannes , and filii ejusdem , seu haeredes and eorum deputati , quascunque hujusmodi villa , castra , oppida , and insulas a se inventas , quae subjugari , occupari , possideri possint , subjugare , occupare , possidere valeant tanquam vasalli nostri , and gubernatore , locatenente , and deputati eorundem , dominium , titulum and jurisdictionem earundem villarum , castrorum , oppidorum , insularum , ac terrae firmae sic inventorum nobis acquirendo . ita tamen , ut ex omnibus fructibus , proficuis , emolumentis , commodis , lucris , and obventionibus ex hujusmodi navigation provenientibus , praefatus Johannes , and filii ac haeredes , and eorum deputati , teneantur and sint obligati nobis pro omni viagio suo , toty quoty and portum nostrum bristolliae applicuerint ( ad quem omnino applicare teneantur and sint astricti ) deductis omnibus sumptibus and impensis necessariis per eosdem factis , quintam partem capitalis lucri facti , sive in mercibus , sive in pecuniis persolvere : Dante nos and concedentes eisdem suisque haeredibus and deputatis , ut ab omni solution custumarum omnium and singulorum bonorum and mercium , quas secum re - portarint ab illis locis sic noviter inventis , liberi sint and immune . et insuper dedimus and concessimus eisdem ac suis haeredibus and deputatis , quod terra omnes firmae , insulae , villae , oppida , castra , and loca quaecunque a se [ three . 5 . i inventa , quotquot ab eis inveniri contigerit , non possint ab aliis quibusvis nostris subditis frequentari seu visitari , absque licentia praedictorum Joannis and ejus filiorum , suoriimque deputatorum , sub poena amissionis tam navium quam bonorum omnium quorumciinque ad ea loca sic inventa navigare praesumentium . Volentes and strictissime mandante omnibus and singulis nostris subditis , tam in terra quam in mari constitutis , ut praefato Joanni , and ejus filiis ac deputatis , bonam assistentiam 142 faciant , and tam in armandis navibus seu navigiis , quam in provision commeatus and victualium pro sva pecunia emendorum , atque aliarum omnium rerum sibi providendarum pro dicta navigation sumenda suos omnes favore and auxilia impertiant . in cujus rei testimonium have litera nostras fieri fecimus patentes . testae meipso apud westmonasterium quinto die Martii anno regni nostri undecimo . the same in english . HEnry by the grace of God , king of England and France , and lord of Ireland , to all to who these present shall come , greet . be it know that we have give and grant , and by these present do give and grant for we and our heir , to our well - beloved John Cabot citizen of Venice , to Lewis , Sebastian , and Santius , son of the say John , and to the heir of they , and every of they , and their deputy , full and free authority , leave , and power to sail to all part , country , and sea of the east , of the west , and of the north , under our banner and ensign , with five ship of what burden or quantity soever they be , and as many mariner or man as they will have with they in the say ship , upon their own proper cost and charge , to seek out , discover , and find whatsoever isle , country , region or province of the heathen and infidel whatsoever they be , and in what part of the world soever they be , which before this time have be unknown to all Christians : we have grant to they , and also to every of they , the heir of they , and every of they , and their deputy , and have give they licence to set up our banner and ensign in every village , town , castle , isle , or main land of they new find . and that the aforesaid John and his son , or their heir and assign may subdue , occupy and possess all such town , city , castle and isle of they find , which they can subdue , occupy and possess , as our vassal , and lieutenant , get unto we the rule , title , and jurisdic - M3 Ann . Dom . 1495 - Bristol think the meet port for western discovery . freedom from custom . cion of the same village , town , castle , and firm land so find . yet so that the aforesaid John , and his son and heir , and their deputy , be hold and bind of all the fruit , profit , gain , and commodity grow of such navigation , for every their voyage , as often as they shall arrive at our port of Bristol ( at the which port they shall be bind and hold only to arrive ) all manner of necessary cost and charge by they make , be deduct , to pay unto we in ware or money the five part of the capital ! gain so get . we give and grant unto they and to their heir and deputy , that they shall be free from all pay of custom of all and singular such merchandise as they shall bring with they from those place so new find . and moreover , we have give and grant to they , their heir and deputy , that all the firm land , isle , village , town , castle and place whatsoever they be that they shall chance to find , may not of any other of our subject be frequent or visit without the licence of the foresaid John and his son , and their deputy , under pain of forfeiture aswell of their ship as of all and singular good of all they that shall presume to sail to those place so find . willing , and most straight command all and singular our subject aswell on land as on sea , to give good assistance to the aforesaid John and his son and deputy , and that as well in arm and furnish their ship or vessel , as in provision of food , and in buy of victual for their money , and all other thing by they to be provide necessary for the say navigation , they do give they all their help and favour . in witness whereof we have cause to be make these our letter patent . witness our self at Westminster the five day of march , in the eleven year of our reign .