to carry you southeast accord to your desire , yet can you not winter convenient , until you come to 60 degree , and to take up one degree run southeast , you must sail 24 league and three four part , which amount to 495 league . 6 furthermore , you may by the northwest sail thither with all easterly wind , and return with any westerly wind , whereas you must have by the north - east sundry wind , and those proper , accord to the lie of the coast and cape , you shall | be enforce to double , which wind be not always to be have , when they be look for : whereby your journey shall be great prolong , and hardly endure so near the pole . as we be teach by sir Hugh Willoughbie , who be freeze to death far near the south . 7 moreover , it be very doubtful , whether we shall 184 long enjoy that trade by the north - east , if there be any such passage that way , the commodity thereof once know to the Moscovite , what privilege soever he have grant , see policy with the mass of excessive gain , to the enrich ( so great ) of himself and all his dominion will persuade Kim to presume the same , have so great opportunity to utter the commodity of those country by the narve . but by the northwest , we may safe trade without danger or annoyance of any prince live , Christian or heathen , it be out of all their trade . 8 also the queen majesty dominion be near [ three . 22 . ] the northwest passage than any other great prince that may pass that way , and both in their go and return , they must of necessity succour themselves and their ship upon some part of the same , if any tempestuous weather shall happen . further , no prince navy of the world be able to encounter the queen majesty navy , as it be at this present : and yet it shall be great increase by the traffic ensue upon this discovery , for it be the long voyage that increase and maintain great ship . now it seem necessary to declare what commodity will grow thereby , if all these thing be , as we have heretofore presuppose , and think they to be : which next adjoin be brief declare . what commodity will ensue , this passage once discover . Cap . 10 . first , it be the only way for our prince , to possess the wealth of all the east part ( as they term they ) of the world , which be infinite : as appear by the experience of Alexander the great , in the time of his conquest of India , and other the east part of the world , allege by Quintus Curtius , which will be a great advancement to our country , a wonderful enrich to 185 our prince , and a unspeakable commodity to all the inhabitant of Europe . 2 for through the shortness of the voyage , we shall be able to sell all manner of merchandise , bring from thence , far better cheap than either the Portugal or Spaniard do or may do . and further , we shall share with the Portugal in the east , and the Spaniard in the west , by trade to any part of America , through mar deal Sur , where they can no manner of way offend we . 3 also we may sail to diverse very rich country , both civil and other , out of both their jurisdiction , trade and traffic , where there be to be find great abundance of gold , silver , precious stone , cloth of gold , silk , all manner of spice , grocery ware , and other kind of merchandise of a inestimable price , which both the Spaniard and Portugal , through the length of their journey , can well attain unto . 4 also we may inhabit some part of those country , and settle there such needy people of our country , which now trouble the common wealth , and through want here at home be enforce to commit outrageous offence , whereby they be daily consume with the gallows . 3 moreover , we may from all the aforesaid place have a yearly return , inhabit for our staple some convenient place of America , about Sierra Nevada , or some other part , whereas it shall seem best for the shorten of the voyage . 6 beside utter of our country commodity , which the Indian , etc much esteem : as appear in Hester , where the pomp be express of the great king of India , Assuerus , who match the colour clothes , wherewith his house and tent be apparel , with gold and silver , as part of his great treasure : not mention either velvet , silk , cloth of gold , cloth of silver , or such like , be in those country most plentiful : whereby it plain appear in what great estimation they will have the clothes of this our country , so 186 1576 . that there will be find a far better vent for they by this mean , then yet this realm ever have : and that without depend either upon France , Spain , Flanders , Portugal , Hamborow , Emden , or any other part of Europe . 7 also , here we shall increase both our ship and mariner , without burden of the state . 8 and also have occasion to set poor man child to learn handy craft , and thereby to make trifle and such like , which the Indian and those people do much esteem : by reason whereof , there shall be none occasion to have our country cumber with loiterer , vagabond , and such like idle person . all these commodity will grow by follow this our discovery , without injury do to any christian prince , by cross they in any of their use trade , whereby they may take any just occasion of offence . thus have i brief show you some part of the ground of my opinion , trust that you will no long judge i fantastic in this matter : see i have conceive no vain hope of this voyage , but be persuaded thereunto by the best cosmographer of our age , the same be confirm both by reason and certain experience . also this discovery have be diverse time heretofore by other both offer , attempt , and perform . it have be offer by Stephan Gomes unto Carolus the five emperor , in the year of our lord God 1527 , [ three . 23 . ] as Alphonso Ullva testify in the story of Carolus life : who will have set he forth in it ( as the story men - tioneth ) if the great want of money , by reason of his long war have not cause he to surcease the same . and the king of Portugal fear least the emperor will have persevere in this his enterprise , give he to this discovery leave the matter unattempted , the sum of 350000 crown : and it be to be think that the king of Portugal will not have give to the emperor such sum of money for egg in moonshine . 187 the labour of this discovery shorten by other man travel . why you king of Spain and Portugal will not persevere in this discovery . the english voyage it have be attempt by Sebastian Cabota in the time of king Henry the seven , by Corterialis the Portugal , and Scolmus the Dane . and it have be perform by three brethren , the Indian aforesaid , and by Urdaneta the friar of Mexico . also diverse have offer the like unto the french king , who have send two or three time to have discover the same : the discoverer spend and consume their victual in search the gulf and bay between Florida and terra de Labrador , whereby the ice be break to the after comer . so that the right way may now easy be find out in short time : and that with little jeoperdie and less expense . for America be discover so far towards the north as cape Frio , which be at 62 degree , and that part of Grondland next adjoin be know to stand but at 72 degree . so that we have but 10 degree to sail north and south , to put the world out of doubt hereof : and it be likely that the king of Spain , and the king of Portugal will not have fit out all this while , but that they be sure to possess to themselves all that trade they now use , and fear to deal in this discovery , lest the queen majesty have so good opportunity , and find the commodity which thereby may ensue to the common wealth , will cut they off , and enjoy the whole traffic to her self , and thereby the Spaniard and Portugal , with their great charge , shall beat the bush , and other man catch the bird : which thing they foresee , have command that no pilot of they upon pain of death , shall seek to discover to the northwest , or plat out in any sea card any thorough passage that way by the northwest . now , and if you will indifferent compare the hope that remain , to animate i to this enterprise , with those likelihood which Columbus allege before Ferdinando the king of Castilia , to prove that there be such island in the west ocean , as be after by he 188 and other discover to the great commodity of Spain and all the world : you will think then this northwest passage to be most worthy travel therein . for Columbus have none of the west Islands set forth unto he , either in globe or card , neither yet once mention of any writer ( Plato except , and the commentary upon the same ) from 942 year before Christ , until that day . Moreover , Columbus himself have neither see America nor any other of the island about it , neither , understand he of they by the report of any other that have see they , but only comfort himself with this hope , that the land have a beginning where the sea have a end : for as touch that which the Spaniard do write of a Biscaine , which shall have teach he the way thither , it be think to be imagine of they , to deprive Columbus of his honour , be none of their country man , but a stranger bear . and if it be true of the Biscaine , yet do he but rove at the matter , or ( at the least ) gather the knowledge of it , by conjecture only . and albeit my self have not see this passage or any part thereof , but be ignorant of it as touch experience ( as Columbus be before his attempt make ) yet have i both the report , relation , and authority of diverse most credible man , which have both see and pass through some and every part of this discovery , beside sundry reason for my assurance thereof : all which Columbus want . Theise thing consider , and indifferent weigh togeth , with the wonderful commodity which this discovery may bring , especial to this realm of England : i must needs conclude with learned Baptista Ramusius , and diverse other learned man , who say , that this discovery have be reserve for some noble prince or worthy man , thereby to make himself rich , and the world happy : desire you to accept in good part this brief and simple discourse , write in haste , which if 189 the english voyage i may perceive that it shall not sufficient satisfy you in this behalf , i will then impart unto you a large discourse , which i have write only of this discovery . and further , because it suffice not only to know that such a thing there be , without ability to perform the same , i will at leisure make you partaker of another simple discourse of navigation , wherein i have not a little travel , to make my self as sufficient to bring these thing to effect , as i have be ready to offer my self therein . and therein i have devise to amend the error of usual sea card , who common fault be , to make the degree of longitude in every latitude of one like bigness . and have also devise therein a spherical instrument , with a compass of variation for the perfect know of the longitude . and a precise order to prick the sea card , together with certain infallible rule for the shorten of any discovery , to know at the first enter of any fret , whether it lie open to the ocean more way than one , how far soever the sea stretch it self into the land . desire you hereafter never to mislike with i , for the take in hand of any laudable and honest enterprise : for if through pleasure or idleness we purchase shame , the pleasure vanish , but the shame remain for ever . and therefore to give i leave without offence , always to live and die in this mind , that he be not worthy to live at all , that for fear , or danger of death , shun his country service , and his own honour : see death be inevitable , and the fame of virtue immortali . wherefore in this behalf , mutare vel timere sperno . 190 certain other reason , or argument to prove a passage by the northwest , learned write by m . Richard Willes gentleman . four famous way there be speak of to those fruitful and wealthy island , which we do usual call Moluccaes , continual haunt for gain , and daily travel for riches therein grow . Theise Islands , although they stand east from the meridian , distant almost half the length of the world , in extreme heat , under the equinoctial line , possess of infidel and barbarian : yet by our neighbour great abundance of wealth there be painful seek in respect of the voyage . dear buy , and from thence dangerous bring home unto we . our neighbour i call the Portugal in comparison of the molucchians for nearness unto we , for like situation westward as we have , for