bear get themselves clear without danger of ice and rock , strike their sail and lay a hull , stay to have the rest of the fleet come forth : which as yet have not find the right way to clear themselves from the danger of rock and ice , until the next morning , at what time the rearadmiral discharge certain warning piece to give notice that she warn have escape , and that the rest ( by follow of she ) may set themselves free , which they do that day . charnd * then have gather our self together we proceed on our purpose voyage , bear off , and keep our self distant from the coast till the 19 day of July : at which time the fog break up and disperse , so that we may plain and clear behold the pleasant air , which so long have be take from we , by the obscurity of the foggy mist : and after that time we be not much encumber therewith until we have leave the con fine of the country . than we espy a fair sound , suppose it to go a fair sound into the strait between the queen foreland and between the jackmans sound , which prove as we imagine . for our general scent forth again the Gabriel to discover it , who jackmans pass through with much difficulty : for there run such sound . a extreme current of a tide , with such a horrible gulf , that with a fresh gale of wind they be scarce able to stem it : yet at the length with great travail they pass it , and come to the strait , where they meet with the Thomas Allen , the Thomas of Ipswich , and the buss of Bridgewater : who altogether adventure to bear into the ice again , to see if they can obtain their wish port . but they be so encumber that with much difficulty they be able to get out again , yet at the last they escape , the Thomas Allen , and the Gabriel 237 the time of our set forward , etc the english voyage bear in with the western shore , where they find harbour , and there moar their ship until the four of August , at which time they come to we in the countess of Warwick sound . the Thomas of Ipswich catch a great leak which cause she to cast again to Seabord and so be mend . we sail along still by the coast until we come to the queen foreland , at the point whereof we meet with part of the gulf aforesaid , which place or gulf ( as some of our master do credible report ) do flow nine hour , and ebb but three . at that point we discover certain land southward , which neither time nor opportunity will serve to search . then be come to the mouth of the strait we meet with the anne Francis , who have lie bult up and down ever since her departure alone , never find any of her company . we meet then also the Francis of Foy , with who again we intend to venture and get in : but the ice be yet so thick , that we be compel again to retire and get we on seaboard . there fall also the same day be the 26 . of July , such a horrible snow , that it lie a foot thick upon the hatch which freeze as it fall . we have also at other time diverse cruel storm both of snow and hail , which manifest declare the dis - temperature of the country : yet for all that we be so many time repulse and put back from our purpose , know that linger delay be not profitable for we , but hurtful to our voyage , we mutual consent to our valiant general once again , to give the onset . the 28 . day therefore of the same July we assay , and with little trouble ( God be praise ) we pass the danger by day light . then night fall on the face of the earth , we hull in the clear , till the cheerful light of the day have chase away the noisome darkness of the night : at which time we set forward towards our wish port : by the 30 . day we obtain our expect desire , where we find the Judith , and the Michael : 238 which bring no small joy unto the general , and great consolation to the heavy heart of those weary wight . the 30 . day of July we bring our ship into the [ three . 43 . ] countess of Warwick sound , and moar they , namely these ship , the admiral , the rearadmiral , the Francis of Foy , the bear Armenel , the Salomon , and the buss of Bridgewater : which be do , our general commanded we all to come a shore upon the countess hand , where he set his miner to work upon the mine , give charge with expedition to dispatch with their lade . Oure general himself , accompany with his gentleman , diverse time make road into sundry part of the country , as well to find new mine , as also to find out and see the people of the country . he find out one mine upon a island by bear sound , and name it the countess of Sussex island . one other be find in countess winter furnace , with diverse other , to which the ship ° f ^ sjex be send sunder to be lade . in the same rodes winter he meet with diverse of the people of the country at furnace . sundry time , as once at a place call David sound : who David sound . shoot at our man , and very desperate give they the onset , be not above three or four in number , there be of our country man above a dozen : but see themselves not able to prevail , they take themselves to flight : who our man pursue , but be not use to such craggy cliff , they soon lose the sight of they , and so in vain return . we also see of they at bear sound , both by sea the politic of and land in great company : but they will at all time the people fir keep the water between they and we . and if any of our ship chance to be in the sound ( as they come diverse time , because the harbour be not very good ) the ship jade , and depart again : then so long as any ship be in sight , the people will not be see . but when as they perceive the ship to be go , they will not only show themselves stand upon high clifle , and call we to come over unto they : but also 239 the english voyage will come in their boat very near to we , as it be to brag at we : whereof our general have advertisement , send for the captain and gentleman of the ship , to accompany and attend upon he , with the captain also of the anne Francis , who be but the night before come unto we . for they , and the Fleebote have lose we the 26 . day in the great snow , put into a harbour in the queen foreland , where they find good oar , wherewith they jade themselves , and come to seek the general : so that now we have all our ship , save one bark , which be lose , and the Thomas of Ipswich , who ( compel by what fury i know not ) forsake our company , and return home without lade . Oure general accompany with his gentleman , ( of who i speak ) come all together to the countess of Sussex island , near to bear sound : where he man out certain pinniss , and go over to the people : who perceive his arrival , flee away with all speed , and in haste leave certain dart and other engine behind they , which we find : but the people we can not find . the next morning our general perceive certain of they in boat upon the sea , give chase to they in a pinnace under sail , with a fresh gale of wind , but can by no mean come near unto they : for the long he sail , the further off he be from they : which well show their cunning and activity . thus time wear away , and the day of our departure approach , our general command we to lade with all expedition , that we may be again on Seaboard with our ship : for while we be in the country , we be in continual danger of freeze in : for often snow and hail often fall , the water be so much freeze and congeal in the night , that in the morning we can scarce row our boat or pinnace , especial in dyer sound , which be a calm and still water : which cause our general to make the more haste , so that by the 30 . day of August we be all lade , and make all thing ready to depart . 240 but before i proceed any further herein , to show what gentleman fortune befall at our departure , i will turn my pen a little to m . captain Fenton , and those gentleman which ' c ^^ gy * it shall have inhabit all the year in those country , who valiant mind be much to be commend : for doubtless they have do as they intend , if luck have not withstand their willingness . for the bark dionise which be lose , have in her much of their house which be prepare and shall have be build for they , with many other implement . also the Thomas of Ipswich which have most of their provision in she , come not into the strait at all : neither do we see she since the day we be separate in the great snow , of which i speak before . for these cause , have not their house , nor yet provision , they be disappoint of their pretence to tarry , and therefore jade their ship , and so come away with we . but before we take ship , we build a little house a house in the countess of Warwick island , and garnish it trick and with many kind of trifle , as pin , point , lace , iverstrin ^ s glass , kombe , babe on horseback and on foot , with innumerable other such fancy and toy : thereby to allure and entice the people to some familiarity against other year . thus have finish all thing we depart the [ three . 44 . i country , as i say before : but because the buss have not lade enough in she , she put into bear sound to take in a little moor . in the mean while the admiral , and the rest without at sea stay for she . and that night fall such a outrageous tempest , beat a outragwus on our ship with such vehement rigor , that anchor and temfest - cable avail nought : for we be drive on rock and island of ice , insomuch that ( have not the great goodness of God be miraculous show to we ) we have be cast away every man . this danger be more doubtful and terrible , than any that precede or go before : for there be not any one ship ( i think ) that escape without damage . some lose anchor and vn 241 q our enter the coast dangerous . the english voyage also cable , some boat , some pinniss : some anchor , cable , boat and pinniss . this boisterous storm so sever we from one another , that one ship know not what be become of another . the admiral know not where to find the vice - admiral or rearadmiral , or any other ship of our company . Oure general being on land in bear sound can not come to his ship , but be compel to go aboard the Gabriel where he continue all the way homeward : for the boisterous blast continue so extreme and so long a time , that they send we homeward ( which be God favour towards we ) will we , will we , in such haste , as not any one of we be able to keep in company with other , but be separate . and if by chance any one ship do overtake other , by swiftness of sail , or meet , as they often do : yet be the rigour of the wind so hideous , that they can not continue company together the space of one whole night . thus our journey outward be not so pleasant , but our come thither , enter the coast and country , by narrow strait , perilous ice , and swift tide , our time of abode there in snow and storm , and our departure from thence the 31 . of August with dangerous bluster wind and tempest , which that night arise , be as uncomfortable : separate we so as we sail , that not any of we meet together , until the 28 . of September , which day we fall on the english coast , between Sylley and the land end , and pass the channel , until our arrival in the river of Thames . 242 the report of Thomas wiars passenger in the Emanuel , otherwise call the buss of Bridgewater , wherein James Leech be master , one of the ship in the last voyage of master Martin Frobisher 1578 . concern the discovery of a great island in their way homeward the 12 . of September . he buss of Bridgewater be leave in bear sound at Meta incognita , the second day of September behind the fleet in some distress , through much wind , ride near the lee shore , and force there to ride it out upon the hazard of her cable and anchor , which be all aground but two . the three of September be fair weather , and the wind north northwest she set sail , and depart thence , and fall with Frisland on the 8 . day of September at six of the clock at night , and then they set off from the southwest point of Frisland , the wind be at east , and east southeast , but that night the wind vear southerly , and shift oftentimes that night : but on the ten day in the morning , the wind at west northwest fair weather , they steer southeast , and by south , and continue that course until the 12 . day of September , when about 11 . a clock before noon , they descry a land , which be from they about five league , and the southermost part of it be southeast by east from they