. Cap . 7 . it be as likely that they come by the northwest , as it be unlikely that they shall come either by the southeast , Southwest , Northeast , or from any other part of Africa or America , and therefore this northwest passage have be already so many way prove , by disprove of the other , etc i shall the less need in this place , to use many word otherwise then to conclude in this sort , that they come only by the northwest from England , have these many reason to lead i thereunto . 1 first , the one half of the wind of the compass may bring they by the northwest , bear always between two sheat , with which kind of sail the Indian be only acquaint , not have any use of a bow line , or quarter wind , without the which no ship can possible come either by the southeast , Southwest or Northeast , have so many sundry cape to double , whereunto be require such change and shift of wind . true , both in 2 and it seem likely that they shall come by oblique northwest , because the coast whereon they be oho indentis drive , lay east from this our passage , and all wind ex diametro doe natural drive a ship to a opposite point from spirantibus , whence it blow , not be otherwise guide by art , which the Indian do utter want , and therefore it seem that they come direct through this our fret , which they may do with one wind . 3 for if they have come by the cape de buona speranda , then must they ( as aforesaid ) have fall upon the south part of America . 4 and if by the fret of Magellan , then upon the coast of Africa , Spain , Portugal , France , Ireland or England . 178 5 and if by the north - east , then upon the coast of Ceremissi , Tartarii , Lappia , island , terra de Labrador , etc and upon these coast ( as aforesaid ) they have never be find . so that by all likelihood they can never have come without shipwreck upon the coast of Germany , if they have first strike upon the coast of so many country , want both art and ship to make orderly discovery , and altogether ignorant both in the art of navigation , and also of the rock , flat , sand or haven of those part of the world , which in most of these place be plentiful ! . 6 and further it seem very likely , that the inhabitant of the most part of those country , by which they must have come any other way beside by the northwest , be for the most part anthropophagi , or man eater , will have devour they , slay they , or ( at the least wise ) keep they as wonder for the gaze . so that it plain appear that those Indian ( which as you have hear in sundry age be drive by tempest upon the shore of Germany ) come only through our northwest passage . 7 moreover , the passage be certain prove by a navigation that a Portugal make , who pass through this fret , give name to a promontory far within the same , call it after his own name , Promontorium Corterialis , near adjoin unto Polisacus fluvius . 8 also one Scolmus a Dane enter and pass a great part thereof . 9 also there be one Salvaterra , a gentleman of Victoria in Spain , that come by chance out of the west India into Ireland , anno 1568 . who affirm they northwest passage from we to Cataia , constant to be believe in America navigable . and further say in the presence of sir Henry Sidney ( than lord Deputie of Ireland ) in my hear , that a friar of Mexico , call Andrew Urdaneta , more than eight year before 179 his then come into Ireland , tell he there , that he come from mar deal Sur into Germany through this northwest passage , and show Salvaterra ( at that time be then with he in Mexico ) a sea card make by his own experience and travel in that voyage , wherein be plain set down and describe this northwest passage , agree in all point with Ortelius map . and further , this friar tell the king of Portugal ( as he return by that country homeward ) that there be ( of certainty ) such a passage northwest from England , and that he mean to publish the same : which do , the king most earnest desire he not in any wise to disclose or make the passage know to any [ three . 20 . ] nation : for that ( say the king ) if England have know -^ the kin ^ of kdge and experience thereof , it will great hinder Portugal , to both the king of Spain and i . this friar ( as Sal - Andro Urda - vaterra report ) be the great discoverer by sea , neta a friar , that have be in our age . also Salvaterra be touch then nerswade of this passage by the friar Urdaneta , and this northwest then common opinion of the Spaniard inhabit passage from America , offer most willing to accompany i in England to this discovery , which of like he will not have do Cataia . if he stand in doubt thereof . and now as these modern experience can be impugn , so , lest it may be object that these thing ( gather out of ancient writer , which write so many year past ) may serve little to prove this a objection , passage by the north of America , because both America and India be to they then utter unknown : to Aristotle lib . remove this doubt , let this suffice : that Aristotle ( who be 300 . year before Christ ) name mare indi - 5 cum . also Berosus ( who live 330 year before Christ ) have these word , Ganges in India . also in the first chapter of Hester be these word , in the day of Assuerus which rule from India to Aethiopia , which Assuerus live 580 year before Christ . also Quintus Curtius ( where he speak of the conquest of Alexander ) mention India . also , Arianus , Philostratus , 180 and Sidrach in his discourse of the war of the king of Bactria , and of Garaab , who have the most part of India under his government . all which assure we , that both India and Indian be know in those day . Theise thing consider , we may ( in my opinion ) not only assure our self of this passage by the northwest , but also that it be navigable both to come and go , as have be prove in part and in all , by the experience of diverse , as Sebastian Cabota , Corterialis , the three brethren above name , the Indian , and Urdaneta the friar of Mexico , etc and yet notwithstanding all this , there be some that have a better hope of this passage to Cataia by the north - east then by the west , who reason with my several answer ensue in the chapter follow . certain reason allege for the prove of a passage by the north - east , before the queen majesty , and certain lord of the counsel , by master Anthony Jenkinson , with my several answer then use to the same . Cap . 8 . because you may understand as well those thing allege against i , as what do serve for my purpose , i have here add the reason of master Anthony Jenkinson a worthy gentleman , and a great traveller , who conceive a better hope of the passage to Cataia from we , to be by the north - east , then by the northwest . he first say that he think not to the contrary , the north - but that there be a passage by the northwest , accord - west passage ing to my opinion : but assure he be , that there assent unt0 ' may be find a navigable passage by the north - east from England , to go to all the east part of the world , which he endeavour to prove three way . the first be that he hear a fisherman of Tartary the first say in hunt the morce , that he sail very far reas ° n . 181 visus nonnun - quam fallitur in suo objecto . the second reason or allegation . the answer or resolution . [ Iii . 21 . ] towards the southeast , find no end of the sea : whereby he hope a thorough passage to be that way . whereunto i answer , that the tartarian be a barbarous people , and utter ignorant in the art of navigation , not know the use of the sea card , compass or star , which he confess to be true : and therefore they can not ( say i ) certain know the southeast from the north - east , in a wide sea , and a place unknown from the sight of the land . or if he sail any thing near the shore , yet he ( be ignorant ) may be deceive by the double of many point and cape , and by the trending of the land , albeit he keep continual alongst the shore . and further , it may be that the poor fisherman through simplicity think that there be nothing that way but sea , because he see no land : which proof ( under correction ) give small assurance of a navigable sea by the north - east , to go round about the world . for that he judge by the eye only , see we in this our clear air do account twenty mile a ken at sea his second reason be , that there be a unicorn horn find upon the coast of Tartary , which can not come ( say he ) thither " by any other mean then with the tide , through some fret in the north - east of mare Glaciale , there be no unicorn in any part of Asia , save in India and Cataia : which reason ( in my simple judgement ) force as little . first , it be doubtful whether those barbarous tartarian do know a unicorn horn , yea , or no : and if it be one , yet it be not credible that the sea can have drive it so far , be of such nature that it will not swim . also the tide run too and fro , will have drive it as far back with the ebb , as it bring it forward with the flood . there be also a beast call asinus Indicus ( who horn most like it be ) which have but one horn like a unicorn in his forehead , whereof there be great 182 ... isib ' plenty in all the north part thereunto adjoin , as in Lappia , noruegia , Finmarke , etc as Jacobus Zieglerus write in his history of Scondia . and as Albertus say , there be a fish which have but one horn in his forehead like to a unicorn , and therefore it seem very doubtful both from whence it come , and whether it be a unicorn horn , yea , or no . his three and last reason be , that there come a con - than three and tinuall stream or current through mare Glaciale , of such swiftness ( as a colmax tell he ) that if you cast any ’ thing therein , it will present be carry out of sight towards the west . whereunto i answer , that there do the like from the answer or Maeotis Palus , by Pontus Euxinus , Sinus Bosphorus , resolution - and along the coast of Graecia , etc as it be affirm by Contarenus , and diverse other that have have experience of the same : and yet that sea lie not open to any main sea that way , but be maintain by freshet as by Tanais , Danubius , etc in like manner be this current in mare Glaciale increase and maintain by the Dwina , the river ob , etc now as i have here brief recite the reason allege , to prove a passage to Cataia by the north - east , with my several answer thereunto : so will i leave it to your judgement , to hope or despair of either at your pleasure . how that the passage by the northwest be more commodious for our traffic , than the other by the east , if there be any such . Cap . 9 first , by the north - east ( if your wind do not give you a marvelous speedy and lucky passage ) you be in danger ( be so near the pole ) to be benight almost the one half of the year , and what danger that be , to live so long comfortless , void of light , ( if the 183 cold kill you not ) each man of reason or understanding may judge . some doubt of 2 also Mangia , Quinzai , and the Moluccae be near unto we by the northwest , then by the north - east , more than two five part , which be almost by the half . 3 also we may have by the west a yearly return , it be at all time navigable , whereas you have but 4 . month in the whole year to go by the north - east : the passage be at such elevation as it be former express , for it can be any near than south . 4 furthermore , it can be finish without diverse wintring by the way , have no haven in any temperate climate to harbour in there : for it be as much as we can well sail from hence to saint Nicholas , in the trade of Moscovia , and return in the navigable season of the year , and from saint Nicholas to Cerimissi Tartari , which stand at 80 degree of the septentrionali latitude , it be at the least 400 league , which amount scarce to the three part of the way , to the end of your voyage by the north - east . 5 and yet after you have double this cape , if then there may be find a navigable sea