a discourse write by sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , to prove a passage by the northwest to Cathaia , and the east Indies . the table of the matter in every chapter of this discourse . Capitulo 1 . o prove by authority a passage to be on the north side of America , to go to Cataia , China , and to the east India . Capitulo 2 . to prove by reason a passage to be on the north side of America , to go to Cataia , Moluccas , etc Capitulo 3 . to prove by experience of sundry man travail the open of this northwest passage , whereby good hope remain of the rest . 158 to prove by circumstance , that the northwest passage have be sail throughout . Capitulo 5 . to prove that such Indian as have be drive upon the coast of Germany come not thither by the southeast , and Southwest , nor from any part of Africa or America . Capitulo 6 . to prove that the Indian aforenamed come not by the north - east , and that there be no thorough passage navigable that way . Capitulo 7 . to prove that these Indian come by the northwest , which induce a certainty of this passage by experience . Capitulo 8 . what several reason be allege before the queen majesty , and certain lord of her highness privy council , by m . Anth . Jenkinson a gentleman of great travail and experience , to prove this passage by the north - east , with my several answer then allege to the same . Capitulo 9 how that this passage by the northwest be more commodious for our traffic , than the other by the north - east , if there be any such . Capitulo 10 . what commodity will ensue , this passage be once discover . [ to prove 159 to prove by authority a passage to be on the northside of America , to go to Cathaia , and the east India . chapter 1 . when i give my self to the study of Geographic , after i have peruse and diligent scan the description of Europe , Asia and Africa , and confer they with the map and globe both antique and modern : i come in fine to the four part of the world , common call America , which by all description i find to be a hand environ round about with sea , have on the southside of it the frete or straight of Magellan , on the west side mar deal Sur , which sea run towards the north , separate it from the east part of Asia , where the dominion of the cathaians be : on the east part our west ocean , and on the north side the sea that sever it from Groneland , through which northern sea the passage lie , which i take now in hand to discover . Plato in Timaeo , and in the dialogue call Critias , discourse of a incomparable great hand then call Atlantis , be great than all Africa and Asia , which lie westward from the strait of Gibraltar , navigable round about : affirm also that the prince of Atlantis do aswell enjoy the governance of all Africa , and the most part of Europe , as of Atlantis it self . also to prove Plato opinion of this hand , and the inhabit of it in ancient time by they of Europe , to be of the more credit ; Marinseus Siculus in his chronicle of Spain , report that there have be find by the Spaniard in the gold mine of America , certain piece of money engrave with the image of Augustus Caesar : which piece be send to the pope for a testimony of the matter , by John Rufus archbishop of Consentinum . Moreover , this be not only think of Plato , but by Marsilius Ficinus , and excellent florentine philosopher , 160 Crantor the grecian , and Proclus , and Philo the famous pnclut page . Jew ( as appear in his book de mundo , and in the 24 - commentary upon Plato ) to be overflow and swallow up with water , by reason of a mighty earthquake , and stream down of the heavenly fludgate . the like whereof happen unto some part of Italy , when by the forciblenes of the sea , call Superum , it cut off Sicilia from the continent of Calabria , as appear in Justine , in the begin of his four book . also Justine Lib . there chance the like in Zetland a part of Flanders . and also the city of Pyrrha and Antissa , about Pliny . Meotis palus : and also the city Burys , in the corynthian bosom , common call Sinus Corinthiacus , have be swallow up with the sea , and be not at this day to be discern : by which accident America grow to be unknown of long time , unto we of the late age , and be late discover again , by Americus Vespucius , in the year of our lord 1497 . which some say to have be first discover by Christophorus Columbus a genuois , anno 1492 . the same calamity happen unto this isle of Atlantis 600 . and odd year before Plato his time , which some of the people of the southeast part of the world accounted as 9000 . year : for the manner then be to reckon the moon her period of the zodiak for a year , which be our usual month , depend a Luminari minori . so that in these our day there can no other main or island be find or judge to be parcel of this Atlantis , than those western island , which bear now the name of America : countervail thereby the name of Atlantis , in the knowledge of our age . then , if when no part of the say Atlantis be oppress by water , and earthquake , the coast round about the same be navigable : a far great hope now remain of the same by the northwest , see the most part of it be ( since that time ) swallow up with a minore ad water , which can not utter take away the old deep mai ^- and channel , but rather , be a occasion of the enlarge Vii 161 l of the old , and also a enforce of a great many new : why then shall we now doubt of our northwest passage and navigation from England to India ? etc see that Atlantis now call America , be ever know to be a island , and in those day navigable round about , which by access of more water can not be diminish . also Aristotle in his book de mundo , and the learned germane Simon Gryneus in his annotation upon the same , say that the whole earth ( mean thereby , as manifest do appear , Asia , Africa , and Europe , be all the country then know ) be but one island , compass about with the reach of the sea Atlantine : which likewise prove America to be a island , and in no part adjoin to Asia , or the rest . Strabo lib . 15 . also many ancient writer , as Strabo and other , call both the ocean sea , ( which lie east of India ) Atlanticum pelagus , and that sea also on the west coast of Spain and Africa , mare Atlanticum : the distance between the two coast be almost half the compass of the earth . so that it be incredible , as by Plato appear manifest , that the east Indian sea have the name Atlanticum pelagus of the mountain Atlas in Africa , or yet the sea adjoin to Africa , have the name Oceanus Atlanticus Valerius of the same mountain : but that those sea and the anselmus in mountain Atlas be so call of this great island rum Orin Atlantis , and that the one and the other have their name dpium . folio 6 . for a memorial of the mighty prince Atlas , sometime king Gen . 9 10 . thereof , who be Japhet young son to Noah , in who time the whole earth be divide between the three brethren , Sem , cam , and Japhet . wherefore i be of opinion that America by the northwest will be find favourable to this our enterprise , and be the rather embolden to believe the same , for that i find it not only confirm by Plato , Aristotle , and other ancient philosopher : but also by all the best [ two modern geographer , as gemma Frisius , Munsterus , Appianus , Hunterus , Gastaldus , Guyccardinus , Michael 162 Tramasinus , Franciscus Demongenitus , Bernardus Puteanus , Andreas Vavasor , Tramontanus , Petrus martyr , and also Ortelius , who do coast out in his general map set out anno 1569 , all the country and cape , on the northwest side of America , from Hochelaga to cape de Paramantia : describe likewise the sea coast of Cataia and Gronland , towards any part of America , make both Gronland and America , island disjoin by a great sea , from any part of Asia . all which learned man and painful traveller have affirm with one consent and voice , that America be a island : and that there lie a great sea between it , Cataia , and Grondland , by the which any man of our country , that will give the attempt , may with small danger pass to Cataia , the Moluccas , India , and all other place in the east , in much short time , then either the Spaniard , or Portugal do , or may do , from the near part of any of their country within Europe . what move these learned man to affirm thus much , wh i know not , or to what end so many and sundry traveller of both age have allow the same : but i reverent conjecture that they will never have so constant opinion of affirm , or notify their opinion therein to the world , worthy man . if they have not have great good cause , and many probable reason , to have lead they thereunto . now lest you shall make small account of ancient writer or of their experience which travel long before our time , reckon their authority among fable of no importance : i have for the better assurance of those proof , set down some part of a discourse , write in the saxon tongue , and translate into english by m . Nowell servant to sir William Cecil , lord Burleigh , and lord high treasurer of England , wherein there be describe a navigation , which one ochther make , in the time of a navigation king Alfred , king of westsaxe anno 871 . the word of ofoneqchther which discourse be these : he sail right north , have always the desert land on the starborde , and on the larboard the main sea , continue his course , until 163 a perfect description ofour Moscovia voyage - by sir Hugh Willouglibie knight , chancellor and borough . the english voyage he perceive that the coast bow direct towards the east , or else the sea open into the land he can not tell how far , where he be compel to stay until he have a western wind , or somewhat upon the north , and sail thence direct east alongst the coast , so far as he be able in four day , where he be again enforce to tarry until he have a north wind , because the coast there bow direct towards the south , or at least open he know not how far into the land , so that he sail thence along the coast continual full south , so far as he can travel in the space of five day , where he discover a mighty river , which open far into the land , and in the entry of this river he turn back again . whereby it appear that he go the very same way , that we now do yearly trade by saint Nicholas into mos - covia , which way no man in our age know for certainty to be by sea , until it be since discover by our english man , in the time of king Edward the sixth ; but think before that time that Groneland have join to Normoria , Byarmia , etc and therefore be account a new discovery , be nothing so indeed , as by this discourse of ochther it appear . nevertheless if any man shall have take this voyage in hand by the encouragement of this only author , he shall have be think but simple : consider that this navigation be write so many year past , in so barbarous a tongue by one only obscure author , and yet we in these our day find by our own experience his former report to be true . how much more than ought we to believe this passage to Cataia to be , be verify by the opinion of all the best , both antique , and modern geographer , and plain set out in the best and most allow map , Charts , globe , cosmographical table and discourse of this our age , and by the rest not deny , but left as a matter doubtful . 164 to prove by reason , a passage to be on the northside of America , to go to Cataia , etc Chap . 3 . first , all sea be maintain by the abundance of experiment water , so that the near the end any river , bay or haven be , the shallower it wax , ( although by some er ' accidentali bar , it be sometime find otherwise ) but the far you sail west from island towards the place , where this fret be think to be , the more deep be the sea : which give we good hope of continuance of the same sea with mar deal Sur , by some fret that lie between America , Groneland and Cataia . 2 also if that America be not a island , but a part of you continent adjoin to Asia , either the people [ three . 14 . ] which inhabit Mangia , Anian , and quinzay , etc be borderer upon it , will before this time have make some road into it , hope to have find some like commodity to their own . 3 or else the scythian and tartarian ( which often time heretofore have seek far and