the second voyage of master Martin Frobisher , make to the west and northwest region , in the year 1577 . with a description of the country , and people : write by master dionise settle . n Whitsunday , be the six and twenty of May , in the year of our lord God 1577 . captain Frobisher depart from black wall , with one of the queen majesty ship , call the aid , of nine score ton , or thereabouts : and two other little bark like wise , the one call the Gabriel , whereof master Fenton , a gentleman of my lord of warwikes , be captain : 211 theorcadians upon small occasion f . ee their home . the english voyage and the other , the Michael , whereof master York , a gentleman of my lord admiral be captain , accompany with seven score gentleman , soldier , and sailor , well furnish with victual , and other provision necessary for one half year , on this his second voyage , for the further discover of the passage to Cathay , and other country , thereunto adjacent , by west and northwest navigation : which passage or way , be suppose to be on the north and northwest part of America : and the say America to be a island environ with the sea , where through our merchant may have course and recourse with their merchandise , from these our northernmost part of Europe , to those orientali coast of Asia , in much short time , and with great benefit than any other , to their no little commodity and profit that do or shall frequent the same . Oure say captain and general of this present voyage and company have the year before , with two little pinnace , to his great danger , and no small commendation , give a worthy attempt towards the performance thereof , be also press , when occasion shall be minister ( to the benefit of his prince , and native country ) to adventure himself further therein . as for this second voyage , it seem sufficient , that he have better explore and search the commodity of those people and country , which in his first voyage the year before he have find out . upon which consideration , the day and year before express , we depart from black wall to Harwich , where make a accomplishment of thing necessary , the last of may we hoist up sail , and with a merry wind the 7 . of June we arrive at the island call Orcades , or vulgar Orkney , be in number 30 . subject and adjacent to Scotland , where we make provision of fresh water ; in the do whereof our general license the gentleman and soldier for their recreation , to go on shore . at our land , the people flee from their poor cottage , with shriek and alarm , to warn their neighbour of enemy , but by gentle persuasion we reclaim 212 they to their house . it seem they be often fright with pirate , or some other enemy , that move they to such sudden fear . their house be very simple build with pibble stone , without any chimney , the fire be make in the midst thereof . the good man , wife , child , and other of their family eat and sleep on the one side of the house , and the cattle on the other , very beastly and rude , in respect of civility . they be destitute of wood , their fire be turf , and cowshard . no wood in they have corn , big , and oat , with which they pay their king rend , to the maintenance of his house . they take great quantity of fish , which they dry in the wind and sun . they dress their meat very filthy , and eat it without salt . their apparel be after the rude sort of Scotland . their money be all base . their church and religion be reform accord to the Scot . the fisher man of England can better declare the disposition fisher man oj of those people than i : wherefore i remit other their England have usage to their report , as yearly repair thither , in ta Orkney their course to and from island for fish . we depart herehence the 8 . of June , and follow [ he . 33 . ] our course between west and northwest , until the 4 . June and of July : all which time we have no night , but that easy , thoseld ^ st and without any impediment we have when we be so and north - disposed , the fruition of our book , and other pleasure - west region . to pass away the time : a thing of no small moment , to such as wander in unknown sea , and long navigation , especial , when both the wind and rage surge do pass their common and wont course . this benefit endure in those part not 6 . week , while the sun be near the Tropike of Cancer : but where the pole be raise to 70 . or 80 . degree , it continue much long . all along these sea , after we be six day sail great abun - from Orkney , we meet dote in the sea , great fir tree , dance of Fin e which as we judge , be with the fury of great flood fo ^ ngin root up , and so drive into the sea . island have ’ almost no other wood nor fuel , but such as they take up upon their coast . it seem , that these tree be 213 inquire drive from some part of the new find land , with the current that set from the west to the east . can ent . the we come within the make of fris - land . from this shore io . or 12 . league , we meet great island of ice , of half a mile , some more , some less in compass , show above the sea , 30 . or 40 . fathom , and as we suppose fast on ground , where with our lead we can scarce sound the bottom for depth . here , in place of odoriferous and fragrant smell of sweet gum , and pleasant note of musical bird , which other country in more temperate zone do yield , we tee , snow , and taste the most boisterous boreal blast mix with snow hrite ui June j hail , in the month of June and July , nothing inferior to our untemperate winter : a sudden alteration , and especial in a place or parallel , where the pole be not elevate above 61 . degree : at which height other country moor to the north , yea unto 70 . degree , show themselves more temperate than this do . all along this coast ice lie , as a continual bulwark , and so defend the country , that those that will land there , incur great danger . Oure general 3 . day together attempt with the ship boat to have go on shore , which for that without great danger he can not accomplish , he defer it until a more convenient time . all along the coast lie very high mountain cover with snow , except in such place , where through the steepness of the mountain of force it must needs fall . four day coast along this land , we find no sign of habitation . little bird , which we judge to have lose Friseland sub - the shore , by reason of thick fog which that country ject tofigge . js much subject unto , come fly into our ship , which cause we to suppose , that the country be both more tolerable , and also habitable within , than the outward shore make show or signification . from hence we depart the eight of July : and the 16 . of the same , we come with the make of land , which land our general the year before have name the queen foreland , be a island as we judge , lie 214 near the suppose continent with America : and on the other side , opposite to the same , one other island call Halles isle , after the name of the master of the ship , near adjacent to the firm land , suppose continent with Asia . between the which two island there be a large entrance or strait , call Frobishers straight , after the name of our general , the first finder thereof . This strni say straight be suppose to have passage into the sea of Sur , which i leave unknown as yet . it seem that either here , or not far hence , the sea shall have more large entrance , then in other part within the freeze or untemperate zone : and that some contrary tide , either from the east or west , with main force cast out that great quantity of ice , which come float from this coast , even unto Friseland , cause that country to seem more untemperate than other , much more northerly than the same . i can judge that any temperature under the pole , the time of the sun northern declination be half a year together , and one whole day , ( consider that the sun elevation surmount not 23 . degree and 30 . minute ) can have power to dissolve such monstrous and huge ice , comparable to great mountain , except by l ^ tsds of ice . some other force , as by swift current and tide , with t0 the help of the say day of half a year . mounatnes . before we come within the make of these land we taste cold storm , in so much that it seem we have change summer with winter , if the length of the day have not remove we from that opinion . at our first come , the strait seem to be shut up with a long mure of ice , which give no little cause of discomfort unto we all : but our general , ( to who captain fn - diligence imminent danger , and difficult attempt seem ht s ^ e ' nothing , in respect of his willing mind , for the come - diligence fir moditie of his prince and country , ) with two little the benefit of pinnace prepare of purpose , pass twice through his prince and they to the east shore , and the island thereunto countrey - adjacent : and the ship , with the two bark lie off and 215 [ by . 34 ] the order of the people appear on shore . fierce and bold people . one take . on something further into the sea , from the danger of the ice . while he be search the country near the shore , some of the people of the country show themselves leap and dance , with strange shriek and cry , which give no little admiration to our man . Oure general desirous to allure they unto he by fair mean , cause knife , and other thing to be proffer unto they , which they will not take at our hand : but be lay on the ground , and the party go away , they come and ' take up , leave some thing of they to countervail the same . at the length two of they leave their weapon , come down to our general and master , who do the like to they , command the company to stay , and go unto they : who after certain dumb sign , and mute congratulation , begin to lay hand upon they , but they deliverly escape , and run to their bow and arrow , and come fierce upon they , ( not respect the rest of our company which be ready for their defence ) but with their arrow hurt diverse of they : we take the one , and the other escape . while our general be busy in search the country , and those island adjacent on the eastshoare , the ship and bark have great care , not to put far into the sea from he , for that he have small store of victual , be force to abide in a cruel tempest , chance in the night , among and in the thick of the ice , which be so monstrous , that even the least of a thousand have be of force sufficient , to have shiver our ship and bark into small portion , if God ( who in all necessity , have care upon the infirmity of man ) have not provide for this our extremity a sufficient remedic through the light of the night , whereby we may well discern to flee from such imminent danger , which we avoid with 14 . bourd in one watch the space of 4 hour . if we have not incur this danger among these monstrous island of ice , we shall have lose our 216 general and master , and the most of our best sailor , which be on the shore destitute of victual : but by the valour of our master gunner , master Jackman , and hard Cox , Andrew Dier , the master mate , man expert both in easy gunnavigation , and other good quality , we be all content master jack - to incur the danger aforerehearse , before we will man . with our own safety , run into the sea , to the destrue - andrewdier . cion of our say general , and his company . the day follow , be the 19 of Julie , our captain return to the ship , with report of suppose riches , which show it self in the bowel of those barren mountain , wherewith we be all satisfy . within foufe day after we have be at the entrance of the strait , then northwest and west wind disperse the ice into the sea , and make we a large entrance into the strait , so that without any impediment , on the 19 of Julie we enter they , and the 20 . thereof , our general and master with great diligence , seek out and sound the west shore , and find out a fair harbour for the ship and bark to ride in , and name it after our master mate , jackmans sound , and bring the ship , jackmans bark , and all their company to safe anchor , except one man , which die by God visitation . at our first arrival , after the ship ride at anchor , our general , with such company as can well be spare from the ship , in march order enter the land , have speciali care by exhortation , that at our entrance thereinto , we shall all with one voice , kneel upon our knee , chief thank God for our safe arrival : second beseech he , that it will please his divine majesty , long to continue our queen , for who he , and all the rest of our company in this order take possession of the possession country : and three , that by our Christian study and taken - endevour , those barbarous people train up in paganism , and infidelity , may be reduce to the knowledge of true religion , and to the hope of salvation in Christ our redeemer . with other word very apt to signify his willing mind , and affection towards his prince and 217