their usual trade with we , for that the far southeasterling do know this part of Europe by no other name then Portugal , not great acquaint as yet with the other nation thereof . their voyage be very well understand of all man , and the southeasterne way round about 1 by the Africa by the cape of good hope more speak of , better o ^ ttst . know and travel , then that it may seem needful to discourse thereof any further . the second way lie southwest , between the west 2 A ? tJie India or south America , and the south continent , through authwest - that narrow strait where Magellan first of all man that ever we do read of , pass these latter year , leave thereunto therefore his name . the way no doubt the Spaniard will commodious take , for that it lie near unto their dominion there , can the eastern current and levant wind as easy suffer they to return , be a er ' as speedy therewith they may be carry thither : for it the which difficulty , or rather impossibility of strive against the force both of wind and stream , this passage be little or nothing use , although it be very well know . 191 3 by the the three way by the north - east , beyond all Europe Northeast . anj Asia , that worthy and renown knight sir Hugh Willoughbie seek to his peril , enforce there to end his life for cold , congeal and freeze to death . and true this way consist rather in the imagination of geographer , then allowable either in reason , or approve by experience , as well it may appear by the dangerous Ortel . tab . trending of the scythish cape set by Ortelius under • A ™ * the 80 degree north , by the unlikely sail in that northern sea always clad with ice and snow , or at the least continual pester therewith , if happy it be at any time dissolve : beside bay and shelf , the water wax moor shallow towards the east , that we say nothing of the foul mist and dark fog in the cold clime , of the little power of the sun to clear the air , of the uncomfortable night , so near the pole , five month long . 4 by the a four way to go unto these aforesaid happy island Northeast . moluccas sir Humphrey Gilbert a learned and valiant knight discourse of at large in his new passage to Cathayo . the enterprise of it self be virtuous , the fact must doubtless deserve high praise , and whensoever it shall be finish , the fruit thereof can be small : where virtue be guide , there be fame a follower , and fortune a companion . but the way be dangerous , the passage doubtful , the voyage not thorough know , and therefore gainsay by many , after this manner . Ob . 1 . first , who can assure we of any passage rather by the [ three . 25 . ] northwest , then by the north - east ? do not both way lie in equal distance from the north pole ? stand not the north cape of either continent under like elevation ? be not the ocean sea beyond America far distant from our meridian by 30 . or 40 . degree west , than the extreme point of Cathayo eastward , if Ortelius InTheatro . general ! card of the world be true ? in the north - east that noble knight sir Hugh Willoughbie perish for cold : and can you then promise a passenger any better hap by the northwest ? who have go for trial sake at any time this way out of Europe to Cathayo ? 192 if you seek the advice herein of such as make profession in cosmography , Ptolome the father of Geographic , and his elder child , will answer by their map with a negative , conclude most of the sea within the land , and make a end of the world northward , near the 63 . degree . the same opinion , when learn chief flourish , be receive in the roman time , as by their poet write it may appear : tibi serviat ultima Thyle , say Virgil , be of opinion , that island be the extreme part of the world habitable towards the north . Joseph Moletius a italian , and Mercator a germane , for knowledge man able to be compare with the best geographer of our time , the one in his half sphere of the whole world , the other in some of his great globe , have continue the west Indies land , even to the north pole , and consequent , cut off all passage by sea that way . the same doctor , Mercator in other of his globe and map , Moletius in his sea card , nevertheless doubt of so great continuance of the former continent , have open a gulf betwixt the west Indies and the extreme northern land : but such a one , that either be not to be travel for the cause in the first objection allege , or clean shut up from we in Europe by Greenland : the south end whereof Moletius make firm land with America , the north part continent with Lappeland and Norway . third , the great favourer of this voyage can not deny , but that if any such passage be , it lie subject unto ice and snow for the most part of the year , whereas it stand in the edge of the frosty zone . before the sun have warm the air , and dissolve the ice , each one well know that there can be no sail : the ice once break through the continual abode the sun make a certain season in those part , how shall it be possible for so weak a vessel as a ship be , to hold out amid whole island , as it be of ice continual beat on each side , and at the mouth of seven 193 n A . D . £ 576 . Ob . 2 . Ob . 3 . that gulf , issue down furious from the north , and safe to pass , when whole mountain of ice and snow shall be tumble down upon she ? Ob . 4 . well , grant the west Indies not to continue continent unto the pole , grant there be a passage between these two land , let the gulf lie near we then common in card we find it set , namely , between the 61 . and 64 . degree north , as gemma Frisius in his map and globe imagine it , and so leave by our countryman Sebastian Cabot in his table which the earl of Bedford have at cheinies : let the way be void of all difficulty , yet do it not follow that we have free passage to Cathayo . for example sake : you may trend all Norway , Finmarke , and Lappeland , and then bow southward to saint Nicholas in Moscovia : you may likewise in the mediterranean sea fetch Constantinople , and the mouth of Tanais : yet be there no passage by sea through Moscovia into Pont euxine , now call mare Maggiore . again , in the aforesaid mediterranean sea , we sail to Alexandria in Egypt , the barbarian bring their pearl and spice from the molucca up the red sea or arabian gulf to sue , scarce three day journey from the aforesaid haven : yet have we no way by sea from Alexandria to the molucca , for that Isthmos or little straight of land between the two sea . in like manner although the northern passage be free at 61 degree of latitude , and the west ocean beyond America , usual call mar deal Zur , know to be open at 40 . degree elevation from the island Japan , yea three hundred league northerly above Japan : yet may there be land to hinder the thorough passage that way by sea , as in the example aforesaid it fall out , Asia and America there be join together in one continent . ne can this opinion seem altogether frivolous unto any one that diligent peruse our cosmographer do . Josephus Moletius be of that mind , not only in his plain hemisphere of the world , but also in his sea card . the french geographer in like manner be of 194 then same opinion , as by their map cut out in form of a hart you may perceive : as though the west Indies be part of Asia . which sentence well agree with that old conclusion in the school : quicquid praeter africam and Europam est , Asia est , whatsoever land do neither appertain unto Africa nor to Europe , be part of Asia . Furthermore it be to small purpose to make so long , Ob . 5 . so painful , so doubtful a voyage by such a new find way , if in Cathayo you shall neither be suffer to land for silk and silver , nor able to fetch the Molucca spice and pearl for piracy in those sea . of a law deny all alien to enter into China , and forbid all the inhabiter under a great penalty to let in any stranger into those country , shall you read in [ three . 26 . ] the report of Galeotto Perera there imprison with other Portugal : as also in the japonish letter , how for that cause the worthy traveller Xavierus bargain with a barbarian merchant for a great sum of pepper to be bring into Canton , a port in China . the great and dangerous piracy use in those sea no man can be ignorant of , that list to read the japonish and East Indian history . final , all this great labour will be lose , all these Ob . 6 . charge spend in vain , if in the end our traveller may not be able to return again , and bring safe home into their own native country that wealth and riches , which they in foreign region with adventure of good , and danger of their life have seek for . by the north - east there be no way , the southeast passage the Portugal do hold as the lord of those sea . at you southwest magellans experience have partly teach we , and partly we be persuade by reason , how the eastern current strike so furious on that straight , and fall with such force into that narrow gulf , that hardly any ship can return that way into our west ocean out of Mar deal Zur . the which if it be true , as true it be , than we may say that the aforesaid eastern current or levant course of water continual * 95 follow after the heavenly motion , lodse not altogether his force , but be double rather by a other current from out the north - east , in the passage between America and the north land , whither it be of necessity carry : have none other way to maintain it self in circular motion , and consequent the force and fury thereof to be no less in the strait of Anian , where it strike south into mar deal Zur , beyond America ( if any such straight of sea there be ) than in Magellans fret , both straight be of like breadth : as in Belognine zalterius table of new France , and in don Diego Hermano de Toledo his card for navigation in that region we do find precise set down . nevertheless to approve that there lie a way to Cathayo at the northwest from out of Europe , we have experience , namely of three brethren that go that journey , as gemma Frisius record , and leave a name unto that strait , whereby now it be call Fretum trium fratrum . we do read again of a Portugal that pass this straight , of who master Frobisher speak , that be imprison therefore many year in Lisbon , to verify the old spanish proverb , i suffer for do well . likewise Andrew Urdaneta a friar of Mexico come out of Mar deal Zur this way into Germany : he card ( for he be a great discoverer ) make by his own experience and travel in that voyage , have be see by gentleman of good credit . Cic . 1 . de now if the observation and remembrance of thing he breed experience , and of experience proceed art , ea ? ' and the certain knowledge we have in all faculty , as the best philosopher that ever be do affirm : true the voyage of these aforesaid traveller that have go out of Europe into mar deal Zur , and return thence at the northwest , do most evident conclude that way to be navigable , and that passage free . so much the Lib . i Geog . moor we be so to think , for that the first principle Cap . 2 . and chief ground in all geographic , as Ptolome say , 196 be the history of travel , that be , report make by traveller skilful in geometric and astronomic , of all such thing in their journey as to Geographic do belong . it only then remain , that we now answer to those argument that seem to make against this former conclusion . the first objection be of no force , that general table sol i . of the world set forth by Ortelius or Mercator , for it great skill not , be unskilful draw for that point : as manifest it may appear unto any one that confer the same with gemma Frisius his universali map , with his round quarter card , with his globe , with Sebastian Cabota his table , and Ortelius his general map alone , worthy prefer in this case before all Mercator and Ortelius other do : for that Cabota be not only a skilful sea man , but a long traveller , and such a one as enter personal that straight , send by king Henry the seven to make this aforesaid discovery , as in his own discourse of navigation you may read in his card draw with his own hand , that the mouth of the north wester ne straight lie near the 318 . Meridian , between 61 . and 64 . degree in the elevation , continue the same breed that about 10 . degree west , where it open southerly moor and more , until it come under