the three and last voyage unto Meta incognita , make by m . Martin Frobisher , in the year 1578 . write by Thomas Ellis . these be to let you know , that upon the 25 . of may , the Thomas Allen be vice - admiral who captain be m . York , m . Gibbes master , Christopher hall pilot , accompany with the rear - admiral name the hopewel , who captain be m . Henry carewe , the m . Andrew Dier , and certain other ship come to Gravesend , where we anchor and abide the come of certain of our fleet which be not yet come . the 27 . of the same month our fleet be now come together , and all thing press in a readiness , the wind favour , and tide serve , we be of sail in number eight , weigh anchor and hoist our sail towards Harwich to meet with our admiral , and the residue which then and there abide our arrival : where we safe arrive the 28 . thereof , find there our admiral , who we with the discharge of certain piece salute , accord to order and duty , and be welcome with the like courtesy : which be finish we land : where our general continue mustering his soldier and miner , and set thing in order appertain to the voyage until the last of the say month of May , which day we hoist our sail , and commit our self to the conduct of almighty God , we set forward towards the west country in such lucky wise and good success , that by the five of June we pass the dursy , be the utmost part of Ireland to the westward . and here it be not much amiss nor far from our purpose , if i shall a little discourse and speak of our adventure and chance by the way , as our land at Plymouth , as also the meeting certain poor man , which be rob and spoil of all that they have by 231 master fork . Christopher hall . the hopewel . captain Carew . Andrew Dier . [ Iii . + o . i Harwich . dursy . Ireland . Plymouth . pirate and rover : among who be a man of Briitote . Bristol , on who our general use his liberality , and send he away with letter into England . but because such thing be impertinent to the matter , i will return ( without any more mention of the same ) to that from the which i have digress and swerve , i mean our ship now sail on the surge sea , sometime pass at pleasure with a wish eastern wind , sometime hinder of our course again by the western blast , until the 20 . day of the foresay month of June , Frizeland . on which day in the morning we fall with Frizeland , which be a very hie and crag land and be almost clean cover with snow , so that we may see nought but craggy rock and the top of high and huge hill , sometime ( and for the most part ) all cover with foggy mist . there might we also perceive the great isle of ice lie on the sea , like mountain , some small , some big , of sundry kind of shape , and such a number of they , that we can not come near the shore for they . thus sail alongst the coast , at the last we see a place somewhat void of ice , where our general ( accompany with certain other ) go a shore , where they see certain tent make of beast skin , and boat much the like unto they of Meta incognita . the tent be furnish with flesh , fish , skin , and other trifle : among the which be find a box of nail : whereby we do conjecture , that they have either artificer among they , or else a traffic with some other nation . the man run away , so that we can have no conference or communication with they . Oure general ( because he will have they no more to flee , but rather encourage the courtesy of to stay through his courteous deal ) give commaunde - our general . ment that his man shall take nothing away with they , save only a couple of white dog , for the which he leave pin , point , knife , and other trifle thing , and depart without take or hurt any thing , and so come aboard , and hoist sail , and pass forward . 232 but be scarce out of the sight thereof , there fall such a fog and hideous mist that we can not see one another : whereupon we strike our drum , and sound our trumpet , to the end we may keep together : and so continue all that day and night till the next day that the mist break up : so that we may easy perceive all the ship thus sail together all that day , until the next day , be the 22 . of the same : on which day we see a infinite number of ice , from the which we cast about to shun the danger thereof . but one of our small bark name the Michael , who master captain be master Kinderslie , the master Bartholomew bull , lose our company , insomuch that we can not ° mew ■ obtain the sight of her many day after , of who 1 mean to speak further anon when occasion shall be minister , and opportunity serve . thus we continue in our course until ! the second of July , on which day we fall with the queen foreland , where we see so much ice , that we think it unpossible to get into the strait : yet at the last we give the adventure and enter the ice . be among it we see the Michael , of who i Michael . speak before , accompany with the Judith , who captain be Master Fenton , the master Charles Jackman , Charles bear into the foresay ice , far distant from we , who Jackman . in a storm that fall that present night , ( whereof i will at large God willing , discourse hereafter ) be sever from we , and be in , wander up and down the strait among the ice many day in great peril , till at the last , ( by the providence of God ) they come safe to harbour in their wish port . in the countess countess of Warwick sound , the 20 . of July aforesaid , ten day before any of the other ship : who go on ' shore find where the people of the country have be , and have hide their provision in great heap of stone be both of flesh and fish , which they have kill ; whereof we also find great store in other place after [ three . 41 . j our arrival . they find also diverse engine , as bow , 233 narrow shift fir safety . the english voyage sling , and dart . they find likewise certain piece of the pinnace which our general leave there the year before , which pinnace he have sink , mind to have it again the next year . now see i have entreat so much of the Judith and the Michael : i will return to the rest of the other ship , and will speak a little of the storm which fall , with the mishap that we have , the night that we put into the ice : whereof i make mention before . at the first enter into the ice in the mouth of the strait , our passage be very narrow , and difficult but be once get in , we have a fair open place without any ice for the most part , be a league in compass , the ice be round about we and enclose we , as it be , within the pale of a park . in which place , ( because it be almost night ) we mind to take in our sail , and lie a hull all that night . but the storm so increase , and the wave begin to mount aloft , which bring the ice so near we , and come on so fast upon we , that we be fain to bear in and out , where we may espy a open place . thus the ice come on we so fast , we be in great danger , look every hour for death . and thus pass we on in that great danger , see both our self and the rest of our ship so trouble and toss among the ice , that it will make the strong heart to relent . at the last the bark Dionyse be but a weak ship , and bruise afore among the ice , be so leak that no long she can tarry above the water , sink without save any of the good which be within she : which sight so abash the whole fleet , that we think very we shall have taste of the same sauce . but nevertheless we see they in such danger , man our boat and save all the man in such wise , that not one perish : God be thank . the storm still increase and the ice enclose we , so that we be fain to take down top and top mast : for the ice have so environ we , that we can see neither 234 i578 - land nor sea , as far as we can ken : so that we be fain to cut our cable to hang over board for fender , somewhat to ease the ship side from the great and driry stroke of the ice : some with capstan bar , some fend off with oar , some with plank of two inche thick , which be break immediate with the force of the ice , some go out upon the ice to bear it off with their shoulder from the ship . but the rigorousness of the tempest be such , and the force of the ice so great , that not only they burst and spoil the foresay provision , but likewise so raze the side of the ship , that it be pitiful to behold , and cause the heart of many to faint . thus we continue all that dismal and lamentable night plunge in this perplexity , look for instant death : but our god ( who never leave they destitute godsprwi - which faithful call upon he , although he often punish dence ' for amendment sake ) in the morning cause the wind to cease , and the fog which all that night lie on the face of the water to clear : so that we may perceive about a mile from we , a certain place clear from any ice , to the which with a easy breath of wind which our God send we , we bend our self . and furthermore , he provide better for we than we deserve or hope for : for when we be in the foresay clear place , he send we a fresh gale at west or at west Southwest , which set we clear without all the ice . and further he add more : for he send we so pleasant a day as the like we have not of a long time before , as after punishment consolation . thus we joyful wight be at liberty , take in all our sail and lay a hull , praise God for our deliverance , and stay to gather together our fleet : which once be do , we see that none of they have any great hurt , neither any of they want , save only they of who i speak before and the ship which be lose , then at the last we hoist our sail , and lay bult off and on , till such time as it will please God to take away the ice that we may get into the strait . 235 1578 . a mountain of ice appear in sundry figure . and as we thus lay off and on we come by a marvellous huge mountain of ice , which surpass all the rest that ever we see : for we judge it to be near fourscore fathom above water , and we think it to be a ground for any thing that we can perceive , be there nine score fathom deep , and of compass about half a mile . a fog of long continuance . also the five of July there fall a hideous fog and mist , that continue till the nineteenth of the same : so that one ship can not see another . therefore we be fain to bear a small sail and to observe the time : a current to the ' northwest . but there run such a current of a tide , that it set we to the northwest of the queen foreland the backside of all the strait : where ( through the contagious fog have no sight either of sun or star ) we scarce know where we be . in this fog the ten of July we lose the company of the vice - admiral , the anne Francis , the buss of Bridgewater , and the Francis of Foy . the 16 . day one of our small bark name they the Gabriel . Gabriel be send by our general to bear in with the land to descry it , where be on land , they meet with [ he . 42 . ] the people offer to traffic with we . the people of the country , which seem very humane and civil , and offer to traffic with our man , proffer they fowl and skin for knife , and other trifle : who courtesy cause we to think , that they have small conversation with other of the strait . than we bear back again to go with the queen foreland : and the eighteenth day we come by two island whereon we go on shore , and find where the people have be : but we see none of they . this day we be again in the ice , and like to be in as great peril as we be at the first . for through the darkness and obscurity of the foggy mist , we be almost run on rock and island before we see they : but God ( even miraculous ) provide for we , open the fog that we may see clear , both where and in what danger we present be , and also the way to escape : or else without fade we have ruinous run upon the rock . 236 when we know perfect our instant case , we cast about to get again on seaboard , which ( God be thank ) by night we obtain and praise God . the clear continue scarce a hour , but the fog fall again as thick as ever it be . then the rearadmiral and the