country : whereby all suspicion of a undutifiill subject , may credible be judge to be utter exempt from his mind . all the rest of the gentleman and other deserve fee needful to be regard of seafaring man . [ he . 35 . - ] stone glister with sparkle like gold . worthy herein , their due praise and commendation . Theise thing in this order accomplish , our general command all the company to be obedient in thing needful for our own safeguard , to master Fenton , master York , and master beast his lieutenant , while he be occupy in other necessary affair , concern our come thither . after this order we march through the country , with ensign display , so far as be think needful , and now and then heap up stone on high mountain , and other place in token of possession , as likewise to signify unto such as hereafter may chance to arrive there , that possession be take in the behalf of some other prince , by those who first find out the country . whoso make navigation to those country , have not only extreme wind , and furious sea to encounter withal , but also many monstrous and great island of ice : a thing both rare , wonderful , and great to be regard . we be force sundry time , while the ship do ride here at anchor , to have continual watch , with boat and man ready with halser to knit fast unto such ice , as with the ebb and flood be toss to and fro in the harbour , and with force of oar to hale they away , for endanger the ship . Oure general certain day search this suppose continent with America , and not find the commodity to answer his expectation , after he have make trial thereof he depart thence with two little bark , and man sufficient to the east shore be the suppose continent of Asia , and leave the ship with most of the gentleman , soldier , and sailor , until such time as he either think good to send or come for they . the stone of this suppose continent with America be altogether sparkle , and glister in the sun like 218 gold : so likewise do the sand in the bright water , yet they verify the old proverb : all be not gold that 4 common pro - glistereth . verb . on this west shore we find a dead fish float , which have in his nose a horn strait and torquet , of length two yard lack two inche , be break in the top , where we may perceive it hollow , into the which some of our sailor put spider they present die . i see not the trial hereof , but it be report unto i of a truth : by the virtue whereof we suppose it to be the sea unicorn . u " * - after our general have find out good harbour for corn it the ship and bark to anchor in , and also such store of suppose gold over as he think himself satisfy withal , he return to the Michael , whereof master York aforesaid be captain , accompany with our master and his mate : who coast along the west shore not far from whence the ship ride , they perceive a fair harbour , and willing to sound the same , at the entrance thereof they espy two tent of seal skin , unto which the captain , our say master , and other company resort . at the sight of our man the people flee into the people the mountain : nevertheless they go to their tent , where leave certain trifle or we , as glass , bell , i „ 0 knife , and such like thing they depart , not take any thing of they except one dog . they do in like manner leave behind they a letter , pen , ink , and paper , whereby our man who the captain lose the year before , and in that people custody , may ( if any of they be alive ) be advertise of our presence and be there . on the same day after consultation have , all the gentleman , and other likewise that can be spare from the ship , under the conduct and lead of master master Phil - Philpot , ( unto who in our general he absence , and his lieutenant master beast , all the rest be obedient ) go master beast . a shore , determine to see , if by fair mean we can either allure they to familiarity , or otherwise take some of 219 they , and so attain to some knowledge of those man who our general lose the year before . at our come back again to the place where their tent be before , they have remove their tent further into the say bay or sound , where they may if they be drive from the land , flee with their boat into the sea . we part our self into two company , and compass a mountain come sudden upon they by land , who espy we , without any tarry flee to their boat , leave the most part of their oar behind they for haste , and row down the bay , where our two pinnace meet they and drive they to shore : but if they have have all their oar , so swift be they in row , it have be lose time to have chase they . when they be land they fierce assault our man with their bow and arrow , who wound three of they with our arrow : and perceive themselves thus hurt , they desperate leap off7 the rock into the sea , and drown themselves : which if they have not do , but have submit themselves , or if by any mean we can have take they alive ( be their enemy as they judge ) we will both have save they , and also have seek remedy to cure their wound receive at our hand . but they altogether void of humanity , and ignorant what mercy mean , in extremity look for no other then death : and perceive they shall fall into our hand , thus miserable by drown rather desire death then otherwise to be save by we : the rest perceive their fellow in this distress , flee into the high mountain . two woman not be so apt to escape as the man be , the one for her age , and the other be encumber with a young child , we take . the old wretch , who diverse of our sailor suppose to be either a devil , or a witch , have her buskin pluck off , to see if she be cleave footed , and for her ugly hue and deformity we let she go : the young woman and the child we bring away . we name the place where they be slay , bloody point : and the bay or harbour , York 220 sound , after the name of one of the captain of the two bark . have this knowledge both of their fierceness and fair mean cruelty , and perceive that fair mean as yet be not able to allure they to familiarity , we dispose our self , familiarity t0 contrary to our inclination , something to be cruel , return to their tent and make a spoil of the same : where we find a old shirt , a doublet , a girdle , and also shoe of our man , who we lose the year before : on nothing else unto they belong cold we set our eye . their riches be not gold , silver or precious drapery , [ he . 36 . ] but their say tent and boat , make of the skin of red ° f dear and seal skin : also dog like unto wolf , 5 s ' but for the most part black , with other trifle , more to be wonder at for their strangeness , then for any other commodity needful for our use . thus return to our ship the 3 . of August , we our departure depart from the west shore suppose firm with west America , after we have anchor there 13 . day : and so ' the 4 . thereof we come to our general on the east shore , and anchor in a fair harbour name anne warwick ' s sound , unto which be annex a island both name after the countesseof Warwick , anne Warwick sound and isle . in this isle our general thought good for this - voyage , to fraught both the ship and bark , with such stone or suppose gold minerali , as he judge to countervail the charge of his first , and this his second navigation to these country . in the mean time of our abode here some of they the country country people come to show themselves unto we , sundry setoe time on the main shore , near adjacent to the say unt0 we . isle . Oure general desirous to have some news of his man , who he lose the year before , with some company with he repair with the ship boat to common , or sign with they for familiarity , whereunto he be persuaded to bring they . they at the first show make token , that three of his five man be alive , and desire 221 their usage in traffic or exchange . the people show themselves the three time . the people show themselves again on jirme land . the english voyage pen , ink , and paper , and that within three or four day they will return , and ( as we judge ) bring those of our man which be live , with they . they also make sign or token of their king , who they call Cacough , and how he be carry on man shoulder , and a man far surmount any of our company , in bigness and stature . with these token and sign of writing , pen , ink , and paper be deliver they , which they will not take at our hand , but be lay upon the shore , and the party go away , they take up : which likewise they do when they desire any thing for change of they , lay for that which be leave so much as they think will countervail the same , and not come near together . it seem they have be use to this trade or traffic , with some other people adjoin , or not far distant from their country . after 4 . day some of they show themselves upon the firm land , but not where they be before . our general very glad thereof , suppose to hear of our man , go from the island , with the boat , and sufficient company with he . they seem very glad , and allure he about a certain point of the land : behind which they may perceive a company of the crafty villain to lie lurk , who our general will not deal withal , for that he know not what company they be , and so with few sign dismiss they and return to his company . a other time as our say general be coast the country with two little pinnace , whereby at our return he may make the better relation thereof , three of the crafty villain , with a white skin allure we to they . once again our generail , for that he hope to hear of his man , go towards they : at our come near the shore whereon they be , we may perceive a number of they lie hide behind great stone , and those 3 . in sight labour by all mean possible that some will come on land : and perceive we make no haste 222 by word nor friendly sign , which they use by clap their first of their hand , and be without weapon , and but 3 . in sight , they seek further mean to provoke we as ^ us 0 thereunto . one alone lay flesh on the shore , which their second we take up with the boat hook , as necessary victual mean . for the relieve of the man , woman , and child , who we have take : for that as yet they can not digest our meat : whereby they perceive themselves deceive of their expectation , for all their crafty allurement . yet once again to make ( as it be ) a full show of their their three crafty nature , and subtle sleight , to the intent thereby an ^ crafiest . 1 ° r allurement . to nave entrap and take some or our man , one or they counterfeit himself impotent and lame of his leg , who seem to descend to the water side , with great difficulty : and to cover his craft the more , one of his fellow come down with he , and in such place where he seem unable to pass , he take he on his shoulder , set he by the water side , and depart from he , leave he ( as it shall seem ) all alone , who play his counterfeit pageant very well , think thereby to provoke some of we to come on shore , not fear , but that one of we may make our party good with a lame man . Oure general have compassion of his impotency , compassion to thought good ( if it be possible ) to cure he thereof : c “ re a crafty wherefore he cause a soldier to shoot at he with ’ his caliver , which graze before his face . the counterfeit villeine deliverly flee , without any impediment at all , and get he to his bow and arrow , and the rest from their lurk hole , with their weapon , bow , arrow , sling , and dart . Oure general cause some caliver to be shoot off " at they , whereby some be hurt , they may hereafter stand in more fear of we . this be all the answer for this time we can have [ three . 37 . ] of our man , or of our general letter . their crafty deal at these three several time be thus manifest unto we , may plain show their disposition in other thing to be correspondent . we judge that they use 223 these stratagem , thereby to have catch some of we , for the deliver of the man , woman and child who we have take . they be man of a large corporature , and good proportion : their colour be not much unlike the sun burn country man , who labour daily in the sun for his live . they wear their hair something long , and cut before either with stone or knife , very disorderly . their woman wear their hair long , and knit up with two loupe , show forth on either side of their face , and the rest foltre upon a knot . also some of their woman raze their face proportional , as chin , cheek , and forehead , and the wrist of their hand , whereupon they lie a colour which continue dark azurine . they eat their meat all raw , both flesh , fish , and foul , or something per boil with blood and a little water which they drink . for lack of water they will eat ice ,