if the mutiny of the master and mariner have not be . now as these man experience have prove some part of this passage : so the chapter follow shall put you in full assurance of the rest , by their experience which have pass through every part thereof . [ to prove 171 2 auditus . 3 Olfactus . 4 Gustus . 5 Tactus . Singularia sensu , universalia vero mente percipiuntur . Lib . i . cap . ss . [ Iii . 17 . i page - s ^ o . the english voyage to prove by circumstance that then northwest passage have be sail throughout . Chap . 4 . the diversity between bruit beast and man , or between the wise and the simple be , that the one judge by sense only , and gather no surety of any thing that he have not see , feel , hear , taste , or smell : and the other not so only , but also find the certainty of thing by reason , before they happen to be try . wherefore i have add proof of both sort , that the one and the other may thereby be satisfy . 1 first , as gemma Frisius recite , there go from Europe three brethren through this passage : whereof it take the name of Fretum trium fratrum . 2 also Pliny affirm out of Cornelius Nepos , ( who write 57 year before Christ ) that there be certain Indian drive by tempest , upon the coast of Germany which be present by the king of sum evia , unto quintus Metellus Celer , the proconsuli of France . 3 and Pliny upon the same say , that it be no marvel though there be sea by the north , where there be such abundance of moisture : which argue that he doubt not of a navigable passage that way , through which those Indian come . 4 and for the better proof that the same authority of Cornelius Nepos be not by i wrest , to prove my opinion of they northwest passage : you shall find the same affirm more plain in that behalf , by the excellent geographer Dominicus Marius Niger , who show how many way the Indian sea stretch it self , make in that place recital of certain Indian , that be likewise drive through the north sea from India , upon the coast of Germany , by great tempest , as they be sail in trade of merchandise . 172 5 also while Frederic Barbarossa reign emperor , avouch by anno do . 1160 . there come certain other Indian upon franciscuslo - the coast of Germany . pesdeGomara r t , • i . r 0 tn his histone oh . likewise otnon in the stone of the Goth affirm , of India , lib . that in the time of the germane emperor , there be i . cap . io . also certain Indian cast by force of weather , upon the coast of the say country , which foresay Indian can not possible have come by the southeast , Southwest , nor from any part of Africa or America , nor yet by the north - east : therefore they come of necessity by this our northwest passage . to prove that these Indian aforenamed come not by the southeast , Southwest , nor from any other part of Africa , or America . Cap . 5 . first , they can not come from the southeast by the cape de bona speranda , because the roughness of the sea there be such ( occasion by the current and great wind in that part ) that the great armada the king of Portugal have , can without great difficulty pass that way , much less than a Canoa of India can live in those outrageous sea without shipwreck ( be a vessel of very small burden ) and have conduct themselves to the place aforesaid , be man unexpert in the art of navigation . 2 also , it appear plain that they be not able to come from alongst the coast of Africa aforesaid , to those part of Europe , because the wind do ( for the most part ) blow there easterly off from the shore , and the current run that way in like sort , shall have drive they westward upon some part of America : for such wind and tide can never have lead they from thence to the say place where they be find , nor yet can they have come from any of the country aforesaid , keep the sea always , without skilful mariner 173 this five reason by late experience be prove utter untrue . that the Indian can not be native either of Africa , or of America . the english voyage to have conduct they such like course as be necessary to perform such a voyage . 3 presuppose also , if they have be drive to the west ( as they must have be , come that way ) than they shall have perish , want supply of victual , not have any place ( once leave the coast of Africa ) until they come to America , nor from America until they arrive upon some part of Europe , or the island adjoin to it , to have refresh themselves . 4 also , if ( notwithstanding such impossibility ) they may have recover Germany by come from India by the southeast , yet must they without all doubt have strike upon some other part of Europe before their arrival there , as the isle of the azore , Portugal , Spain , France , England , Ireland , etc which if they have do , it be not credible that they shall or will have depart undiscovered of the inhabitant : but there be never find in those day any such ship or man but only upon the coast of Germany , where they have be sundry time and in sundry age cast aland : neither be it like that they will have commit themselves again to sea , if they have so arrive , not know where they be , nor whither to have go . 5 and by the southwest it be unpossible , because the current aforesaid which come from the east , strike with such force upon the fret of Magellan , and fall with such swiftness and fury into mar deal Zur , that hardly any ship ( but not possible a Canoa , with such unskilful mariner ) can come into our western ocean through that fret , from the west sea of America , as magellans experience have partly teach we . 6 and further , to prove that these people so arrive upon the coast of Germany , be Indian , and not in - habiters of any part either of Africa or America , it be manifest , because the native both of Africa and America neither have , or have at this day ( as be report ) other kind of boat then such as do bear neither mast nor sail , ( except only upon the coast of Barbary and the 174 Turk ship ) but do carry themselves from place to place near the shore by the ore only . to prove that those Indian come not by the north - east , and that there be no thorough navigable passage that way . Cap . 6 . it be likely that there shall be no thorough passage by the north - east , whereby to go round about the world , because all sea ( as aforesaid ) be maintain by the abundance of water , wax moor shallow and shelffie towards the end , as we find it do by experience in mare glaciali , towards the east , which breed small hope of any great continuance of that sea , to be navigable towards the east , sufficient to sail thereby round about the world . 2 also , it stand scarce with reason , that the Indian dwell under torrida zona , can endure the injury of the cold air , about the septentrional latitude of 80 . degree , under which elevation the passage by the north - east can be ( as the often experience have of all the south part of it show ) see that some of the inhabitant of this cold climate ( who summer be to they a extreme winter ) have be strike to death with the cold damp of the air about 72 degree , by a accidental mishap , and yet the air in such like elevation be always cold , and too cold for such as the Indian be . 3 furthermore , the pierce cold of the gross thick air so near the pole will so stiffen and fur the sail and ship tackle , that no mariner can either hoist or strike they ( as our experience far near the south , than this passage be presuppose to be , have teach we ) without the use whereof no voyage can be perform . 4 also , the air be so darken with continual ! mist and fog so near the pole , that no man can well see , either to guide his ship , or direct his course . 5 also the compass at such elevation do very 175 [ three . 18 . ] quicquid ■ natural loco privatur , quam citissime corrumpitur . Qualls causa talis effectus . quicquid corrumpitur a contrario corrumpitur . omne simile gignit svi simile . the english voyage sudden vary , which thing must of force have be their destruction , although they have be man of much more skill than the Indian be . 6 moreover , all bay , gulf , and river do receive their increase upon the flood , sensible to be discern on the one side of the shore or the other , as many way as they be open to any main sea , as mare mediterraneum , mare rubrum , Sinus Persicus , Sinus Bodicus , Thamesis , and all other know haven or river in any part of the world , and each of they open but on one part to the main sea , do likewise receive their increase upon the flood the same way , and none other , which mare Glaciale do , only by the west ; as m . Jenkinson affirm unto i : and therefore it follow that this Northeast sea , receive increase but only from the west , can possible open to the main ocean by the east . 7 moreover , the far you pass into any sea towards the end of it , on that part which be shut up from the main sea ( as in all those above mention ) the less and less the tide rise and fall . the like whereof also happen in mare Glaciale , which prove but small continuance of that sea towards the east . 8 also , the further you go towards the east in mare Glaciale , the less salt the water be : which can not happen , if it be open to the salt sea towards the east , as it be to the west only , see every thing natural engender his like : and then must it be like salt throughout , as all the sea be , in such like climate and elevation . and therefore it seem that this Northeast sea be maintain by the river ob , and such like freshet , as mare Goticum , and mare mediterraneum , in the uppermost part thereof by the river Nilus , Danubius , neper , Tanais , etc 9 furthermore , if there be any such sea at that elevation , of like it shall be always freeze throughout ( there be no tide to hinder it ) because the extreme coldness of the air be in the uppermost part , and the extreme coldness of the earth in the bottom , the sea 176 sir Humphrey GILBERT ’ S map of the world , a . d . 1576 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv downlo ^ dedfomthttpsv / www . cambridge . org / core ^ u ^ library , on 30 Aug 2021 at 14 : 06 : 09 , subject to there be but of small depth , whereby the one accidentali coldness do meet with the other , and the sun not have his reflection so near the pole , but at very blunt angel , it can never be dissolve after it be freeze , notwithstanding the great length of their day : for that the sun have no heat at all in his light or beam , but proceed only by a accidentali reflection , which there want in effect . io and yet if the sun be of sufficient force in that elevation , to prevail against this ice , yet must it be break before it can be dissolve , which can be but through the long continuance of the sun above their horizon , and by that time the summer will be so far spend , and so great darkness and cold ensue , that no man can be able to endure so cold , dark , and discomfortable a navigation , if it be possible for he then , and there to live . both further , the ice be once break , it must of force so drive with the wind and tide , that no ship can sail in those sea , see our fisher of island , and the new find land , be subject to danger through the great island of ice which fleet in the sea ( to the sailor great danger ) far to the south of that presuppose passage . 12 and it can be that this Northeast passage shall be any near than south , then before recite , for than it shall cut off Ciremissi , and Turbi Tartari , with Uzesucani , Chisani , and other from the continent of Asia , which be know to be adjoin to Scythia , Tartary , etc with the other part of the same continent . and if there be any thorough passage by the north - east , yet be it to small end and purpose for our traffic , because no ship of great burden can navigate in so shallow a sea : and ship of small burden [ three . 19 i be very unfit 8c unprofitable , especial towards the bluster north , to perform such a voyage . [ to prove seven 177 m to prove that the Indian aforenamed , come only by the northwest , which induce a certainty of our passage by experience