the tropic of cancer , and so run into mar deal Zur , at the least 18 . degree more in breadth there , than it be where it first begin : otherwise i can as well imagine this passage to be more unlikely than the voyage to Moscovia , and more impossible than it for the far situation and continuance thereof in the frosty clime : as now i can affirm it to be very possible and most likely in comparison thereof , for that it neither coast so far north as the moscovian passage do , neither be this straight so long as that , before it bow down southerly towards the sun again . the second argument conclude nothing . Ptolome Sol . 2 . know not what be above sixteen degree south 197 beyond the equinoctial line , he be ignorant of all passage northward from the elevation of 63 . degree : he know no ocean sea beyond Asia , yet have the [ three . 27 . ] Portugal trended the cape of good hope at the south point of Africa , and travel to Japan a island in the east ocean , between Asia and America : our merchant in the time of king Edward the sixth discover the moscovian passage far north than Thyle , and show Greenland not to be continent with Lappeland and Norway : the like our northwestern traveller have do , declare by their navigation that way , the ignorance of all cosmographer that either do join Greenland with America , or continue the west Indies with that frosty region under the north pole . as for Virgil he sing accord to the knowledge of man in his time , as a other poet do of the hot zone . Ovid . 1 . Quarum quae media est , non est habitabilis aestu . etam ' imagine , as most man then do , Zonam torridam , the hot zone to be altogether dishabit for heat , though present we know many famous and worthy kingdom and city in that part of the earth , and the island of S . Thomas near ^ Ethiopia , and the wealthy island for the which chief all these voyage be take in hand , to be inhabit even under the equinoctial line . So / . 3 . to answer the three objection , beside Cabota and all other traveller navigation , the only credit of m . Frobisher may suffice , who late through all these island of ice , and mountain of snow , pass that way , even beyond the gulf that tumble down from the north , and in some place though he draw one inch thick ice , as he return in August do , yet come he home safe again . Sol 4 . the four argument be altogether frivolous and vain , for neither be there any isthmo or strait of land between America and Asia , ne can these two land joint be one continent . the first part of my answer be manifest allow of by Homer , who that excellent 198 geographer Strabo follow , yield he in this Lib . Geog . faculty the price . the author of that book likewise irepi Kotlov to Alexander , attribute unto Aristotle , be of the same opinion that Homer and Strabo be of , in two or three place . Dionysius in oiKovnevw irepuiywi have this verse wr « ? anceavo irepiSeSpo / ae yatav airacrav . So do the ocean sea run round about the world : speak only of Europe , Africa and Asia , as than Asia be travel and know . with these doctor may note . you join Pomponius Mela . cap . 2 . lib . I . Plinius lib . 2 . cap . 67 . and Pius 2 . cap . 2 . in his description of Asia . all the which writer do no less confirm the whole eastern side of Asia to be compass about with the sea , than Plato do affirm in Timaeo , under the name Atlantis , the west Indies to be a island , as in a special discourse thereof R . Eden write , agreeable Richard Eden . unto the sentence of Proclus , Marsilius Ficinus , and other . out of Plato it be gather that America be a island . Homer , Strabo , Aristotle , Dionysius , Mela , Pliny , pius 2 . affirm the continent of Asia , Africa , and Europe , to be environ with the ocean . i may therefore bold say ( though late intelligence thereof have we none at all ) that Asia and the west Indies be not tie together by any Isthmos or straight of land , contrary to the opinion of some new cosmographer , by who doubtful this matter have be bring in controversy . and thus much for the first part of my answer unto the four objection . the second part , namely that America and Asia can be one continent , may thus be prove , koto Lib . 2 . me - trjv r ^ s be koikorrjta pei km twv troTa / Mov to trX ^ Ooi . the ttor ‘ ca ? ' 1 • most river take down that way their course , where the earth be most hollow and deep , write Aristotle : and the sea ( say he in the same place ) as it go further , so be it find deep . into what gulf do the Moscovian river Onega , Duina , ob , power out their stream northward out of Moscovia into the sea ? which way do that sea strike ? the south be main 199 the english voyage land , the eastern coast wax more and more shallow : from the north , either natural , because that part of the earth be high Aristot . 2 Met . cap . 1 . or of necessity , for that the forcible influence of some northern star cause the earth there to shake off the sea , as some philosopher do think : or final for the great store of water engender in that frosty and cold climate , that the bank be not able to hold they . Alber , in 2 . meteor , cap . 6 . from the north , i say , continual fall down great abundance of water . so that this northeastern currant must at the length abrupt bow towards we south on the west side of Finmarke and Norway : or else strike down southwest above groan - land , or betwixt groneland and Iseland , into the northwest strait we speak of , as of congruence it do , if you mark the situation of that region , and by the report of m . Frobisher experience teach we . and m . Frobisher the further he travail in the former passage , as he tell i , the deep always he find the sea lay you now the sum hereof together . the river run where the channel be most hollow , the sea in take his course wax deep , the sea water fall continual from the north southward , the northeastern current strike down into the straight we speak of , and be there augment with whole mountain of ice and snow fall down furious out from the land under the north pole . where store of water be , there be it a thing impossible to want sea , where sea not only do not want , but wax deep , there can be discover no land . final , whence i pray you come the contrary tide , that m . Frobisher meet withal after that he have sail no small way in that passage , if there be any Isthmos or straight of land betwixt the aforesaid northwestern gulf , and mar deal Zur , to join Asia and America together ? that conclusion frequent in school quicquid praeter , etc be mean of the part of the world then know , and so be it of right to be understand . 200 the five objection require for answer wisdom and sol 5 . policy in the traveler , to win the barbarian favour by some good mean : and so to arm and strengthen himself , that when he shall have the repulse in one coast , he may safe travail to a other , commodious take his convenient time , and discreet make choice of they with who he will thorough deal . to force a violent entry , will for we Englishman be very hard , consider the strength and valour of so great a nation , far distant from we , and the attempt thereof may be most perilous unto the doer , unless their part be very good . touch their law against stranger , you shall read nevertheless in the same relation of Galeotto Perera , that the cathaian king be wont to grant free access unto all foreigner that trade into his country for merchandise , and a place of liberty for they to remain in : as the moor have , until such time as they have bring the Loutea or lieutenant of that coast to be a circumcise Saracene : wherefore some of they be put to the sword , the rest be scatter abroad : at fuquien a great city in China , certain of they be yet this day to be see . as for the japans they be most desirous to be acquaint with stranger . the Portugal though they be strait handle there at the first , yet in the end they find great favour at the prince his hand , insomuch that the Loutea or precedent that misuse they be therefore put to death . the rude Indian Canoa hall those sea , the Portugal , the saracenes , and moor travail continual up and down that reach from Japan to China , from China to Malacca , from Malacca to the molucca : and shall a Englishman , better appoint than any of they all ( that i say no more of our navy ) fear to sail in that ocean ? what sea at all do want piracy ? what navigation be there void of peril ? to the last argument . our traveller need not to Sol . 6 . seek their return by the north - east , neither shall they be constrain , except they listen , either to attempt 201 what the eastern cut rend be . the english voyage magellan straight at the southwest , or to be in danger of the Portugal for the southeast : they may return by the northwest , that same way they do go forth , . as experience have show . the reason allege for proof of the contrary may be disprove after this manner . and first it may be call in controversy , whether any current continual be force by the motion of primum mobile , round about the world , or no ? for learned man do diverse handle that question . the natural course of all water be downward , wherefore of congruence they fall that way where they find the earth most low and deep : in respect whereof > it be erst say , the sea do strike from the northern land southerly . violent the sea be toss and trouble diverse way with the wind , increase and diminish by the course of the moon , hoist up and down through the sundry operation of the sun and the star : final , some be of opinion , that the sea be carry in part violent about the world , after the daily motion of the high movable heaven , in like manner as the element of air and fire , with the rest of the heavenly sphere , be from the east unto the west . and this they do call their eastern current , or levant stream . some such current may not be deny to be of great force in the hot zone , for the nearness thereof unto the centre of the sun , and bluster eastern wind violent drive the sea westward : howbeit , in the temperate clime , the sun be further off , and the wind more diverse , blow as much from the north , the west and south , as from the east , this rule do not effectual withhold we from travail eastward , neither be we keep ever back by the aforesaid Levant wind and stream . but in Magellans straight we be violent drive back westward : ergo , through the northwestern straight or Anian fret shall we not be able to return eastward ? it follow not . the first , for that the northwestern straight have more sea room at the least by one hundred english miles , than 202 1576 . Magellans fret have , the only want whereof cause all narrow passage general to be most violent . so will i say in the Anian gulf , if it be so narrow as don Diego and zalterius have paint it out , any return that way to be full of difficulty , in respect of such straightness thereof , not for the nearness of the sun , or eastern wind , violent force that way any levant streamer but in that place there be more sea room by many degree , if the card of Cabota , and gemma Frisius , and that which Tramezine imprint , be true . and hitherto reason see i none at all , but that i may as well give credit unto their do , as to any of the rest . it must be peregrinationis historia , that be , true report of skilful traveller , as Ptolome write , that in ca ? ' 2 ' such controversy of Geographic must put we out of doubt . Ortelius in his universali table , in his particular [ three . 29 . ] map of the west Indies , of all Asia , of the northern kingdom , of the east Indies , Mercator in some of his globe , and generail map of the world , Moletius in his universali table of the globe divide , in his sea card , and particular table of the east Indies , zalterius , and don Diego , with Ferdinando berte , and other , do so much differ from gemma Frisius and Cabota , among themselves , and in diverse place from themselves , concern the diverse situation and sundry limit of America , that one may not so rash , as true surmise , these man either to be ignorant in those point touch the aforesaid region , or that the map they have give out unto the world , be collect only by they , and never of their own draw .