where he find his 361 None of the people will be take . m . wolfall a godly preacher . the english voyage ship ready rig and load . wherefore he depart from thence again the next morning towards the countess sound , where he arrive the 28 . of the same . by the way he set his miner ashore at bear sound , for the better dispatch and gather the ore together : for that some of the ship be behind hand with their fraught , the time of the year pass sudden away . the thirtith of August the anne Francis be bring aground , and have 8 . great leak mend which she have receive by mean of the rock and ice . this day the mason finish a house which captain Fenton cause to be make of lime and stone upon the countess of Warwick island , to the end we may prove against the next year , whither the snow can overwhelm it , the frost break it up , or the people dismember the same . and the better to allure those brutish and uncivil people to courtesy against other time of our come , we leave therein diverse of our country toy , as bell , and knife , wherein they special delight , one for the necessary use , and the other for the great pleasure thereof . also picture of man and woman in lead , man on horseback , look glass , whistle , and pipe . also in the house be make a oven , and bread leave bake therein for they to see and taste . we bury the timber of our pretend fort . also here we sow pease , corn , and other grain , to prove the fruitfulness of the soil against the next year . master wolfall on winter furnace preach a godly sermon , which be end , he celebrate also a communion upon the land , at the partake whereof be the captain of the anne Francis , and many other gentleman and soldier , mariner , and miner with he . the celebration of - the divine mystery be the first sign , seal , and confirmation of Christ name , death , and passion ever know in these quarter . the say m . Wolfall make sermon , and celebrate the communion at sundry other time , in several and sundry ship , because the whole company can never meet together at any one 362 place . the fleet now be in some good readiness for their lade , the general call together the gentleman and captain to consult , tell they that he be very desirous that some further discovery shall be attempt , and that he will not only by God help bring home his ship lade with ore , but also mean to bring some certificate of a further discovery of the country , which thing to bring to pass ( have sometime therein consult ) they find very hard , and almost invincible . And consider that already they have spend sometime in consultation search out the trending and fashion of the mistake afurtly strait , therefore it can not be say , but that by this voyage they have notice of a further discovery , and that the hope of the passage thereby be much further and increase , as appear before in the discourse thereof . yet notwithstanding if any mean may be further devise , the captain be content and willing , as the general shall appoint and command , to take any enterprise in hand . which after long debate be find a thing very impossible , and that rather consultation be to be have of return homeward , especial for these cause follow . First the dark foggy mist , the continual fall snow and stormy weather which they common be vex with , and now daily ever moor and more increase , have no small argument of the winter draw near . and also the frost every night be so hard congeal within the sound , that if by evil hap they shall be long keep in with contrary wind , it be great to be fear , that they shall be shut up there fast the whole year , which be utter unprovide , will be their utter destruction . again , drink be so scant throughout all the fleet by mean of the great leakage , that not only the provision which be lay in for the habitation be want and waste , but also each ship several provision spend and lose , which many of our company to their great grief find in their return since , for all the way homeward they drink nothing but water . and the great cause of this leakage 3 ^ 3 and waste be , for that the great timber and seacole , which lie so weighty upon the barrel , break , bruise , and rot the hoop insunder . yet notwithstanding these reason allege the general himself ( will the rest of the gentleman and captain every man to look to his several charge and lade , that against a day appoint , they shall be all in a readiness to set homeward ) go in a pinnace and discover further northward in the straight , and find that by bear sound and hall island , the land be not firm , as it be break Hands first suppose , but all break island in manner of a mma ” er ° fan Archipelagus , and so with other secret intelligence to rc tpe agus . returnec [ to the fleet . where present upon his arrival at the countess sound , he begin to take order for their return homeward , and first cause certain article to be proclaim , for the better keep of order and course in their return , which article be deliver to every captain . the fleet return homeward . have now receive article and direction for our return homeward , all other thing be in forwardness and in good order , the last day of August [ three . 92 . ] the whole fleet depart from the countess sound , except the Judith , and the anne Francis , who stay for the take in of fresh water , and come the next day and meet the fleet lie off and on , athwart bear sound , who stay for the general , which then be go return home - ashore to dispatch the two bark and the buss of ward - Bridgewater , for their load , whereby to get the company and other thing aboard . the captain of the anne Francis have most part of his company ashore , the first of September go also to bear sound in his pinnace to fetch his man aboard , but the wind grow so great immediate upon their land , that the ship at sea be in great danger , and some of they forcible put from their anchor , and great fear to be utter lose , as the Hopewell , wherein be captain Carew and 364 other , who can not tell on which side their danger be most : for have mighty rock threaten on the one side , and drive island of cut ice on the other side , they great fear to make shipwreck , the ice drive so near they that it touch their bolt - sprit . and by mean of the sea that be grow so high , they be not able to put to sea with their small pinnace to recover their ship . and again , the ship be not able to tarry or lie athwart for they , by mean of the outrageous wind and swell sea . the general will the captain of the anne Francis with his company , for that night to lodge aboard the buss of Bridgewater , and go himself with the rest of his man aboard the bark . but their number be so great , and the provision of the bark so scant , that they pester one another exceed . they have great hope that the next morning the weather will be fair , whereby they may recover their ship . but in the morning follow it be much worse , for the storm continue great , the sea be more swell , and the fleet go quite out of sight . so that now their doubt begin to grow great : for the ship of Bridgewater which be of great receit , and whereof they have best hope and make most account , ride so far to leeward of the harborowe mouth , that they be not able for the rock ( that lie between the wind and they ) to lead it out to sea with a sail . and the bark be already so pester with man , and so slender furnish with provision , that they have scarce meat for six day for such number . the general in the morning depart to sea in the Gabriel to seek the fleet , leave the buss of Bridgewater , and the Michael behind in bear sound . the buss set sail , and think by turn in the narrow channel within the harbour to get to windward : but be put to leeward more , by that mean be fain to come to anchor for her better safety , among a number of rock , and there leave in great danger of ever get 365 fort again . the Michael set sail to follow the general , and can give the buss no relief , although they earnest desire the same . and the captain of the anne Francis be leave in hard election of two evil : either to abide his fortune with the buss of Bridgewater , which be doubtful of ever get forth , or else to be tow in his small pinnace at the stern of the Michael through the rage sea , for that the bark be not able to receive or relieve half his company , wherein his danger be not a little perilous . so after he resolve to commit himself with all his company unto that fortune of God and sea , and be dangerous tow at the stern of the bark for many mile , until at length they espy the anne Francis under sail , hard under their lee , which be no small comfort unto they . for no doubt , both those and a great number more have perish for lack of victual , and convenient room in the bark without the help of the say Ship . but the honest care that the master of the anne Francis have of his captain , and the good regard of duty towards his general , suffer he not to depart , but honesdy abode to hazard a dangerous road all the night long , notwithstanding all the stormy weather , when all the fleet beside depart . and the pinnace come no soon aboard the ship , and the man enter , but she present shiver and fall in piece and sink at the ship stern , with all the poor man furniture : so weak be the boat with tow , and so forcible be the sea to bruise she in piece . but ( as God will ) the man be all save . at this present in this storm many of the fleet be dangerous distress , and be sever almost all asunder . yet , thank be to God , all the fleet arrive safe in England about the first of October , some in one place and some in another . but among other , it be most marvelous how the buss of Bridgewater get away , who be leave behind the fleet in great danger of never get forth , be force to seek a way north - 366 ward through a unknown channel full of rock , upon the back side of bear sound , and there by good hap find out a way into the north sea , a very dangerous attempt : save that necessity , which have no law , force they to try mastery . this aforesaid north sea be the same which lie upon the back side of frobishers strait , where first the general himself in his pinnace , A . D . 1578 . a unknown channel into the north - east , discover by the buss of Bridgewater . and after some other of our company have discover [ three . 93 . ] ( as they affirm ) a great foreland , where they will have also a great likelihood of the great passage towards the south sea , or mar deal Sur . the buss of Bridgewater , as she come homeward , to a fruitful the southeastward of Friseland , discover a great island in the latitude of 57 degree and a half , which be ‘ never yet find before , and sail three day alongst the coast , the land seem to be fruitful , full of wood , and a champion country . there die in the whole fleet in all this voyage not above forty person , which number be not great , consider how many ship be in the fleet , and how strange fortune we pass .