and meet again with he in the straight , which they do : and as we imagine before , so the queen foreland prove a hand , as i think most of these suppose continent will . and so he depart towards the straight , think it be high time now to recover his port , and to provide the fleet of their lade , whereof he be not a little careful , as shall by the process and his resolute attempt appear . and in his return with the rest of the fleet he be so entangle by reason of the dark fog among a number of hand and break ground that lie off this coast , that many of the ship come over the top of rock , which present after they may perceive to lie dry , have not half a foot water more than some of their ship do draw . and by reason they can not with a small gale of wind stem the force of the flood , whereby to go clear off the rock , they be fain to let a anchor fall with two bent of cable together , at a hundred and odd fathom depth , where otherwise they have be by the force of the tide carry upon the rock again , and perish : so that if God in these fortune ( as a merciful guide , beyond the expectation of man ) have not carry we through , we have sure perish amid these danger . for be many time drive hard aboard the shore without any sight of land , until we be ready to make shipwreck thereon , be force common with our boat to sound before our ship , lest we may light [ three . 82 . ] return out of the mistake straight . great danger . 339 Anae Francis meet with some of the fleet . the english voyage thereon before we can discern the same ; it please God to give we a clear of sun and light for a short time to see and avoid thereby the danger , have be continual dark before , and present after . many time also by mean of fog and current be drive near upon the coast , God lend we even at the very pinch one prosperous breath of wind or other , whereby to double the land , and avoid the peril , and when that we be all without hope of help , every man recommend himself to death , and cry out , lord now help or never , now lord look down from heaven and save we sinner , or else our safety come too late : even than the mighty maker of heaven , and our merciful God do deliver we : so that they who have be partaker of these danger do even in their soul confess , that God even by miracle have seek to save they , who name be praise evermore . long time now the anne Francis have lie beat off and on all alone before the queen foreland , not be able to recover their port for ice , albeit many time they dangerous attempt it , for yet the ice choke up the passage , and will not suffer they to enter . and have never see any of the fleet since twenty day past , when by reason of the thick mist they be sever in the mistake straight , they do now this present 23 of July overthwart a place in the straight call hatton Hedland , where they meet with seven ship of you fleet again , which good hap do not only rejoice they for themselves , in respect of the comfort which they receive by such good company , but especial that by this mean they be put out of doubt of their dear friend , who safety long time they do not a little suspect and fear . at their meeting they hale the admiral after the manner of the sea , and with great joy welcome one another with a thunder volley of shot . and now every man declare at large the fortune and danger which they have pass . 34 ° the four and twenty of July we meet with the Francis of Foy , who with much ado seek way back FrandsefF ^ . again , through the ice from out of the mistake straight , where ( to their great peril ) they prove to recover their port . they bring the first news of the vice - admiral captain York , who many day with themselves , and the buss of Bridgewater be miss . Bridgwater they report that they leave the viceadmiral reasonable s ^ ' clear of the ice , but the other ship they great fear , who they can not come to help , be themselves so hardly distress as never man more . also they tell we of the Gabriel , who have get thorough from the backside , and western point of the queen foreland , into frobishers straight , fall into their company about the cape of good hope . and upon the seven and twenty of July , the ship of Bridgewater get out of the ice and meet with the fleet which lie off and on under hatton Hedland . they report of their marvellous accident and danger , declare their ship to be so leak that they must of necessity seek harbour , have their stem so beat within their hudding , that they have much ado to keep themselves above water . they have ( as they say ) five hundred stroke at the pump in less than half a watch , be scarce two hour ; their man be so overweary therewith , and with the former danger that they desire help of man from the other ship . Moreover they declare that there be nothing but ice and danger [ three . 83 . ] where they have be , and that the straight within be freeze up , and that it be the most impossible thing of the streit the world , to pass up unto the countess of Warwick over sound , which be the place of our port . the report of these danger by these ship thus publish among the fleet , with the remembrance of the peril past , and those present before their face , bring no small fear and terror into the heart of many considerate man . so that some begin privy to murmur against the general for this wilful manner of 341 proceed . some desire to discover some harbour thereabouts to refresh themselves and reform their break vessel for a while , until the north and northwest wind may disperse the ice , and make the place more free to pass . other some forget themselves , speak more undutiful in this behalf , say : that they have as leave be hang when they come home , as without hope of safety to seek to pass , and so to perish among the ice . the general not open his ear to the peevish passion of any private person , but chief respect the accomplishment of the cause he have undertake ( wherein the chief reputation and fame of a general and captain consist ) and call to his remembrance the short time he have in hand to provide so great number of ship their load , determine with this resolution to pass and recover his port , or else there to bury himself with his attempt . notwithstanding somewhat to appease the feeble passion of the fearefull sort , and the better to entertain time for a season , while the ice may the better be dissolve , he hale on the fleet with belief that he will put they into harbour : thereupon while the ship lie off " and on under hatton Hedland , he seek to go in with his pinnace among the island there , as though he mean to search for harborowe , where indeed he mean nothing less , but rather seek if any ore may be find in that place , as by the sequel appear . in the mean time while the fleet lie thus doubtful without any certain resolution what to do , be hard aboard the lee - shore , there arise a sudden and terrible tempest at the southsoutheast , whereby the ice begin marvellous to gather about we . whereupon every man , as in such case of extremity he think best , seek the wise way for his own safety . the most part of the fleet which be further shoot up within the straight , and so far to the leeward , as that they can not double the land , follow the 342 course of the general , who lead they the way , take in their sail , and lay it a hull among the ice , and so pass over the storm , and have no extremity at all , but for a short time in the same place . howbeit the other ship which ply out to seaward , have a extreme storm for a long season . and the nature of the place be such , that it be subject diverse to diverse wind , accord to the sundry situation of the great Alps and mountain there , every mountain cause a several blast , and pirrie , after the manner of a Levant . in this storm be the six and twenty of July , there fall so much snow , with such bitter cold air , that we can not scarce see one another for the same , nor open our eye to handle our rope and sail , the snow snow in July . be above half a foot deep upon the hatch of our ship , which do so wet through our poor mariner clothes , that he that have five or six shift of apparel have scarce one dry thread to his back , which kind of wet and coldness , together with the overlabour of the poor man amid the ice , breed no small sickness among the fleet , which somewhat discourage some of the poor man , who have not experience of the like before , every man persuade himself that the winter there must needs be extreme , where they find extreme win - so unseasonable a summer . ter ' and yet notwithstanding this cold air , the sun great heattn many time have a marvellous force of heat among m . etam 1 ™ % - , i , .... ° mta . those mountain , insomuch that when there be no breath of wind to bring the cold air from the disperse ice upon we , we shall be weary of the bloom heat and then sudden with a perry of wind which inconstant come down from the hollowness of the hill , we weather - shall have such a breath of heat bring upon our face as though we be enter within some bathstove or hothouse , and when the first of the pirry and blast be past , we shall have the wind sudden a new blow cold again . 343 the general recavere th his port . the english voyage in this storm the anne Francis , the moon , and the Thomas of Ipswich , who find themselves able to hold it up with a sail , and can double about the cape of the queen foreland , ply out to the seaward , hold it for better policy and safety to seek sea room , than to hazard the continuance of the storm , the danger of the ice , and the leeshoare . And be uncertain at this time of the general private determination , the weather be so dark that they can not discern one another , nor perceive which way he wrought , betake themselves to this course for best and safe . the general , notwithstanding the great storm , follow his own former resolution , seek by all mean possible , by a short way to recover his port , and where he see the ice never so little open , he gate in at one gap and out at another , and so himself valiant lead the way through before to induce the fleet to follow after , and with incredible pain and peril at length get through the ice , and upon the one and thirty of July recover his long wish port after many attempt and sundry time be put back , and come to anchor in the countess of Warwick sound , in the entrance whereof , when he think all peril past , he encounter a great hand of ice which give the aid such a blow , have a little before weigh her anchor a cock bill , that it strike the anchor flouke through the ship bow under the water , which cause so great a leak , that with much ado they preserve the ship from sink . at their arrival here they perceive two ship at anchor within the harbour , whereat they begin much to marvel and great to rejoice , for those they know to be the Michael , wherein be the lieutenant general captain Fenton , and the small bark call the Gabriel , who so