a true discourse of the three voyage of discovery , for the find of a passage to Cathaya , by the northwest , under the conduct of Martin Frobisher general : before which , as a necessary preface be prefix a twofold e discourse , containing certain reason to prove all part of the world habitable . pen by master George best , a gentleman employ in the same voyage . what commodity and instruction may be reap by diligent read this discourse . i tturst , by example may be gather , how a dis - j ? coverer of new country be to proceed in his first attempt of any discovery . 2 item , how he shall be provide of ship , victual , munition , and choice of man . 3 how to proceed and deal with strange people , be they never so barbarous , cruel and fierce , either by lenity or otherwise . 4 how trade of merchandise may be make without money . 5 how a pilot may deal , bq environ with mountains of ice in the freeze sea 25 ° 6 How length of day , change of season , summer and winter do differ in ' sundry region . 7 how dangerous it be to attempt new discovery , either for the length of the voyage , or the ignorance of the language , the want of interpreter , new and unaccustomed element and air , strange and unsavoury meat , danger of thief and robber , fierceness of wild beast and fish , hugeness of wood , dangerousness of sea , dread of tempest , fear of hide rock , steepness of mountain , darkness of sudden fall fog , continual pain take without any rest , and infinite other . 8 how pleasant and profitable it be to attempt new discovery , either for the sundry sight and shape of strange beast and fish , the wonderful work of nature , the different manner and fashion of diverse nation , the sundry sort of government , the sight of strange tree , fruit , fowl , and beast , the infinite treasure of pearl , gold and silver , the news of new find land , the sundry position of the sphere , and many other . 9 how valiant captain use to deal upon extremity , and otherwise . 10 how trusty soldier dutiful use to serve . 11 also here may be see a good example to be observe of any private person , in take note , and make observation of all such thing as be requisite for a discoverer of new country . 12 last , the reader here may see a good pattern of [ in . 4 . 8 . i a well govern service , sundry instruction of matter of cosmography , Geographic , and navigation , as in read more at large may be see . [ experience 251 experience and reason of the sphere , to prove all part of the world habitable , and thereby to confute the position of the five zone . experience to prove thattor - rida zona be habitable . irst , it may be gather by experience of our Englishman in anno 1553 . for captain Windam make a voyage with merchandise to Guinea , and enter so far within the torrida zona , that he be within three or four degree of the equinoctial , and his company abide there certain month , return , with gain . also the Englishman make another voyage very prosperous and gainful , An . 1554 . to the coast of Guinea , within 3 . degree of the equinoctial . and yet it be report of a truth , that all the tract from cape de las Palmas trending by C . de tres puntas alongst by Benin , unto the he of saint Thomas ( which be perpendicular under the equinoctial ) all that whole bay be more subject to many bloom and smother heat , with infectious and contagious air , than any other place in all torrida zona : and the cause thereof be some accident in the land . for it be most certain , that mountain , sea , wood and lake etc may cause through their sundry kind of situation , sundry strange and extraordinary effect , which the reason of the climb otherwise will not give . i mention these voyage of our Englishman , not so much to prove that torrida zona may be , and be inhabit , as to show their readiness in attempt long and dangerous navigation . we also among we in England have black moor , . / ethiopian , out of all part of torrida zona , which after a small continuance , can well endure the cold of our country , and why shall not we as well abide the heat of their country ? but what shall i name any more experience , see that all the coast of Guinea and Benin be inhabit of Portugal , span - 252 yard , french , and some Englishman , who there have build castle and town . only this i will say to the merchant of London , that trade yearly to Marochus , it be very certain , that the great part of the burn zone be far more temperate and cool in June , than the country of Marochus , as shall appear by these reason and experience follow . for let we first consider the breadth and bigness of this burn zone ( which as every man know , be 47 . degree ) each Tropic , which be the bounder thereof , be 23 . degree and a half distant from the equinoctial . imagine again two other parallel , on each side the equinoctial one , either of they distant from the equinoctial about 20 . degree , which parallel may be describe either of they twice a year by the sun , be in the first degree of gemini the 11 . of may , and in Leo the 13 . of July , have north latitude . and again , the sun be in the first degree of sagittarius , the 12 . of November , and in Aquarius the 9 of January , have south latitude , i be to prove by experience and reason , that all that distance include between these two parallel last name ( contain 40 . degree in latitude , go round about the earth , accord to longitude ) be not only habitable , but the same most fruitful and delectable , and that if any extremity of heat be , the same not to be within the space of twenty degree of the equinoctial on either side , but only under and about the two tropicke , and so proportional the near you do approach to either Tropic , the more you be subject to extremity of heat ( if any such be ) and so Marochus be situate but six or seven degree from the Tropic of Cancer , shall be more subject to heat , than any place under or near the equinoctial line . and first by the experience of sundry man , yea thousand , traveller and merchant , to the east and west Indies in many place both direct under , and hard by the equinoctial , they with one consent affirm , that it abound in the midst of torrida zona with all 253 A . D . 1578 . Marochus more hot than about the equinoctial . 1578 . manner of grain , herb , grass , fruit , wood and cattle , that we have here , and thousand other sort , far more wholesome , delectable and precious , than any we have in these northern climate , as very well shall appear to he that will read the history and navi - marvellous fruitful soil under the equinoctial . gation of such as have travel Arabia , India intra and extra gangem , the island Moluccas , America , etc which all lie about the middle of the burn zone , where it be true report , that the great herb , as be radish , lettuce , colewort , borage , and such like , do wax ripe , great , more savoury and delectable in taste than we , within sixteen day after the seed be sow . wheat be sow the first of February , be [ hl 49 ] find ripe the first of May , and general , where it be less fruitful , the wheat will be ripe the four month after the seed be sow , and in some place will bring forth a ear as big as the wrist of a man ’ s arm contain 1000 grain ; bean , peace , etc be there ripe twice a year . also grass be cut down , will grow up in six day above one foot high . if our cattle be transport thither , within a small time their young one become of big stature , and more fat than great tree . ever they will have be in these country . there be find in every wood in great number , such timber tree as twelve man hold hand together be not able to fathom . and to be short , all they that have be there with one consent affirm , that there be the goodly green meadow and plain , the fair mountain commodity and pleasure under the equinoctial . cover with all sort of tree and fruit , the fair valley , the goodly pleasant fresh river , store with infinite kind of fish , the thick wood , green and bear fruit all the whole year , that be in all the world . and as for gold , silver , and all other kind of metal , all kind of spice and delectable fruit , both for delicacy and health , be there in such abundance , as hitherto they have be think to have be breed no where else but there . and in conclusion , it be now think that no where else but under the equinoctial , 254 or not far from thence , be the earthly paradise , and the only place of perfection in this world . and that these thing may seem the less strange , because it have be account of the old philosopher , that there can nothing prosper for the extreme heat of the sun continual go over their head in the zodiac , i think good here to allege such natural cause as to i seem very substantiali and sure reason . first you be to understand that the sun do work his moor or less heat in these low part by two mean , the one be by the kind of angle that the sun beam do make with the earth , as in all torrida zona iter make perpendicular right angle in some place or other at noon , and towards the two pole very oblique and uneven angle . and the other mean be the long or short continuance of the sun above the horizon . so that wheresoever these two cause do most concur , there be most excess of heat : and when the one be want , the rigor of the heat be less . for though the sun beam do beat perpendicular upon any region subject unto it , if it have no continuance or abode above the horizon , to work his operation in , there can no hot effect proceed . for nothing can be do in a moment . and this second cause mora solis supra horizontem , the time of the sun abide above the horizon , the old philosopher never remember , but regard only the manner of Angles that the sun beam make with the horizon , which if they be equal and right , the heat be the great , as in torrida zona : if they be unequal and oblique , the heat be the less , as towards both pole , which reason be very good and substantiali : for the perpendicular beam reflect and reverberate in themselves , so that the heat be double , every beam strike twice , and by unite be multiply , and continue strong in form of a column . but in our latitude of 50 . and 60 . degree , the sun beam descend oblique and slant wise , and so strike but once and depart , and therefore our 255 heat be cause by two mean that be by his manner of angle and by his continuance . note this reason . heat be the less for any effect that the angle of the sun beam make . yet because we have a long continuance of the sun presence above our horizon than they have under the equinoctial ; by this continuance the heat be increase , for it shine to we 16 . or 18 . hour sometime , when it continue with they but twelve hour always . and again , our night be very short wherein cold vapour use to abound , be but six or eight hour long , whereas they be always twelve hour long , by which two advantage of long day and short night , though we want the equality of angle , it come to - passe that in summer our heat here be as great as they be there , as have be prove by experience , and be nothing dissonant from good reason . therefore whosoever will right weigh the force of cold and heat in any region , must not only consider the angle that the sun beam make , but also the continuance of the same above the horizon . as first to they under the equinoctial the sun be twice a year at noon in their zenith perpendicular over their head , and therefore during the two hour of those two day the heat be very urgent , and so perhaps it will be in four or five day more an hour every day , until the sun in his proper motion have cross the equinoctial ; so