and thus march towards our boat , we espy certain of the country people on the top of mount Warwick with a flag waft we back again and make great noise , with cry like the mow of Buis seem great desirous of conference with we : whereupon the general be therewith better acquaint , answer they again with the like cry , whereat and with the noise of our trumpet they seem greedy to rejoice , skip , laugh and dance for joy . and hereupon we make sign unto they , hold up two finger , command two of our man to go apart from our company , whereby they may do the like . so that forthwith two of our man and two of they meet together a good space from company , neither party have their weapon about they . our man give they pin and point and such trifle as they have . and they likewise bestow on our man two bow case and such thing as they have . they earnest desire our man to go up into their country , and our man offer they like kindness aboard our ship , but neither part ( as it seem ) admit or trust the other courtesy . their manner of traffic be thus , they do use to lay down of their merchandise upon the ground , so much as they mean to part withal , and 292 so look that the other party with who they make trade shall do the like , they themselves do depart , and then if they do like of their mart they come again , and take in exchange the other merchandise , otherwise if they like not , they take their own and depart . the day be thus well near spend , in haste we retire our company into our boat again , mind forthwith to search alongst the coast for some harbour fit for our ship , for the present necessity thereof be much , consider that all this while they lie off and on between the two land , be continual subject aswell to great danger of fleet ice , which environ they , as to the sudden flaw which the coast seem much subject unto . but when the people perceive our departure , with great token of affection they earnest call we back again , follow we almost to our boat : whereupon our general take his master with he , who be best acquaint with their manner , go apart unto two of they , mean , if they can lay sure hold upon they , forcible to bring they aboard , with intent to bestow certain toy and apparel upon the one , and so to dismiss he with all argument of courtesy , and retain the other for a interpreter . the general and his master be meet with their two companion together , after they have exchange certain thing the one with the other , one of the savage for lack of better merchandise , cut off the tail of his coat ( which be a chief ornament among they ) and give it unto our general for a present . but he present upon a watchword give with his master sudden lay hold upon the two savage . but the ground underfoot be slippery with the snow on the side of the hill , their handfast fail and their prey escape run away and light recover their bow and arrow , which they have hide not far from they behind the rock . And be only two savage in sight , they so fierce , desperate , and with such fury assault and pursue our general and his master , be altogether unarm , and not mistrust their subtlety 293 another meeting of two of our man with two of they . the Englishman chase to their boat . one of that countryman take . the english voyage that they chase they to their boat , and hurt the general in the buttock with a arrow , who the rather speedy flee back , because they suspect a great number behind the rock . our soldier ( which be command before to keep their boat ) perceive the danger , and hear our man call for shot come speedy to rescue , think there have be a great number . but when the savage hear the shot of one of our caliver ( and yet have first bestow their arrow ) they run away , our man speedy follow they . but a servant of my lord of Warwick , call Nicholas Conger a good footman , and uncumber with any furniture have only a dagger at his back overtook one of they , and be a Cornishman and a good wrestler , show his companion such a cornish trick , that he make his side ache against the ground for a month after . and so be stay , he be take alive and bring away , but the other escape . thus with their strange and new prey our man repair to their boat , and pass from the main to a small hand of a mile compass , where they resolve to tarry all night ; for even now a sudden storm be grow so great at sea , that by no mean they can recover their ship . and here every man refresh himself with a small portion of victual which be lay into the boat for their dinner , have neither eat nor drink all the day before . but because they know not how long the storm may last , nor how far off the ship may be put to sea , nor whither they shall ever recover they again or not , they make great spare of their victual , as it great behoove they : for they know full well that the best cheer the country can yield they , be rock and stone , a hard food to live withal , and the people more ready to eat they then to give they wherewithal ! to eat . and thus keep very good watch and ward , they lie there all night upon hard clifle of snow and ice both wet , cold , and comfortless . Theise thing thus happen with the company on land , 294 the danger of the ship at sea be no less perilous . for within one hour after the general depart in the morning by negligence of the cook in overheating , and the workman in make the chimney , the aid be set on fire , and have be the confusion of the whole if by chance a boy espy it , it have not be speedy with great labour and god help well extinguish . this day also be diverse storm and flaw , and by nine of the clock at night the storm be grow so great , and continue such until the morning , that it put our ship at sea in no small peril : for have mountain of fleet ice on every side , we go roomer for one , and loof for another , some scrape we , and some happy escape we , that the least of a m . be as dangerous to strike as any rock , and able to have split asunder the strong ship of the world . we have a scope of clear without ice , ( as God will ) wherein we turn , be otherwise compass on every side about : but so much be the wind and so little be our sea room , that be able to bear only our forecourse we cast so oft about , that we make fourteen horde in eight ' glass running , be but four hour : but God be our best steresman , and by the industry of Charles Jackman and Andrew Dyer the master mate , both very expert mariner , and Richard Cox you master gunner , with other very careful sailor , then within board , and also by the help of the clear night which be without darkness , we do happy avoid those present danger , whereat since we have more marvel then in the present danger fear , for that every man within board , both better and worse have enough to do with his hand to hale rope , and with his eye to look out for danger . but the next morning be the 20 of July , as God will , the storm cease , and the general espy the ship with his new captive and whole company , come happy aboard , and report what have pass a shore , whereupon altogether upon our knee we give God humble and hearty thanks , for that it have please he , the aid set on fire . the great danger of those rock of ice . [ Iii . 65 . ] night without darkness in that country . 295 from so speedy peril to send we such speedy deliverance , and so from this northern shore we strike over towards the Southerland . the one and twenty of July , we discover a bay which run into the land , that seem a likely harbour gur first come - for our ship , wherefore our general row thither with his boat , to make proof thereof , and with his goldfiner fa , " » ™ to search for ore , have never assay any thing on the straight . south shore as yet , and the first small hand which we land upon . here all the sand and cliff do so glister and have so bright a marquesite , that it seem all to be gold , but upon trial make , it prove no better than a i of black - lead , and verify the proverb . all be not gold black lead . tjiat glister . upon the two and twenty of July we bear into the say sound , and come to anchor a reasonable breadth off the shore , where think our self in good security , we be great endanger with a piece of drift ice , which the ebb bring forth of the sound and come thwart we ere we be aware . but the gentleman and soldier within board take great pain at this pinch at the Capstone , overcome the most danger thereof , and yet for all that may be do , it strike on our stern such a blow , that we fear lest it have strike away our rudder , and be force to cut our cable in the hawse , we be fain to set our fore sail to run further up within , and if our stirrage have not be strong than in the present time we fear , we have run the ship upon the rock , have a very narrow channel to turn in , but as God will , all come well to pass . and this jackmans be name jackmans sound , after the name of the sound . master mate , who have first like unto the place . smith hand . upon a small hand , within this sound call smith hand ( because he first set up his forge there ) be find a i of silver , but be not win out of the rock without great labour . here our goldfiner make say of such ore as they find upon the Northerland , and find four sort thereof to hold gold in good quantity . 296 i577 - upon another small hand here be also find a great dead fish , which as it shall seem , have be embay with ice , and be in proportion round like to a porpose , be about twelve foot long , and in bigness answerable , have a horn of two yard long grow out of Thejmdingtf the snout or nostril . this horn be wreathe and an " ic ° rnes strait , like in fashion to a taper make of wax , and ’ may true be think to be the sea unicorn . this horn be to be see and reserve as a jewel by the queen majesty commandment , in her wardrobe of robe . Tuesday the three and twenty of July , our general with his best company of gentleman , soldier and sailor , to the number of seventie person in all , march with ensign displayde , upon the continent of the Southerland ( the suppose continent of America ) where , command a trumpet to sound a call for every man to repair to the ensign , he declare to the whole company how much the cause import for the service of her majesty , our country , our credit , and the safety of our own life , and therefore require every man to be conformable to order , and to be direct by those he shall assign . and he appoint for leader , captain Fenton , captain York , and his lieutenant George Beste : which do , we cast our self into a ring , and altogether upon our knee , give God humble thank for that it have please he of his great goodness to preserve we from such imminent danger , beseech likewise the assistance of his holy spirit , so to deliver we in safety into our country , whereby the light and truth of these secret be know , it may redound to the more honour of his holy name , and consequent to the advancement of our common wealth . and so , in as good sort as the place suffer , we march towards the top of the mountain , which be no less painful in climb then dangerous in descend , by reason of their steepness and ice . and have pass about five mile , by such unwieldy way , we return unto our ship with - 297 out sight of any people , or likelihood of habitation . here diverse of the gentleman desire our general to suffer they to the number of twenty or thirty person to march up thirty or forty league in the country ,