straight , and can not get beyond . within few day after he perceive the ice to be well consume and go , either there ingulf in by some swift current or indraft , carry more to the southward of the same straight , or else convey some other way : wherefore he determine to make proof of this place , to see how far that gut have continuance , and whether he may carry himself through the same into some open sea on the back side , whereof he conceive no small hope , and so enter the same the one and twenty of July , and pass above fifty league therein , as he report , have upon either hand a great main or continent . and that land upon his right hand as he sail westward he judge to be the continent of Asia , and there to be divide from the firm of America , which lie upon the left hand over against the same . this place he name after his name , frobisher strait , like as Magellanus at the southwest end of the world , have discover the passage to the south sea ( where America be divide from the continent of that land , which lie under the south pole ) and call the same straight , magellane strait . after he have pass 60 league into this foresay strait , he go ashore , and find sign where fire have be make . deer . he see mighty dear that seem to be mankind , which run at he , and hardly he escape with his life in a narrow way , where he be fain to use defence and policy to save his life . in this place he see and perceive sundry token of the people resort thither . And be ashore upon the top of a hill , he perceive a number of small thing fleet in the sea afar off , which he suppose to be porpose or seal , or some kind of strange fish ; but come near , he discover they to be man in small the first sight boat make of leather . and before he can descend of you Savages . down from the hill , certain of those people have almost 280 cut off his boat from he , have steal secret behind the rock for that purpose , where he speedy haste to his boat , and bend himself to his halberd , and narrow escape the danger , and save his boat . afterwards he have sundry conference with they , and they come aboard his ship , and bring he salmon salmon . and raw flesh and fish , and greedy devour the same before our man face . and to show their agility , they try many mastery upon the rope of the ship after our mariner fashion , and appear to be very strong of their arm , and nimble of their body . they exchange coat of seal , and bear skin , and such like , with our man ; and receive bell , look glass , and other toy , in recompense thereof again . after great courtesy , and many meeting , our mariner , contrary to their captain direction , begin more easy to trust they ; and five of our man go ashore be by five engrsh - them intercept with their boat , and be never since hear of to this day again : so that the captain be t ^ en destitute of boat , bark , and all company , have scarce sufficient number to conduct back his bark again . he can now neither convey himself ashore to rescue his man ( if he have be able ) for want of a boat ; and again the subtle traitor be so wary , as they will after that never come within our man danger . the captain notwithstanding desirous to bring some token from thence of his be there , be great discontent that he have not before apprehend some of they : and therefore to deceive the deceiver he wrought a pretty policy ; for know well how they great delight in our toy , and special in bell , he ring a pretty lowbell , make sign that he will give he the same that will come and fetch it . and because they will not come within his danger for fear , he fling one bell unto they , which of purpose he throw short , that it may fall into the sea and be lose . and to make take of the they more greedy of the matter he ring a loud bell , firstsava &- so that in the end one of they come near the ship 281 the take possession of Meta incognita . how the ore be find by chance . the english voyage side to receive the bel ; which when he think to take at the captain hand , he be thereby take himself : for the captain be ready provide let the bell fall , and catch the man fast , and pluck he with main force boat and all into his bark out of the sea . whereupon when he find himself in captivity , for very choler and disdain he bite his tongue in twain within his mouth : notwithstanding , he die not thereof , but live until he come in England , and then he die of cold which he have take at sea . now with this new prey ( which be a sufficient witness of the captain far and tedious travel towards the unknown part of the world , as do well appear by this strange infideli , who like be never see , read , nor hear of before , and who language be neither know nor understand of any ) the say captain Frobisher return homeward , and arrive in England in Harwich the 2 of October follow , and thence come to London 1576 , where he be high commend of all man for his great and notable attempt , but special famous for the great hope he bring of the passage to Cataya . and it be especial to be remember that at their first arrival in those part there lay so great store of ice all the coast along so thick together , that hardly his boat can pass unto the shore . at length , after diverse attempt he command his company , if by any possible mean they can get ashore , to bring he whatsoever thing they can first find , whether it be live or dead , stock or stone , in token of christian possession , which thereby he take in behalf of the queen most excellent majesty , think that thereby he may justify then have and enjoy of the same thing that grow in these unknown part . some of his company bring flower , some green grass ; and one bring a piece of black stone much like to a sea coal in colour , which by the weight seem to be some kind of metal or minerali . this 282 be a thing of no account in the judgement of the captain at the first sight ; and yet for novelty it be keep in respect of the place from whence it come . after his arrival in London , be demand of sundry his friend what thing he have bring they home out of that country , he have nothing leave to present they withal but a piece of this black stone . [ Iii . 60 . ] and it fortune a gentlewoman one of the adventurer wife to have a piece thereof , which by chance she throw and burn in the fire , so long , that at the length be take forth , and quench in a little vinegar , it glister with a bright marquesset of gold . whereupon the matter be call in some question , it be bring to certain goldfiner in London to make assay thereof , who give out that it hold gold , and that very rich for the quantity . afterwards , the same goldfiner pro - many adven - mised great matter thereof if there be any store to turers - be find , and offer themselves to adventure for the search of those part from whence the same be bring . some that have great hope of the matter seek secret to have a lease at her majesty hand of those place , whereby to enjoy the mass of so great a public profit unto their own private gain . in conclusion , the hope of more of the same gold over to be find kindle a great opinion in the heart of many to advance the voyage again . whereupon preparation be make for a new voyage against the year follow , and the captain more special direct by commission for the search moor of this gold ore i » than for the search any further discovery of the v ° ya & compassage . And be well accompany with diverse resolute and when me ^ and forward gentleman , her majesty then lie at the fir the bring - right honourable the lord of Warwick house in Essex , mg of ore . he come to take his leave , and kiss her highness hand , with gracious countenance and comfortable word depart towards his charge . [ A true 283 a true report of such thing as happen in the second voyage of captain Frobisher , pretend for the discovery of a new passage to Cataya , China and the east India , by the northwest . Ann . Dom . 1577 . eing furnish with one tall ship of her majesty , name the aid , of two hundred ton , and two other small bark , the one name the Gabriel , the other the Michael , about thirty tun a piece , be fit appoint with man , munition , victual , and all thing niece - sary for the voyage , the say captain Frobisher , with the rest of his company come aboard his ship ride at Blackwall , intend ( with God help ) to take the first wind and tide serve he , the 25 day of May , in the year of our lord God 1577 . the name of such gentleman as attempt this discovery , and the number of soldier and mariner in each ship , as follow . aboard the aid be admiral be the number of 100 man of all sort , whereof 30 or more be gentleman and soldier , the rest sufficient and tall sailor . aboard the Gabriel be vice - admiral , be in all 18 person , whereof six be soldier , the rest mariner . aboard the Michael be 16 person , whereof five be soldier , the rest mariner . 284 ' general of the | whole company for her majesty encage Martin Frobisher . his lieutenant his ensign Corporali of the shot George Best . 1 Richard Philpot . Francis Forder . aboard the aid be the rest of the gentleman ' Henry Carew . Edmund Stafford . John Lee . m . Harvie . Matthew Kinersley . Abraham Lins . Robert Kinersley . Francis Brakenbury . William Armshow . aboard Gabrieli aboard Michael than i be | the i be ] the master the mate the pilot - the master gunner ' captain | one gentleman the master 1 captain | one gentleman the master encage ' Christopher hall . Charles Jackman . Andrew Dier . Richard Cox . ' Edward Fenton . [ he . 61 . ] William Tamfield . William Smyth . " " Gilbert York . Thomas Chamberlaine . James bear . on Whitsunday be the 26 of may , anno 1577 , early in the morning , we weigh anchor at Blackwall , and fall that tie down to Gravesend , where we remain until Monday at night .. on Monday morning the 27 of may , aboard the aid the ^ mmun - we receive all the communion by the minister of ion 285 thefirst arrival after our departingfrom England . a i of silver find in Orkney . the english voyage Gravesend , and prepare we as good Christians towards God , and resolute man for all fortune : and towards night we depart to Tilbery hope . Tuesday the eight and twenty of may , about nine of the clock at night , we arrive at Harwitch in Essex and there stay for the take in of certain victual , until Friday be the thirty of May , during which time come letter from the lord of the council , straight command our general , not to exceed his compliment and number appoint he , which be , one hundred and twenty person : whereupon he discharge many proper man which with unwilling mind depart . he also dismiss all his condemn man , which he think for some purpose very needful for the voyage , and towards night upon Friday the one and thirty of May we set sail , and put to the sea again . And sail northward alongst the east coast of England and Scotland , the seven day of June we arrive in saint magnus sound in Orkney hand , call in latin Orcades , and come to anchor on the south side of the bay , and this place be reckon from Blackwall where we set sail first league . here our company go on land , the inhabitant of these island begin to flee as from the enemy , whereupon the lieutenant will every man to stay together , and go himself unto their house to declare what we be and the cause of our come thither , which be understand , after their poor manner they friendly entreat we , and bring we for our money such thing as they have . and here our goldfiner find a i of silver . Orkney be the principali of the isle of the Orcades , and stand in the latitude of fifty nine degree and a half . the country