that this extreme heat cause by the perpendicular angle of the sun beam , endure but two hour of two day in a year . but if any man say the sun may scalde a good while before and after it come to the meridian , so far forth as reason lead , i be content to allow it , and therefore i will measure and proportion the sun heat , by compare the Angles there , with the Angles make here in England , because this temperature be best know unto we . as for example , the two . day of march , when under the equinoctial it be half hour past eight of the clock in the morning , the sun will be in the east about 38 . degree above the horizon , because there it rise always at six 256 of the clock , and move every hour 15 . degree , and so high very near will it be with we at London the say eleven day of march at noon . and therefore look what force the sun have with we at noon , the eleven of march , the same force it seem to have under the equinoctial at half a hour past eight in the morning , or rather less force under the equinoctial . for with we the sun have be already six hour above the horizon , and so have purify and cleanse all the vapour , and thereby his force increase at noon ; but under the equinoctial , the sun have be up but two hour and a half , have sufficient to do , to purge and consume the cold and moist vapour of the long night past , and as yet have wrought no effect of heat . and therefore i may bold pronounce , that there be much less heat at half a hour past eight under the equinoctial , then be with we at noon : i fortiori . but in march we be not only content to have the sun shine , but we great desire the same . likewise the 11 of June , the sun in our meridian be 62 degree high at London : and under the equinoctial it be so high after 10 of the clock , and see then it be beneficial with we ; a fortiori it be beneficial to they after 10 of the clock . and thus have we measure the force of the sun great heat , the hot day in the year , under the equinoctial , that be in march and September , from six till after ten of the clock in the morning , and from two until sun set . and this be conclude , by respect only the first . cause of heat , which be the consideration of the angle of the sun beam , by a certain similitude , that whereas the sun shine never above twelve hour , more than eight of they will be cool and pleasant even to we , much more to they that be acquaint always with such warm place . so there remain less than four hour of any excessive heat , and that only in the two summer day of the year , that be the eleven day of march , and the foure - vii 257 r teenth of September : for under the equinoctial they have two summer , the one in march , and the other in September , which be our spring and autumn : and likewise two winter , in June and December , which be our summer and winter , as may well appear to he that have only taste the principle of the sphere . but if the sun be in either Tropic , or approach near thereunto , then may we more easy measure the force of his meridian altitude , that it strike upon the equinoctial . as for example , the twelve of June the sun will be in the first degree of Cancer . then look what force the heat of the sun have under the equinoctial , the same force and great it have in all that parallel , where the pole be elevate between fourty and seven , Paris in . and fourty and eight degree . and therefore Paris in France ss as prance the twelve day of June sustain more heat of the Equinoc - the sun , than saint Thomas hand lie near the tiall in June , same meridian do likewise at noon , or the hand Taprobana , Moluccae , or the firm land of Peru in America , which all lie underneath the equinoctial . for upon the twelve day of June aforesaid , the sun beam at noon do make a isoscheles triangle , who vertex be the centre of the sun , the basis a line extend from saint Thomas hand under the equinoctial , unto Paris in France near the same meridian : therefore the two angle of the base must needs be equal per 5 . primi , ergo the force of the heat equal , if there be no other cause then the reason of the angle , as the old philosopher have appoint . but in June be because at Paris the sun rise two hour before it m ^ then0 * r ^ set ^ to under the equinoctial , and set like - und the wise two hour after they , by mean of the obliquity equinoctial , of the horizon , in which time of the sun presence four hour in one place more than the other , it work some effect more in one place then in the other , and be of equal height at noon , it must then needs follow to be more hot in the parallel of Paris , than it be under the equinoctial . 258 also this be a other reason , that when the sun set to they under the equinoctial , it go very deep and low under their horizon , almost even to their antipode , whereby their twilight be very short , twilight and their night be make very extreme dark and long , a ’ sl ® rter . ’ and so the moisture and coldness of the long night dark under wonderful increase , so that at length the sun the equinoc - rising can hardly in many hour consume and drive at away the cold humour and moist vapour of the night Paris ' past , which be clean contrary in the parallel of Paris : for the sun go under their horizon but very little , after a slope sort , whereby their night be not very dark , but lightsome , as look into the north in a clear night without cloud it do manifest appear , their twilight be long : for the parallel of Cancer cut not the horizon of Paris at right angle , but at angle very uneven , and unlike as it do the horizon of the equinoctial . also the summer day at Paris be sixteen hour long , and the night but eight : where contrariwise under the equinoctial the day be but twelve hour long , and so long be also the night , in whatsoever parallel the sun be : and therefore look what odds and difference of proportion there be between . the sun abode above the horizon in Paris , and the abode it have under the equinoctial , ( it be in cancer ) the same proportion will seem to be between the heat of the one place , and heat of the other : [ three . 51 . ] for other thing ( as the angle of the whole ark of the sun progress that day in both place ) be equal . but under the equinoctial the presence and abode of the sun above the horizon be equal to his absence , and abide under the horizon , each be twelve hour . and at Paris the continuance and abode of the sun be above the horizon sixteen hour long , and but eight hour absence , which proportion be double , from which if the proportion of the equality be subtract to find the difference , there will remain still a double propor - 259 inn what proportion the angle of the sun beante heat . they use and have need of fire under the equinoctial . cold intermingle with heat under the equinoctial . the english voyage cion , whereby it seem to follow , that in June the heat at Paris be double to the heat under the equinoctial . for ( as i have say ) the angle of the sun beam be in all point equal , and the cause of difference be , Mora solis supra horizontem , the stay of the sun in the one horizon more than in the other . therefore , whosoever can find out in what proportion the angle of the sun beam heat , and what increase the sun continuance do add thereunto , it may express be set down , what force of heat and cold be in all region . thus you partly see by compare a climate to we well know , and familiar acquaint by like height of the sun in both place , that under the equinoctial in June be no excessive heat , but a temperate air rather tend to cold . for as they have there for the most part a continual moderate heat , so yet sometime they be a little pinch with cold , and use the benefit of fire as well as we , especial in the evening when they go to bed , for as they lie in hang bed tie fast in the upper part of the house , so will they have fire make on both side their bed , of which two fire , the one they devise superstitious to drive away spirit , and the other to keep away from they the coldness of the night . also in many place of torrida zona , especial in the high land somewhat mountainous , the people a little shrink at the cold , and be often force to provide themselves clothing , so that the Spaniard have find in the west Indies many people clothe , especial in winter , whereby appear , that with their heat there be cold intermingle , else will they never provide this remedy of clothing , which to they be rather a grief and trouble then otherwise . for when they go to war , they will put off all their apparel , think it to be cumbersome , and will always go naked , that they thereby may be more nimble in their fight . some there be that think the middle zone extreme hot , because the people of the country can , and doe 260 • .... IS78 ' live without clothe , wherein they childish be deceive : for our climb rather tend to extremity of cold , because we can live without clothe : for this our double line , fur , and wear so many clothes , be a remedy against extremity , and argue not the goodness of the habitation , but inconvenience and injury of cold : and that be rather the moderate , temperate , and delectable habitation , where none of these troublesome thing be require , but that we may live naked and bare , as nature bring we forth . other again imagine the middle zone to be extreme hot , because the people of Africa , especial the ethiopian , be so coal black , and their hair like wool curl short , which blackness and curl hair they suppose to come only by the parch heat of the sun , which how it shall be possible i can see : for even under the equinoctial in America , and in the east Indies , and in the hand Moluccae the people be not black , but tauney and white , with long hair uncurl as we have , so that if the ethiopian blackness ethiopian come by the heat of the sun , why shall not those Americans and Indian also be as black as they , see ’ the sun be equal distant from they both , they abide in one parallel : for the concave and convex superficies of the orb of the sun be concentrike , and equidistant to the earth ; except any man shall imagine somewhat of aux solis , and oppositum , which indifferent may be apply aswell to the one place as to the other . but the sun be think to give no otherwise heat , but by way of angle in reflection , and not by his nearness to the earth : for throughout all Africa , yea in the midst of the middle zone , and in all other place upon the top of mountain there lie con - ume tinuall snow , which be near to the orb of the sun , ^ ateth not then the people be in the valley , by so much as the but oneiy height of these mountain amount unto , and yet the reflection . sun notwithstanding his nearness , can not melt the snow for want of convenient place of reflection . also 261 at black moor son bear in England . [ Iii . 52 . ] the colour of the people in Meta incognita . the complexion of the people of Meta incognita . the english voyage the middle region of the air where all the hail , frost , and snow be engender , be near unto the sun then the earth be , and yet there continue perpetuali cold , because there be nothing that the sun beam may reflect against , whereby appear that the nearness of the body of the sun work nothing . therefore to return again to the black moor . i my self have see a ethiopian as black as a coal bring into England , who take a fair english woman to wife , beget a son in all respect as black as the father be , although England be his native