be much subject to cold , answerable for such a climate , and yet yield some fruit , and sufficient maintenance for the people content so poor to live . there be plenty enough of poultrey , store of egg , fish , and foul . 286 for their bread they have oaten cake , and their drink be ewe milk , and in some part ale . their house be but poor without and sluttish enough within , and the people in nature thereunto agreeable . for their fire they burn heath and turf , the country in most part be void of wood . they have great want of leather , and desire our old shoe , apparel , and old rope ( before money ) for their victual , and yet be they not ignorant of the value of our coin . the chief town be call Kyrway . Kyrway then in this island have be sometime a abbey or a cq , fa ™ ne < > f religious house call saint Magnus , be on the west s magnus side of the he , whereof this sound bear name , through find why so which we pass . their governor or chief lord be call . call the lord Robert steward , who at our being there , as we understand , be in durance at Edinburgh , by the regent commandment of Scotland . after we have provide we here of matter sufficient for our voyage the eight of June we set sail again , and pass through saint magnus sound have a merry wind by night , come clear and lose sight of all the land , and keep our course west northwest by the space of two day , the wind shift upon we so that we lay in traverse on the sea , with contrary wind , make good ( as near as we can ) our course to the westward , and sometime to the northward , as the wind shift . and hereabout we meet with 3 sail of english fisherman from Iseland , bind homeward , by who we write our letter unto our friend in England . we traverse these sea by the space of 26 day without sight of any land , and meet with much drift wood , and whole body of tree . we see many monstrous fish and strange fowl , great body of tree drive in the sea . [ Iii . 62 . ] monstrous fish in strange foul live which seem to live only by the sea , be there so far distant from any land . at length God favour we with more prosperous wind , and after we have sail four day with good wind in the poop , the four of July the Michael be foremost a head shoot off a piece sea 287 water be black and smooth signify land to be near . hand ofyce . we first sight of Frisland then . 4 . of July . Frisland describe . a easy kind of fish . of ordinance , and strike all her sail , suppose that they descry land which by reason of the thick mist they can not make perfect : howbeit , as well our account as also the great alteration of the water , which become more black and smooth , do plain declare we be not far off the coast . Oure general send his master aboard the Michael ( who have be with he the year before ) to bear in with the place to make proof thereof , who descry not the land perfect , but see sundry huge hand of ice , which we deem to be not pass twelve league from the shore , for about ten of the clock at night be the four of July , the weather be more clear , we make the land perfect and know it to be frislande . and the heighth be take here , we find our self to be in the latitude of 60 degree and a half , and be fall with the southermost part of this land . between Orkney and Frisland be reckon league . this frislande show a ragged and high lahde , have the mountain almost cover over with snow alongst the coast full of drift ice , and seem almost inaccessible , and be think to be a hand in bigness not inferior to England , and be call of some author , west Frislande , i think because it lie more west than any part of Europe . it extend in latitude to the northward very far as seem to we , and appear by a description set out by two brethren venetian , Nicholaus and Antonius Zeni , who be drive off from Ireland with a violent tempest make shipwreck here , and be the first know Christians that discover this land about two hundred year sithence , and they have in their sea - cardes set out every part thereof and describe the condition of the inhabitant , declare they to be as civil and religious people as we . and for so much of this land as we have sail alongst , compare their card with the coast , we find it very agreeable . this coast seem to have good fish , for we lie becalm let fall a hook without any bait and present 288 catch a great fish call a hollibut , who serve the whole company for a day meat , and be dangerous meat for surfeit . And sound about five league off from the shore , our lead bring up in the tallow a kind of coral almost white , and small stone as bright as crystal : and it be not to be doubt but that this land may be find very rich and beneficial if it be thorough discover , although we see no creature there but little bird . it be a marvellous thing to behold of what great bigness and depth some hand of ice be here , some seventie , some eighty fathom under water , beside that which be above , seem hand more than half a mile in circuit . all these ice be in taste fresh , and seem to be breed in the sound thereabouts , or in some land near the pole , and with the wind and tide be drive alongst the coast . we find none of these hand of ice salt in taste , whereby it appear that they be not congeal of the ocean sea water which be always salt , but of some stand or little move lake or great fresh water near the shore , cause either by melt snow from top of mountain , or by continual access of fresh river from the land , and intermingle with the sea water , bear yet the dominion ( by the force of extreme frost ) may cause some part of salt water to freeze so with it , and so seem a little brackish , but otherwise the main sea freeze not , and therefore there be no mare Glaciale or freeze sea , as the opinion hitherto have be . Oure general prove land here twice , but by the sudden fall of mist ( whereunto this coast be much subject ) he be like to loose sight of his ship , and be greedy endanger with the drive ice alongst the coast , be force aboard and fain to surcease his pretence till a better opportunity may serve : and have spend four day and night sail alongst this land , find the coast subject to such bitter cold and continual mist , he determine to spend no more time therein , but to bear out his course towards the straight call frobisher strait after the general name , who seven 289 t White coral get by sound . monstrous isle of ice , in taste fresh , tohere - hence they be suppose to come . the opinion of the freeze sea be destroy by experience . be the first that ever pass beyond 58 degree to the northward , for any thing that have be yet know of certainty of new find land , otherwise call the continent or firm land land of America , discover the say straight this last year 1576 . between Frisland and the straight we have one great storm , wherein the Michael be somewhat in danger , the stirrage have her stirrage break , and her top mast blow ° bnkenb ^ ae ^ over board , and be not pass 50 league short of the tempest ? straight by our account , we strike sail and lay a hull , fear the continuance of the storm , the wind be at the north - east , and have lose company of the bark the first en - in that flaw of wind , we happy meet again the seven - tranceofthe teenth day of July , have the evening before see * s ' diverse hand of fleet ice , which give a argument that we be not far from land . Oure general in the morning from the main top ( the weather be reasonfill . 63 . ] able clear ) descry land , but to be better assure he send the two bark two contrary course , whereby they may descry either the south or north foreland , the aid lie off and on at sea , with a small sail by a hand of ice , which be the mark for we to meet together again . and about noon , the weather be more clear , we make the north foreland perfect , which hall Ilana otherwise be call Halles hand , and also the small hand bear the name of the say hall whence the ore be take up which be bring into England this last year 1576 then say hall be present at the find and take up thereof , who be then master in the gabrieli with captain Frobisher . at our arrival here all the sea about this coast be so cover over with huge quanti tie of great ice , that we think these place may only deserve the name of mare Glaciale , and be call the icy sea the descrip - this north foreland be think to be divide from the trafhb continent of the Northerland , by a little sound call ' Halles sound , which make it a hand , and be think little less than then he of wight , and be the first entrance 290 of the straight upon the norther side , and stand in the latitude of sixty two degree and fifty minute , and be reckon from Frisland league . God have bless we with so happy a landfall , we bear into the straight which run in next hand , and somewhat further up to the northward , and come as near the shore as we may for the ice , and upon the eighteenth day of July our general take the goldfiner with he , attempt to go on shore with a small row pinnace , upon the small island where the ore be take up , to prove whether there be any store thereof to be find , but he can not get in all that hand a piece so big as a walnut , where the first be find . but our man which seek the other hand thereabouts find they all to have good store of the ore , whereupon our general with these good tiding return aboard about ten of the clock at night , and be joyful welcome of the company with a volie of shot . he bring egg , fowl , and a young seal aboard , which the company have kill ashore , and have find upon those hand begin set to catch foul , and stick new cut , with other thing , he well perceive that not long before some of the country people have resort thither . have therefore find those token of the people access in those part , and be in his first voyage well acquaint with their subtle and cruel disposition , he provide well for his better safety , and on Friday the ninteenth of July in the morning early , with his best company of gentleman and soldier , to the number of forty person , go on shore , aswell to discover the inland and habitation of the people , as also to find out some fit harborowe for our ship . And pass towards the shore with no small difficulty by reason of the abundance of ice which lie alongst the coast so thick together • that hardly any passage through they may be discover , we arrive at length upon the main of hall great hand , and find there also aswell as in the other small hand good store of the ore . and no more gold over find in the first hand . egg in fowl of Meta incognita . snare set to catch bird withal . 291 the building of a column , call mount Warwick . the first sight of the country people , waft with a flag . the meeting apart of two Englishman , with two of that country . the order oj their traffic leave his boat here with sufficient guard we pass up into the country about two english mile , and recover the top of a high hill , on the top whereof our man make a column or cross of stone heap up of a good heighth together in good sort , and solemn sound a trumpet , and say certain prayer kneel about the ensign , and honour the place by the name of mount Warwick , in remembrance of the right honourable the lord Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick , who noble mind and good countenance in this , as in all other good action , give great encouragement and good furtherance . this do , we retire our company not see any thing here worth further discovery , the country seem barren and full of ragged mountain and in most part cover with snow .