captive countryman , if it may come to their hand , may know their friend mind , and of their arrival , and likewise return their answer . and so without take any thing away in their tent , leave there also look glass , point , and other of our toy ( the better to allure they by such friendly mean ) depart aboard his bark , with intent to make haste to the aid , to give notice unto the company of all such thing as he have there discover : and so mean to return to these tent again , hope that he may by force or policy entrap or entice the people to some friendly conference . which thing when he have deliver a good devise of captain York . 3 ° 3 to the whole company there , they determine forthwith to go in hand with the matter . hereupon captain York with the master of the aid and his mate ( who the night before have be at the tent , and come over from the other side in the Michael with he ) be accompany with the gentleman and soldier to the number of thirty or forty person in two small row pinnace make towards the place , where the night before they discover the tent of those people , and set Charles Jackman , be the master mate , ashore with a convenient number , for that he can best guide they to the place , they march over land , mean to compass they on the one side , while the captain with his boat may entrap they on the other side . but land at last at the place where the night before they leave they , they find they with their tent remove . notwithstanding , our man which march up into the country , pass over two or three mountain , by chance espy certain tent in a valley underneath they near unto a creek by the sea side , which because it be not the place where the guide have be the night before , they judge they to be another company , and besetting the Savages they about , determine to take they if they can . but have boat of they have quick descry our company , launch one 3 ™ ’ great and another small boat , be about 16 or 18 person , and very narrow escape , put themselves to sea . the english whereupon our soldier discharge their caliver , and " those ^ people of f °^ owed they , think the noise thereof be hear that country . to our boat at sea , our man there will make what speed they may to that place . and thereupon indeed our man which be in the boat ( cross upon ' they in the mouth of the sound whereby their passage be let from get sea room , wherein it have be impossible the swift for we to overtake they by row ) force they to put rowtngof those themselves ashore upon a point of land within the say * e < * e ' sound ( which upon the occasion of the slaughter there , the bloody be since name the bloody point ) whereunto our man five ™ * ' so speedy follow , that they have little leisure leave they 304 to make any escape . but so soon as they land , each of they break his oar , think by that mean to prevent we , in carry away their boat for want of oar . and desperate return upon our man , resist they manful in their land , so long as their arrow and dart last , and after gather up those arrow which our man shoot at they , yea , and pluck our arrow out of their body encounter afresh again , and maintain their cause until both weapon and life fail they . and when they find they be mortal wound , be ignorant what mercy mean , with deadly fury they cast themselves headlong from off the rock into the sea , lest perhaps their enemy shall receive glory or prey of their dead carcaise , for they suppose we belike to be cannibal or eater of man flesh . in this conflict one of our man be dangerous hurt in the belly with one of their arrow , and of they be slay five or six , the rest by flight escape among the rock , save two woman , whereof the one be old and ugly , our man think she have be a devil or some witch , and therefore let she go : the other be young , and cumber with a suck child at her back , hide her self behind the rock , be espy by one of our man , who suppose she have be a man , shoot through the hair of her head , and pierce through the child arm , whereupon she cry out , and our surgeon mean to heal her child arm , apply salve thereunto . but she not acquaint with such kind of surgery , pluck those salve away , and by continual lick with her own tongue , not much unlike our dog , heal up the child arm . and because the day be wellnear spend our man make haste unto the rest of our company which on the other side of the water remain at the tent , where they find by the apparel , letter , and other english furniture , that they be the same company which captain York discover the night before , have remove themselves from the place where he leave they . and now consider their sudden fly from our vn 305 u York sound . a hot skirmish between the english and they of that country . the desperate nature of those people . the take of the woman and her child . a pretty kind of surgery which nature teach . man , and their desperate manner of fight , we begin to suspect that we have hear the last news of our man which the last year be betray of these people . And consider also their ravenous and bloody disposition in eat any kind of raw flesh or carrion howsoever stink , it be to be think that they have slay and devour our man : for the doublet which be find in their tent have many hole therein be make with their arrow and dart . [ Iii . 69 . ] but now the night be at hand , our man with their captive and such poor stufie as they find in their tent , return towards their ship , when be at sea , there arise a sudden flaw of wind , which be not a little dangerous for their small boat : but as God will they come all safe aboard . and with these good news they return ( as before mention ) into the countess of Warwick sound unto we . and between jackmans sound , from whence they come , and the countess of Warwick sound between land and land , be think the narrow the narrow place of the strait be judge nine raius ^ s league over at the least : and jackmans sound be league over . upon the Southerland , lie direct almost over against the countess sound , as be reckon scarce thirty league the queen within the strait from the queen cape , which be the entrance of the streit of the Southerland . this cape be name queen Elizabeth cape , stand in the latitude of 62 degree and a half to the northward of new find land , and upon the same continent , for any thing that be yet know to the contrary . the manner of have now get a woman captive for the comfort the meeting of qf our manj we bring they both together , and every five , and their man with silence desire to behold the manner of their entertainment , meet and entertainment , the which be more worth the behold then can be well express by writing . at their first encounter they behold each the other very wistly a good space , without speech or word utter , with great change of colour and countenance , as though it seem the grief and disdeine of their captivity have 306 take away the use of their tongue and utterance : the woman at the first very sudden , as though she disdain or regard not the man , turn away , and begin to sing as though she mind another matter : but be again bring together , the man break up the silence first , and with stern and stay countenance , begin to tell a long solemn tale to the woman , whereunto she give good hear , and interrupt he nothing , till he have finish , and afterward , be grow into more familiar acquaintance by speech , they be turn together , so that ( i think ) the one will hardly have live without the comfort of the other . and for so much as we can perceive , albeit they live continual together , yet they do never use as man and wife , though the woman spare not to do all necessary thing that appertain to a good housewife indifferent for they both , as in make clean their cabin , and every other thing that appertain to his ease : for when he be seasick , she will make he clean , she will kill and flay the dog for their eat , and dress his meat . only i think it worth the note , the continency of they both : for the man will never shift himself , except he have first cause the woman to depart out of his cabin , and they both be most shamefast , lest any of their privy part shall be discover , either of themselves , or any other body . on Monday the six of August , the lieutenant with all the soldier , for the better guard of the miner and the other thing a shore , pitch their tent in the countess island , and fortify the place for their better defence as well as they can , and be to the number of forty person , when be all at labour , they may perceive upon the top of a hill over against they a number of the country people waft with a flag , and make great outcry unto they , and be of the same company , which have encounter late our man upon the other shore , be come to complain their late loss , and to entreat ( as it seem ) for restitution of the shamefastness and chastity of those savage captive . another appearance of the country people . 307 these people know the use of writing . a letter send unto the five english captive . [ in . 70 . ] the english voyage the woman and child , which our man in the late conflict have take and bring away ; whereupon the general take the savage captive with he , and set the woman where they may best perceive she in the high place of the island , go over to talk with they . this captive at his first encounter of his friend fall so out into tear that he can not speak a word in a great space , but after a while , overcome his kindness , he talk at full with his companion , and bestow friendly upon they such toy and trifle as we have give he , whereby we note , that they be very kind one to another , and greedy sorrowful for the loss of their friend . Oure general by sign require his five man which they take captive the last year , and promise they , not only to release those which he have take , but also to reward they with great gift and friendship . our savage make sign in answer from they that our man shall be deliver we , and be yet live , and make sign likewise unto we that we shall write our letter unto they , for they know very well the use we have of writing , and receive knowledge thereof , either of our poor captive countryman which they betray , or else by this our new captive who have see we daily write , and repeat again such word of his language as we desire to learn : but they for this night , because it be late , depart without any letter , although they call earnest in haste for the same . and the next morning early be the seven of August , they call again for the letter , which be deliver unto they , they speedy depart , make sign with three finger , and point to the sun , that they mean to return within 3 day , until which time we hear no more of they , and about the time appoint they return , in such sort as you shall afterward hear . this night because the people be very near unto we , the lieutenant cause the trumpet to sound a call , and every man in the island repair to the ensign , he put they in mind of the place so far from their 308 country wherein they live , and the danger of a great multitude which they be subject unto , if good watch and ward be not keep , for at every low water the enemy may come almost dryfoot from the main unto we , wherefore he will every man to prepare he in good readiness upon all sudden occasion , and so give the watch their charge , the company depart to rest . i think the captain letter well worth the remembering , not for the circumstance of curious endite , but for the substance and good meaning therein contain , and therefore have repeat here the same , as by himself it be hasty write .