by the heat of the summer sun , be loose , do empty themselves with the ebb into the sea , and so gather in great abundance there together . and to speak somewhat here of the ancient opinion of the freeze sea in these part : i do think it to be rather a bare conjecture of man , then that ever any man have make experience of any such sea . and that which they speak of mare glacial , may be true think to be speak of these part : for this may well be call indeed the icy sea , but not the freeze sea , for no sea consist of salt water can be freeze , as i have more at large herein show my opinion in my second voyage , for saltwatercan - it seem impossible for any sea to be freeze , which not freeze . have his course of ebb and flow , especial in those place where the tide do ebb and flow above ten fathom . and also all these aforesaid ice , which we sometime meet a hundred mile from land , be gather out of the salt sea , be in taste fresh , and be dissolve , become sweet and wholesome water . [ Iii . 78 . ] and the cause why this year we have be more cumber with ice then at other time before , may be by reason of the easterly and southerly wind , which 328 bring we moor timely thither now then we look for . which blow from the sea direct upon the place of our streite , have keep in the ice , and not suffer they to be carry out by the ebb to the main sea , where they will in more short time have be dissolve . and all these fleet ice be not only so dangerous in that they wind and gather so near together , that a man may pass sometime ten or twelve mile as it be upon one firm island of ice : but also for that they open and shut together again in such sort with the tide and sea - gate , that while one ship follow the other with full sail , the ice which be open unto the foremost will join and close together before the latter can come to follow the first , whereby many time our ship be bring into great danger , as be not able so sudden to take in our sail , or stay the swift way of our ship . we be force many time to stem and strike great rock of ice , and so as it be make way through mighty mountain . by which mean some of the fleet , where they find the ice to open , enter in , and pass so far within the danger thereof , with continual desire to recover their port , that it be the great wonder of the world that they ever escape safe , or be ever hear of again . for even at this present we miss two of the fleet , that be , the Judith , wherein be the lieutenant general captain Fenton ; and the Michael , who both we suppose have be utter lose , have not hear any tiding of they in more than 20 day before . and one of our fleet name the bark Dennis , be b ^ ke Dennis of a hundred ton burden , seek way in among these ice , receive such a blow with a rock of ice that she sink down therewith in the sight of the whole fleet . howbeit have signify her danger by shoot off a piece of great ordinance , new succour of other ship come so ready unto they , that the man be all save with boat . 329 A . D . 1578 . part of the house lose . the english voyage within this ship that be drown there be parcel of our house which be to be erect for they that shall stay all the winter in Meta incognita . this be a more fearful spectacle for the fleet to behold , for that the outrageous storm which present follow , threaten they the like fortune and danger . for the fleet be thus compass ( as aforesaid ) on every side with ice , have leave much behind they , through which they pass , and find more before they , through which it be not possible to pass , there arise a sudden terrible tempest at the southeast , which blow from the main sea , direct upon the place of the streite , bring together all the ice a seaboard of we upon our back , and thereby debar we of turn back to recover sea - room again : so that be thus compass with danger on every side , sundry man with sundry devise seek the best way to save themselves . some of the ship , where they can find a place more clear of ice , and get a little birth of sea room , do take in their sail , and there lay a drift . other some fasten and more anchor upon a great island of ice , and ride under the lee thereof , suppose to be better guard thereby from the outrageous wind , and the danger of the lesser fleet ice . and again some where so fast shut up , and compass in among a infinite number of great country and island of ice , that they be fain to submit themselves and their ship to the mercy of the unmerciful ice , and strengthen the side of their ship with juncke of cable , bed , mast , plank and such like , which be hang over board on the side of their ship , may the better defend they from the outrageous sway and stroke of the say ice . but as in great distress , man of best valour be best to be discern , so it be great worthy commendation and note with what invincible mind every captain encourage his company , and with what incredible labour the painful mariner and poor miner ( unacquainted with such extremity ) to the ever - 330 • .. I578 , last renown of our nation , do overcome the brunt of these so great and extreme danger : for some , even without board upon the ice , and some within board upon the side of their ship , have pole , pike , piece of timber , and Ores in their hand , stand almost day and night without any rest , bear off the force , and break the sway of the ice with such incredible pain and peril , that it be wonderful to behold , which otherwise no doubt have strike quite through and through the side of their ship , notwithstanding our former provision : for plank of timber of more than three inch thick , and other thing of great force and bigness , by the surge of the sea and billow , with the ice be shiver and cut in sunder , at the side of our ship , so that it will seem more than credible to be report of . and yet ( that which be more ) it be faithful and plain to , be prove , and that by many substantiali witness , that our ship , even those of great burden , with the meeting of contrary wave of the sea , be heave up between island of ice , a foot wellnear out of the sea above their watermark , have their knee and timber within board [ he . 79 . i both bow and break therewith . and amid these extreme , while some labour for defence of the ship , and seek to save their body , other some of more mild spirit seek to save the soul by devout prayer and meditation to the almighty , think indeed by no other mean possible then by a divine miracle to have their deliverance : so that there be none that be either idle , or not well occupy , and he that hold himself in best security have ( god know ) but only bare hope remain for his best safety . thus all the gallant fleet and miserable man without hope of ever get forth again , distress with these extremity remain here all the whole night and part of the next day , except four ship , that be , the anne Francis , the moon , the Francis of Foy , and the Gabrieli , which be somewhat a seaboord of the fleet , and 331 being fist ship by a wind , have a moor scope of clear , try it out all the time of the storm under sail , be hardly able to bear a coast of each . and albeit , by reason of the fleet ice , which be disperse here almost the whole sea over , they be bring many time to the extreme point of peril , mountain of ice ten thousand time escape they scarce one inch , which to have strike have be their present destruction , consider the swift course and way of the ship , and the unwieldiness of they to stay and turn as a man will wish : yet they esteem it their better safety , with such peril to seek sea - room , than without hope of ever get liberty to lie strive against the stream , and beat among the icy mountain , who hugeness and monstrous greatness be such , that no man will credit , but such as to their pain see and feel it . and these four ship by the next day at noon get out to sea , and be first clear of the ice , who now enjoy their own liberty , begin a new to sorrow and fear for their fellow safety . and devout kneel about their main mast , they give unto God humble thanks , not only for themselves , but beseech he likewise high for their friend deliverance . and even now white amid these extremity this gallant fleet and valiant man be altogether overlabour and forewatch , with the long and fearful continuance of the foresay danger , it please God with his eye of mercy to look down from heaven to send they help in good time , give they the next day a more favourable wind at the west northwest , which do not only disperse and drive forth the ice before they , but also give they liberty of more scope and sea - room , and they be by night of the same day follow perceive of the other four ship , where ( to their great comfort ) they enjoy again the fellowship one of another . some in mend the side of their ship , some in set up their top mast , and mend their sail and tackle ; again , 332 some complain of their false stem bear away , some in stop their leak , some in recount their danger past , spend no small time and labour . so that i dare well avouch , there be never man more dangerous distress , nor more merciful by God providence deliver . and hereof both the tear ship , and the forweary body of the man arrive do bear most evident mark and witness . and now the whole fleet ply off to seaward , resolve there to abide until the sun may consume , or the force of wind disperse these ice from the place of their passage : and be a good birth off the shore , they take in their sail , and lie adrift . the seven of July as man nothing yet dismay , we another as - cast about towards the inward , and have sight of land , salt ' which rise in form like the Northerland of the straight , which some of the fleet , and those not the worst mariner , judge to be the north foreland : howbeit other sum be of contrary opinion . but the matter be not well to be discern by reason of the thick fog which a long time hang upon the coast , and the fog , snow , new fall snow which yearly alter the shape of the land , and take away oftentimes the mariner iners mark . mark . and by reason of the dark mist which continue by the space of twenty day together , this doubt grow the great and the long perilous . for whereas indeed we think our self to be upon the north - east side of frobishers straight , we be now carry to the south westwards of the queen foreland , and be deceive by a swift current come from the north - east , a swift eur - were bring to the southwestwards of our say course many mile more than we do think possible can come ’ to pass . the cause whereof we have since find , and it shall be at large hereafter declare . here we make a point of land which some mistake for a place in the straight call mount Warwick : but how we shall be so