like a small drum . whereupon we man our boat and come to they , they all stay in their canoas : we come to the water side be they be : and after we have swear by the sun after their fashion , they do trust we . so i shake hand with one of they , and he kiss my hand , and we be very familiar with they . we be in so great credit with they upon this single great famill - acquaintance , that we can have any thing they have . with the we buy five canoas of they : we buy their clothes from their back , which be all make of seal skin and bird skin ; their buskin , their hose , their glove , all be common sow and well dress : so that we be full persuade that they have diverse artificer among they . we have a pair of buskin of they full of fine wool like beaver . their apparel for heat be make of bird skin with their feather on they . we see among they leather dress like glover leather , and thick thong like white leather of a good length . we have of their dart and oar , and find in they that 387 they may • make much train , if they have mean how to use it . Moscovie glass . a fruit like corinth . the english voyage they will by no mean displease we , but will give we whatsoever we ask of they , and will be satisfy with whatsoever we give they . they take great care one of another : for when we have buy their boat , than two other will come and carry he away between they that have sell we his . they be very tractable people , void of craft or double deal , and easy to be bring to any civility or good order : but we judge they to be idolater and to worship the sun . during the time of our abode among these island we find reasonable quantity of wood , both fir , spruce and juniper ; which whether it come float any great distance to these place where we find it , or whether it grow in some great island near the same place by we not yet discover , we know not ; but we judge that it grow there further into the land than we be , because the people have great store of dart and oar which they make none account of , but give they to we for small trifle , as point and piece of paper . we see about this coast marvelous great abundance of seal skull together like skull of small fish . we find no fresh water among these island , but only snow water , whereof we find great pool . the cliflfe be all of such oar as m . Frobisher bring from Meta incognita . we have diverse show of study or Muscovy glass shine not altogether unlike to crystal . we find a herb grow upon the rock , who fruit be sweet , full of red juice , and the ripe one be like corinth . we find also birch and willow grow like shrub low to the ground . Theise people have great store of fur as we judge . they make show unto we the 30 of this present , which be the second time of our be with they , after they perceive we will have skin and fur , that they will go into the country and come again the next day with such thing as they have : but this night the wind come fair , the captain and the master will by no mean detract the purpose of our discovery . and so the last of this month about four 388 of the clock in the morning in God name we set sail , and be all that day becalm upon the coast . the first of August we have a fair wind , and so pro - August . ceed towards the northwest for our discovery . the sixth of August we discover land in 66 degree land in 66 40 minute of latitude , altogether void from the pester of degree +° ice : we anchor in a very fair road under a brave ' mount , the cliflfe whereof be as orient as gold . this mount be name mount Raleigh . the road where our ship lay at anchor be call Totnes ride . the sound which do compass the mount be name Exeter sound . the foreland towards the north be call dyer cape . the foreland towards the south be name cape Walsingham . so soon as we be come to a anchor in Totnes ride under mount Raleigh , we espy four white four white bear at the foot of the mount : we suppose they to eares - be goat or wolf , man our boat and go towards they : but when we come near the shore , we find they to be white bear of a monstrous bigness : we be desirous of fresh victuali and the sport , begin to assault they , and i be on land , one of they come down the hill right against i : my piece be charge with hailshot and a bullet : i discharge my piece and shoot he in the neck ; he roar a little , and take the water straight , make small account of his hurt . than we follow he with our boat , and kill he with boar - spear , and two more that night . we find nothing in their maw ; but we judge by their dung that they feed upon grass , because it appear in all respect like the dung of a horse , wherein we may very plain see the very straw . the 7 we go on shore to another bear which lie all night upon the top of a island under mount Raleigh , and when we come up to he he lie fast asleep . i level at his head , and the stone of my piece give no fire : with that he look up , and lay down his head huge white again : then i shoot be charge with two bullet , and strike he in the head : he be but amaze fell 389 backwards : whereupon we run all upon he with boar - spear , and thrust he in the body : yet for all that he grip away our boar - spear , and go towards the water ; and as he be go down , he come back again . than our master shoot his boar - spear , and strike he in the head , and make he to take the water , and swim into a cove fast by , where we kill he , and bring he aboard . the breadth of his forefoot from one side to the other be fourteen inch over . they be very fat , so as we be constrain to cast the fat away . we see a raven upon mount Raleigh . we find withy also grow like low shrub and flower like primrose in the say place . the coast be very mountainous , altogether without wood , grass , or earth , and be only huge mountain of stone ; but the brave stone that ever we see . the air be very moderate in this country . the 8 we depart from mount Raleigh , coast along the shore , which lie Southsouthwest , and eastnortheast . the 9 our man fall in dislike of their allowance , because it be too small as they think : whereupon we make a new proportion ; every mess be five to a mess shall have four pound of bread a day , twelve wine quart of beer , six Newland fish ; and the flesh day a gill of pease more : so we restrain they from their butter and cheese . the both we come to the most southerly cape of this land , which we name the cape of God mercy , as be the place of our first entrance for the discovery . the weather be very foggy we coast this north land ; at length when it break up , we perceive that we be shoot into a very fair entrance or passage , be in some place twenty league broad , and in some thirty , altogether void of any pester of ice , the weather very tolerable , and the water of the very colour , nature and quality of the main ocean , which give we the great hope of our passage . Having sail northwest sixty league in this entrance 39 ° we discover certain island stand in the midst thereof , have open passage on both side . whereupon our ship divide themselves , the one sail on the north side , the other on the south side of the say isle , where we stay five day , have the wind at southeast , very foggy and foul weather . the 14 we go on shore and find sign of people , for we find stone lay up together like a wall , and see the skull of a man or a woman . the 15 we hear dog howl on the shore , which we think have be wolf , and therefore we go on shore to kill they . when we come on land the dog come present to our boat very gentle , yet we think they come to pray upon we , and therefore we shoot at they , and kill two : and about the neck of one of they we find a leathern collar , whereupon we think they to be tame dog . there be twenty dog like mastiff with prick ear and long bush tail : we find a bone in the pizzle of their dog . than we go far , and find two slead make like we in England : the one be make of fir , spruce and oaken board sawen timber like inch board : the other be make all of whale bone , sawen -& there hang on the top of the slead three head of beast which they have kill . we see here lark , raven , foul . and partridge . the 17 we go on shore , and in a little thing make like a oven with stone i find many small trifle , as a small canoa make of wood , a piece of wood make like a image , a bird make of bone , bead have small hole a image . in one end of they to hang about their neck , and other small thing . the coast be very barren without wood or grass : the rock be very fair like marble , full of vein of diverse colour . we find a seal which be kill not long before , be flean , and hide under stone . our captain and master search still for proba - probability bility of the passage , and first find , two that this place fi ^ the passage . be all island , with great sound pass between they . 391 we never come into any bay before or after , but the water colour be alter very blackish . the english Voyages second , the water remain of one colour with the main ocean without alter . third , we see to the west of those isle three or four whale in a skull , which they judge to come from a westerly sea , because to the eastward we see not any whale . also as we be row into a very great sound lie southwest , from whence these whale come , upon the sudden there come a violent countercheck of a tide from the southwest against the flood which we come with , not know from whence it be maintain . five , in sail twenty league within the mouth of this entrance we have sound in 90 fathom , fair grey osie sand , and the further we run into the westwards the deep be the water ; so that hard aboard the shore among these isle we can not have ground in 330 fathom . last , it do ebb and flow six or seven fathom up and down , the flood come from diverse part , so as we can not perceive the chief maintenance thereof . the 18 and 19 our captain and master determine what be best to do , both for the safeguard of their credit , and satisfy of the adventurer , and resolve , if the weather break up , to make further search . the 20 the wind come direct against we : so they alter their purpose , and reason both for proceed and return . the 21 the wind be northwest , we depart from these island ; and as we coast the south shore we see many fair sound , whereby we be persuade that it be no firm land but island . the 23 of this month the wind come southeast , with very stormy and foul weather : so we be constrain to seek harbour upon the south coast of this entrance , where we fall into a very fair sound , and anchor in 25 fathom green osie sand . here we go on shore , where we have manifest sign of people where they have make their fire , and lay stone like a wall . in this place we 392 letter from John Davis to Walsingham , 3rd October , 1585 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this downioarnmwsy / ^ lwon « sgm ^ to 1585 . see four very fair falcon ; and m . Bruton take Faukens . from one of they his prey , which we judge by the wing and leg to be a snite , for the head be eat off . the 24 in the afternoon , the wind come somewhat fair , we depart from this road , purpose by God grace to return for England . the 26 we depart from sight of the north land of their return . this entrance , direct our course homeward until the ten of the next month . the 10 . of September we fall with the land of desola - September . cion , think to go on shore , but we can get never IO3 ' J a good harbour . that night we put to sea again think to search it the next day : but this night arise a very great storm , and separate our ship , so that we lose the sight of the moonshine . the 13 . about noon ( have try all the night before with a goose wing ) we set sail , and within two hour after we have sight of the moonshine again : this day England in we depart from this land . 14 . day . the 27 . of this month we fall with sight of England . this night we have a marvelous storm and lose the moonshine . the 30 . of September we come into Dartmouth , where we find the moonshine be come in not two hour before .