long time be miss , and never hear of before , who every man make the last reckon , never to hear of again . here every man great rejoice of their happy meet - 344 ing , and welcome one another after the sea manner with their great ordinance , and when each party have rip up their sundry fortune and peril past , they high praise God , and altogether upon their knee give he due , humble and hearty thanks , and master master wilf - wolfall a learned man , appoint by her majesty a ^ preachei - councell to be their minister and preacher make unto they a godly sermon , exhort they especial to be thankful to God for their strange and miraculous deliverance in those so dangerous place , and put they in mind of the uncertainty of man life , will they to make themselves always ready as resolute man to enjoy and accept thankful whatsoever adventure his divine providence shall appoint . this master Wolfall be well seat and settle at home in his own country , with a good and large live , have a good honest woman to wife and very towardly child , be of good reputation among the best , refuse not to take in hand this painful voyage , for the only care he have to save soul , and to reform those infidel if it be possible to Christianity : and also partly for the great desire he have that this notable voyage so well begin , may be bring to perfection : and therefore he be content to stay there the whole year if occasion have serve , be in every necessary action as forward as the resolute man of all . wherefore in this behalf he may right be call a true pastor and minister of God word , which for the profit of his flock spare not to venture his own life . but to return again to captain fentons company , the adven - and to speak somewhat of their danger ( albeit they be more than by writing can be express ) they report cbm 0 that from the night of the first storm which be about panie . the first day of July until seven day before the general arrival , which be the six and twentieth of the same , they * never see any one day or hour , wherein they be not trouble with continual danger and fear of death , and be twenty day almost together fast 345 extremity cause man to devise nevi art and remedy . hard shift . [ Iii . 85 . ] strange wonder . the english voyage among the ice . they have their ship strike through and through on both side , their false stem bear quite away , and can go from their ship in some place upon the ice very many mile , and may easy have pass from one hand of ice to another even to the shore , and if God have not wonderful provide for they and their necessity , and time have not make they more cunning and wise to seek strange remedy for strange kind of danger , it have be impossible for they ever to have escape : for among other devise , wheresoever they find any hand of ice of great bigness than the rest ( as there be some of more than half a mile compass about , and almost forty fathom high ) they common covet to recover the same , and thereof to make a bulwark for their defence , whereon have more anchor , they ride under the lee thereof for a time , be thereby guard from the danger of the lesser drive ice . but when they must needs forgo this new find fort by mean of other ice , which at length will undermine and compass they round about , and when that by heave of the billow they be therewith like to be bruise in piece , they use to make fast the ship unto the most firm and broad piece of ice they can find , and bind her nose fast thereunto , will fill all their sail whereon the wind have great power , will force forward the ship , and so the ship bear before she the ice , and so one ice drive forward another , shall at length get scope and searoom e . and have by this mean at length put their enemy to flight , they occupy the clear place for a pretty season among sundry mountain and Alps of ice . one there be find by measure to be 65 fathom above water , which for a kind of similitude , be call Salomons porch . some think those hand eight time so much under water as they be above , because of their monstrous weight . but now i remember i see very strange wonder , man walk , run , leap and shoot upon the main sea 40 . mile from any land , without 346 any ship or other vessel under they . also i see fresh river run amid the salt sea a hundred mile from land , which if any man will not believe , let he know that many of our company leap out of their ship upon island of ice , and run there up and down , do shoot at butt upon the ice , and with their caliver do kill great seal , which use to lie and sleep upon the ice , and this ice melt above at the top by reflection of the sun , come down in sundry stream , which unite together , make a pretty brook able to drive a mill the say captain Fenton recover his port ten day before any man , and spend good time in search for i , and he find good store thereof . he also discover about ten mile up into the country , where he perceive neither town , village , nor likelihood of habitation , but it seem ( as he say ) barren , as the other part which as yet we have enter upon : but their victual and provision go so scant with they , that they have determine to return homeward within seven day after , if the fleet have not then arrive . the general after his arrival in the countess sound , spend no time in vain , but immediate at his first land call the chief captain of his council together , and consult with they for the speedy execution of such thing as than they have in hand . as first , for search and find out good minerail for the miner to be occupy on . than to give good order to be observe of the whole company on shore . and last , to consider for the erect up of the fort and house for the use of they which be to abide there the whole year . for the better handle of these , and all other like important cause in this service , it be ordain from her majesty and the council , that the general shall call unto he certain of the chief captain and gentleman in council , to confer , consult and determine of all occurrent in this service , who name be as here they follow . 347 captain Fenton . 1 icaptaine Carew . captain York . > < captain best . i ^ captaine Philpot . and in sea cause to have as assistant , Christopher hall and Charles Jackman , be both very good pilot , and sufficient mariner , whereof the one be chief pilot of the voyage , and the other for the discovery . from the place of our habitation westward , master Selman be appoint notary , to register the whole manner of proceed in these affair , that true relation thereof may be make , if it please her majesty to require it . the first of August every captain by order , from the general and his council , be command to bring ashore unto the countess hand all such gentleman , soldier , and miner , as be under their charge , with such provision as they have of victual , tent , and thing necessary for the speedy get together of i , and fraught for the ship . the muster of the man be take , and the victual with all pth thing view and consider , every man be set to his charge , as his place and office require . the miner be appoint where to work , arid the mariner discharge their ship . upon the second of August be publish and proclaim upon the countess of Warwick hand with sound of trumpet , certain order by the general and his council , appoint to be observe of the company during the time of their abide there . in the mean time , while the mariner ply their work , the captain seek out new mine , the goldfiner make trial of the ore , the mariner discharge their ship , the gentleman for example sake labour hearty , and honest encourage the inferior sort to work . so that the small time of that little leisure that be leave to tarry , be spend in vain . the second of August the Gabriel arrive , who come from the viceadmiral , and be distress sore with ice , put into harbour near unto mount Oxford . 348 and now be the whole fleet arrive safe at their port , except four , beside the ship that be lose : that be , the Thomas Allen , the anne Francis , the Thomas of Ipswich , and the moon , who absence be some let unto the work and other proceed , aswell for that these ship be furnish with the better sort of miner , as with other provision for the habitation . the nine of August the general with the captain of his counsel assemble together , and begin to consider and take order for the erect up of the house or fort for they that be to inhabit there the whole year , [ three . 86 . ] and that present the mason and carpenter may go in hand therewith . First therefore they peruse Consulta tun the bill of lade , what every man receive into his ship , and find that there be arrive only the east - n ‘ t “ side , and the southside of the house , and yet not that perfect and entire : for many piece thereof be use for fender in many ship , and so break in piece while they be distress in the ice . also after due examination have , and true account take , there be find want of drink and fuel to serve one hundred man , which be a hundred the number appoint first to inhabit there , because their great store be in the ship which be not ' yet arrive . then captain Fenton see the scarcity of the necessary thing aforesaid , be content , and ofired himself to inhabit there with sixty man . where - habitatu » upon they cause the carpenter and mason to come ® , jun - before they , and demand in what time they will take upon they to erect up a less house for sixty man . they require eight or nine week , if there be timber sufficient , whereas now they have but six and twenty day in all to remain in that country . wherefore it be full agree upon , and resolve by the general and his counsel , that no habitation shall be there this year . and therefore they will master Selman the register to set down this decree with all their consent , for the better satisfy of her majesty , the lord of the counsel , and the adventurer . 349 the anne Francis , since she be part from the fleet , in the last storm before speak of , can never recover above five league within the strait , the wind be sometime contrary , and most time the ice compass they round about . and from that time , be about the seven and twenty of July , they can neither hear nor have sight of any of the fleet , until the 3 . of August , when they descry a sail near unto mount Oxford , with who when they have speak , they can understand no news of any of the fleet at all . and this be the Thomas of Ipswich , who have lie beat off and on at sea with very foul weather , and contrary wind , ever since that foresay storm , without sight of any man . they keep company not long together , but be force to loose one another again , the moon be consort always with the anne Francis , and keep very good company ply up together into the strait , with great desire to recover their long wish port : and they attempt as often , and pass as far as possible the wind , weather , and ice give they leave , which common they find very contrary . for when the weather be clear and without fog ,