then common the wind be contrary . and when it be either easterly or southerly , which will serve their turn , then have they so great a fog and dark mist therewith , that either they can not discern way through the ice , or else the ice lie so thick together , that it be impossible for they to pass . and on the other side , when it be calm , the tide have force to bring the ice so sudden about they , that common then they be most therewith distress , have no wind to carry they from the danger thereof . and by the sixth of August be with much ado get up as high as Leicester point , they have good hope to find the Souther shore clear , and so to pass up towards their port . but be there becalm and lie a hull open upon the great bay which come out of the mistake strait before speak of , they be 35 ° so sudden compass with ice round about by mean of the swift tide which run in that place , that they be never afore so hardly beset as now . and in seek to avoid these danger in the dark weather , the anne Francis lose sight of the other two ship , who be likewise hardly distress , signify their danger , as they since report , by shoot off their ordinance , which the other can not hear , nor if they have hear , can have give they any remedy , be so busy occupy to wind themselves out of their own trouble . the fleeboate call the moon , be here heave the moon . above the water with the force of the ice , and receive a great leak thereby . likewise the Thomas of Ipswich , and the anne Francis be sore bruise at that instant , have their false stem bear away , and their ship side strike quite through . now consider the conti nuall danger and contrary , and the little leisure that they have leave to tarry in these part , beside that every night the rope of their ship be so freeze , that a man can not handle they without cut his hand , together with the great doubt they have of the fleet safety , think it a impossibility for they to pass unto their port , as well for that they see themselves , as for that they hear by the former report of the ship which have prove before , who affirm that the strait be all freeze over within : they think it now very high time to consider of their estate and safety that be yet leave together . and hereupon the captain and master of these ship , desire the captain of the anne Francis to enter into the anne consideration with they of these matter . wherefore captain Tanfield of the Thomas of Ipswich , with his pilot Richard Cox , and captain upcote of the moon , the moon c < m - with his master John Lakes come aboard the anne ™ lt . Francis the eight of August to consult of these cause . P11 , 87 - ] and be assemble together in the captain cabin , sundry doubt be there allege . for the fearefull sort of mariner be overtyre with the continual 351 labour of the former danger , covet to return homeward , say that they will not again tempt God so much , who have give they so many warning , and deliver they from so wonderful danger : that they rather desire to lose wage , fraught , and all , than to continue and follow such desperate fortune . again , their ship be so leak , and the man so weary , that to amend the one , and refresh the other , they must of necessity seek into harbour . but on the other side it be argue again to the contrary , that to seek into harbour thereabouts , be but to subject themselves to double danger : if happy they escape the danger of rock in their enter , yet be in , they be nevertheless subject there to the danger of the ice , which with the swift tide and current be carry in and out in most harborough thereabouts , and may thereby gall their cable asunder , drive they upon the shore , and bring they to much trouble . also the coast be so much subject to break ground and rock , especial in the mouth and entrance of every harbour , that albeit the channel be sound over and over again , yet be you never the near to discern the danger . for the bottom of the sea hold like shape and form as the land , be full of hill , dale , and ragged rock , suffer you not by your sounding to know and keep a true guess of the depth . for you shall sound upon the side or hollowness of one hill or rock under water , and have a hundred , fifty , or fourty fathom depth : and before the next cast , year you shall be able to heave your lead again , you shall be upon the top thereof , and come aground to your utter confusion . another reason against go to harbour be , that the cold air do threaten a sudden freeze up of the sound , see that every night there be new congeal ice , even of that water which remain within their ship . and therefore it shall seem to be more safe to lie off and on at sea , then for lack of wind to bring 352 they forth of harbour , to hazard by sudden frost to be shut up the whole year . after many such danger and reason allege , and large debate of these cause on both side , the captain of the anne Francis deliver his opinion unto the company to this effect . First concern the question of return home , he think it so much dishonourable , as not to grow in any far question : and again to return home at length ( as at length they must needs ) and not to be able to bring a certain report of the fleet , whether they be live or lose , or whether any of they have recover their port or not , in the countess sound , ( as it be to be think the most part will if they be live ) he say that it will be so great a argument either of want of courage or discretion in they , as he resolve rather to fall into any danger , then so shameful to consent to return home , protest that it shall never be speak of he , that he will ever return without do he endeavour to find the fleet , and know the certainty of the general safety . he put his company in remembrance of a pinnisse of five ton burden , which he have within his ship , which be carry in piece , and unmake up for the use of those which shall inhabit there the whole year , the which , if they can find mean to join together , he offer himself to prove before therewith , whether it be possible for any boat to pass for ice , whereby the ship may be bring in after , and may also thereby give true notice , if any of the fleet be arrive at their port or not . captain best resolution . a pinnisse for the inhabiter . but notwithstanding , for that he well perceive that the most part of his company be addict to put into harbour , he be will the rather for these cause somewhat to incline thereunto . at first , to search alongst the same coast , and the sound thereabouts , he think it to be to good purpose , for that it be likely to find some of the fleet there , which be leak , and sore bruise with the ice , be the rather think likely to be seven 353 z put into a ill harbour , be distress with foul weather in the last storm , than to hazard their uncertain safety among the ice : for about this place they lose they , and leave the fleet then doubtful question of harbour . it be likely , also , that they may find some fit harbour thereabouts , which may be behooveful for they against another time . it be not likewise impossible to find some ore or i thereabouts wherewithal ! to fraught their ship , which will be more commodious in this place , for the nearness to seaward , and for a better outlet , then far within the strait , be likely here always to load in a short time , howsoever the strait shall be pester with ice within , so that if it may come to pass that thereby they may either find the fleet , i , or convenient harbour , any of these three will serve their present [ three . 88 ] turn , and give some hope and comfort unto their company , which now be altogether comfortless . but if that all fortune shall fall out so contrary , that they can neither recover their port , nor any of these aforesaid help , that yet they will not depart the coast , as long as it be possible for they to tarry there , but will lie off and on at sea athwart the place . therefore his final ! conclusion be set down thus , first , that the Thomas of Ipswich and the moon shall consort and keep company together careful with the anne Francis , as near as they can , and as true Englishman and faithful friend , shall supply one another want in all fortune and danger . in the morning follow , every ship to send off his boat with a sufficient pilot , to search out and sound the harborough for the safe bring in of their ship . And be arrive in harbour , where they may find convenient place for the purpose , they resolve forthwith to join and set together the pinnace , wherewithal ! the captain of the anne Francis might , accord to his former determination , discover up into the strait . 354 after these determination thus set down , the Thomas of Ipswich the night follow lose company of the other ship , and afterward shape a contrary course homeward , which fall out as it manifest appear , very much against their captain master tanfields mind , as by due examination before the lord of her majesty most honourable privy counsel it have since be prove , to the great discredit of the pilot Cox , who special persuade his company against the opinion of his say captain , to return home . and as the captain of the anne Francis do witness , even at their conference together , captain Tanfield tell he , that he do not a little suspect the say pilot Cox , say that he have opinion in the man neither of honest duty , manhood , nor constancy . notwithstanding the say ship departure , the captain of the anne Francis be desirous to put in execution his former resolution , go with his ship boat ( be accompany also with the moon skiff ) to prove among the hand which lie under hatton Hedland , if any convenient harbour , or any knowledge of the fleet , or any good ore be there to be find . the ship lie off and on at sea the while under sail , search through many sound , they see they all full of many danger and break ground : yet one there be , which seem a indifferent place to harbour in , and which they do very diligent sound over , and search again . here the say captain find a great black hand , whereunto he have good like , and certify the company thereof , they be somewhat comfort , and with the good hope of his word row cheerful unto the place : where when they arrive , they find such plenty of black ore of the same sort which be bring into England this last year , that if the goodness may answer the great plenty thereof , it be to be think that it may reasonable suffice all the gold - glutton of the world . this hand the captain for cause of his good 355 Bestes bless - hap , call after his own name , Bestes blessing , and with these good tiding return aboard his ship the nine of August about ten of the clock at night , he be joyful welcome of his company , who before be discomfort , and great expect some better fortune at his hand . the next day be the ten of August , the weather reasonable fair , they put into the foresay harbour , have their boat for their better security sound before their ship . but for all the care and diligence that can be take in sound the channel Anne Francis over and