sufficient at large declare the temperature of the middle zone , it remain to speak somewhat also of the moderate and continual heat in cold region , as well in the night as in the day all the summer long , and also how these region be habitable to the inhabitant of the same , contrary to the opinion of the old writer . of the temperature of cold region all the summer long , and also how in winter the same be habitable , especial to the inhabitant thereof . he cold region of the world be those , which tend towards the pole arctike , and antarctike , be without the circuit or bound of the seven climate : which assertion agreeable to the opinion of the old writer , be find and set out in our author of the sphere , Johannes de Ninus climate . Sacrobosco , where he plain say , that without the seven climate , which be bound by a parallel pass at fifty degree in latitude , all the habitation beyond be discommodious and intolerable . but gemma Frisius a late writer find England and Scotland to be without the compass of those climate , wherein he know to be very temperate and good habitation , add thereunto two other climate , the uttermost parallel whereof pass by 56 . degree in latitude , and therein com - prehendeth over and above the first computation , England , Scotland , Denmark , Moscovia , etc which all be rich and mighty kingdom . 268 the old writer persuade by bare conjecture , go about to determine of those place , by compare they to their own complexion , because they feel they to be hardly tolerable to themselves , and so take thereby a argument of the whole habitable earth ; as if a man bear in Marochus , or some other part of Barbary , comparison shall at the latter end of summer upon the sudden , either naked , or with his thin vesture , be bring into England , he will judge this region present not to be habitable , because he be bring up in so warm a country , be not able here to live , for so sudden a alteration of the cold air : but if the same man have come at the begin of summer , and so afterward by little and little by certain degree , have feel and acquaint himself with the frost of autumn , it will have seem by degree to harden he , and so to make it far more tolerable , and by use after one year or two , the air will seem to he more temperate . it be count a great matter in the old time , that there be a brass pot break in sunder with freeze water in Pontus , which after be bring and show in Delphis , in token of a miraculous cold region and winter , and therefore consecrate to the temple of Apollo . this effect be wrought in the parallel of fouretie three degree in latitude , it be present count a place very hardly and uneasy to be inhabit for the great cold . and how then can such man define upon other region very far without that parallel , whether they be inhabit or not , see that in so near a place they so gross mistake the matter , and other their follower be content with the invention of the old author , have persist willing in the same opinion , with more confidence than consideration of the cause : so light be that opinion receive , as touch the unhabitable climb near and under the pole . therefore i be at this present to prove , that all the land lie between the last climate even unto the point ° ' direct under either pole , be or may be inhabit , habitable . 369 especial of such creature as be engender and breed therein . for indeed it be to be confess , that some particular live creature can live in every particular place or region , especial with the same joy and felici tie , as it do where it be first breed , for the certain agreement of nature that be between the place and the thing elephant . breed in that place ; as appear by the elephant , which be translate and bring out of the second or three climate , though they may live , yet will they never engender or bring forth young . also we see the like in many kind orange tree , of plant and herb ; for example , the orange tree , although in Naples they bring forth fruit abundant , in room and Florence they will bear only fair green leaf , but not any fruit : and translate into England , they will hardly bear either flower , fruit , or leaf , but be the next winter pinch and wither with cold : yet it follow not for this , that England , Rome , and Florence shall not be habitable . twa cause of ln the prove of these cold region habitable , i shall heat - very short , because the same reason serve for this purpose , which be allege before in the prove the middle zone to be temperate , especial see all heat and cold proceed from the sun , by the mean either of the angle which his beam do make with the horizon , or else by the long or short continuance of the sun presence above ground : so that if the sun beam do beat perpendicular at right angle , than there be one cause of heat , and if the sun do also long continue above the horizon , than the heat thereby be much increase by access of this other cause , and so grow to a kind of extremity . and these two cause , as i say before , do most concur under the two Tropic , and therefore there be the great heat of the world . and likewise , where both these cause be most absent , there be great want of heat , and increase of cold ( see that cold be nothing but the privation and absence of heat ) and if one cause be want , and the other present , the effect will grow indifferent . therefore this be to be 270 understand , that the near any region be to the equinoctial , the high the sun do rise over their head at noon , and so make either right or near right angle , but the sun tarry with they so much the short time , and cause short day , with long and cold night , to restore the damage of the day past , by reason of the moisture consume by vapour . but in such region , over the which the sun rise low ( as in region extend towards either pole ) it make there unequal angle , but the sun continue long , and make long day , and cause so much short and warm night , as retain warm vapour of the day past . for there be find by experience summer hight night night in Scotland and Gothland very hot , when under near t / ie the equinoctial they be find very cold . this benefit of the sun long continuance and increase of the day , do augment so much the more in cold region as they be near the pole , and cease not increase until it come direct under the point of the pole arcticke , where the sun continue above ground the space of .. six month or half a year together , and so the day ? it be half a year long , that be the time of the sun be in the north sign , from the first degree of Aries until the last of virgo , that be all the time from our io day of march until the 14 of September . the sun their - ° f fore during the time of these six month without any six monet , is - offence or hindrance of the night , give his influence upon those land with heat that never cease during that time , which make to the great increase of summer , by reason of the sun continuance . therefore it follow , that though the sun be not there very high over their head , to cause right angle beam , and to give great heat , yet the sun be there sometime almost 24 degree high do cast a convenient and mean heat , which there continue without hindrance of the night the space of six month ( as be before say ) during which time there follow to be a convenient , moderate and moderate heat temperate heat : or else rather it be to be suspect then under you pole . 271 the sun never set in 182 day . [ Iii . 56 . ] horizon and equinoctial all one under the pole . the english voyage heat there to be very great , both for continuance , and also , quia virtus unita crescit , the virtue and strength of heat unite in one increase . if then there be such a moderate heat under the pole , and the same to continue so long time ; what shall move the old writer to say there can be place for habitation . and that the certainty of this temperate heat under both the pole may more manifest appear , let we consider the position and quality of the sphere , the length of the day , and so gather the height of the sun at all time , and by consequent the quantity of his angle , and so last the strength of his heat . those land and region lie under the pole , and have the pole for their zenith , must needs have the equinoctial circle for their horizon : therefore the sun enter into the north sign , and describe every 24 hour a parallel to the equinoctial by the diurnal motion of primum mobile , the same parallel must needs be whole above the horizon : and so look how many degree there be from the first of Aries to the last of virgo , so many whole revolution there be above their horizon that dwell under the pole , which amount to 182 , and so many of our day the sun continue with they . during which time they have there continual day and light , without any hindrance of moist night . yet it be to be note , that the sun be in the first degree of Aries , and last degree of virgo , make his revolution in the very horizon , so that in these 24 hour half the body of the sun be above the horizon , and the other half be under his only centre , describe both the horizon and the equinoctial circle . and therefore see the great declination of the sun be almost 24 degree , it follow , his great height in those country to be almost 24 degree . and so high be the sun at noon to we in London about the 29 of October , be in the 15 degree of Scorpio , and likewise the 21 of January be in the 15 of Aquarius . therefore look what force the sun at noon have in 272 London the 29 of October , the same force of heat it London . have , to they that dwell under the pole , the space almost of two month , during the time of the summer solstitium , and that without intermingle of any cold night ; so that if the heat of the sun at noon can be well measure in London ( which be very hard to do , because of the long night which engender great moisture and cold ) then will manifest appear by express number the manner of the heat under the pole , which certain must needs be to the inhabitant very commodious and profitable , if it incline not to overmuch heat , and if moisture do not want . for as in October in England we find temperate air , and have in our garden herb and flower notwithstanding our cold1 night , how much more shall they have the same good air , be continual without night . this heat of we continue but one hour , while the sun be in that meridian , but they continue a long time in one height . this our heat be weak , and by the coolness of the night vanish , that heat be strong , and by continual access be still increase and strengthen . and thus by a similitude of the equal height of the sun in both place appear they come - commodious modious and moderate heat of the region under the t ^ ngt " ider . ° the pole . pole . 1 and sure i can think that the divine providence have make any thing uncommunicable , but to have give such order to all thing , that one way or other the same shall be employ , and that every thing and place shall be tolerable to the next : but especial all thing in this low world be give to man to have dominion and use thereof . therefore we need no long to doubt of the temperate and commodious habitation under the pole during the time of summer . but all the controversy consist in the winter , for than the sun leave those region , and be no more see for the space of other six month , in the which time all the sun course be under their horizon for seven 273 s the space of half a year , and then those region ( say some ) must needs be deform with horrible darkness , and continual night , which may be the cause that beast can not seek their food , and that also the cold shall then be intolerable .