by which double evil all live creature shall be constrain to die , and be not able to endure the extremity and injury of winter , and famine ensue thereof , but that all thing shall perish before the summer follow , when they shall bring forth their brood and young , and that for these cause the say climb about the pole shall be desolate and not habitable . to all which objection may be answer in this manner : first , that though the sun be absent from they those six month , yet it follow not that there shall be such extreme darkness ; for as the sun be depart under their horizon , so be it not far from they : and not so soon as the sun fall so sudden come the dark night ; but the evening do substitute and prolong the day a good while after by twilight . after which time the residue of the night receive light of the moon and star , until the break of the day , which give also a certain light before the sun rise ; so that by these mean the night be seidome dark ; which be verify in all part of the world , but least in the middle zone under the equinoctial , where the twilight be short , and the night dark than in any other place , because the sun go under their horizon so deep , even to their antipode . we see in England in the summer night , when the sun go not far under the horizon , , that by the light of the moon and star we may travel all night , and if occasion be , do some other labour also . and there be no man that doubt whither our cattle can see to feed in the night , see we be so well certify thereof by our experience : and by reason of the sphere our night shall be dark than any time under the pole . the astronomer consent that the sun descend 274 from our upper hemisphere at the 18 parallel under the horizon make a end of twilight , so that at length the dark night ensue , and that afterward in the morning the sun approach again within as many parallel , do drive away the night by access of the twilight . again , by the position of the sphere under the pole , the horizon , and the equinoctial be all one . Theise revolution therefore that be parallel to the equinoctial be also parallel to the horizon , so that the sun descend under that horizon , and there describe certain parallel not far distant , do not bring dark night to those region until it come to the parallel distant 18 [ three . 57 ] degree from the equinoctial , that be , about the 21 degree of Scorpio , which will be about the 4 day of our November , and after the winter solstitium , the sun return back again to the 9 degree of Aquarius , which will be about the 19 of January ; during which time only , that be , from the 4 day of November until the 19 day of January , which be about six week space , those region do want the commodity of twilight : therefore , during the time of these say six month of darkness under the pole , the night be destitute of the benefit of the sun and the say twilight only for the the region space of six week or thereabouts . and yet neither this under thepole time of six week be without remedy from heaven ; for the moon with her increase light have access at that time , and illuminate the month lack light every one of themselves several half the course of that month , by who benefit it come to pass that the night name extreme dark possess those region no long than one month , neither that continual , or all at one time , but this also divide into two sort of short night , of the which either of they endure for the space of 15 day , and be illuminate of the moon accord . and this reason be gather out of the sphere , whereby we may testify that the summer be warm and fruitful , and the winter night under the pole be tolerable to live creature . and if it be so that the winter and 275 winter night time of darkness there be very cold , yet have not nature unfer ^ leave they provide therefore : for there the beast be sng crea - cover with hair so much the thick inn how much the ture . vehemency of cold be great ; by reason whereof the best and rich fur be bring out of the cold region . also the fowl of these cold country have thick skin , thick feather , and more store of down then in other hot place . Oure english man that travel to saint Nicholas , and go a fish to Wardhouse , enter far within the circle arctike , and so be in the freeze zone , and yet there , aswell as in island and all along those northern sea , they find the great store of the great fish that be ; as whale , etc and also abundance of mean fish ; as herring , cod , haddock , bret , etc which argue that the sea as well as the land may be and be well frequent and inhabit in the cold country . a objection but some perhaps will marvel there shall be such ° f Meta incog - temperate place in the region about the pole , when at it under 62 degree in latitude our captain Frobisher and his company be trouble with so many and so great mountain of fleet ice , with so great storm of cold , with such continual snow on top of mountain , and with such barren soil , there be neither wood nor tree , but low shrub , and such like . to all which objection may be answer thus : first , those infinite island of ice be engender and congeal in time of winter , and now by the great heat of summer be thaw , and then by ebb , flood , wind , and current , be drive to and fro , and trouble the fleet ; so that this be a argument to prove the heat in summer there to be great , that be able to thaw so monstrous mountain of ice . as for continual snow on top of mountain , it be there not otherwise then be in the hot part of the middle zone , where also lie great snow all the summer long upon top of mountain , because there be not sufficient space for the sun reflection , whereby the snow shall be melt . touch the cold stormy 276 wind and the barrenness of the country , it be there as it be in Cornwall and Devonshire in England , which part though we know to be fruitful and fertile , yet on the north side thereof all alongst the coast within seven or eight mile off the sea there can neither hedge nor tree grow , although they be diligent by art husband and see unto : and the cause thereof be the northern drive wind , which come from the sea be so bitter and sharp that they kill all the young and tender plant , and suffer scarce any thing to grow ; and so be it in the island of Meta incognita , which be subject most to Meta incogeast and northeastern wind , which the last year choke habit . up the passage so with ice that the fleet can hardly recover their port . yet notwithstanding all the objection that may be , the country be habitable ; for there be man , woman , child , and sundry kind of beast in great plenty , as bear , dear , hare , fox and dog : all kind of fly fowl , as duck , seamewe , wilmot , partridge , lark , crow , hawk , and such like , as in the three book you shall understand more at large . than it appear that not only the middle zone but also the zone about the pole be habitable . which thing be well consider , and familiar captain know to our general captain Frobisher , aswell for f ^ uhers that he be thorough furnish of the knowledge of the 5 sphere and all other skill appertain to the art of navigation , as also for the confirmation he have of the same by many year experience both by sea and land , and be persuade of a new and near passage to Cataya then by Capo de buona speranda , which the Portugal yearly use : he begin first with himself to devise , and then with his friend to confer , and lay a plain plat unto they that that voyage be not only possible by the northwest , but also he can prove easy to be perform . and further , he determine and resolve with himself to go make full proof thereof , and to accomplish or bring true certificate of the truth , or else never [ in . 58 . ] to return again , know this to be the only thing of 277 the world that be leave yet undo , whereby a notable mind may be make famous and fortunate . but although his will be great to perform this notable voyage , whereof he have conceive in his mind a great hope by sundry sure reason and secret intelligence , which here for sundry cause i leave untouched , yet he want altogether mean and ability to set forward , and perform the same . long time he confer with his private friend of these secret , and make also many offer for the perform of the same in effect unto sundry merchant of our country above 15 year before he attempt the same , as by good witness shall well appear ( albeit some evil willer which challenge to themselves the fruit of other man labour have great injure he in the report of the same , say that they have be the first author of that action , and that they have learn he the way , which themselves as yet have never go ) but perceive that hardly he be hearken unto of the merchant , which never regard virtue without sure , certain , and present gain , he repair to the court ( from whence , as from the fountain of our common wealth , all good cause have their chief increase and maintenance ) and there lay open to many great estate and learned man the plot and sum of his device . and among many honourable mind which favour his honest and commendable enterprise , he be special bind and behold to the right honourable Ambrose Dudley earl of Warwick , who favourable mind and good disposition have always be ready to countenance and advance all honest action with the author and executer of the same : and so by mean of my lord his honourable countenance he receive some comfort of his cause , and by little and little , with no small expense and pain bring his cause to some perfection , and have draw together so many adventurer and such sum of money as may well defray a reasonable charge to furnish himself to sea withal . he prepare two small bark of twenty and five and 278 1578 . twenty ton a piece , wherein he intend to accomplish his pretend voyage . wherefore , be furnish with the foresay two bark , and one small pinnace of ten tun burden , have therein victual and other necessary for twelve month provision , he depart upon the say voyage from black - wall the 15 or June anno domini 1576 . one of the bark wherein he go be name the Gabriel , and the other the Michael ; and sail northwest from England upon the 11 of July he have sight of a high and ragged land , which he judge to be Frisland ( whereof some author have make mention ) but dare not approach the same by reason of the great store of ice that lie alongst the coast , and the great mist that trouble they not a little . not far from thence he lose company of his small pinnace , which by mean of the great storm he suppose to be swallow up of the sea , wherein he lose only four man . also the other bark name the Michael mistrust 7 ^ Michael the matter , convey themselves privy away from he , return and return home , with great report that he be cast me - away . the worthy captain notwithstanding these discomfort , although his mast be spring , and his top mast blow overboard with extreme foul weather , continue his course towards the northwest , know that the sea at length must needs have a end , and that some land shall have a beginning that way ; and determine therefore at the least to bring true proof what land and sea the same may be so far to the northwestwards , beyond any man that have heretofore discover . and the twenty of July he have sight of a high land , which he call queen Elizabeth foreland , after her majesty name . And sail more northerly alongst that coast , he descry another foreland with a great gut , bay , or passage , divide as it be two main land or continent asunder . there he meet with store of exceed great ice all this coast along , and covet still to continue his 279 " frobishers first entrance within you strait . frobishers straight . [ in . 59 - ] the english voyage course to the northward , be always by contrary wind detain overthwart these