far shoot up so sudden within the say straight the expert mariner begin to 333 James bear a good mariner . : Christopher hall chief pilot . the english voyage marvel , think it a thing impossible that they can be so far overtake in their account , or that any current can deceive they here which they have not by former experience prove and find out . howbeit many confess that they find a swift course of flood then before time they have observe . and true it be wonderful to hear and see the rush and noise that the tide do make in this place with so violent a force that our ship lie a hull be turn sometime round about even in a moment after the manner of a whirlpool , and the noise of the stream no less to be hear afar off , than the waterfall of London bridge . but while the fleet lie thus doubtful among great store of ice in a place they know not without sight of sun , whereby to take the height , and so to know the true elevation of the pole , and without any clear of light to make perfect the coast , the general with the captain and master of his ship , begin doubtful to question of the matter , and send his pinnace aboard to hear each man opinion , and special of James bear , master of the anne Francis , who be know to be a sufficient and skilful mariner , and have be there the year before , have well observe the place , and draw out card of the coast . but the rather this matter grow the more doubtful , for that Christopher hall chief pilot of the voyage , deliver a plain and public opinion in the hear of the whole fleet , that he have never see the foresay coast before , and that he can not make it for any place of frobishers streit , as some of the fleet suppose , and yet the land do lie and trend so like , that the best mariner therein may be deceive . the ten of July , the weather still continue thick and dark , some of the ship in the fog lose sight of the admiral and the rest of the fleet , and wander to and fro , with doubtful opinion whether it be best to seek back again to seaward through great store of ice , or to follow on a doubtful course in a sea , bay , or streite they know not , or along a coast , whereof by reason of the 334 1578 . dark mist they can not discern the danger , if by chance any rock or break ground shall lie of the place , as common in these part it do . the vice - admiral captain York consider the foresaid opinion of the pilot hall , who be with he in the Thomas Allen , have lose sight of the fleet , turn back to sea again , have two other ship in company with he . also the captain of the anne Francis have likewise lose company of the fleet , and be all alone , hold it for best to turn it out to sea again , until they may have clear weather to take the sun altitude , and with incredible pain and peril get out of the doubtful place , into the open sea again , be so narrow distress by the way , by mean of continual fog and ice , that they be many time ready to leap upon a hand of ice to avoid the present danger , and so hope to prolong life awhile mean rather to die a pine death . some hope to save themselves on chest , and some hard shift to determine to tie the hatch of the ship together , and man to bind themselves with their furniture fast thereunto , wet ' and so to be tow with the ship - boat ashore , which otherwise can not receive half of the company , by which mean if happy they have arrive , they shall either have perish for lack of food to eat , or else shall themselves have be eat of those ravenous , bloody , and men - eating people . the rest of the fleet follow the course of the the coast along general which lead they the way , pass up above sixty league within the say doubtful and suppose straight , ieagU ™ have always a fair continent upon their starreboorde side , and a continuance still of a open sea before they . the general albeit with the first perchance he find mistake out the error , and that this be not the old straight , yet tf ^ ghttwhich he persuade the fleet always that they be in their n ° right course , and know straight . howbeit i suppose he rather dissemble his opinion therein then otherwise , 335 1578 . meaning by that policy ( be himself lead with a honourable desire of further discovery ) to induce the fleet to follow he , to see a further proof of that place . and as some of the company report , he have since confess that if it have not be for the charge and care he have of the fleet and fraught ship , he Frobisher can have pass to Cataia . both will and can have go through to the south sea , call mar deal Sur , and dissolve the long doubt of the passage which we seek to find to the rich country of Cataya . 1 of which mistaken straight , consider the circumstance , we have great cause to confirm our opinion , to like and hope well of the passage in this place . for fair open may . reason to prove a passage here . the foresay bay or sea , the further we sail therein , the wide we find it , with great likelihood of endless continuance . and where in other place we be much trouble with ice , as in the entrance of the same , so after we have sail fifty or sixty league therein we have no let of ice , or other thing at all , as in other place we find . great indraft . [ Iii . 81 . ] 2 also this place seem to have a marvellous great indraft , and draw unto it most of the drift ice , and other thing which do fleet in the sea , either to the north or eastwards of the same , as by good experience we have find . 3 for here also we meet with board , lathe , and diverse other thing drive in the sea , which be of the wrack of the ship call the bark Dennis , which a current to the west . perish among the ice as beforesaid , be lose at the first attempt of the entrance overthwart the queen foreland in the mouth of frobishers straight , which can by no mean have be so bring thither , neither by wind nor tide , be lose so many league off , if by force of the say current the same have not be violent bring . for if the same have be bring thither by tide of flood , look how far the say flood have carry it , the ebb will have recarry it as far back again , and by the wind it can not so come to 336 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv of this book , by click on it resource available ' ... 15781 pass , because it be then sometime calm , and most time contrary . and some mariner do affirm that they have diligent observe , that there run in this place nine nine hour hour flood to three ebb , which may thus come to t0 pass by force of the say current : for whereas the sea in most place of the world , do moor or less ordinary ebb and flow once every twelve hour with six hour ebb , and six hour flood , so also will it do there , be it not for the violence of this hasten current , which force the flood to make appearance to begin before his ordinary time one hour and a half , and also to continue long than his natural course by a other hour and a half , until the force of the ebb be so great that it will no long be resist : accord to the say , naturam expellas furca licet , usque recurrit . although nature and natural course be force and resist never so much , yet at last they will have their own sway again . Moreover it be not possible that so great course of flood and current , so high swell tide with continuance of so deep water , can be digest here without unburden themselves into some open sea beyond this place , which argue the more likelihood of the passage to be hereabout . also we suppose these great indraft do grow and be make by the reverberation and reflection of that same current , which at our come by Ireland , meet and cross we , of which in the first part of this discourse i speak , which come from the bay of Mexico , pass by and wash the southwest part of Ireland , rebound over to the north - east part of the world , as Norway , island , etc where not find any passage to a open sea , but rather be there increase by a new access , and another current meet with it from the scythian sea , pass the bay of saint Nicholas westward , it do once again rebound back , by the coast of Greenland , and from thence upon frobishers straight be to the southwestwardes of the same . seven 337 in the sea move from east to west continual . authority . hard but yet possible turn back again . tsaffique . the english voyage 5 and if that principle of philosophy be true , that inferiora corpora reguntur a superioribus , that be , if inferior body be govern , rule , and carry after the manner and course of the superior , than the water be a inferior element , must needs be govern after the superior heaven , and so follow the course of primum mobile from east to west . 6 but every man that have write or consider any thing of this passage , have more doubt the return by the same way by reason of a great downfall of water , which they imagine to be thereabouts ( which we also by experience partly find ) than any mistrust they have of the same passage at all . for we find ( as it be ) a great downfall in this place , but yet not such but that we may return , although with much ado . for we be easily carry in one hour than we can get forth again in three . also by another experience at another time , we find this current to deceive we in this sort : that whereas we suppose it to be 15 league off , and lie a hull , we be bring within two league of the shore contrary to all expectation . our man that sail further in the same mistake straight ( have the main land upon their starboard side ) affirm that they meet with the outlet or passage of water which come through frobishers straight , and follow as all one into this passage . some of our company also affirm that they have sight of a continent upon their larboard - side be 60 league within the suppose straight : howbeit except certain hand in the entrance hereof we can make no part perfect thereof . all the foresay tract of land seem to be more fruitful and better store of grass , deer , wild foul , as partridge , lark , seamewe , gull , wilmot , falcon and tassel gen till , raven , bear , hare , fox , and other thing , than any other part we have yet discover , and be more populous . and here luke ward , a gentleman of the company , trade merchandise , and do exchange knife , bell , look glass , etc with 338 those country people , who bring he foul , fish , bear skin , and such like , as their country yield for the same . here also they see of those great boat of the country , with twenty person in a piece . now after the general have bestow these many day here , not without many danger , he return back again . and by the way sail alongst this coast ( be the backside of the suppose continent of America ) and the queen foreland , he perceive a great sound to go through into frobishers straight . whereupon he send the Gabriel the one and twenty of July , to prove whether they may go through