be all the morning before exceed pleasant , tell his captain he dream that he be cast overboard , and that the 315 boatswain have he by the hand , and can not save he , and so immediate upon the end of his tale , his dream come right evil to pass , and indeed the boatswain in like sort hold he by one hand , have hold on a rope with the other , until his force fail , and the master drown . the height be take we find our self to be in the latitude of degree and a half , and reckon our self from the queen cape homeward about two hundred league . the last of August about midnight , we have two or three great and sudden flaw or storm . the first of September the storm be grow very great , and continue almost the whole day and night , and lie a hull to tarry for the bark our ship be much beat with the sea , every sea almost overtake our poop , so that we be constrain with a bunt of our sail to try it out , and ease the roll of our ship . and so the Gabriel not able to bear any sail to keep company with we , and our ship be high in the poop , [ three . 73 . ] and a tall ship , whereon the wind have more force to drive , go so fast away that we lose sight of they , and leave they to God and their good fortune of sea the second day of September in the morning , it please God of his goodness to send we a calm , whereby we perth rudder of ceive the rudder of our ship tear in twain , and almost the aid tome ready to fap away . wherefore take the benefit of the ’ time , we fling half a dozen couple of our best man over board , who take great pain under water , drive plank , and bind with rope , do well strengthen and mend the matter , who return the most part more than half dead out of the water , and as god pleasure be , the sea be calm until the work be finish . how the lati - the September , the height of the sun be tude be take , we find our self to be in the latitude of always take degree and a half . in this voyage common we ' ratte - mth ^^ take the latitude of the place by the height of the sun , staff then because the long day take away the light not only of astrolabe . the polar , but also of all other fix star . and here 316 the north star be so much elevate above the horizon , that with the staff it be hardly to be well observe , and the degree in the astrolabe be too small to observe minute . therefore we always use the staff and the sun as fit instrument for this use . have spend four or five day in traverse of the sea with contrary wind , make our Souther way good as near as we can , to raise our degree to bring our self with the latitude of Sylley , we take the height the ten of September , and find our self in the latitude of degree and ten minute . the eleven of September about six a clock at night the wind come good Southwest , our vex sb eat and set our course southeast . and upon Thursday , the twelve of September , take the height , we be in the latitude of and a half , and reckon our self not past one hundred and fifty league short of Sylley , the weather fair , the wind large at Westsouth west , we keep our course southeast . the thirteenth day the height be take , we find our self to be in the latitude of degree , the wind Westsouthwest , then be in the height of Sylley , and we keep our course east , to run in with the sleeve or chanel so call , be our narrow sea , and reckon we short of Sylley twelve league . Sunday , the 15 of September about four of the clock , we begin to sound with our lead , and have ground at 61 fathom depth , white small sandy ground , and reckon we upon the back of Sylley , and set our course east and by north , Eastnortheast , and Northeast among . the sixteenth of September , about eight of the clock in the morning sound , we have 65 . fathom osey sand , and think our self thwart of saint George channel a little within the bank . And bear a small sail all night , we make many sounding , which be about forty fathom , and so shallow , that we can not well tell where we be . 317 the seventeenth of September we sound , and have forty fathom , and be not far off the land end , find brand sand with small worm and cockle shell , and be shoot between Sylley and the land end , and be within the bay , we be not able to double the point with a south and by east way , but be fain to make another board , the wind be at southwest and by west , and yet can not double the point to come clear of the land end , to bear along the channel : and the weather clear up when we be hard aboard the shore , and we make the land end perfect , and so put up along saint George chanel . and the weather be very foul at sea , we covet some harbour , because the arrival of our steerage be break , and so come to anchor in Padstow ? road in Cornwall . but ride there a very dangerous Cornwall ride , we be advise by the country , to put to sea again , and of the two evil , to choose the less , for there be nothing but present peril where we ride : whereupon we ply along the channel to get to Londy , from whence we be again drive , be but a open road , where our anchor come home , and with force of weather put to sea again , and about the three and twenty our cam of September , arrive at Milford haven in wale , which ^ haven ^ be a very good harbour , make we happy man , that ’ we have receive such long desire safety . about one month after our arrival ! here , by order from the lord of the counsel , the ship come up to the arrival Bristol , where the ore be commit to keep in the ^ qrhtow ^ 1 castle there . here we find the Gabriel one of the ’ bark , arrive in good safety , who have never a man within board very sufficient to bring home the ship , after the master be lose , by good fortune , when she come upon the coast , meet with a ship of Bristol at sea , who conduct she in safety thither . the Michael here we hear good tiding also of the arrival of the “ llorth ' art ^ other bark call the Michael , in the north part , which cr pars . as not a ttie joyful unto we , that it please God so to bring we to a safe meeting again , and we lose in 318 all the voyage only one man , beside one that die only one man at sea , which be sick before he come aboard , and be die the so desirous to follow this enterprise , that he rather choose to dye therein , than not to be one to attempt so notable a voyage . the three voyage of captain Frobisher , pre - [ m . 74 . ] tend for the discovery of Cataia , by Meta incognita , anno do . 1578 . he general be return from the second voyage , immediate after his arrival in England , repair with all haste to the court be then at Windsor , to advertise her majesty of his prosperous proceed , and good success in this last voyage , and of the plenty of gold over , with other matter of importance which he have in these septentrional ! part discover . he be courteous entertain , and hearty welcome of many noble man , but especial for his great adventure , commend of her majesty , at who hand he receive great thanks , and most gracious countenance , accord to his desert . her highness also great commend the rest of the gentleman in this service , for their great forwardness in this so dangerous a attempt : but especial she rejoice very much , that among they there be so good order of government , so good agreement , every man so ready in his call , to do whatsoever the general shall command , which due commendation gracious of her majesty remember , give so great encouragement to all the captain and gentleman , that they , to continue her highness so good and honourable opinion of they , have since neither spare labour , limb , nor life , to bring this matter ( so well begin ) to a happy and prosperous end . And find that the matter of the gold over have appearance and make show of great riches and profit , and the hope of the passage to Cataya , by this last voyage great 3X9 m . Frobisher commend of her majesty . the gentleman commend . 1578 - commissioner appoint to examine the goodness of the ore . a name give tope place new discover . the hope of the passage to Cataya . a fort to be build in Meta incognita . the english voyage increase , her majesty appoint speciali Commissioners choose for this purpose , gentleman of great judgement , art , and skill , to look thorough into the cause , for the true trial and due examination thereof , and for the full handle of all matter thereunto appertain . and because that place and country have never heretofore be discover , and therefore have no speciali name , by which it may be call and know , her majesty name it very proper Meta incognita , as a mark and bind utter hitherto unknown . the commissioner after sufficient trial and proof make of the ore , and have understand by sundry reason , and substantiali ground , the possibility and likelihood of the passage , advertise her highness , that the cause be of importance , and the voyage great worthy to be advance again . whereupon preparation be make of ship and all other thing necessary , with such expedition , as the time of the year then require . and because it be assure make account of , that the commodity of mine , there already discover , will at the least countervail in all respect the adventurer charge , and give further hope and likelihood of great matter to follow : it be think needful , both for the better guard of those part already find , and for further discovery of the inland and secret of those country , and also for further search of the passage to Cataya ( whereof the hope continual more and more increase ) that certain number of choose soldier and discreet man for those purpose shall be assign to inhabit there . whereupon there be a strong fort or house of timber , artificial frame , and cunning devise by a notable learned man here at home , in ship to be carry thither , whereby those man that be appoint to winter and stay there the whole year , may aswell be defend from the danger of the snow and cold air , as also fortify from the force or offence of those country people , which perhaps otherwise with too great multitude may oppress they . and to this great adventure and notable exploit many 320 well mind and forward young gentleman of our country willing have offer themselves . and first captain Fenton lieutenant generail for captain Frobisher , and in charge of the company with he there , captain best , and captain Filpot , unto who good discretion the government of that service be chief commend , who , as man not regard peril in respect of the profit and common wealth of their country , be willing to abide the first brunt and adventure of those danger among a savage and brutish kind of people , in a place hitherto ever think for extreme can not habitable . the whole number of man which have offer , and be appoint to inhabit Meta incognita all the year , be one hundred person , whereof 40 shall be mariner for the use of ship , 30 miner for gather the gold over together for the next year , and 30 soldier for the better guard of the rest , within which last number be include the gentleman , goldfiner , baker , carpenter , and all necessary person . to each of the captain be assign one ship , aswell for the further search of the coast and country there , as for to return and bring back their company again , if the necessity of the place so urge , or by miscarry of the fleet the next year , they may be disappoint of their further provision . be therefore thus furnish with all necessary , there be ready to depart upon the say voyage 15 sail of good ship , whereof the whole number be to return again with their load of gold over in the end of the summer , except those 3 ship , which shall be leave for the use of those captain which shall inhabit there the whole year . And be in so good readiness , the general with all the captain come to the court , then lie at Greenwich , to take their leave of her majesty , at who hand they all receive great encouragement , and gracious countenance . her highness beside other good gift , and great promise , bestow on the general a fair chain of gold , and the rest of the captain kiss her hand , take unto 321 ten a hundred man appoint to inhabit there . fifteen sail . [ he . 75 - 1 a chain of gold give to m . Frobisher . their leave , and depart every man towards their charge . the name of the ship with their several captain . i in the aid be Amirali , be the general captain Frobisher . 2 in the Thomas Allen vice - admiral York . 3 in the Judith lieutenant generail Fenton . 4 in the anne Francis Best . 5 in the Hopewell Carew . 6 in the bear Filpot . 7 in the Thomas of Ipswich Tanfield . 8 in the Emmanuel of Exeter Courtney . 9 in the Francis of Foy moil . 10 in the moon Upcot . 11 in the Emmanuel of Bridgewater Newton . 12 in the Salomon of Weymouth Randal . 13 in the bark Dennis Kendal . 14 in the Gabriel Harvey . 15 in the Michael , Kinnersley . the say fifteen sail of ship arrive and meet together at Harwich , the seven and twenty day of May anno 1578 , where the general and the other captain make view , and muster their company . and every several captain receive from the general certain article of direction , for the better keep of order and company together in the way , which article be as follow .