article and order to be observe for the fleet , set down by captain Frobisher general , and deliver in write to every captain , as well for keep company , as for the course , the 31 of May . 1 tnprimis , to banish swear , dice , and card - playing , 1 . and filthy conmunication , and to serve God twice a day , with the ordinary service usual in church of 322 England , and to clear the glass , accord to the old order of England . 2 the admiral shall carry the light , and after his light be once put out , no man to go a head of he , but every man to fit his sail to follow as near as they may , without endanger one another . 3 that no man shall by day or by night depart further from the admiral then the distance of one english mile , and as near as they may , without danger one of another . 4 if it chance to grow thick , and the wind contrary , either by day or by night , that the admiral be force to cast about , before her cast about she shall give warning , by shoot off a piece , and to her shall answer the vice - admiral and the rearadmiral each of they with a piece , if it be by night , or in a fog ; and that the vice - admiral shall answer first , and the rearadmiral last . 5 that no man in the fleet descry any sail or sail , give upon any occasion any chase before he have speak with the admiral . 6 that every evening all the fleet come up and speak with the admiral , at seven of the clock , or between that and eight , and if the weather will not serve they all to speak with the admiral , than some shall come to the vice - admiral , and receive the order of their course of master hall chief pilot of the fleet , as he shall direct they . 7 if to any man in the fleet there happen any mischance , they shall present shoot off two piece by day , and if it be by night , two piece , and show two light . 8 if any man in the fleet come up in the night , and hale his fellow know he not , he shall give he this watchword , before the world be God . the other shall answer he ( if he be one of our fleet ) after God come Christ his son . so that if any be find among we , not of our own company , he that first describe any such sail or sail , shall give warning to the 323 [ three . 76 . ] admiral by himself or any other that he can speak to , that sail better than he , be near unto he . 9 that every ship in the fleet in the time of fog , which continual happen with little wind , and most part calm , shall keep a reasonable noise with trumpet , drum , or otherwise , to keep themselves clear one of another . io if it fall out so thick or misty that we lay it to hull , the admiral shall give warning with a piece , and put out three light one over another , to the end that every man may take in his sail , and at his set of sail again do the like , if it be not clear . 11 if any man discover land by night , that he give the like warning , that he do for mischance , two light , and two piece , if it be by day one piece , and put out his flag , and strike all his sail he have aboard . 12 if any ship shall happen to lose company by force of weather , than any such ship or ship shall get she into the latitude of , and so keep that latitude until they get Frisland . and after they be past the west part of Frisland , they shall get they into the latitude of , and , and not to the northward of ; and be once enter within the streite , all such ship shall every watch shoot off a good piece , and look out well for smoke and fire which those that get in first shall make every night , until all the fleet be come together . 13 that upon the sight of a ensign in the mast of the admiral ( a piece be shoot off ) the whole fleet shall repair e to the admiral , to understand such conference as the general be to have with they . 14 if we chance to meet with any enemy , that four ship shall attend upon the admiral , viz . the Francis of Foy , the moon , the bark Dennis , and the Gabriel : and four upon my lieutenant general in the Judith , viz . the hopewel , the armenal , the bear , and the Salomon : and the other four upon the vice - admiral , the 324 Anne Francis , the Thomas of Ipswich , the Emmanuel , and the Michael . 15 if there happen any disorder person in the fleet , that he be take and keep in safe custody until he may convenient be bring aboard the admiral , and there to receive such punishment as he or their offence shall deserve . by i Martin Frobisher . our departure from England . have receive these article of direction we depart from Harwich the one and thirty of May . And sail along the south part of England westward , we at length come by the coast of Ireland at cape clear cape clear the six of June , and give chase there to a small bark which be suppose to be a pirate , or rover on the ’ sea , but it fall out indeed that they be poor man of Bristol , who have meet with such company of Frenchmen as have spoil and slay many of they , and leave the rest so sore wound that they be like to perish in the sea , have neither hand nor foot hole to help themselves with , nor victual to sustain their hungry body . Oure general , who well understand the office of a soldier and a Englishman , and know well what the necessity of the sea mean , pity much the misery charitable of the poor man , relieve they with surgery and salve to heal their hurt , and with meat and drink to comfort their pine heart ; some of they have neither eat nor drink more than olive and stink water in many day before , as they report . and after this good deed do , have a large wind , we keep our course upon our say voyage without stay for the take in of fresh water , or any other provision , whereof many of the fleet be not thorough furnish : and sail towards the northwest part from Ireland , we meet with a great current from out of the southwest , mark this which carry we ( by our reckon ) one point to the currentnortheastwards of our say course , which current seem 325 the english voyage to we to continue it self towards Norway , and other the north - east part of the world , whereby we may be induce to believe , that this be the same which the Portugal meet at Capo de buona Speranza , where strike over from thence to the stfeite of Magellan , and find no passage there for the narrowness of the say streite , run along into the great bay of Mexico , where also have a let of land , it be force to strike back again towards the north - east , as we not only here , but in another place also , further to the northward , by good experience this year have find , as shall hereafter in his place more at large declare . now have we sail about fourteen day , without sight of any land , or any other live thing , except certain fowl , as wilmot , nody , guile , etc which there seem only to live by sea . the twenty of June , at two of the clock in the morning , the general descry land , and find it to be west Frisland , now name west England . here the general , and other gentleman go ashore , be the first know Christians that we have true notice of , that ever set foot upon that ground : and therefore the general take possession thereof to the use of our sovereign lady the queen majesty , and discover here a goodly harbour for the ship , where be also certain little boat of that country . And be there land , they espy certain tent and people of that country , which be ( as they judge ) in all sort , very like those of Meta incognita , as by their apparel , and other thing which we find in their tent , appear . the savage and simple people so soon as they perceive our man come towards they ( suppose there have be no other world but they ) flee fearful away , as man much amaze at so strange a sight , and creature of humane shape , so far in apparel , complexion , and other thing different from themselves . they leave in their tent all their furniture for haste behind they , where among other thing be find a box of small 326 i578 - naile , and certain e red herring , board of fir tree well cut , with diverse other thing artificial wrought : whereby it appear , that they have trade with some civil people , or else be indeed themselves artificiali workman . our man bring away with they only two of their dog , leave in recompense belles , looking - glass , and diverse of our country toy behind they . this country , no doubt , promise good hope of great commodity and riches , if it may be well discover . the description whereof you shall find more at large in the second voyage . some be of opinion , that this west England be firm Frlsland supland with the north - east part of Meta incognita , or else with Greenland . and their reason be , because the people , Qroenian ^ apparel , boat , and other thing be so like to they : and another reason be , the multitude of island of ice , which lie between it and Meta incognita , do argue , that on the north side there be a bay , which can be but by conjoin of the two land together . and have a fair and large wind we depart from thence towards frobishers streite , the three and twenty 2 3 ° f of June . but first we give name to a high cliff in June ' West England , the last that be in our sight , and for a certain similitude we call it Charing cross . then Charing we bear southerly towards the sea , because to the cnue ' northwards of this coast we meet with much drive ice , which by reason of the thick mist and weather may have be some trouble unto we . on Monday the last of June , we meet with many great whale , as they have be porpoise . this same day the salamander be under both her whale corpse and bonnet , happen to strike a great whale with stn , > ke a shilling ! 1 ^- her full stem , with such a blow that the ship stand still , and stir neither forward nor backward . the whale thereat make a great and ugly noise , and cast up his body and tail , and so go under water , and within two day after , there be find a great whale dead 327 swim above water , which we suppose be that which the salamander strike . the second day of July early in the morning we have sight of the queen foreland , and bear in with the land all the day , and pass through great quantity of ice , by night be enter somewhat within the streite , perceive no way to pass further in , the whole place be freeze over from the one side to the other , and as it frobisher be with many wall , mountain , and bulwark of ice , streite mud choke up the passage , and deny we entrance . and up w ice . joe j not nthat passage or sea hereabout be freeze over at any time of the year : albeit it seem so unto we by the abundance of ice gather together , which occupy the whole place . but i do rather suppose these ice to be breed in the hollow sound and freshet thereabouts : which