over again , the anne Francis come aground in danger . upon a sink rock within the harbour , and lie thereon more than half dry until the next flood , when by god almighty providence , contrary almost to all expectation , they come afloat again , be force all that time to underset their ship with their main yard , which otherwise be likely to overset and put thereby in danger the whole company . they have above two thousand stroke together at the pump , before they can make their ship free of the water again , so sore the moon in she be bruise by lie upon the rock . the moon harbour . come safe , and ride at anchor by the anne Francis , who help in their necessity they can not well have miss . now while the mariner be rummage their ship , and mend that which be amiss , the miner follow their labour for get together of sufficient quantity of ore , and the carpenter endeavour to do their best for the make up of the boat or pinnace : which to bring to pass , they want two speciali and most necessary thing , that be , certain principali timber that be call knee , which be the chief strength of any boat , and also nail , wherewithal ! to join the plank together . whereupon have by chance a smyth among they , ( and yet unfurnish of his necessary tool to work and [ three . 89 . ] make nail withal ) they be fain of a gun chamber to make a anvil to work upon , and to use a pickaxe 356 in stead of a sledge to beat withal , and also to occupy two small bellows in stead of one pair of great smith bellows . and for lack of small iron for the easy make of the nail , they be force to break their tong , grydiron , and fireshovell in piece . the eleven of August the captain of the anne Francis take the master of his ship with he , go up to the top of hatton Hedland , which be the high land of all the strait , to the end to descry the situation of the country underneath , and to take a true plot of the place , whereby also to see what store of ice be yet leave in the strait , as also to search what mineral matter or fruit that soil may yield : and the rather for the honour the say captain do owe to that honourable name which himself give thereunto the last year , in the high part of this Hedland he cause his company to make a column or cross of stone , in token of christian possession . in this place there be plenty of black ore , and diverse pretty stone . the seventeenth of August the captain with their company chase and kill a great white bear , which adventure and give a fierce assault upon twenty man be weapon . and he serve they for good meat many day . the eighteenth of August the pinnace with much ado be set together , the say captain best determine to depart up the strait , to prove and make trial , as before be pretend , some of his company great persuade he to the contrary , and special the carpenter that set the same together , who say that he will not adventure himself therein for five hundred hatton Hedland . pretty stone . a mighty white bear . a pinnace there build . pound , for that the boat hang together but only by the strength of the nail , and lack some of her principali knee and timber . Theise word somewhat discourage some of the company which shall have go therein . whereupon the captain , as one not altogether addict to his own selfwill , but somewhat foresee how it may be 357 they adventure by the strait in a weak pinnace . the english voyage afterward speak , if contrary fortune shall happen he ( lo he have follow his own opinion and desperate resolution , and so thereafter it be befall he ) call the master and mariner of best judgement together , declare unto they how much the cause import he in his credit to seek out the general , as well to confer with he of some cause of weight , as otherwise to make due examination and trial of the goodness of the ore , whereof they have no assurance but by guess of the eye , and it be well like the other : which so to carry home , not know the goodness thereof , may be as much as if they shall bring so many stone . and therefore he desire they to deliver their plain and honest opinion , whether the pinnace be sufficient for he so to adventure in or no . it be answer , that by careful heed take thereunto among the ice , and the foul weather , the pinnace may suffice . and hereupon the master mate of the anne Francis call John grey , manful and honest offer himself unto his captain in this adventure and service , give cause to other of his mariner to follow the attempt . and upon the nineteenth of August the say captain be accompany with captain upcote of the moon , and eighteen person in the small pinnace , have convenient portion of victual and thing necessary , depart upon the say pretend voyage , leave their ship at anchor in a good readiness for the take in of their fraught . and have little wind to sail withal , they ply alongst the Souther shore , and pass above 30 . league , have the only help of man labour with oar , and so intend to keep that shore aboard until they be get up to the far and narrow of the strait , mind there to cross over , and to search likewise alongst the Northerland unto the countess sound , and from thence to pass all that coast along , whereby if any of the fleet have be distress by wreck of rock or ice , by that mean they may be perceive of they , and so they thereby to give they such 358 help and relief as they can . they do great fear , and ever suspect that some of the fleet be sure cast away , and drive to seek sour salad among the cold cliff . And be shoot up about forty league within the +° - league strait , they put over towards the norther shore , which be not a little dangerous for their small boat . * ’ and by mean of a sudden flaw be dry when , and fain to seek harbour in the night among all the rock and break ground of gabriels hand , a place so name gabriel within the strait above the countess of Warwick add . sound : and by the way where they land , they do find certain great stone set up by the country people as it seem , for mark , where they also make many cross of stone , in token that Christians have be there . the 22 . of August they have sight of the countess sound , and make the place perfect from the top of a hill , and keep along the norther shore , perceive the smoke of a fire under a hill side : whereof they diverse [ he . 90 . ] deem . when they come near the place , they perceive people which waft unto they , as it seem , with a flag or ensign . and because the country people have use to do the like , when they perceive any of our boat to pass by , they suspect they to be the same . And come somewhat near , they may perceive certain tent , and discern this ensign to be of mingle colour , black and white , after the english fashion . but because they can see no ship , nor likelihood of harbour within five or six league about , and know that none of our man be wont to frequent those part , they can not tell what to judge thereof , but imagine that some of the ship be carry so high with the storm and mist , have make shipwreck among the ice or the break island there , and be spoil by the country people , who may use the sundry colour flag for a policy , to bring they likewise within their danger . whereupon the say captain with his company , resolve to recover the same ensign , if it 359 be so , from those base people , or else to lose their life , and all together . in the end they discern they to be their countryman , and then they deem they to have lose their ship , and so to be gather together for their better strength . on the other side , the company ashore fear that the captain have lose his ship , come to seek forth the fleet for his relief in his poor pinnisse , so that their extremity cause each part to suspect the worst . the captain now with his pinnisse be come near the shore , command his boat careful to be keep aflote , lest in their necessity they may win the same from he , and seek first to save themselves : for every proximus sum man in that case be next himself . they hale one ogomet mihi . another accord to the manner of the sea , and de - mand what cheer ? and either party answer the other , that all be well : whereupon there be a sudden and joyful outshoot , with great fling up of cap , and a brave voly of shot to welcome one another . and true it be a most strange case to see how joyful and glad every party be to see themselves meet in safety again , after so strange and incredible danger : yet to be short , as their danger be great , so their god be great . and here the company be work upon new mine , captainyorke which captain York be here arrive not long before , have find out in this place , and it be name the countess of Sussex i . after some conference with our friend here , the captain of the anne Francis depart towards the countess of Warwick sound , to speak with the general , and to have trial make of such mettle as he have bring thither , by the goldfiner . and so he determine to dispatch again towards his ship . and have speak with the general , he receive order for all cause , and direction as well for the bring up of his ship to the countess sound , as also to fraught his ship with the same oar which he himself have 360 sound , which upon trial make , be suppose to be very good . the 23 . of August , the say captain meet together with the other captain ( commissioner in counsel with the general ) aboard the aid , where they consider and consult of sundry cause , which be particular register by the notary , be appoint where and how to be do against another year . the 24 . of August , the general with two pinniss and good number of man go to bear sound , command the say captain with his pinnace to attend the service , to see if he can encounter or apprehend any of the people : for sundry time they show themselves busy thereabouts , sometime with seven or eight boat in one company , as though they mind to encounter with our company which be work there at the mine , in no great number . but when they perceive any of our ship to ride in that road ( be belike more amaze at the countenance of a ship , and a more number of man ) they do never show themselves again there at all . wherefore our man seek with their pinniss to compass about the hand where they do use , suppose there sudden to intercept some of they . but before our man can come near , have belike some watch in the top of the mountain , they convey themselves privy away , and leave ( as it shall seem ) one of their great dart behind they for haste , which we find near to a place of their cave and house . therefore , though our general be very desirous to have take some of they to have bring into England , they be now grow more wary by their former loss , will not at any time come within our danger . about midnight of the same day , the captain of the anne Francis depart thence and set his course over the strait towards hatton Hedland , be about 15 . league over , and return aboard his ship the 25 . of August , to the great comfort of his company , who long expect his come ,