the first voyage of m . John Davis , undertake in June 1585 . for the discovery of they northwest passage , write by m . John Janes merchant , sometime servant to the worshipful master William Sanderson . ertaine honourable personage and worthy gentleman of the court and country , with diverse worshipful merchant of London and of the west country , move with desire to advance God glory and to seek the good of their native country , consult together of the likelihood of the discovery of they northwest passage , which heretofore have be attempt , but unhappy give over by accident unlooked for , which turn the enterpriser from their principali purpose , resolve after good deliberation , to put down their adventure to provide for necessary ship , and a fit man to be chief conductor of this so hard a enterprise . the set forth of this action be commit by the adventurer , especial to the care of m . William Sanderson merchant of London , who be so forward therein , that beside his travail which be not small , he become the great adventurer with his purse , and commend unto the rest of the company one m . John Davis , a man very well ground in the principle of the art of navigation , for captain and chief pilot of this exploit . thus therefore all thing be put in a readiness , we depart from Dartmouth the seven of June , towards the discovery of the aforesaid northwest passage , with two bark , the one be of 50 . ton , 381 name the sunshine of London , and the other be 35 . ton , name the moonshine of Dartmouth . in the sunshine we have 23 . person , who name be these follow , m . John Davis captain , William Eston master , Richard pope master mate , John Jane merchant , Henry Davie gunner , William across boatswain , John bag , Walter Arthur , luke Adam , Robert coxworthie , John Ellis , John Kelley , Edward Helman , musician . William Dick , Andrew Maddock , Thomas hill , Robert wat carpenter , William Russell , Christopher Gorney boy : James coal , Francis Ridley , John Russell , Robert Cornish musician . the moonshine have 19 person , William Bruton captain , John Ellis master , the rest mariner . the 7 . of June the captain and the master draw out a proportion for the continuance of our victual . the 8 . day the wind be at southwest and west southwest , we put in for Falmouth , where we remain until the 13 . the 13 . the wind blow at north , and be fair weather we depart . the 14 . with contrary wind we be force to put into Silley . the 15 . we depart thence , have the wind north and by east moderate and fair weather . the 16 . we be drive back again , and be constrain to arrive at new Grymsby in Silley : here the wind remain contrary 12 . day , and in that space the captain , the master and i go about all the hand , and the captain do plat out and describe the situation of all the hand , rock and harborough to the exact use of navigation , with line and scale thereunto convenient . they depart the 28 . in God name we depart the wind be from Silley . Easterly but calm . July . the first of July we see great store of porpoise ; the master call for a harp iron , and shoot twice or thrice : sometime he miss , and at last shoot one 382 and strike he in the side , and wound he into the [ three . 99 ] ship ; when we have he aboard , the master say it be a darlie head . the 2 . we have some of the fish sodden , and it do eat as sweet as any mutton . the 3 . we have moor in sight , and the master go to shoot at they , but they be so great , that they burst our iron , and we lose both fish , iron , pastime and all : yet nevertheless the master shoot at they with a pike , and have wellnigh get one , but he be so strong that he burst off the bar of the pike and go away : than he take the boathook , and hit one with that , but all will not prevail , so at length we let they alone . the 6 . we see a very great whale , and every day we see whale continual . the 16 . 17 . and 18 . we see great store of whale . great store of the 19 of July we fall into a great whirl and us . brustle of a tide , set to the northward : and sail about half a league we come into a very calm sea , which bend to the southsouthwest . here we hear a mighty great roar of the sea , as if it have be the breach of some shore , the air be so foggy and full of thick mist , that we can not see the one ship from the other , be a very small distance asunder : so the captain and the master be in distrust how the tide may set they , cause the moonshine to hoist out her boat and to sound , but they can not find ground in 300 . fathom and better . then the captain , master , and i go towards the breach , to see what it shall be , give charge to our gunner that at every glass they shall shoot off a musketshot , to the intent we may keep our self from loose they . then come near to the breach , we meet many hand of ice dote , which have quick compass we about : than we go upon some of they , and do perceive that all the roar which we hear , be cause only by the roll of this ice together : our company see we not to return 383 the rout if the ice together make a great roar . the english voyage accord to our appointment , leave off shoot musket , and begin to shoot falkonet , for they fear some mishap have befall we , but before night we come aboard again with our boat lade with ice , which make very good fresh water . than we bend our course towards the north , hope by that mean to double the land . the 20 . as we sail along the coast the fog break up , and we discover the land , which be the most deform rocky and mountainous land that ever we see : the first sight whereof do show as if it have be in form of a sugarloaf , stand to our sight above the cloud , for that it do show over the fog like a white list in the sky , the top altogether cover with snow , and the shore beset with ice a league off into the sea , make such irksome noise as that it seem to be the true pattern of desolation , and after the same our captain name it , the land of desolation . the 21 . the wind come northerly and overblew , so that we be constrain to bend our course south again , for we perceive that we be run into a very deep bay , where we be almost compass with ice , for we see very much towards the northnortheast , west , and Southwest : and this day and this night we clear our self of the ice , run southsouthwest along the shore . upon Thursday be the 22 . of this month , about three of the clock in the morning , we hoist out our boat , and the captain with six sailor go towards the shore , think to find a land place , for the night before we do perceive the coast to be void of ice to our judgement , and the same night we be all persuaded that we have see a Canoa row along the shore , but afterward we fall in some doubt of it , but we have no great reason so to do . the captain row towards the shore , will the master to bear in with the land after he , and before he come near the shore by the space of a league , or about two mile , he find so much ice , that he can not get to land by any 384 mean . here our mariner put to their line to see if they can get any fish , because there be so many seal upon the coast , and the bird do beat upon the water , but all be in vain : the water about this place be very black and thick like to a filthy stand pool , we sound and have ground in 120 . fathom . while the captain be row to the shore , our man see wood upon the rock like to the rock of Newfoundland , but i can not discern they , yet it may be so very well : for we have wood float upon the coast every day , and the moonshine take up a tree at sea not far from the coast be sixty foot of length and fourteen handful about , have the root upon it : after this the captain come aboard , the weather be very calm and fair we bend our course towards the south , with intent to double the land . the 23 . we coast the land which do lie Eastnortheast and Westsouthwest . the 24 . the wind be very fair at east , we coast the land which do lie east and west , not be able to come near the shore by reason of the great quantity of ice . at this place , because the weather be somewhat cold by reason of the ice , and the better to encourage our man , their allowance be increase : the captain and the master , take order that every mess , be five person , shall have half a pound of bread and a can of beer every morning to breakfast . the weather be not very cold , but the air be moderate like to our april - weather in England : when the wind come from the land , or the ice , it be some what cold , but when it come off the sea it be very hot . the 25 of this month we depart from sight of this land at six of the clock in the morning , direct our course to the northwestward , hope in God mercy to find our desire passage , and so continue above four day . the 29 of July we discover land in 64 degree 15 minute of latitude , bear Northeast from we . the vn 385 2 b very black water . float wood . coldebyreason ofyce . [ Iii . 100 ] they sail northwestward above four day . land in 64 degree 15 min . the sound where our ship do ride be call gilbert sound . musician . the people of the country come and confer with man . the english voyage wind be contrary to go to the northwestwards , we bear in with this land to take some view of it , be utter void of the pester of ice and very temperate . come near the coast , we find many fair sound and good road for ship , and many great inlet into the land , whereby we judge this land to be a great number of island stand together . here have more our bark in good order , we go on shore upon a small island to seek for water and wood . upon this island we do perceive that there have be people : for we find a small shoe and piece of leather sow with sinew , and a piece of fur , and wool like to Bever . than we go upon another island on the other side of our ship : and the captain , the master , and i , be get up to the top of a high rock , the people of the country have espy we , make a lamentable noise , as we think , with great outcry and skreeching : our hear they , think it have be the howl of wolf . at last i hallow again , and they likewise cry . than we perceive where they stand , some on the shore , and one row in a Canoa about a small island fast by they , we make a great noise , partly to allure they to we , and partly to warn our company of they . whereupon m . Bruton and the master of his ship , with other of their company , make great haste towards we , and bring our musician with they from our ship , purpose either by force to rescue we , if need shall so require , or with courtesy to allure the people . when they come unto we , we cause our musician to play , our self dance , and make many sign of friendship . at length there come ten canoas from the other island , and two of they come so near the shore where we be , that they talk with we , the other be in their boat a pretty way off . their pronunciation be very hollow through the throat , and their speech such as we can not understand : only we allure they by friendly embrace and sign of courtesy . at length one of they point up to the sun with his hand , will present strike his breast so 386 .. I585 ' hard that we may hear the blow . this he do many time before he will any way trust we . then John Ellis the master of the moonshine be appoint to use his best policy to gain their friendship ; who strike his breast , and point to the sun after their order : which when he have diverse time do , they begin to trust he , and one of they come on shore , to who we throw our cap , stocking and glove , and such other thing as than we have about we , play with our music , and make sign of joy , and dance . So the night come , we bid they farewell , and go aboard our bark . the next morning be the 30 of July there come 37 thirty seven canoas row by our ship , call to we to come on canms - shoare : we not make any great haste unto they , one of they go up to the top of the rock , and leap and dance as they have do the day before , show we a seal skin , and another thing make like a timbrel , which he do beat upon with a stick , make a noise their music .