the second voyage attempt by m . John Davis with other , for the discovery of they northwest passage , in anno 1586 . he 7 . day of May , i depart from the port of Dartmouth for the discovery of they northwest passage , with a ship of a hundred and twenty ton name the mermaid , a bark of 60 . ton name the sunshine , a bark of 35 . ton name the moonshine , and a pinnace of ten ton name the north star . 393 and the 15 . of June i discover land in the latitude of 60 . degree , and in longitude from the meridian of London Westward 47 . degree , mighty pester with ice and snow , so that there be no hope of land : the ice lie in some place ten league , in some 20 . and in some 50 . league off the shore , so that we be constrain to bear into 57 degree to double the same , and to recover a free sea , which through God favourable mercy we at length obtain . the 29 . of June after many tempestuous storm we again discover land , in longitude from the meridian of London 58 . degr . 30 . min . and in latitude 64 . being east from we : into which course sith it please God by contrary wind to force we , i think it very necessary to bear in with it , and there to set up our pinnace , provide in the mermaid to be our scout for this discovery , and so much the rather because the year before i have be in the same place , and find it very convenient for such a purpose , well store with float wood , and possess by a people of tractable conversation : so that the 29 . of this month we arrive within the isle which lie before this land , lie north northwest , and south southeast , we know not how far . this land be very high and mountainous , have before it on the west side a mighty company of isle full of fair sound , and harborough . this land be very little trouble with snow , and the sea altogether void of ice . the ship be within the sound we send our boat to search for shoal water , where we may anchor , which in this place be very hard to find : and as the boat go sound and search , the people of the country have espy they , come in their canoas towards they with many shout and cry : but after they have espy in the boat , some of our company that be , the year before here with we , they present row to the boat , and take hold on the oar , and hang about the boat with such comfortable joy , as will require a long discourse to be utter : they come with the boat to our 394 ship , make sign that they know all those that the year before have be with they . after i perceive their gentle and joy and small fear of we , my self with the merchant and : other of the company go a shore , bear with ' i twenty knife : i have no soon land , but they leap out of their canoas and come run to i and the rest , and embrace we with many sign of hearty welcome : at this present there be eighteen of they , and to each of they i give a knife : they oflr skin to i for reward , but i make sign that they be not sell , but give they of courtesy : and so dismiss they for that time , with sign that they shall return again after certain hour . the next day with all possible speed the pinnace be ^ » 100 land upon a isle there to be finish to serve our purpose for the discovery , which isle be so convenient mo ^ et for that purpose , as that we be very well able to defend our self against many enemy . during the time that the pinnace , be there set up , the people come continual unto we sometime a hundred canoas at a time , sometime fourty , fifty , more and less , as occasion serve . they bring with they seal skin , stag skin , white hare , seal fish , salmon peal , small cod , dry caplin , with other fish , and bird such as the country do yield . my self still desirous to have a further search of this place , send one of the shipboat to one part of the land , and my self go to another part to search for the habitation of this people , with straight commandment [ three . 104 . ] that there shall be no injury offer to any of the people , neither any gun shoot . the boat that go from i find the tent of the image , trane people make with seal skin set up upon timber , where - c > I | will > an ‘ i seal in they find great store of dry caplin , be a little st ^ m tan fish no big than a pilchard : they find bag of Trane oil , many little image cut in wood , seal skin in tan - tub , with many other such trifle , whereof they diminish nothing . 395 a grave with a cross lay over . the english voyage they also find ten mile within the snowy mountains a plain champion country , with earth and grass , such as our moory and waste ground of England be : they go up into a ri ^ er ( which in the narrow place be two league broad ) about ten league , find it still to continue they know not how far : but i with my company take another river , which although at the first it offer a large inlet , yet it prove but a deep bay , the end whereof in four hour i attain , and there leave the boat well man , go with the rest of my company three or four mile into the country , but find nothing , nor see any thing , save only gripe , raven , and small bird , as lark and linnet . the three of July i man my boat , and go with fifty canoas attend upon i up into another sound where the people by sign will i to go , hope to find their habitation : at length they make sign that i shall go into a warm place to sleep , at which place i go on shore , and ascend the top of a high hill to see into the country , but perceive my labour vain , i return again to my boat , the people still follow i , and my company very diligent to attend we , and to help we up the rock , and likewise down : at length i be desirous to have our . man leap with they , which be do , but our man do overleap they : from leap they go to wrestle , we find they strong and nimble , and to have skill in wrestle , for they cast some of our man that be good wrestler . the four of July we launch out pinnace , and have forty of the people to help we , which they do very willing : at this time our man again wrestle with they , and find they as before , strong and skilful . this four of July the master of the mermaid go to certain hand to store himself with wood , where he find a grave with diverse bury in it , only cover with seal skin , have a cross lay over they . the people be of good stature , well in body proportion , with small slender hand and foot , with broad visage , 396 1586 . and small eye , wide mouth , the most part unbearded , Tartar great lip , and close tooth . their custom be as often “ jf ^ arealso as they go from we , still at their return to make a new jialey saint truce , in this sort , hold his hand up to the sun with a loud voice he cry ylyaoute , and strike his breast with like sign , be promise safety , he give credit . Theise people be much give to bleed , and therefore stop their nose with dear hair , or the hair of a elan . they be idolater and have image great store , which they wear about they , and in their boat , which we suppose they worship . they be witch , and have many kind of enchantment , which they often use , but to small purpose , thanks be to God . be among they at shore the four of July , one of they make a long oration , begin to kindle a fire in this manner : he take a piece of a board wherein be a hole half through : into that hole he put the end of a round stick like unto a bedstaff , wet the end thereof in Trane , and in fashion of a turner with a piece their manner of leather , by his violent motion do very speedy ofkindlingfire produce fire : which do , with turf he make a fire , into which with many word and strange gesture , he a £ re make you put diverse thing , which we suppose to be a sacrifice : turf . my self and diverse of my company stand by , they be desirous to have i go into the smoke , i will they likewise to stand in the smoke , which they by no mean will do . i then take one of they , and thrust he into the smoke , and will one of my company to tread out the fire , and to spurn it into the sea , which be do to show they that we do contemn their sorcery . Theise people be very simple in all their conversation , great thief . but marvelous thievish , especial for iron , which they have in great account . they begin through our lenity to show their vile nature : they begin to cut our cable : they cut away the moonelight boat from her stern , they cut our cloth where it lie to air , though we do careful look unto it , they steal our oar , a caliver , a boar spear , a sword , with diverse other thing , whereat 397 their weapon . strange net . Theise islander war with the people of the main . copper oar . their language . the english voyage the company and master be grieve , for our better security , desire i to dissolve this new friendship , and to leave the company of these thievish miscreant : whereupon there be a caliver shoot among they , and immediate upon the same a falcon , which strange noise do sore amaze they , so that with speed they depart : notwithstanding their simplicity be such , that within ten hour after they come again to we to entreat peace ; which be promise , we again fall into a great league . they bring we seal skin , and salmon peal , but see iron , they can in no wise forbear steal : which when i perceive , it do but minister unto i a occasion of laughter , to see their simplicity , and i will that in no case they shall be any more hardly use , but that our own company shall be the more vigilant to keep their thing , suppose it to be very hard in so short time to make they know their evil . they eat all their meat raw , they live most upon fish , they drink salt water , and eat grass and ice with delight : they be never out of the water , but live in the nature of fish , save only when dead sleep take they , and then under a warm rock lay his boat upon the land , he lie down to sleep . their weapon be all dart , but some of they have bow and arrow and sling . they make net to take their fish of the fin of a whale : they do all their thing very artificial : and it shall seem that these simple thievish islander have war with those of the main , for many of they be sore wound , which wound they receive upon the main land , as by sign they give we to understand . we have kesinyoh , eat some . among they copper oar , black copper , and red copper : they pronounce their language very hollow , and deep in the throat : these word follow we learn from they . paaotyck , a oar . madlycoyte , music . Aginyoh , go fetch . Yliaoute , ! meanenoharme . Ponameg , a boat . Asanock , a dart . ► < Sawygmeg , a knife . Uderah , a nose . Aoh , iron . 398 Panygmah , a needle . Aob , the sea Mysacoah , wash it . lethicksaneg , a seal skin . Canyglow , kiss i . Ugnera , my son . Acu , shot . Conah , leap . maatuke , fish . Sambah , below . Maconmeg , will you have this . it Cocah , go to he . Aba , fall down . Icune , come hither . awennye , yonder . Nugo , no tucktodo , a fog . Lechiksah , a skin . , Maccoah , a dart . ’ Sugnacoon , a coat . Gounah , come down . sasobneg , a bracelet . ugnake , a tongue . ataneg , a seal . Macuah , a beard . Pignagogah , a thread . Quoysah , give it to i . the 7 . of July be very desirous to search the habitation of this country , i go myself with our new pinnace into the body of the land , think it to be a firm continent , and pass up a very large river , a great flaw of wind take i , whereby we be constrain to seek succour for that night , which be have , i land with the most part of my company , and go to the top of a high mountain , hope from thence to see into the country : but the mountain be so many and so mighty as that my purpose prevail not : whereupon i again return to my pinnace , and will diverse of my company to gather muscle for my supper , whereof in this place there be great store , my self have espy a very strange sight , especial to i that never before see the like , which be a mighty whirlwind take up the water in very great quantity , furious mount it into the air , which whirlwind , be not for a puff or blast , but continual , for the space of three hour , with very little intermission , which sith it be in the course that i shall pass , we be constrain that night to take up our lodging under the rock . the next morning the storm be break up , we A . D . 1586 . muscle . a strange whirlwind . 399 [ three . 106 . ] the english voyage go forward in our attempt , and sail into a mighty great river direct into the body of the land , and in brief , find it to be no firm land , but huge , waste , and desert isle with mighty sound , and inlet pass between sea and sea whereupon we return towards our ship , and land to stop a flood , we find the burial of these miscreant ; we find of their fish in bag , plaice , and caplin dry , of which we take only one bag and depart . the nine of this month we come to our ship , where we find the people desirous in their fashion , of friendship and barter : our mariner complain heavy against the people , and say that my lenity and friendly use of they give they stomach to mischief : for they have steal a anchor from we , they have cut our cable very dangerous , they have cut our boat from our stern , and now since your departure , with sling they spare we not with stone of half a pound weight : and will you still endure these injury ? it be a shame to bear they . i desire they to be content , and say , i doubt not but all shall be well . the 10 . of this month i go to the shore , the people follow i in their canoas : i toll they on shore , and use they with much courtesy , and then depart