aboard , they follow i , and my company . i give some of they bracelet , and cause seven or eight of they to come aboard , which they do willing , and some of they go into the top of the ship : and thus courteous use they , i let they depart : the sun be no soon down , but they begin to practise their devilish nature , and with sling throw stone very fierce into the moonlight , and strike one of her man then boatswain , that he overthrow withal : whereat be move , i change my courtesy , and grow to hatred , my self in my own boat well man with shot , and the bark boat likewise pursue they , and give they diverse shot , but to small purpose , by reason of their swift row : so small content we return . 400 the 11 . of this month there come five of they to make a new truce : the master of the admiral come to i to show i of their come , and desire to have they take and keep as prisoner until we have his anchor again : but when he see that the chief ringleader and master of mischief be one of the five , he then be vehement to execute his purpose , so it be determine to take he : he come cry iliaout , and strike his breast offer a pair of glove to sell , the master offer he a knife for they : so two of they come to we , the one be not touch , but the other be soon captive among we : than we point to he and his fellow for our anchor , which be have , we make sign that he shall be set at liberty : within one hour after he come aboard the wind come fair , whereupon we weigh and set sail , and so bring the oneofthepeo - fellow with we : one of his fellow still follow our ship close aboard , talk with he and make a kind a ™ r you ' of lamentation , we still use he well with yliaout , which be the common course of courtesy . at length this fellow aboard we speak four or five word unto the other and clap his two hand upon his face , whereupon the other do the like , depart as we suppose with heavy cheer . we judge the cover of his face with his hand and bow of his body down , signify his death . at length he become a pleasant companion among we . i give he a new suit of freeze after the english fashion , because i see he can not endure the cold , of which he be very joyful , he trim up his dart , and all his fish tool , and will make okam , and set his hand to a rope end upon occasion . he live with the dry caplin that i take when i be search in the pinnis , and do eat dry Newland fish . all this while , God be thank , our people be in very good health , only one young man except , who die at sea the fourteenth of this month , and the fifteen , accord to the order of the sea , with praise give to God by service , be cast overboard . vn 401 2 c a huge quantity ofyce in 63 . degree of latitude . the nature of fog . the english voyage the 17 of this month be in the latitude of 63 . degree 8 . minute , we fall upon a most mighty and strange quantity of ice in one entire mass , so big as that we know not the limit thereof , and be withal so very high in form of a land , with bay and cape and like high cliff land , as that we suppose it to be land , and therefore send our pinnace off to discover it : but at her return we be certain inform that it be only ice , which breed great admiration to we all consider the huge quantity thereof , incredible to be report in truth as it be , and therefore i omit to speak any further thereof . This only i think , that the like before be never see : and in this place we have very stickle and strong current . we coast this mighty mass of ice until the 30 of July , find it a mighty bar to our purpose : the air in this time be so contagious and the sea so pester with ice , as that all hope be banish of proceed : for the 24 of July all our shrowd , rope and sail be so freeze , and compass with ice , only by a gross fog , as seem to i more than strange , sith the last year i find this sea free and navigable , without impediment . our man through this extremity begin to grow sick and feeble , and withal hopeless of good success : whereupon very orderly , with good discretion they entreat i to regard the state of this business , and withal advise i , that in conscience i ought to regard the safety of my own life with the preservation of they , and that i shall not through my overboldness leave their widow and fatherless child to give i bitter curse . this matter in conscience do great move i to regard their estate : yet consider the excellency of the business if it may be attain , the great hope of certainty by the last year discovery , and that there be yet a three way not put in practice , i think it will grow to my great 402 disgrace , if this action by my negligence shall grow into discredit : whereupon seek help from God , the fountain of all mercy , it please his divine majesty to move my heart to prosecute that which i hope shall be to his glory , and to the contentation of every christian mind . whereupon fall into consideration that the mermaid , albeit a very strong and sufficient ship , yet by reason of her burden be not so convenient and nimble as a small bark , especial in such desperate hazard : further have in account her great charge to the adventurer be at xoo . li . the month , and that in doubtful service : all the premise consider with diverse other thing , i determine to furnish the moonlight with revictual and sufficient man , and to proceed in this action as God shall direct i . whereupon i alter our course from the ice , and bare eastsoutheast to recover the next shore where this thing may be perform : so with favourable wind it please God that the first of August we discover the land in latitude 66 . degree , 33 . min . [ Iii . 107 . ] and in longitude from the meridian of London 70 . degree void of trouble without snow or ice . the second of August we harbour our self in a very excellent good road , where with all speed we grave the moonlight , and revictual she : we search this country with our pinnace while the bark be trim , which William Eston do : he find all this land to be only hand , with a sea on the east , a sea on the west , and a sea on the north . in this place we find it very hot , and we be very much trouble great heat . with a fly which be call muskyto , for they do sting grievous . the people of this place at our first coming in catch a seal , and with bladder fast tie to he send he unto we with the flood , so as he come . right with our ship , which we take as a friendly present from they . the five of August i go with the two master and other to the top of a hill , and by the way William 403 Eston espy three canoas lie under a rock , and go unto they : there be in they skin , dart , with diverse superstitious toy , whereof we diminish nothing , but leave upon every boat a silk point , a bullet of lead , and a pin . the next day be the sixth of August , the people come unto we without fear , and do barter with we for skin , as the other people do : they differ not from the other , neither in their canoas nor apparel , yet be their pronunciation more plain than the other , and nothing hollow in the throat . Oure Savage aboard we keep himself close , and make show that he will fain have another companion . thus be provide , i depart from this land the twelve of August at six of the clock in the morning , where i leave the mermaid at a anchor : the fourteen sail west about fifty league , we discover land , be in latitude 66 . degree 66 . degree igminut : this land be 70 . league from the 19 minute . other from whence we come . this fourteenth day from nine a clock at night till three a clock in the morning , we anchor by a hand of ice , twelve league off the shore , be more to the ice . the fifteen day at three a clock in the morning we depart from this land to the south , and the eighteenth of August we discover land northwest from we in the morning , be a very fair promontory , in latitude 65 . degree , have no land on the south . great hope of here we have great hope of a through passage . a passage . this day at three a clock in the afternoon we again discover land Southwest and by south from we , where at night we be becalm . the nineteenth of this month at noon , by observation , we be in 64 . . degr . 20 . 64 . degree 20 . minute . from the eighteenth day at mn ' noon unto the nineteenth at noon , by precise ordinary care , we have sail 15 . league south and by west , yet by art and more exact observation , we find our . course to be southwest , so that we plain perceive rend to the a great current strike to the west . west . this land be nothing in sight but isle , which in - 404 crease our hope . this nineteenth of August at six a clock in the afternoon , it begin to snow , and so continue all night with foul weather , and much wind , so that we be constrain to lie at hull all night five league off the shore : in the morning be the twenty of August , the fog and storm break up , we bear in with the land , and at nine a clock in the morning we anchor in a very fair and safe road and lock for all weather . at ten of the clock i go on shore to the top of a very high hill , where i perceive that this land be Islands : at four hand , of the clock in the afternoon we weigh anchor , have a fair north north - east wind , with very fair weather ; at six of the clock we be clear without the land , and so shape our course to the south , to discover the coast , whereby the passage may be through god mercy find . we coast this land till the eight and twenty of they runnel . August , find it still to continue towards the south , ^ 9 " south from the latitude of 67 . to 57 degree : we find 7 ^^ / marvelous great store of bird , gull and mew , incredible upon the coast . to be report , whereupon be calm weather , we lie one glass upon the lee , to prove for fish , in which space we catch 100 of cod , although we be but bad provide for fish , not be our purpose . this eight and twenty have great distrust of the weather , we arrive in a very fair harbour in the latitude of 56 . a harbonugh degree , and sail 10 . league into the same , be two ™ degree . league broad , with very raire wood on both side : in this place we continue until the first of September , in which time we have two very great storm . i land , and go six mile by guess into the country , and find that the wood be fir , pineapple , alder , yew , withy , fair wood . and birch : here we see a black bear : this place yield great store of bird , as fezant , partridge , Barbary hen or the like , wild goose , duck , black bird , jeye , thrush , with other kind of small bird . of the partridge and fezant we kill great store with bow and 405 a perfect hope of the passage about 54 . degree and a half . two of our man slay by the savage . the english voyage arrow : in this place at the harbour mouth we find great store of cod . the first of September at ten a clock we set sail , and coast the shore with very fair weather . the third day be calm , at noon we strike sail , and let fall a cadge anchor , to prove whether we can take any fish , be in latitude 54 . degree 30 . minute , in which place we find great abundance of cod , so that the hook be no soon overboard , but present a fish be take . it be the large and the best feed fish that ever i see , and diverse fisher man that be with i say that they never see a more suavle or better skull of fish in their life : yet have they see great abundance . the four of September at five a clock in the afternoon we anchor in a very good road among great store of isle , the country low land , pleasant and very full of fair wood . to the north of this place eight league , we have a perfect hope of the passage , find a mighty great sea pass between two land west . the south land to our judgement be nothing but isle : we great desire to go into this sea , but the wind be direct against we . we anchor in four fathom fine sand . in this place be foul and fish mighty store . the sixth of September have a fair northnorthwest wind , have trim our bark we purpose to depart , and send five of our sailor young man a shore to a island , to fetch certain fish which we purpose to weather , and therefore leave it all night cover upon the isle : the brutish people of this country lie secret lurk in the wood , and upon the sudden assault our man : which when we perceive , we present let slip our cable upon the halse , and under our foresail bear into the shore , and with all expedition discharge a double musket upon they twice , at the noise whereof they flee : notwithstanding to our very great grief , two of our man be slay with their arrow , and two grievous wound , of who at this present we stand in very great doubt , only one escape by swim , with a arrow 406 1586 . shot through his arm . Theise wicked miscreant never offer parley or speech , but present execute their curse fury . this present evening it please God further to increase our sorrow with a mighty tempestuous storm , the wind be north north - east , which last unto the ten of this month very extreme . we unrig our ship , and purpose to cut down our mast , the cable of our shutanker break , so that we only expect to be drive on shore among these cannibal for their prey . yet in this deep distress the mighty mercy of God , when hope be pass , give we succour , and send we a fair lee , so as we recover our anchor again , and new more our ship : where we see that God manifest deliver we : for the strain of one of our cable be break , and we only road by a old junke . thus be fresh more a new storm arise , the wind be westnorthwest , very forcible , which last unto the ten day at night . the eleven day with a fair westnorthwest wind we depart with trust in god mercy , shape our course for England , and arrive in the west country in the begin of October .