the form of m . Martin Frobishers letter to the english captive . in the name of God , in who we all believe , who ( i trust ) have preserve your body and soul among these infidel , i commend i unto you . i will be glad to seek by all mean you can devise for your deliverance , either with force , or with any commodity within my ship , which i will not spare for your sake , or any thing else i can do for you . i have aboard , of they , a man , a woman , and a child , which i be content to deliver for you , but the man which i carry away from hence the last year be dead in England . Moreover you may declare unto they , that if they deliver you not , i will not leave a man alive in their country . and thus , if one of you can come to speak with i , they shall have either the man , woman , or child in pawn for you . and thus unto God who i trust you do serve , in haste i leave you , and to he we will daily pray for you . This Tuesday morning the seven of August . anno 1557 . you to the uttermost of my power , Martin Frobisher . i have send you by these bearer , pen , ink , and postscript paper , to write back unto i again , if personal you can come to certify i of your estate . 3 ° 9 the cause why m , Frobisher enter no fur - therwithin the streit this year . best bulwark . their king calledCatchoe . how he be honour . the english voyage now have the general alter his determination for go any further into the streite at this time for any further discovery of the passage , have take a man and a woman of that country , which he think sufficient for the use of language : and have also meet with these people here , which intercept his man the last year , ( as the apparel and english furniture which be find in their tent , very well declare ) he know it be but a labour lose to seek they further off , when he have find they there at hand . And consider also the short time he have in hand , he think it best to bend his whole endeavour for the get of i , and to leave the passage further to be discover hereafter . for his commission direct he in this voyage , only for the search of the ore , and to defer the further discovery of the passage until another time . on Thursday the nine of August we begin to make a small fort for our defence in the countess island , and entrench a corner of a cliff , which on three part like a wall of good heighth be compass and well fence with the sea , and we finish the rest with cask of the earth , to good purpose , and this be call best bulwark , after the lieutenant name , who first devise - the same . this be do for that we suspect more lest the desperate man may oppress we with multitude , than any fear we have of their force , weapon , or policy of battle : but as wisdom will we in such place ( so far from home ) not to be of our self altogether careless : so the sign which our captive make unto we , of the come down of his governor or prince , which he call Catchoe , give we occasion to foresee what may ensue thereof , for he show by sign that this Catchoe be a man of high stature far then any of our nation be , and he be accustom to be carry upon man shoulder . about midnight the lieutenant cause a false alarm to be give in the island , to prove as well the readiness of the company there ashore , as also what help may be 310 hope for upon the sudden from the ship if need so require , and every part be find in good readiness upon such a sudden . Saturday the eleven of August the people show themselves again , and call unto we from the side of a hill over against we . the general ( with good hope to hear of his man , and to have answer of his letter ) go over unto they , where they present themselves not above three in sight , but be hide indeed in great number behind the rock , and make sign of delay with we to entrap some of we to redeem their own , do only seek advantage to train our boat about a point of land from sight of our company : whereupon our man just suspect they , keep aloof without their danger , and yet set one of our company ashore , which take up a great bladder which one of they offer we , and leave a look glass in the place , come into the boat again . in the mean while our man which stand in the countess island to behold , who may better discern they , than those of the boat , by reason they be on high ground , make a great outcry unto our man in the boat , for that they see diverse of the savage creep behind the rock towards our man , whereupon the general present return without tiding of his man . concern this bladder which we receive , our captive make sign that it be give he to keep water and drink in , but we suspect rather it be give he to swim and shift away withal , for he and the woman seek diverse time to escape , have loose our boat from astern our ship , and we never a boat leave to pursue they withal , and have prevail very far , have they not be very timely espy and prevent therein . after our general come away from they they muster themselves in our sight , upon the top of a hill , to the number of twenty in a rank , all hold hand over their head , and dance with great noise and song 3 “ [ he - 7i . ] a bladder change fir a looking - glass . no news oj the english captive . to what end the bladder be deliver . those people dance upon the hill top . a skirmish show to those people . their flag make of bladder . the english voyage together : we suppose they make this dance and show for we to understand , that we may take view of their whole company and force , mean belike that we shall do the same . and thus they continue upon the hill top until night , when hear a piece of our great ordinance , which thunder in the hollowness of the high hill , it make unto they so fearful a noise , that they have no great will to tarry long after . and this be do more to make they know our force then to do they any hurt at all . on Sunday the 12 of August , captain Fenton train the company , and make the soldier maintain skirmish among themselves , as well for their exercise , as for the country people to behold in what readiness our man be always to be find , for it be to be think , that they lie hide in the hill thereabouts , and observe all the manner of our proceed . on Wednesday the fourteenth of August , our general with two small boat well appoint , for that he suspect the country people to lie lurk thereabouts , go up a certain bay within the countess sound , to search for ore , and meet again with the country people , who so soon as they see our man make great outcry , and with a white flag make of bladder sow together with the gut and sinew of beast , waft we amain unto they , but show not above three of their company . but when we come near they , we may perceive a great multitude creep behind the rock , which give we good cause to suspect their traitorous meaning : whereupon we make they sign , that if they will lay their weapon aside , and come forth , we will deal friendly with they , although their intent be manifest unto we : but for all the sign of friendship we can make they they come still creep towards we behind the rock to get more advantage of we , as though we have no eye to see they , think belike that our single wit can not discover so bare devise and simple drift of they . their spokesman earnest persuade we with 312 ... I577 > many entice show , to come eat and sleep ashore , with great argument of courtesy , and clap his bare hand over his head in token of peace and innocence , will we to do the like . but the better to allure our hungry stomach , he bring we a trim bait of raw great offer . flesh , which for fashion sake with a boathook we catch into our boat : but when the cunning cater perceive his first cold morsel can nothing sharpen our stomach , he cast about for a new train of warm flesh to procure our appetite , wherefore he cause one of his fellow in halt manner , to come forth as a lame man from behind the rock , and the better to declare his kindness in carve , he hoist he upon his shoulder , and bring he hard to the water side where we be , leave he there limp as a easy prey to be take of we . his hope be that we will bite at this bait , and speedy leap ashore within their danger , whereby they may have apprehend some of we , to ransom their friend home again , which before we have take . the gentleman and soldier have great will to encounter they ashore , but the general moor careful by process of time to win they , then wilful at the first to spoil they , will in no wise admit that any man shall put himself in hazard ashore , consider the matter he now intend be for the ore , and not for the conquest : notwithstanding to prove this cripple footmanship , he give liberty for one to shoot : whereupon the cripple have a part blow , light recover a rock and go away a true and no feign cripple , and have learn his lesson for ever halt afore such cripple again . but his fellow which lie hide before , full quick then appear in their likeness , and maintain the skirmish with their sling , bow and arrow very fierce , and come as near as the water suflr they : and with as desperate mind as have be see in any man , without fear of shcrtte or any thing , follow we all along the coast , but all their shot fall short of we , and be of little danger . they have belay all the coast along for we , [ in . 72 . ] 313 and be disperse so , be not well to be number , a hundred but we may discern of they above a hundred perSavages . sonsj anj bad cause to suspect a great number . and thus without loss or hurt we return to our ship again . now our work grow to a end , and have , only with five poor miner , and the help of a few gentleman and soldier , bring aboard almost two hundred ton of ore in the space of twenty day , every man therewithal ! well comfort , determine lusty to work a fresh for a bone voyage , to bring our labour to a speedy and happy end . and upon Wednesday at night be the one and twenty of August , we full finish the whole work . and it be now good time to leave , for as the man be well weary , so their shoe and clothes be well wear , their basket bottom tear out , their tool break , and the ship reasonable well fill . some with overstraining themselves receive hurt not a little dangerous , some have their belly break , and other their leg make lame . and about this time the ice begin to congeal and freeze about our ship side a night , which give we a good argument of the sun decline southward , and put we in mind to make more haste homeward . it be not a little worth the memory , to the commendation of the gentleman and soldier herein , who leave all reputation apart , with so great willingness and with courageous stomach , have themselves almost overcome in so short a time the difficulty of this so great a labour . and this to be true , the matter , if it be well weigh without further proof , now bring home do well witness . Thursday the 22 of August , we pluck down our tent , and every man haste homeward , and make bonfire upon the top of the high mount of the island , and march with ensign display round about the island , we give a volley of shot for a farewell , in honour of the right honourable lady Anne , countess of Warwick , who name it bearethi : and so depart aboard . the 23 of August have the wind large at west , we set sail from out of the countess sound homeward , they return . but the wind calm we come to anchor within the point of the same sound again . the 24 of August about three of the clock in the morning , have the wind large at west , we set sail again , and by nine of the clock at night , we leave the queen foreland astern of we , and be clear of the streite , we bear further into the main ocean , keep our course more southerly , to bring our self the soon under the latitude of our own climate . the wind be very great at sea , so that we lay a hull all night , and have snow half a foot deep on the snow a hatch . fauus ? e from the 24 until the 28 we have very much wind , * ' but large , keep our course southsoutheast , and have like to have lose the bark , but by good hap we meet again . the height be take , we be in degree and a half . the 29 of August the wind blow much at Northeast , so that we can bear but only a bunt of our foresail , and the bark be not able to carry any sail at all . the Michael lose company of we and shape her course towards Orkney because that way be better know unto they , and arrive at Yermouth . the 30 of August with the force of the wind , and a surge of the sea , the master of the Gabriel and than the master boatswain be strike both overboard , and hardly be the boatswain recover , have hold on a rope hang overboard in the sea , and yet the bark be lace fore and after with rope a breast high within board . this master be call William smith , be but a young man and a very sufficient mariner , who