to the end they may discover the inland , and do some acceptable service for their country . but he not content with the matter he seek for , and well consider the short time he have in hand , and the greedy desire our country have to a present savour and return of gain , bend his whole endeavour only to find a i to fraught his ship , and to leave the rest ( by God [ three . 66 . ] help ) hereafter to be well accomplish . and therefore the twenty six of July he depart over to the Northland , with the two bark , leave the aid ride in jackmans sound , and mean ( after he have find convenient harbour , and fraught there for his ship ) to discover further for the passage . the bark come the same night to anchor in a sound upon the Northerland , where the tide do run so swift , and the place be so subject to indraft of ice , that by reason thereof they be great endanger , and have find a very rich i , as they suppose , and get almost twenty ton of ore together , upon the 28 of July the ice come drive into the sound where the bark ride , in such sort , that they be therewith great distress . and the Gabrieli ride astern the Michael , have her cable gall asunder in the hawse with a piece of drive ice , and lose another anchor , and have but one cable and anchor leave , for she have lose two before , and the ice still drive upon she , she be ( by God help ) well fence from the danger of the rest , by one great hand of ice , which come a ground hard a head of she , which if it have not so chance , i think sure she have be cast upon the rock with the ice . the Michael more anchor upon this great ice , and ride under the lee thereof : but about midnight , by the weight of it self , and the set of the tide , the ice break within half the bark length , and make 298 unto the company within board a sudden and fearful noise . the next flood towards the morning we weigh anchor , and go further up the straight , and leave our ore behind we which we have dig , for haste leave the place by the name of bear sound after the master name of the Michael , and name the hand lecester hand . in one of the small hand here we find a tomb , wherein the bone of a dead man lie together , and our savage captive be with we , and be demand by sign whether his countryman have not slay this man and eat his flesh so from the bone , he make sign to the contrary , and that he be slay with wolf and wild beast . here also be find hide under stone good store of fish , and sundry other thing of the inhabitant ; as sled , bridle , kettle of fish - skinne , knife of bone , and such other like . and our savage declare unto we the use of all those thing . And take in his hand one of those country bridle , he catch one of our dog and hamper he handsome therein , as we do our horse , and with a whip in his hand , he teach the dog to draw in a sled as we do horse in a coach , set himself thereupon like a guide : so that we may see they use dog for that purpose that we do our horse . and we find since by experience , that the lesser sort of dog they feed fat , and keep they as domestical cattle in their tent for their eat , and the great sort serve for the use of draw their sled . the twenty nine of July , about five league from bear sound , we discover a bay which be fence on each side with small hand lie off the main , which break the force of the tide , and make the place free from any indraft of ice , do prove a very fit harbour for our ship , where we come to anchor under a small island , which now together with the sound be call by the name of that right honourable and virtuous lady , anne countess of Warwick . and this be the further place that this year we have enter up 299 bear sound . lecesters hand . a tomb with a dead man bone in it . bridle , knife , and other instrument find hide among the rock . they use great dog to draw sleds , and title dog for their meat . thirty league discover within the strait . a good precedent of a good captain show by captain Frobisher . the english voyage within the streite , and be reckon from the cape of the queen foreland , which be the entrance of the streite not above 30 league . upon this hand be find good store of the ore , which in the wash hold gold to our think plain to be see : whereupon it be think best rather to load here , where there be store and indifferent good , than to seek further for better , and spend time with jeoperdie . and therefore our general set the miner to work , and show first a good precedent of a painful labourer and a good captain in himself , give good example for other to follow he : whereupon every man both better and worse , with their best endeavour willing lay to their help hand . and the next day , be the thirty of July , the Michael be send over to jackmans sound , for the ay de and the whole company to come thither . upon the main land over against the countess hand we discover and behold to our the manner of great marvel the poor cave and house of those their house in country people , which serve they ( as it shall seem ) t country . por tjjejr winfer dwelling , and be make two fathom under ground , in compass round , like to a oven , be join fast one by another , have hole like to a fox or Conny berry , to keep and come together . they undertrench these place with gutter so , that the water fall from the hill above they , may slide away without their annoyance : and be seat common in the foot of a hill , to shield they better from the cold wind , have their door and entrance whale bone ever open towards the south . from the ground up - timber ^ ward they build with whale bone , for lack of m er ' timber , which bend one over another , be handsome compact in the top together , and be cover over with sealesskinne , which in stead of tile , fence they from the rain . in which house they have only one room , have the one half of the flower raise with broad stone a foot high than the other , whereon straw moss , they make their nest to sleep in . 300 they defile these den most filthy with their beastly [ hl 67 . ] feed , and dwell so long in a place ( as we think ) until their sluttishness loathe they , they be force to S ‘ seek a sweet air , and a new seat , and be ( no doubt ) a disperse and wander nation , as the tar - tarians , and live in hold and troop , without any certain abode , as may appear by sundry circumstance of our experience . here our captive be ashore with we , to declare set up the use of such thing as we see , stay himself alone behind the company , and do set up five small stick mean round in a circle one by another , with one small bone thereof . place just in the midst of all : which thing when one of our man perceive , he call we back to behold the matter , think that he have mean some charm or witchcraft therein . but the best conjecture we can make thereof be , that he will thereby his countryman shall understand , that for our five man which they betray the last year ( who he signify by the five stick ) he be take and keep prisoner , which he signify by the bone in the midst . for afterward the savage when we show he the picture of his countreman , which the last year be bring into England ( who countreiman counterfeit we have draw , with boat and other furni - picture . ture , both as he be in his own , and also in english apparel ) he be upon the sudden much amaze thereat , and behold advise the same with silence a good while , as though he will strain courtesy whether shall begin the speech ( for he think he no doubt a lively creature ) at length begin to question with he , as with his companion , and find he dumb and mute , seem to suspect he , as one disdeinfull , and will with a little help have grow into choler at the matter , until at last by feel and handle , he find he but a deceive picture . and then with great noise and cry , cease not wonder , think that we can make man live or die at our pleasure . and thereupon call the matter to his remembrance , 301 another show of twenty person of that country in one boat . the english voyage he give we plain to understand by sign , that he have knowledge of the take of our five man the last year , and confess the manner of each thing , numbered the five man upon his five finger , and point unto a boat in our ship , which be like unto that wherein our man be betray : and when we make he sign , that they be slay and eat , he earnest deny , and make sign to the contrary . the last of July the Michael return with the aid to we from the Southerland , and come to anchor by we in the countess of Warwick sound , and report that since we depart from jackmans sound there happen nothing among they there great worth the remembrance , until the thirty of July , when certain of our company be a shore upon a small island within the say jackmans sound , near the place where the aid ride , do espy a long boat with diverse of the country people therein , to the number of eighteen or twenty person , who so soon as our man perceive , they return speedy aboard , to give notice thereof unto our company . they may perceive these people climb up to the top of a hill , where with a flag , they waft unto our ship , and make great outcry and noise , like so many Buis . hereupon our man do present man forth a small skiff , have not above six or seven person therein , which row near the place where those people be , to prove if they can have any conference with they . but after this small boat be send a great , be well appoint for their rescue , if need require . as soon as they espy our company come near they , they take their boat and haste away , either for fear , or else for policy , to draw our man from rescue further within their danger : wherefore our man construe that their come thither be but to seek advantage , follow speedy after they , but they row so swift away , that our man can come nothing near they . howbeit they fail not of their best endeavour in 302 row , and have chase they above two mile into the sea , return into their ship again . the morning follow be the first of August , captain York with the Michael come into jackmans sound , and declare unto the company there , that the last night pass he come to anchor in a certain bay ( which since be name York sound ) about four league distant from jackmans sound , be put to leeward of that place for lack of wind , where he discover certain tent of the country people , where go with his company ashore , he enter into they , but find the people depart , as it shall seem , for fear of their come . but among sundry strange thing which in these tent they find , there be raw and new kill flesh of unknown sort , with dead carcase and bone York sound . the apparel of dog , and i know not what . they also behold ( to their great marveile ) a doublet of canvas make after f0 ™ * 1 a ^ n ^ . , the english fashion , a shirt , a girdle , three shoe for jman which the contrary foot , and of unequal bigness , which they well year before conjecture to be the apparel of our five poor country - be take man , which be intercept the last year by these captwe - countrey people , about fifty league from this place , further within the strait . whereupon our man be in good hope , that some of they may be here , and [ hl 68 ] yet live : the captain devise for the best leave his mind behind he in write , with pen , ink , and paper also , whereby our poor