language of the country , and there be none that can speak it , they use he for their interpreter . and afterward he frequent that trade with they in such sort , that he become very rich , and so furnish out a bark of his own , he return into Frislande , where he make report unto this lord of that wealthy country . and he be thorough credit because of the mariner , who approve many strange thing , that he report to be true . wherefore this lord be resolve to send i forth with a fleet towards those part , and there be so many that desire to go in the voyage , for the novelty and strangeness of the thing , that i think we shall be very strong appoint , without any public expense at all . and this be the tenor of the letter before mention , which i have here set down to give intelligence of another voyage that m . Antonio make , be set out with many bark , and man , notwithstanding he be not captain , as he have think at the first he shall : for Zichmni go in his own person : and concern that matter i have a letter in form follow . one great preparation for the voyage of Estotiland be begin in a unlucky hour : for three day before our departure the fisherman die that shall have be our guide : notwithstanding this lord will not give over the enterprise , but instead of the fisherman take certain mariner that return out of the island with he : and so make our navigation to the westwards , we discover certain island subject to Frisland , and have pass certain shelf we stay at Ledovo for the space of 7 day to refresh our self , and to furnish the fleet with necessary provision . depart from thence we arrive the first of July at the isle of llofe : and for that the wind make for we , we stay not there , but pass 458 forth , and be upon the main sea , there arise immediate a cruel tempest , wherewith for eight day space we be miserable vex , not know where we be : and a great part of the bark be cast away , afterward the weather wax fair , we gather up the break piece of the bark that be lose , and sail with a prosperous wind we discover land at west . wherefore keep our course direct upon it , we arrive in a good and safe harbour , where we see a infinite company of people ready in arm , come run very furious to the water side , as it be for defence of the island . wherefore Zichmni cause his man to make sign of peace unto they , they send io man unto we that can speak ten language , but we can understand none of they , except one that be of island . he be bring before our prince and ask , what be the name of the island , and what people inhabit it , and who govern it , answer , that the island be call Icaria , and that all the king that reign there , be call Icari , after the name of the first king of that place , which as they say be the son of Dedalus king of Scotland , who conquer that island , leave his son there for king , and leave they those law that they retain to this present , and after this , he desire to sail further , in a great tempest that arise , be drown , wherefore for a memoriali of his c . 1380 - 90 . [ Iii . 126 . ] Tdchrnni his discovery of the island Icaria . a island man in Icari . the king of Icaria call Icari after the name of the first king of that place , who as they report , be son to Deda - death , they call those sea yet , the icarian sea , and the lus king of king of the island Icari , and for that they be content with that state , which God have give they , neither Icartan Sea ‘ will they alter one jote of their law and custom , they will not receive any stranger : wherefore they request our prince , that he will not seek to violate their law , which they have receive from that king of worthy memory and observe very due to that present : which if he do attempt , it will redound to his manifest destruction , they be all resolute bend rather to leave their life , than to loose in any respect the use of their law . notwithstanding , that we shall not think they do altogether refuse conversation and traffic with other 459 the people of i carta desirous of the italian tongue . ten man of ten sundry nation . infinite multitude of arm man in Icaria . Zichmni depart from Icaria westwards . the english voyage man , they tell we for conclusion that they will willing receive one of our man , and prefer he to be one of the chief among they , only to learn my language the italian tongue , and to be inform of our manner and custom , as they have already receive those other ten of ten sundry nation , that come into their island . to these thing our prince answer nothing at all , but cause his man to seek some good harbour , he make sign as though he will depart , and sail round about the island , he espy at length a harbour on the east side of the island , where he put in with all his fleet : the mariner go on land to take in wood and water , which they do with as great speed as they can , doubt lest they shall be assault by the inhabitant , as it fall out in deed , for those that dwell thereabouts , make sign unto the other with fire and smoke , put themselves present in arm and the other come to they , they come all run down to the sea side upon our man , with bow and arrow , and other weapon , so that many be slay and diverse sore wound . and we make sign of peace unto they , but it be to no purpose , for their rage increase more and more , as though they have fight for land and live . wherefore we be force to depart , and to sail along in a great circuit about the island , be always accompany upon the hill top and the sea coast with a infinite number of arm man : and so double the cape of the island towards the north , we find many great sholde , among the which for the space of ten day we be in continual danger of loose our whole fleet , but that it please God all that while to send we fair weather . wherefore proceed on till we come to the east cape , we see the inhabitant still on the hill top and by the sea coast keep with we , and in make great outcry and shoot at we a far off , they utter their old spiteful affection towards we . wherefore we determine to stay in some safe harbour , and see if we may speak once again with the islander , but our 460 Nicholas and Antonio Zeno a . d . c . 1380 - 90 . determination be frustrate : for the people more like unto beast than man , stand continual in arm with intent to beat we back , if we shall come on land . wherefore Zichmni see he can not prevail , and think if he shall have persevere and follow obstinate his purpose , their victual will have fail they , he depart with a fair wind and sail six day to the westwards , but the wind change to the southwest , and the sea wax rough , we sail 4 day with the wind the powp , and at length discover land , be afraid to approach near unto it , the sea be grow , and we not know what land it be : but God so provide for we , that the wind cease there come a great calm . wherefore some of our company row to land with oar , return 8c bring we news to our great comfort , that they have find a very good country and a better harbour : upon which news we tow our ship and small bark to land , and be enter into the harbour , we see a far off a great mountain , that cast forth smoke , which give we good hope that we shall find some inhabitant in the island , neither will Zichmni rest , although it be a great way off , but send 100 soldier to search the country and bring report 100 man send what people they be that inhabit it , 8c in the mean t0 discontent ™ time they take in wood and water for the provision of countrey - the fleet , and catch great store of fish and sea foul and find such abundance of bird egg , that our man that be half famish , be fill therewithal ! . while we be ride here , begin the month of June , at which time the air in the island be so temperate and pleasant [ three . 127 . ] as be impossible to express : but when we can see no people at all , we suspect great that this pleasant place loo soui be desolate and dishabit . we give name to the diers retw ^ eii heaven call it trin , and the point that stretch out which have into the sea , we call Capo de Trin . the 100 soldier be through that be send forth , 8 day after return , and bring the lsland , word that they have be through the island and at they and mountain , and that the smoke be a natural thing pro - find . 461 m . Antonio ' leno , make chief captain of those ship which go back to Frisland . the english voyage cede from a great fire that be in the bottom of the hill , and that there be a spring from which issue a certain water like pitch which run into the sea , and that thereabouts dwell great multitude of people half wild , hide themselves in cave of the ground , of small stature , and very fearful ; for as soon as they see they they flee into their hole , and that there be a great river and a very good and safe harbour . Zichmni be thus inform , and see that it have a wholesome and pure air , and a very fruitful soil and fair river , with sundry commodity , fall into such like of the place , that he determine to inhabit it , and build there a city . but his people be weary and faint with long and tedious travel begin to murmur , say that they will return into their country , for that the winter be at hand , and if they enter into the harbour , they shall not be able to come out again before the next summer . wherefore he retain only the bark with oar and such as be willing to stay with he , send all the rest with the ship back again , and will that i , ( though unwilling ) shall be their captain . i therefore depart , because i can not otherwise choose , sail for the space of twenty day to the eastwards without sight of any land ; then turn my course towards the southeast , in 5 . day i discover land , and find my self upon the isle of Neome , and know the country , i perceive i be past island : wherefore take in some fresh victual of the inhabitant be subject to Zichmni , i sail with a fair wind in three day to Frisland , where the people , who think they have lose their prince , because of his long absence , in this our voyage receive we very joyful . what follow after this letter i know not but by conjecture , which i gather out of a piece of another letter , which i will set down here underneath : that Zichmni build a town in the port of the island that he discover , and that he search the country very diligent and discover it all , and also the river on 462 c . 1380 - 90 . both side of Engroneland , for that i see it particular describe in the sea card , but the discourse or narration be lose . the beginning of the letter be thus . concern those thing that you desire to know of the 5 letter . i , as of the man and their manner and custom , of the beast , and of the country adjoin , i have make thereof a particular book , which by God help i will bring with i : wherein i have describe the country , the monstrous fish , the custom and law of Frisland , island , Estland , the kingdom of Norway , Estotiland , Drogio , and in the end the life of m . Nicolo , the knight our brother , with the discovery which he make , and the state of Groneland . i have also write the life and act of Zichmni , a prince as worthy of immortali memory , as any that ever live , for his great valiancy and singular humanity , wherein i have describe the discovery of Engroneland on both side , and the city that he build . therefore i will speak no further hereof in this letter , hope to be with you very short , and to satisfy you in sundry other thing by word of mouth . all these letter be write by m . Antonio to Messer Carlo his brother : and it grieve i , that the book and diverse other write concern these purpose , be miserable lose : for be but a child when they come to my hand , and not know what they be , ( as the manner of child be ) i tear they , and rend they in piece , which now i can call to remembrance but to my exceed great grief . notwithstanding , that the memory of so many good thing shall not be lose : whatsoever i can get of this matter , i have dispose and put in order in the former discourse , to the end that this age may be partly satisfy , to the which we be more behold for the great discovery make in those part , then to any other of the time past , be most studious of the new relation and discovery of strange country , make by the great mind , and industry of our ancestor . for the more credit and confirmation of the former 463 the second discovery thereof . the english voyage historic of Messer Nicolas and Messer Antonio Zeni ( which for some few respect may perhaps be call in question ) i have here annex the judgement of that famous cosmographer Abraham Ortelius , or rather the yield and submit of his judgement thereunto : who in his theatrum orbis , folio 6 . next before the map of Mar deal Zur , borrow proof and authority out of this relation , to show that the north - east part of America call Estotiland , and in the original always affirm to be a island , be about the year 1390 discover by the aforesaid venetian gendeman Messer Antonio Zeno , above 100 year before ever Christopher Columbus set sail for those western region ; and that the northern sea be even then sail by our european pilot through the help of the loadstone : with diverse other particular concern the custom , religion and wealth of the southern Americans , which be most evidendy confirm by all the late and modern spanish history of Nueva Espanna and Peru .