that be cast out as it be sparkle or cinder at the fiery mouth of the hill , and when they be most inflame , cast water upon they , whereby they be dissolve and become excellent white lime and so tough that be contrive in build it last for ever . and the very sparkle after the fire be out of they do serve in stead of stone to make wall and vault : for be once cold they will never dissolve or break , except they be cut with some iron tool , and the vault that be make of they be so light that they need no sustentaccle or prop to hold they up , and they will endure continual very fair and whole . by reason of these great commodity , the friar have make there so many building and wall that it be a wonder to see . the covert or roof of their house for the most part be make in manner follow : first they raise up the wall up to his full height , than they make it incline or bow in by little and little in form of a vault . but they be not great trouble with rain in those part , because the climate ( as i have say ) be extreme cold : for the first snow be fall , it thaw no more for the space of nine month , for so long dure their winter . they feed of the flesh of wild foul and of fish : for whereas the warm water fall into the sea , there be a large and wide haven , which by reason of the heat of the water , do never freeze all the winter , by mean whereof there be such concourse and flock of sea foul and such abundance of fish , that they take thereof infinite multitude , whereby they maintain a great number of people round about , which they keep in continual work , both in building and take of fowl and fish , and in a thousand other necessary affair and business about the monastery . their house be build about the hill on every side , in form round , and 25 foot broad , and in mount upward they go narrow and narrow , leave at the top a little hole , whereat the air come in to give light to the house , and the floor of the house be so hot , 45 2 that be within they feel no cold at all . hither in the summer time come many bark from the island their about , and from the cape above Norway , and from Trondon , and bring to the friar all manner of thing that may be desire , take in change thereof fish , which they dry in the sun or in the cold , and skin of diverse kind of beast . for the which they have wood to burr ne and timber very artificial carve , and corn , and cloth to make they apparel . for in change of the two aforesaid commodity all the nation border round about they covet to traffic with they , and so they without any travel or expense have that which they desire . to this monastery resort friar of Norway , of Suetia and of other country , but the most part be of island . there be continual in that part many bark , which be keep in there by reason of the sea be freeze , wait for the spring of the year to dissolve the ice . the fisher boat be make like unto a weaver shuttle : take the skin of fish , they fashion they with the bone of the same fish , and sow they together in many double they make they so sure and substantial , that it be miraculous to see , how in tempest they will shut themselves close within and let the sea and wind carry trade in summertime from Trondon to saint Thomas friar in Groneland . resort of friar from Norway and Sueden , to the monastery in Engroneland , call S . Tho . m . frobishet bring these kind of boat from these part into England , they they care not whither , without any fear either [ three . 124 . ] of break or drown . and if they chance to be drive upon any rock , they remain sound without the least bruise in the world : and they have as it be a sleeve in the bottom , which be tie fast in the middle , and when there come any water into the boat , they put it into the one half of the sleeve , then fasten the end thereof with two piece of wood and loose the band beneath , they convey the water forth of the boat : and this they do as often as they have occasion , without any peril or impediment at all . Moreover , the water of the monastery , be of sulphurous or brimstony nature , be convey into the lodging of the principali friar by certain vessel of brass , tin , or stone , so hot that it heat the place 453 in the monastery of saint Thomas most of they speak the latin tongue . the end of the 2 . letter . N . Zeno die in Frisland . the english voyage as it be a stove , not carry with it any stink or other noisome smell . beside this they have another conveyance to bring hot water with a wall under the ground , to the end it shall not freeze , unto the middle of the court , where it fall into a great vessel of brass that stand in the middle of a boil fountain , and this be to heat their water to drink and to water their garden , and thus they have from the hill the great commodity that may be wish : and so these friar employ all their travail and study for the most part in trim their garden and in make fair and beautiful building , but especial handsome and commodious : neither be they destitute of ingenious and painful artificer for the purpose ; for they give very large payment , and to they that bring they fruit and seed they be very bountiful , and give they care not what . so that there be great resort of workman and master in diverse faculty , by reason of the good gain and large allowance that be there . the most of they speak the latin tongue , and special the superior and principal of the monastery . and this be as much as be know of Engroneland , which be all by the relation of m . Nicolo , who make also particular description of a river that he discover , as be to be see in the card that i draw . and in the end m . Nicolo , not be use and acquaint with these cruel cold , fall sick , and a little while after return into Frisland , where he die . he leave behind he in Venice , two son , m . Giovanni and m . Toma , who have two son , m . Nicolo the father of the famous cardinal Zeno , and m . Pietro of who descend the other Zenos , that be live at this day . now m . Nicolo be dead , m . Antonio succeed he both in his good , and in his dignity and honour : and albeit he attempt diverse way , and make great supplication , he can never obtain licence to return into his country . for Zichmni , be a man of great 454 c . 1380 - 90 . courage and valour , have determine to make himself lord of the sea . wherefore use always the counsel and service of m . Antonio , he determine to send he with certain bark to the westwards , for that towards those part , some of his fisherman have discover certain island very rich and populous : which discovery m . Antonio , in a letter to his brother m . Carlo , recounteth from point to point in this manner , save that we have change some old word , leave the matter entire as it be . six and twenty year ago there depart four fisher boat , the which , a mighty tempest arise , be toss for the space of many day very desperate upon the sea , when at length , the tempest cease , and the wether wax fair , they discover a island call Estotiland , the discovery lie to the westwards above 1000 mile from Frisland , ° f Estotiland upon the which one of the boat be cast away , and six man that be in it be take of the inhabitant and man take . bring into a fair and populous city , where the king of the place send for many interpreter , but there be none can be find that understand the language of the fisherman , except one that speak latin , who be also cast by fisherman of chance upon the same island , who in the behalf of the Ensland king ask they what countryman they be : and so s ? ea e Ratine . understand their case , rehearse it unto the king , who will that they shall tarry in the country : wherefore they obey his commandment , for that they can not otherwise do , dwell five year in the island , and learn six be five the language , and one of they be in diverse part of the island , and reporteth that it be a very rich country , qne abound with all the commodity of the world , and fisher of fris - that it be little less than island , but far more fruitful , land , report have in the middle thereof a very high mountain , from the which there spring four river that pass through rich the whole country . ing with all the inhabitant be very witty people , and have all the commodi - arte and faculty , as we have : and it be credible that in time past they have have traffic with our man , for Kor ’ 455 abundance of glide . trade from Estotiland , to Engoneland : skin , brimstone , and fitch : glde , corn , and beer , or ale . many city and castle . [ Iii . 125 . ] a country call Drogo . the 6 fisherman of Frisland only save , by show the manner to take fish . the chief of the 6fisher , specifiedbefore and his companion . the english voyage he say , that he see latin book in the king library , which they at this present do not understand : they have a peculiar language , and letter or character to themselves . they have mine of all manner of metal , but especial they abound with gold . they have their trade in Engroneland , from whence they bring fur , brimstone and pitch : and he say , that to the southward , there be a great populous country very rich of gold . they sow corn , and make beer and ale , which be a kind of drink that north people do use as we do wine . they have mighty great wood , they make their building with wall , and there be many city and castle . they build small bark and have sail , but they have not the load stone , nor know not the use of the compass . wherefore these fisher be have in great estimation , insomuch that the king send they with twelve bark to the southward to a country which they call Drogio : but in their voyage they have such contrary weather , that they think to have perish in the sea : but escape that cruel death , they fall into another more cruel : for they be take in the country and the most part of they eat by the savage people , which feed upon man flesh , as the sweet meat in their judgement that be . but that fisher with his fellow show they the manner of take fish with net , save their life : and will go every day a fish to the sea and in fresh river , and take great abundance of fish and give it to the chief man of the country , whereby he gate himself so great favour , that he be very well belove and honour of every one . the fame of this man be spread abroad in the country , there be a lord there by , that be very desirous to have he with he , and to see how he use his miraculous art of catch fish , in so much that he make war with the other lord with who he be before , and in the end prevail , for that he be more mighty and a better warrior , the fisherman be send unto he with the rest of his company . and for the 456 space of thirteen year that he dwell in those part , he say , that he be send in this order to more than 25 lord , for they have continual war among themselves , this lord with that lord , and he with another , only to have he to dwell with they : so that wander up and down the country without any certain abode in one place , he know almost all those part . he say , that it be a very great country and as it be a new world : the people be very rude and void of all goodness , they go all naked so that they be miserable vex with cold , neither have they the wit to cover their body with beast skin which they take in hunt , they have no kind of metal , they live by hunt , they carry certain lance of wood make sharp at the point , they have bow , you string whereof be make of beast skin : they be very fierce people , they make cruel war one with another , and eat one another , they have governor and certain law very diverse among themselves . but the far to the southwestwards , the more civility there be , the air be somewhat temperate , so that there they have city and temple to idol , wherein they sacrifice man and afterward eat they , they have there some knowledge and use of gold and silver . now this fisherman have dwell so many year in those country purpose , if it be possible , to return home into his country , but his companion despair ever to see it again , let he go in god name , and they keep themselves where they be . wherefore he bid they farewell , flee through the wood towards Drogio , and be very well receive of the lord that dwell next to that place ; who know he and be a great enemy of the other lord ; and so run from one lord to another , be those by who he have pass before , after long time and many travel he come at length to Drogio , where he dwell three year . when as by good fortune he hear by the inhabitant , that there be certain boat arrive upon the coast : wherefore enter into good hope to accomplish his intent , he go 457 A . D . c . 1380 - 90 . in the space of 13 year he serve 15 lord of Drogio . he return from Estotiland to Frisland . Zichmni mind to send m . Antonio Zeno with a fleet towards those part of Estotiland . the 4 . letter . the fisherman die that shall have be interpreter . certain mariner take in his steed , which come with he from Estotiland . isle llofe . the english voyage to the sea side , and ask they of what country they be ; they answer of Estotiland , whereat he be exceed glad , , and request that they will take he in to they , which they do very willing , and for that he have the