the discovery of the isle of Frisland , Iseland , [ in . m . ] Engroneland , Estotiland , Drogeo and Icaria : make by two brethren , namely m . Nicholas Zeno , and m . Antonio his brother : gather out of their letter by m . Francisco Marcolino . n the year of our lord 1200 there be in the city of Venice a famous gentleman , name Messer Marino Zeno , who for his great virtue and singular wisdom , be call and elect governor in certain common wealth of Italy : in the administration whereof he bear he - self so discreet , that he be belove of all man , and his name great reverence of those that never know or see his person . and among sundry his worthy work , this be record of he , that he pacify certain grievous civil dissension that arise among the citizen of Verona : whereas otherwise , if by his grave advise and great diligence they have not be prevent , the matter be likely to break out into hot broil of 445 war . he be the first Podesta , or ruler , that the common wealth of Venice appoint in Constantinople in the year 1205 when our state have rule thereof with the french baron . this gentleman have a son name Messer Pietro , who be the father of the duke Rinieri , which duke die without issue , make his heir m . Andrea , the son of m . Marco his brother . this m . Andrea be captain general and procurator , a man of great reputation for many rare part , that be in he . he have a son m . Rinieri , a worthy senator and prudent counsellor : of who descend m . Pietro captain general of the league of the christian against the Turk , who be call dragon , for that in his shield , in stead of a manfrone which be his arm at the first , he bear a dragon . he be father to m . Carlo two grande the famous procurator and captain generail against the genoese in those cruel war , when as almost all the chief prince of Europe do oppugn and seek to overthrow our empire and liberty , wherein by his great valiancy and prowess , as Furius Camillus deliver Rome , so he deliver his country from the present peril it be in , be ready to become a prey and spoil unto the enemy : wherefore he be afterward surname the lion , and for a eternal remembrance of his fortitude and valiant exploit he give the lion in his arm . m . Carlo have two brethren . m . Nicolo , the knight and m . Antonio , the father of m . dragon , of who issue m . Caterino , the father m . Pietro da i Grocecchieri . this m . Pietro have son m . Caterino , that die the last year , be brother unto m . Francisco , m . Carlo , m . Battista , and m . Vincenzo : which m . Caterino be father to m . Nicolo , that be yet live . now m . Nicolo , the knight , be a man of great courage , after this aforesaid Genouan war of Chioggia that trouble so our predecessor , enter into a great desire and fancy to see the fashion of the world and to travel and acquaint himself with the manner of 446 sundry nation and learn their language , whereby afterward upon occasion he may be the better able to do service to his country , and purchase to himself credit and honour . wherefore he cause a ship to be make , and have furnish she at his proper charge ( as he be very wealthy ) he depart out of our sea , and pass the strait of Gibraltar , he sail for certain day upon the ocean , keep his course still to the northward , with intent to see England and Flanders . where be assault in those sea by a terrible tempest , he be so toss for the space of many day with the sea and wind , that he know not where he be , till at length he discover land , and not be able any long to sustain the violence of the tempest the ship be cast away upon the isle of the ship of Friseland . the man be save , and most part of the good that be in the ship . and this be in the year pa ^^ island 1380 . the inhabitant of the island come run in jn anno great multitude with weapon to set upon m . Nicolo 1380 . and he man , who be sore weather - beaten and overlabour at sea , and not know in what part of the world they be , be not able to make any resistance at all , much less to defend themselves courageous , as it behoove they in such a dangerous case . and they shall have be doubtless very discourteous entreat and cruel handle , if by good hap there have not be foreign hard by the place a prince with arm people . who understand that there be even at that present a iandwith great ship cast away upon the island , come rune at arm man , the noise and outcry that they make against our when m . Zeno poor mariner , and drive away the inhabitant , sufferetl s , fp - spake in latin and ask they what they be and come unt0 im from whence they come , and perceive that they come and speak from Italy and that they be man of the say country , latin . he be surprise with marvelous great joy . wherefore promise they all , that they shall receive no discourtesy , and that they be come into a place where they shall be well use and very welcome , he take 447 ziehmm prince of Porland or duke of Zorani . [ Iii . 122 . ] Frisland the king ofnor - waye . the english voyage they into his protection upon his faith . this be a great lord , and possess certain island call Porland , lie on the south side of Frisland , be the rich and most populous of all those part , his name be Zichmni : and beside the say little island , he be duke of Sorani , lie over against Scotland . of these north part i think good to draw the copy of a sea card , which among other antiquity i have in my house , which although it be rot through many year , yet it fall out indifferent well : and to those that be delight in these thing , it may serve for some light to the understanding of that , which without it can so easy be conceive . Zichmni be lord of those sygnory ( as be say ) be a very warlike and valiant man and above all thing famous in sea cause . and have the year before give the overthrow to the king of Norway , who be lord of the island , be desirous to win fame by feat of arm , he be come on land with his man to give the attempt for the win of Frisland , which be a island much big than Ireland . wherefore see that m . Nicolo be a man of judgement and discretion , and very expert both in sea matter and martial affair , he give he commission to go aboard his navy with all his man , charge the captain to honour he and in all thing to use his counsel . this navy of Zichmni be of thirteen vessel , whereof two only be row with oar , the rest small bark and one ship , with the which they sail to the westwards and with little pain win ledovo and ilofe and diverse other small island : and turn into a bay call sudero , in the haven of the town name Sanestol , they take certain small bark lade with fish . and here they find zichmni , who come by land with his army conquer all the country as he go : they stay here but a while , and lead on their course to the westwards till they come to the other cape of the gulf or bay , then turn again , 448 they find certain island and break land which they reduce all unto the signory and possession of Zichmni . Theise sea , forasmuch as they sail , be in manner nothing but shold and rock , in so much that if m . Nicolo and the venetian mariner have not be their pilot , the whole fleet in judgement of all that be in it , have be cast away , so small be the skill of zichmnis man , in respect of we , who have be train up in the art and practice of navigation all the day of their life . now the fleet have do such thing as be declare , the captain , by the counsel of m . Nicolo , determine to go a land , at a town call Bondendon , to understand what success Zichmni have in his war : where they hear to their great content , that he have fight a great battle and put to flight the army of his enemy : by reason of which victory , they send ambassador from all part of the island to yield the country up into his hand , take down their ensign in every town and castle : they think good to stay in that place for his come , it be report for certain that flee will be there very short . at his come there be great congratulation and many sign of gladness show , as well for the victory by land , as for that by sea : for the which the venetian be honour and extol of all man , in such sort that there be no talk but of they , and of the great valour of m . Nicolo . wherefore the prince , who be a great favourer of valiant man and especial of those that can behave themselves well at sea , cause m . Nicolo to be bring before he , and after have commend he with many honourable speech , and praise his great industry and dexterity of wit , by the which two thing he acknowledge himself to have receive a inestimable benefit , as the save of his fleet and the win of many place without any great trouble , he make he knight , and reward his man N . leno , with many rich and bountiful gift . then depart from make knight thence they go in triumph manner towards Frisland , ^ tchmni . vn 449 2 f the chief city of that island , situate on the southeast side of the isle , within a gulf , as there be many in that s ^ fs lade island . in this gulf or bay there be such great abundance risknd “ for ta ^ en > at many ship be lade therewith to serve Flanders , Flanders , Britain , England , Scotland , Norway , and den - britam , Eng - mark , and by this trade they gather great wealth . land , Scotland , and thus much be take out of a letter , that m . Nicolo Norway and send to m Antonio his brother , request that he will but not to be seek some mean to come to he . wherefore he who prove that have as great desire to travail as his brother , buy a ever any come ship , and direct his course that way : and after he have lettersentb sa ^ ed a great while and escape many danger , he arrive m . N . Zeno ^ at length in safety with m . Nicolo , who receive he very from Frisland joyful , for that he be his brother not only in flesh and to his brother blood , but also in valour and good quality . m . Antonio remain in Frisland and dwell there for the space of the end of year , 4 year with m . Nicolo , and 10 year alone . the first where they come in such grace and favour with the letter . prince , that he make m . Nicolo captain of his navy , and with great preparation of war they be send forth for the enterprise of Estland , which lie upon the coast between Frisland and Norway , where they do many damage : but hear that the king of Norway be come towards they with a great fleet , they depart with such a terrible flaw of wind , that they be drive upon certain shold : be a great part of their ship be cast away , the rest be save upon Grisland , a great island but dishabit . the king of Norway his fleet be take with the same storm , do utter perish in those sea : whereof Zichmni have notice , by a ship of his enemy that be cast by chance upon Grisland , have repair his fleet , and perceive himself northerly near unto the island , determine to set upon island , [ three . 123 . ] which together with the rest , be subject to the king of Norway : but he find the country so well fortify and defend , that his fleet be so small , and very ill appoint both of weapon and man , he be glad to retire . and so he leave that enterprise without perform 45 ° Nicholas and Antonio Zeno a . d . c . 1380 - 90 . any thing at all : and in the same channel he assault the other isle call island , which be seven , Talas , Broas , iscant , Trans , Mimant , dambere , and bre : and have spoil they all , he build a fort in bre , where he leave m . Nicolo , with certain small bark and man and munition . and now think he have do well for this voyage , with those few ship which be leave he return safe into Frisland . m . Nicolo remain now in Bres , determine in the spring to go forth and discover land : wherefore arm out three small bark in the month of July , he sail to the northward , and arrive in Engroneland . where he find a monastery of Engnneland . friar , of the order of the predicator , and a church . dedicate to saint Thomas , hard by a hill that cast a ™ forth fire , like Vesuvius and Aetna . there be a fountain of hot burn water with the which they heat the church of the monastery and the friar chamber , it come also into the kitchen so boil hot , that they use no other fire to dress their meat : and put their bread into brass pot without any water , it do bake as it be in a hot oven . they have also small garden cover over in the winter time , which be water with this water , be defend from the force of the snow and cold , which in those part be situate far under the pole , be very extreme , and by this mean they produce flower and fruit and herb of sundry sort , even as in other temperate country in their season , in such sort that the rude and savage people of those part see these supernatural ! effect , do take those friar for god , and bring they many present , as chicken , flesh , and diverse other thing , and have they all in great reverence as lord . when the frost and snow be great , they heat their house in manner beforesaid , and will by let in the water or open the window , at a instant temper the heat and cold at their pleasure . in the building of the monastery they use no other matter but that which be minister unto they by the fire : for they take the burn - 45 * ing stone