the voyage of the two ship , whereof the one [ three . 129 . i be call the dominus vobiscum , set out the 20 day of may in the 19 year of king Henry the eight , and in the year of our lord God 1527 . for the discovery of the north part . Aster Robert thorn of Bristol , a notable member and ornament of his country , as well for his learning , as great charity to the poor , in a letter of he to king Henry the 8 and a large discourse to doctor leigh , his ambassador to Charles the emperor , ( which both be to be see almost in the begin of the first volume of this my work ) exhort the aforesaid king with very weighty and substantial reason , to set forth a discovery even to the north pole . and that it may be know that this his motion take present effect , i think it good herewithal to put down the testimony of two of our chronicler . m . hall , and m . Grafton , who both write in this sort . this same month ( say they ) Viii i ah king Henry the 8 send 2 fair ship well man and victual , have in they diverse cunning man to seek strange region , 8c so they set forth out of the Thames the 20 day of may in the 19 year of his reign , which be the year of our lord . 1527 . and whereas master Hal , and master Grafton say , that in those ship there be diverse cunning man , i have make great enquiry of such as by their year and delight in navigation , may give i any light to know who those cunning man shall be , which be the director in the aforesaid voyage . and it have be tell i by sir Martine Frobisher , and m . Richard Allen , a knight of the sepulchre , that a canon of saint Paul in London , which be a great mathematician , and a man endue with wealth , do much advance the action , and go therein himself in person , but what his name be i can learn of any . and further they . tell i that one of the ship be call the dominus vobiscum , which be a name likely to be give by a religious man of those day : and that sail very far northwestward , one of the ship be cast away as it enter into a dangerous gulf , about the great open , between the north part of Newfoundland , and the country late call by her majesty , Meta incognita . whereupon the other ship shape her course towards cape Briton , and the coast of Aram be , and oftentimes put their man on land to search the state of those unknown region , return home about the begin of October , of the year aforesaid . and thus much ( by reason of the great negligence of the writer of those time , who shall have use more care in preserve of the memory of the worthy act of our nation , ) be all that hitherto i can learn , or find out of this voyage .