order agree upon by the captain and master to be observe by the fleet of sir Humphrey Gilbert . irst the admiral to carry his flag by day , and his light by night . 2 item , if the admiral shall shorten his sail by night , than to show two light until he be answer again by every ship show one light for a short time . 3 item , if the admiral after his shorten of sail , as aforesaid , shall make more sail again : than he to show three light one above another . 4 item , if the admiral shall happen to hull in the night , than to make a waver light over his other light , waver the light upon a pole . 5 item , if the fleet shall happen to be scatter weather , or other mishap , then so soon as one shall descry another , to hoist both top sail twice , if the weather will serve , and to strike they twice again ; but if the weather serve not , than to hoist the main top sail twice , and forthwith to strike it twice again . 6 item , if it shall happen a great fog to fall , then present every ship to bear up with the admiral , if there be wind : but if it be a calm , than every ship to hull , and so to lie at hull till it be clear . and if the fog do continue long , than the admiral to shoot off two piece every evening , and every ship to answer it with one shot : and every man bear to the ship , that be to leeward so near as he may . 7 item , every master to give charge unto the watch to look out well , for lay aboard one of another in the night , and in fog . 8 item , every evening every ship to hail the admiral , and so to fall astern he , sail through the ocean : and be on the coast , every ship to hail he both morning and evening . 9 item , if any ship be in danger any way , by leak or otherwise , than she to shoot off a piece , and present to hang out one light , whereupon every man to bear towards she , answer she with one light for a short time , and so to put it out again ; thereby to give knowledge that they have see her token . 10 item , whensoever the admiral shall hang out her ensign in the main shrowd , than every man to come aboard she , as a token of counsel . 11 item , if there happen any storm or contrary wind to the fleet after the discovery , whereby they be separate : 1583 . then every ship to repair unto their last good port , there to meet again . our course agree upon . [ Iii . 148 . ] he course first to be take for the discovery be to bear direct to cape raze , the most southerly cape of newfound land ; and there to harbour our self either in Rogneux or Fermous , be the first place appoint for our Rendez vous , and the next harbour unto the northward of cape raze : and therefore every ship separate from the fleet to repair to that place so fast as God shall permit , whether you shall fall to the southward or to the northward of it , and there to stay for the meeting of the whole fleet the space of ten day : and when you shall depart , to leave mark . a direction of our course unto the newfound land . begin our course from Silley , the near be by westsouthwest ( if the wind serve ) until such time as we have bring our self in the latitude of 43 or 44 degree , because the ocean be subject much to southerly wind in June and July . than to take traverse from 45 to 47 degree of latitude , if we be enforce by contrary wind : and not to go to the northward of the height of 47 degree of septentrionali latitude by no mean : if God shall not enforce the contrary ; but to do your endeavour to keep in the height of 46 degree , so near as you can possible , because cape raze lie about that height . Notes . if by contrary wind we be drive back upon the coast of England , than to repair unto Silley for a place of our assembly or meeting . if we be drive back by contrary wind that we can not pass the coast of Ireland , than the place of our assembly to be at bear haven or Baltimore haven . if we shall not happen to meet at cape raze , than the place of Rendez vous to be at cape Briton , or the near harbour unto the westward of cape Briton . if by mean of other ship we may not safe stay there , then to rest at the very next safe port to the westward ; every ship leave their mark behind they for the more certainty of the after comer to know where to find they . the mark that every man ought to leave in such a case , be of the general private device write by himself , seal also in close wax , and deliver unto every ship one scroll , which be not to be open until occasion require , whereby every man be certify what to leave for instruction of after comer : that every of we come into any harbour or river may know who have be there , or whether any be still there up high into the river , or depart , and which way . order thus determine , and promise mutual give to be observe , every man withdraw himself unto his charge , the anchor be already weigh , and our ship under sail , have a soft gale of wind , we begin our voyage upon Tuesday the eleven day of June , in the year of our lord 1583 , have in our fleet ( at our departure from causet bay ) these ship , who name and burden , with the name of the captain and master of they , i have also insert , as follow : 1 the delight ali & s the George , of burden 120 ton , be admiral : in which go the general , and William winter captain in she and part owner , and Richard clerk master . 2 the bark Raleigh set forth by m . Walter Raleigh , of the burden of 200 ton , be then viceadmiral : in which go m . butler captain , and Robert Davis , of Bristol master . 3 the golden hind , of burden 40 ton , be then rear - admiral : in which go Edward Hayes captain and owner , and William Cox of Limehouse master . 4 the swallow , of burden 40 ton : in she be captain Maurice Browne . 5 the squirrel , of burden 10 ton : in which go captain William Andrew , and one cade master . we be in number in all about 260 man : among our fleet con - whom we have of every faculty good choice , as ship - tiste ^ offive wright , mason , carpenter , smith , and such like , " wonderful / Mlibout requisite to such a action : also Minerali man and 260 man . refiner . beside , for solace of our people , and allure - prevision fit mean of the savage , we be provide of music in fir su ^ good variety : not omit the least toy , as morris covenes ' dancer , hobby horse , and maylike conceit to delight the savage people , who we intend to win by all fair mean possible . and to that end we be [ three . 149 . ] indifferent furnish of all petty haberdasherie ware to barter with those simple people . in this manner we set forward , depart ( as have be June 11 . say ) out of Causon bay the eleven day of June be Tuesday , the weather and wind fair and good all day , but a great storm of thunder and wind fall the same night . Thursday follow , when we hail one another in June 13 . the evening ( accord to the order before specify ) they signify unto we out of the vice - admiral , that both observe . the captain , and very many of the man be fall sick . and about midnight the viceadmiral forsake we , notwithstanding we have the wind east , fair and good . but it be after credible report , that they be infect with a contagious sickness , and arrive great distress at Plimmoth : the reason i can never understand . sure i be , no cost be spare by their owner master Raleigh in set they forth : therefore i leave it unto God . by this time we be in 48 degree of latitude , not a little grieve with the loss of the most puissant ship in July 20 . Greatfogges upon the ocean sea northward . July 27 . the bank in length unknown , stretchethfrom north into south , in breadth 10 . league , in depth of water upon it 30 . fathom . the english voyage our fleet : after who departure , the golden hind succeed in the place of vice - admiral , and remove her flag from the mizon unto the foretop . from Saturday the 15 of June until the 28 , which be upon a Friday , we never have fair day without fog or rain , and wind bad , much to the west northwest , whereby we be drive southward unto 41 degree scarce . about this time of the year the wind be common west towards the newfound land , keep ordinary within two point of west to the south or to the north , whereby the course thither fall out to be long and tedious after June , which in march , Apriell and may , have be perform out of England in 22 day and less . we have wind always so scant from west northwest , and from west southwest again , that our traverse be great , run south unto 41 degree almost , and afterward north into 51 degree . also we be encumber with much fog and mist in manner palpable , in which we can not keep so well together , but be dissever , lose the company of the swallow and the squirrel upon the 20 . day of July , who we meet again at several place upon the newfound land coast the three of August , as shall declare in place convenient . Saturday the 27 of July , we may descry not far from we , as it be mountain of ice drive upon the sea , be then in 50 degree , which be carry southward to the weather of we : whereby may be conjecture that some current do set that way from the north . before we come to newfound land about 50 league on this side , we pass the bank , which be high ground rise within the sea and under water , yet deep enough and without danger , be common not less than 25 and 30 fathom water upon they : the same ( as it be some vain of mountain within the sea ) do run along , and from the newfound land , begin northward about 52 or 53 degree of latitude , and do extend 48 into the south infinite . the breadth of this bank be somewhere more , and somewhere less : but we find the same about io league over , have sound both on this side thereof , and the other towards newfound land , but find no ground with almost 200 fathom of line , both before and after we have pass the bank . the Portugal , and French chief , have a notable trade of great fishfish upon this bank , where be sometime a hundred or more sail of ship : who common begin the ' fish in Apriell , and have end by July . that fish be large , always wet , have no land near to dry , and be call Corre fish . during the time of fish , a man shall know without sound when he be upon the bank , by the incredible multitude of sea foul hover over the same , to pray abundance of upon the offalle and garbage of fish throw out by fisherman , and float upon the sea . upon Tuesday the 11 of June , we forsake the coast of England . so again Tuesday the 30 of July ( seven i ay 30 . week after ) we get sight of land , be immediate d ^^ embay in the grand bay , or some other great bay : the ’ certainty whereof we can not judge , so great hase and fog do hang upon the coast , as neither we may discern the land well , nor take the sun height . but by our best computation we be then in the 51 degree of latitude . forsake this bay and uncomfortable coast ( nothing appear unto we but hideous rock and mountain , bare of tree , and void of any green herb ) we follow the coast to the south , with weather fair and clear . we have sight of a hand name Penguin , of a foul hand and a there breed in abundance , almost incredible ,