which n ? m can fly , their wing not able to carry their body , be en ^ tn - very large ( not much less than a goose ) and exceed fat : which the french man use to take without difficulty upon that hand , and to barrel they up with salt . but for linger of time we have make we there the like provision . viii 49 d [ three . 150 . ] trending this coast , we come to the hand call baccalaos , be not pass two league from the main : to fafish th6 south thereof lie cape S . Francis , 5 . league distant take there , from baccalaos , between which go in a great bay , by the vulgar sort call the bay of conception . here we meet with the swallow again , who we have lose in the fog , and all her man alter into other apparel : whereof it seem their store be so amend , that for joy and congratulation of our meeting , they spare not to cast up into the air and overboard , their cap and hat in good plenty . the captain albeit himself be very honest and religious , yet be he not appoint of man to his humour and desert : who for the most part be such as have be by we surprise upon the narrow sea of England , be pirate and have take at that instant certain Frenchman lade , one bark with wine , and another with salt . both which we rescue , and take the man of war with all her man , which be the same ship now call the swallow , follow still their kind so oft , as ( be separate from the general ) they find opportunity to rob and spoil . and because God justice do follow the same company , even to destruction , and to the overthrow also of the captain ( though not consent to their misdemeanour ) i will not conceal any thing that make to the manifestation and approbation of his judgement , for example of other , persuade that god more sharp take revenge upon they , and have tolerate long as great outrage in other : by how much these go under protection of his cause and religion , which be then pretend . misdemeanour therefore upon further enquiry it be know , how of they in the this company meet with a bark return home after fallow . the Ashing with his fraught : and because the man in the swallow be very near scant of victuali , and chief of apparel , doubtful withal where or when to find and meet with their admiral , they beseech the captain they may go aboard this newlander , only to borrow what may be spare , the rather because the same 1583 - was bound homeward . leave give , not without charge to deal favorable , they come aboard the fisherman , who they rifle of tackle , sail , cable , victual , and the man of their apparel : not spare by torture ( wind cord about their head ) to draw out else what they think good . this do with expedition ( like man skilful in such mischief ) as they take their cock boat to go aboard their own ship , it be overwhelm in the sea , and certain of these man there drown : the rest be preserve even by those silly soul who they have before spoil , who save and deliver they aboard the swallow . what become afterward of the poor newlander , perhaps destitute of sail and furniture sufficient to carry they home ( whither they have not less to run then 700 league ) god alone know , who take vengeance not long after of the rest that escape at this instant : to reveal the fact , and justify to the world God judgement inflict upon they , as shall declare in place convenient . thus after we have meet with the swallow , we hold on our course southward , until we come against the harbour call S . John , about 5 league from the former cape of S . Francis : where before the entrance into the harbour , english ship we find also the frigate or squirrel lie at anchor , who the english merchant ( that be and always be mirais admiral by turn interchangeable over the fleet of fieete , fish fisherman within the same harbour ) will not permit to upon the south enter into the harbour . glad of so happy meeting both purtsofuew - of the swallow and frigate in one day ( be Saturday ° un a ' the 3 . of August ) we make ready our fight , and prepare to enter the harbour , any resistance to the contrary notwithstanding , there be within of all nation , to the number of 36 sail . but first the general dispatch a boat to give they knowledge of his come for no ill intent , have commission from her majesty for his voyage he have in hand . and immediate we follow with a slack gale , and in the very entrance ( which be but narrow , not above 2 butt length ) the admiral fall upon good order take by english merchant for our supply in newfound land . the english voyage a rock on the larboard side by great oversight , in that the weather be fair , the rock much above water fast by the shore , where neither go any sea gate . but we find such readiness in the english merchant to help we in that danger , that without delay there be bring a number of boat , which tow off the ship , and clear she of danger . have take place convenient in the road , we let fall anchor , the captain and master repair aboard our admiral : whither also come immediate the master and owner of the fish fleet of Englishman , to understand the general intent and cause of our arrival there . they be all satisfy when the general have show his commission , and purpose to take possession of those land to the behalf of the crown of England , and the advancement of christian religion in those paganish region , require but their lawful aid for repair of his fleet , and supply of some necessary , so far as convenient may be afford he , both out of that and other habor adjoin . in lieu whereof , he make offer to gratify they , with any favour and privilege , which upon their better advice they shall demand , the like be not to be obtain hereafter for great price . So crave expedition of his demand , mind to proceed further south without long detention in those part , he dismiss they , after promise give of their best endeavour to satisfy speedy his so reasonable request . the merchant with their master depart , they cause forthwith to be discharge all the great ordinance of their fleet in token of our welcome . it be further determine that every ship of our fleet shall deliver unto the merchant and master of that harbour a note of all their want : which do , the ship aswell English as stranger , be tax at a easy rate to make supply . and beside , commissioner be appoint , part of our own company and part of they , to go into other harbour adjoin ( for our english merchant command all there ) to leavy our provision : whereunto the Portugal ( above other nation ) do most willing and liberal contribute . insomuch as we be present ( above our allowance ) with wine , marmalad , most fine rusk or biscuit , sweet oil and sundry delicacy . also we want not of fresh salmon , trout , lobster and other fresh fish bring daily unto we . Moreover as the manner be in their fish , every week to choose their admiral a new , or rather they succeed in orderly course , and have weekly their admiral feast solemnize : even so the general , captain and master of our fleet be continual invite and feast . to grow short , in our abundance at home , the entertainment goadenter - had be delightful , but after our want and tedious passage through the ocean , it seem more acceptable ianJt and of great contentation , by how much the same be Savages in the unexpected in that desolate corner of the world : where at south part of other time of the year , wild beast and bird have only the fruition of all those country , which now seem a ’ place very populous and much frequent . the next morning be Sunday and the 4 of August , August 4 . the general and his company be bring on land by english merchant , who show unto we their accustom walk unto a place they call the garden . but nothing appear more than nature it self without art : who confuse have bring forth rose abundant , wild , but odoriferous , and to sense very comfortable . also the like plenty of raspis berry , which do grow in every place . Monday follow , the general have his tent set up , August 5 . who be accompany with his own follower , summoned the merchant and master , both english and stranger to be present at his take possession of those possession country . before who open be read and interpret taken ‘ unto the stranger his commission : by virtue whereof he take possession in the same harbour of saint John , and 200 league every way , invest the queen majesty with the title and dignity thereof , have deliver unto he ( after the custom of England ) a rod and a turfle of actuallposses - sion maintain in Newfoundland . the english voyage the same soil , enter possession also for he , his heir and assign for ever : and signify unto all man , that from that time forward , they shall take the same land as a territory appertain to the queen of England , and himself authorise under her majesty to possess and enjoy it . and to ordain law for the government thereof , agreeable ( so near as convenient may be ) unto the law of England : under which all people come thither hereafter , either to inhabit , or by way of traffic , shall be subject and govern . and especial at the same time for a beginning , he propose and deliver three law to be in force immediate . that be to say : the first for religion , which in public exercise shall be accord to the church of England . the 2 . for maintenance of her majesty right and possession of those territory , against which if any thing be attempt prejudicial ! , the party or party offend shall be adjudge and execute as in case of high treason , accord to the law of England . the 3 . if any person shall utter word sound to the dishonour of her majesty , he shall loose his ear , and have his ship and good confiscate . Theise content publish , obedience be promise by generail voice and consent of the multitude aswell of Englishman as stranger , pray for continuance of this possession and government begin . after this , the assembly be dismiss . and afterward be erect not far from that place the arm of England engrave in lead , and infix upon a pillar of wood . yet further and actual to establish this possession take in the right of her majesty , and to the behoof of sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , his heir and assign for ever : the general grant in fee farm diverse parcel of land lie by the water side , both in this harbour of saint John , and elsewhere , which be to the owner a great commodity , be thereby assure ( by their proper inheritance ) of ground convenient to dress and to dry their fish , whereof many time before they do fade , be prevent 54 sir Humphrey Gilbert by they that come first into the harbour . for which ground they do covenant to pay a certain rent and service unto sir Humphrey Gilbert , his heir or assign for ever , and yearly to maintain possession of the same , by themselves or their assign . now remain only to take in provision grant , accord as every ship be tax , which do fish upon the coast adjoin . in the mean while , the general appoint man unto their charge : some to repair and trim the ship , other to attend in gather together our supply and provision : other to search the commodity and singularity of the country , to be find by sea or land , and to make relation unto the general what [ he . 152 . ] either themselves can know by their own travail and experience , or by good intelligence of english man or stranger , who have long frequent they same coast . also some observe the elevation of the pole , and draw plait of the country exact grade . and by that i can gather by each man several relation , i have draw a brief description of the newfound land , with the commodity by sea or land already make , and such also as be in possibility and great likelihood to be make : nevertheless the card and plait that be draw , with the due gradation of the harbour , bay , and cape , do perish with the admiral : wherefore in the description follow , i must omit the particular of such thing .