stock to the Spaniard themselves , who at this day ( of all other people ) be most bind to laud and praise God , who first stir up the man to that enterprise . and while he be attend there to acquaint the king of Castille ( that then be ) with his intend purpose , by how many way and mean be he deride ? some scorn the pildnesse of his garment , some take occasion to jest at his simple and silly look , other ask if this be he that lowt so low , which do take upon he to bring man into a country that abound with gold , pearl , and precious stone ? if he be any such man ( say they ) he will carry another manner of countenance with he , and look somewhat lofty . thus some judge he by his garment , and other by his look and countenance , but none enter into the consideration of the inward man . A . D . 1583 . God do not always begin hit great work by the great person . his custom be to bow himself very low in make of courtesy . in the end , what success his voyage have , who listen to read the decade , the history of the west Indies , the conquest of Hernando Cortes about Mexico , and those Hernando of Francisco Pizarro in Peru about Casamalcha and Cusco , may know more particular . all which their p ^^ discovery , travail and conquest be extant to be have in the english tongue . this devise be then account a fantastical imagination , and a drowsy dream . but the sequel thereof have since awake out of dream thousand of soul to know their creator , be thereof before that time altogether ignorant : and have since make sufficient proof , neither to be fantastic nor vain imagine . withal , how mighty it have enlarge the dominion of the crown of Spain , and great enrich the subject of the same , let all man consider . beside , it be well know , that sithence the time of Columbus his first [ he . 168 . ] discovery , through the plant , possess , and inhabit those part , there have be transport and bring home into Europe great store of gold , silver , pearl , and precious stone , then heretofore have be in all age since the creation of the world . i do therefore hearty wish , that see it have please almighty god of his infinite mercy , at the length to awake some of our worthy country man out of that drowsy dream , wherein we have so long slumber : that we may now not suffer that to quail for want of maintenance , which by these valiant gentleman our countryman be so noble begin and enterprise . for which purpose , i have take upon i to write this simple short treatise , hope that it shall be able to persuade such as have be , and yet do continue detractor and hinderer of this journey , ( by reason perhaps that they have not deliberate and advise enter into the judgement of the matter ) that yet now upon better consideration they will become favourable furtherer of the same . and that such as be already well affect there - a reasonable unto , will continue their good disposition : and withal , i request . most humble pray all such as be no niggard of their purse in buy of costly and rich apparel , and liberali contributor in set forth of game , pastime , feast and banquet , ( whereof the charge be pass , there be no hope of public profit or commodity ) that henceforth they will bestow and employ their liberality ( heretofore that way expend ) to the furtherance of these so commendable purpose proceed . and to this end have i take pen in hand , as in conscience thereunto move , desire much rather , that of the great multitude which this realm do nourish , far better able to handle this matter than i my self be , it will have please some one of they to have undertake the same . but see they be silent , and that it fall to my lot to put pen to the paper , i will endeavour my self , and do stand in good hope ( though my skill and knowledge be simple , yet through the the argument assistance of almighty God ) to prove that the voyage of the book . jate | y enterprise for trade , traffic , and plant in America , be a action tend to the lawful enlargement 96 of her majesty dominion , commodious to the whole realm in generail , profitable to the adventurer in particular , beneficial to the savage , and a matter to be attain without any great danger or difficulty . and last , ( which be most of all ) a thing likewise tend to the honour and glory of almighty God . and for that the lawfulness to plant in those country in some man judgement seem very doubtful , i will begin the proof of the lawfulness of trade , traffic , and plant . the second chapter show , that it be lawful and necessary to trade and traffic with the savage : and to plant in their country : and divide plant into two sort . a nd first for traffic , i say that the Christians may lawful travel into those country and abide there : who the savage may not just impugn and forbid in respect of the mutual society and fellowship between man and man prescribe by the law of nation . for from the first beginning of the creation of the world , and from the renew of the same after Noes flood , all man have agree , that no violence shall be offer to ambassador : that the sea with his haven shall be common : that such as shall fortune to be take in war , shall be servant or slave : and that stranger shall not be drive away from the place or country whereunto they do come . if it be so then , i demand in what age , and by what law be the same forbid or deny since ? for who doubt but that it be lawful for christian to use trade and traffic with infidel or savage , carry thither such commodity as they want , and bring from thence some part of their plenty ? a thing so common and general practise , both in these our day , and in time past , beyond the memory of man , both by Christians and infidel , that it need no further proof . vni 97 g the principali cause why this voyage be undertake . [ Iii . 169 . ] the english voyage and forasmuch as the use of trade and traffic ( be it never so profitable ) ought not to be prefer before the plant of Christian faith : i will therefore somewhat entreat of plant , ( without which , Christian religion can take no root , be the preacher never so careful and diligent ) which i mean to divide into two sort . the first , when Christians by the good like and will assent of the savage , be admit by they to quiet possession . the second , when Christians be unjust repulse , do seek to attain and maintain the right for which they do come . and though in regard of the establishment of christian religion , either of both may be lawful and just exercise : ( whereof many example may be find , as well in the time of Moses and Josua , and other ruler before the birth of Christ , as of many virtuous emperor and king sithence his incarnation : ) yet do i wish , that before the second be put in practice , a proof may be make of the first , save that for their safety as well against the savage , as all other foreign enemy , they shall first well and strong fortify themselves : which be do , then by all fair speech , and every other good mean of persuasion to seek to take away all occasion of offence . as let they to understand , how they come not to their hurt , but for their good , and to no other end , but to dwell peaceable among they , and to trade and traffic with they for their own commodity , without molest or grieve they any way : which must not be do by word only but also by deed . for albeit , to maintain right and repel injury , be a just cause of war : yet must there hereof be heedful care have , that whereas the savage be fearful by nature , and fond otherwise , the Christians shall do their best endeavour to take away such fear as may grow unto they by reason of their strange apparel , armour , and weapon , or such like , by quiet and peaceable conversation , 98 and let they live in security , and keep a measure of blameless defence , with as little discommodity to the savage as may be : for this kind of war will be only defensive and not offensive . and questionless there be great hope and likelihood , that by this kind of mean we shall bring to pass all effect to our desire purpose : consider that all creature , by constitution of nature , be render more tractable and easy win for all assay , by courtesy and mildness , then by cruelty or roughness : and therefore be a principle teach we by natural reason , it be first to be put in ure . for albeit as yet the Christians be not so thorough furnish with the perfectness of their language , either to express their mind to they , or again to conceive the savage intent : yet for the present opportunity , such policy may be use by friendly sign , and courteous token towards they , as the savage may easy perceive ( be their sense never so gross ) a assure friendship to be offer they , and that they be encounter with such a nation , as bring they benefit , commodity , peace , tranquillity and safety . to further this , and to accomplish it in deed , there must be present unto they gratis , some kind of our petty merchandize and trifle : as look glass , bell , bead , bracelet , chain , or collar of bugle , crystal , amber , jet , or glass etc for such be the thing , though to we of small value , yet account by they of high price and estimation : and soon will induce their barbarous nature to a like and a mutual society with we . Moreover , it shall be requisite either by speech , if it be possible , either by some other certain mean , to signify unto they , that once league of friendship with all love conversation be admit between the Christians and they : that than the christian from thenceforth will always be ready with force of arm to assist and defend they in their just quarrel , from all invasion , spoil and oppression offer they by any tyrant , [ in . 170 . ] the second kind of plant mg . the english voyage adversary , or their next borderer : and a benefit be so much the more to be esteem , by how much the person upon who it be bestow stand in need thereof . for it appear by the relation of a countryman of we , namely David Ingram , ( who travel in those country xi . month and more ) that the savage general for the most part , be at continual war with their next adjoin neighbour , and especial the cannibal , be a cruel kind of people , who food be man flesh , and have tooth like dog , and do pursue they with ravenous mind to eat their flesh , and devour they . and it be not to be doubt , but that the Christians may in this case just and lawful aid the savage against the cannibal . so that it be very likely , that by this mean we shall not only mighty stir and inflame their rude mind glad to embrace the love company of the christian , proffer unto they both commodity , succour , and kindness : but also by their frank consent shall easy enjoy such competent quantity of land , as every way shall be correspondent to the christian expectation and contentation , consider the great abundance that they have of land , and how small account they make thereof , take no other fruit thereby then such as the ground of it self do natural yield . and thus much concern the first sort of plant , which as i assure hope , so i most hearty pray may take effect and place . but if after these good and fair mean use , the savage nevertheless will not be herewithal satisfy , but barbarous will go about to practise violence either in repel the christian from their port and safelanding , or in withstand they afterward to enjoy the right for which both painful and lawful they have adventure themselves thither : then in such a case i hold it no breach of equity for the Christians to defend themselves , to pursue revenge with force , and to do whatsoever be necessary for the attain of their safety : for it be allowable by all law in such distress , to resist violence with violence : and 100 for their moor security to increase their strength by building of fort for avoid the extremity of injurious deal . wherein if also they shall not be suffer in reasonable quietness to continue , there be no bar ( as i judge ) but that in stout assembly the Christians may issue out ,