subject to bring in gold and silver for the fill of the hall , as aforesaid , as namely to the city or town of Quito , Paciacama and Cusco , as also to the Calao of Lima , in which town , as their own writer do affirm , they find a large and fair house , all slate and cover with gold : and when as the say hall be not yet a quarter full , a mutiny arise among the Spaniard , in which it be common give out , that the say prince have politic offer this great ransom under pretence to raise a much more mighty power , whereby the Spaniard shall be take , slay and overthrow : whereupon they grow to this resolution , to put the say prince to death , and to make partition of the gold and silver already bring in , which they present put in execution . And come to make perfect inventory of the same , as well for the emperor than king of 125 Spain , his five part , as otherwise , there be find to be already bring in into the say hall , the number of 132425 . pound weight of silver , and in gold the number of 1828125 . pezo , which be a riches never before that nor since see of any man together , of which there do appertain to the emperor for his five part of gold 365625 . pezo , and for his five part of silver 26485 . pound weight , and to every horseman eight thousand pezo of gold , and 67 . pound weight of silver . Every soldier have 4550 . pezo of gold and 280 . pound weight of silver . Every captain have some 30000 . some 20000 pezo of gold and silver , proportional answerable to their degree and call , accord to the rate agree upon among they . Francis Pizarro as their general , accord to his decree and call proportional , have more than any of the rest , over and beside the massy table of gold which Atabalipa have in his litter , which weigh 25000 . pezo of gold : never be there before that day soldier so rich in so small a time , and with so little danger . and in this journey for want of iron , they do shoe their horse , some with gold , and some with silver . this be to be see in the general history of the west Indies , where as the do of Pizarro , and the conquest of Peru be more at large set forth . to this may i add the great discovery and conquest which the prince of Portugal have make round about the west , the south , and the east part of Africa , and also at calicut , and in the east Indies , and in America , at Brasile and elsewhere in sundry island , in fortify , people and plant all along the say coast and island , ever as they discover : which be right weigh and consider , do minister just cause of encouragement to our countryman , not to account it so hard and difficult a thing for the subject of this noble realm of England , to discover , people , plant and possess the like goodly land and rich country not far from we , but near adjoin 8c offer themselves unto we 126 ( as be aforesaid ) which have never yet heretofore be in the actuali possession of any other christian prince , than the prince of this realm . all which ( as i think ) shall not a little animate and encourage we to look out and adventure abroad , understand what large country and island the Portugal with their small number have within these few year discover , people and plant , some part whereof i have think it not amiss , brief in particular to name both the town , country and island , so near as i can upon the sudden call they to remembrance : for the rest i do refer the reader to the history , where more at large the same be to be see . first , they do win and conquer from the prince of Barbary the island of Geisera and town of Arzila , not past a 140 . mile distant from their metropolitan and chief city of Fesse : and after that they win also from the say prince the town of Tanger , Ceuta , Mazigam , Azamor , and azaffi , all alongst the sea coast . and in the year of our lord , 1455 . Alouis de Cadomosta a gentleman venetian , be he that first discover for their use cape Verd , with the island adjoin , of which he then people and plant those of Bonavista and Sant Iago discover also the river Senega , otherwise call Niger , and cape Roxo and Sierra Leone , and in a few year after they do discover the coast of Guinea , and there people and build the castle of Mina : then discover they further to the country of melegette , Benin , and Congo , with the hand of Principe , da Nobon , saint Matthew , and saint Thomas under the equinoctial line , which they people , and build in the say island of S . Thomas the haven town or port of Pavosan . after that , about the year of our lord , 1494 . one Bartholomew Dias be send forth , who be the first man that discover and double that great and large cape call de bon Esperanze , 8c pass the current that run upon the say coast , on the southeast part of Africa , between the say main land 8c the island of S . Laurence , otherwise call of the ancient , madam - 127 Ceffala accomt to be the place where the noble and wise king Salomon do fetch his gold . the english voyage gascar , he discover to you harbour name the river of the infant . after that since the year of our lord God , 1497 . and before the full accomplishment of the year of Christ , 1510 . through the travail and discovery of Vasques de Gama , Peter Alvares , Thomas Lopes , Andrew Corsale , John de Empoli , Peter Sintra , Sancho de Toar , and that noble and worthy gentleman Alonzo de Albuquerque , they do discover , people , and plant at Ceffala , be upon the east side of Africa , in the twenty degree of latitude of the south pole , and direct west from the hand of S . Laurence ( at which port of Ceffala , diverse do affirm that king Salomon do fetch his gold ) as also upon the say east side of Africa , they do afterward discover , people , and plant at Mozambique , Quiola , Monbaza , and melinde , two degree of southerly latitude , and so up to the strait of Babel - Mandell at the enter of the red sea , all upon the east coast of Africa , from whence they put off - at the cape of guarda fu , and past the great gulf of Arabia , and the Indian sea east to Sinus Persicus , and the island of ormus , and so pass the large and great river Indus , where he have his fall into the main ocean , in 23 . degree and a half , under the tropic of cancer , of septentrionali latitude , they make their course again direct towards the south , and begin to discover , people , and plant upon the west side of the hither India at goa , mangalor , Cananor , Calecut and Cochin , and the island of Zeilarn . and here i think good to remember to you , that after their plant upon this coast , their force grow so great that they be able to compel all the moor , the subject of the mighty emperor of the Turk to pay tribute unto they , ever as they pass the gulf of Arabia , from the port of Mecca in Arabia fcelix , where Mahomet lie bury , or any of the other port of the say land , ever as they pass to and from the haven of Cochin , Calecut and Cananor , and by their martial manner of discipline practise in those part , the great 128 and mighty prince the sophy emperor of the persian , and profess enemy to the Turk , come to the knowledge and use of the caliver shoot , and to interlace and join footman with his horseman , si thence which time the persian have grow to that strength and force , that they have give many mighty and great overthrow to the Turk , to the great quiet of all Christendom . and from the island of Zeilarn aforesaid , they also discover more east in pass the gulf of Bengala , and so pass the notable and famous river of Ganges , where he have his fall into the main ocean , under the tropic of cancer , and to the cape of Malaca , and unto the great and large island of Sumatra , Java major , Java minor , Mindanao , Palobane , celebe , Gilolo , Tidore , Mathin , Borneo , Machian , terenate , and all other [ three . 181 . ] the island of Molucques and spicery , and so east alongst the coast of Cathaia , to the port of China , these be the Zaiton and Quinsay , and to the island of Zipango and Japan , situate in the east , in 37 . degree of septentrionali from England . latitude and in 195 . of longitude . these be their at these noble and worthy discovery . here also be not to be island have forget , that in the year of our lord , 1501 . that famous and worthy gentleman Americus Vespucius do the ’ discover , people , and plant to their use the hold and fame of the fort which they have in Brasill , of who ( he be queen most but a private gentleman ) the whole country or firm efce ^ ent Maland of the west Indies , be common call and know ™ by the name of America . i do great doubt lest i seem over tedious in the recital of the particular discovery and conquest of the east and west Indies , wherein i be the more bold to urge the patience of the reader , to the end it may most manifest and at large appear , to all such as be not acquaint with the history , how the king of Portugal , who country for popularity and number of people , be scarce comparable to some three shire of England , and the king of Spain likewise , who natural country do not great abound with people , both vin 129 i which prince by mean of their discovery within less than 90 . year past , have as it appear both mighty and marvellous enlarge their territory and dominion through their own industry by the assistance of the omnipotent , who aid we shall not need to doubt , see the cause and quarrel which we take in hand tend to his honour and glory , by the enlargement of the christian faith . to conclude , since by christian duty we stand bind chief to further all such act as do tend to the increase the true flock of Christ by reduce into the right way those lose sheep which be yet astray : and that we shall therein follow the example of our right virtuous predecessor of renown memory , and leave unto our posterity a divine memoriali of so godly a enterprise : let we i say for the consideration allege , enter into judgement with our self , whether this action may belong to we or not , the rather for that this voyage through the mighty assistance of the omnipotent God , shall take our desire effect ( whereof there be no just cause of doubt . ) then shall her majesty dominion be enlarge , her highness ancient title just confirm , all odious idleness from this our realm utter banish , diverse decay town repair , and many poor and needy person relieve , and estate of such as now live in want shall be embetter , the ignorant and barbarous idolater teach to know Christ , the innocent defend from their bloody tyrannical neighbour , the diabolical custom of sacrifice humane creature abolish . all which ( no man doubt ) be thing grateful in the sight of our saviour Christ , and tend to the honour and glory of the Trinity . bee of good cheer therefore , for he that can err have say : that before the end of the world , his word shall be preach to all nation , which good work i trust be reserve for our nation to accomplish in these part : wherefore my dear countryman , be not dismay : 13 ° for the power of God be nothing diminish , nor the love that he have to the preach and plant of the gospel any whit abate . shall we then doubt he will be less ready most mighty and miraculous to assist our nation in this quarrel , which be chief and principal undertake for the enlargement of the christian faith abroad , and the banishment of idleness at home , than he be to Columbus , Vasques , nun , Hernando Cortes , and Francis Pizarro in the west : and Vasques de Gama , Peter Alvares , and Alonso de Albuquerque in the east ? let we therefore with cheerful mind and courageous heart , give the attempt , and leave the sequel to almighty God : for if he be on our part , what force it who bee against we ? thus leave the correction and reformation unto the gentle reader , whatsoever be in this treatise too much or too little , otherwise unperfect , i take leave , and so end .