and first grow into familiarity with the inland people . 140 what Minerali matter may fall out to be find , be a thing leave in suspense , until some better knowledge , because there be many man , who have long since expect some profit herein , upon the great promise that have be make they , and be as yet in no point satisfy , do thereupon conceive that they be but word purposely cast out for the induce of man to be the more ready and willing to furnish their money towards the charge of the first discovery . but now to answer some other who begin with a other objection , say : that it be not for the merchant purse to continue the charge of transport and plant : and that since these hundred man which be now to be plant , will cost four thousand pound : it be then to be think , that the charge of a far great number , will be also a far great sum of money . whereunto i answer , that in all attempt unknown , especial such a one as this be , wherewith we be present in hand , the first charge be common adventure in more desperate kind , than those that follow upon some better knowledge : and therewith it fall out , that whereas one adventure in the first enterprise , a hundred for that one will of themselves be willing and desirous to adventure in the next , if there be never so little more appearance , that the intend matter be by some knowledge of our own , find true in some point of our first presumption . the example be many , and may easy be remember by those who be merchant , even in their ordinary and daily trade , as well as in extraordinary attempt , which of late year have fall into those term of some likelihood , as be aforesaid . so then no doubt , but when certain report shall be bring by they who direct come from thence , that such a country and people they have themselves see , as be by we speak off , but that then there will come forward a great number of those , who now neither have hear any thing of the matter , as also of other , who present make such 141 A . D . objection . answer . the ewer of metal bring by m . Frobisher , cause two several supply , the two year nextfollow ; whereof the latter be of thirteen tall ship . frivolous scruple , and will not otherwise be satisfy , then by the report of saint Thomas . i speak not this by the merchant who for their freedom of trade 1 will not have press to any further charge than this first preparation , but rather by such as have great affection to hazard the change of their estate , and will be well content to go in the voyage if they may only be assure that there be such a country , and that their money shall not be waste to nothing in the preparation . the right examination of this point must be the contrary sequel of the common proverb that be use , nothing venture , nothing have : so on the other side by venture , many great good profit be find out , to the wonderful benefit of the common weal , and to those especial in private , who take on they the hazard of their life and travel , or substance in the first attempt : and therefore i will wish that they , who ( God be thank ) be well able to spare that which be require of each one towards the undertake of this adventure , be well content and willing to employ the same , since the sequel in good and substantiali reason do promise , not only a great commodity in particular to the merchant , who shall here [ three . 186 . ] at home exercise the trade of merchandise : but also to a infinite number of other , who present live in poor estate , and may by take the opportunity of this discovery , alter the same to a far better degree . wherefore to make some conclusion upon this point of the merchant misdoubt , who suspect lest this first disbursement without return of present gain , shall not be all his charge , but that afterward he may yet further be urge to continue the like again , as have happen in the discovery of the moscovian trade : it may suffice to consider , that this be not a action which concern only the merchant particular , but a great deal more the general sort of people throughout all England : and that when such relation shall be return , as that it may be find a matter worthy the follow , the whole generality will not refuse to contribute towards the furtherance 142 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . .. 1583 * thereof , rather than it shall sink for want of any reasonable supply . but as it be a very little time , since i have be thorough resolve to try my fortune in the matter , so it be more than time the preparation be in hand already , and therefore no fit time now to make any number of ignorant man to understand with reason the circumstance that belong to a matter of so great consideration and importance . to those who have any forward mind in well do to the generality of mankind , i say thus much more , that christian charity do as great persuade the furtherance of this action , as any other that may be lay before we , in as much as thereby we shall not only do a most excellent work , in respect of reduce the savage people to Christianity and civility , but also in respect of our poor sort of people , which be very many among we , live altogether unprofitable , and often time to the great disquiet of the better sort . for who know not , how by the long peace , happy health , and bless plentifulness , wherewith God have endue this realm , that the people be so mighty increase , as a great number be bring up , during their youth in their parent house , without any instruction how to get their live after their parent decease , be drive to some necessity , whereby very often for want of better education they fall into sundry disorder , and so the good sort of people , as i say before , be by they ordinary trouble , and themselves lead on to one shameful end or other , whereas if there may be find some such kind of employment as this will be , no doubt but a great part of they will be withhold from fall into such vile ' deed : and in stead thereof , prove great serviceable in those affair , where they may be so employ . this i speak of my own experience , have see master cardiver come over to the war of the low country ^ es ™ ne during my residence in the same , who here have be very expenence - evill and idle liver , and by some little continuance with 143 we , have grow to be very industrious in their faculty , which i can assure you , be a more painful manner of live then in this action be like to fall out , and withaU to a purpose of far less value , in respect of their particular recompense , then with a assure kind of good hope be look for in this . thus you see in every point that may be wish for in a good action and voyage , there be matter and reason enough to satisfy the well dispose . but now to grow somewhat near the quick , and to show you some great appearance , then have be yet speak of touch the trade which be the only subject wherewith i do mean to intermeddle at this time , because my address hereby , be chief to man of such like faculty : you may understand by that which follow , the circumstance of a little discourse , which do concern these matter very direct . in the year 1534 . James Carthier , of saint Malo make his first discovery of those part of America , which lie to the westwards , and as it be on the backside of Newfoundland . in which voyage his principali intention be to seek out the passage , which he presume may have be find out into the east Indian sea , otherwise call the passage to Cathaya , but this year he go no high than the island of the assumption in the great bay of saint Laurence , and so return back into France . the next year follow he go with great provision into the grand bay again , where he keep the northerly shore , run up the great river that come down from Canada and other place , until at last with his small pinnace , ( have leave his great ship by the way ) he arrive at Hochelaga town , be three hundred league within the entrance of the grand bay . in which travail he have spend so much of the year , that it be now the month of October , and therefore think it convenient , for the better inform himself at large in this discovery , to winter it out in those part , which he do at a place call by himself holy cross . 144 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . .. I583 - this winter fall out to be a very long and hard winter , as many time the like happen with we in these part , and the savage people , who for the most part make but a slender kind of provision , even as it be from hand to mouth , fall into some scarcity of victual ; yet do they not refuse to serve the Frenchman , with any thing [ three . 187 . ] they have all the winter long , albeit at somewhat high price towards the end when the need be most , as with our self the like happen at such time . but when the french have their want serve all the year , and that as yet they see not any appearance of their intend matter , which be the discovery of the passage , and yet imagine by the sign wherewith the willing people endeavour to declare their knowledge in that point , that some good matter may be have from they , if they may have be well understand , they resoulve with themselves to take some of the sufficient man of that country home into France , and there to keep they so long , as that have once achieve the french tongue , they may declare more substantial their mind , and knowledge in the say passage , con - eluding this to be the mean of least charge , of least travail , and of least hazard . and when they come to bethink themselves , who may be meet for it , they determine to take the king , as the person who may be best inform of such part as be somewhat remote from his own country , as also that for the respect of he , the people will be always ready , and content to do they any further service , when it shall happen they to return thither again about the discovery . thus the poor king of the country , with two or three other of his chief companion come aboard the french ship , be require thither to a banquet , be traitorous carry away into France , where he live four year , and then die a christian there , as Thevet the french king cosmographer do make mention . this outrage and injurious deal do put the whole vni 145 king the trenchmens trade re * new in Canada , in the year 1581 . the south fart best fir inhabit and traffic . the english voyage country people into such dislike with the french , as never since they will admit any conversation or familiarity with they , until of late year , the old matter begin to grow out of mind , and be the rather draw on by gift of many trifle thing , which be of great value with they , they be as ( i say ) within these two or three year content again to admit a traffic , which two year since be begin with a small bark of thirty ton , who return be find so profitable , as the next year follow , be the last year , by those merchant , who mean to have keep the trade secret unto themselves , from any other of their own country man , there be hire a ship of fourscore ton out of the isle of Jersey , but not any one mariner of that place , save a shipboy . this ship make her return in such sort , as that this year they have multiply three ship , to wit , one of nine score ton , another of a hundred ton , and a three of four score ton : which report be give by very substantiali and honest man of Plymouth , who see the say ship in readiness to depart on their voyage , and be aboard of some of they . here be at this instant in the town a man of Gernesey , Lewis de Vike , who report to have credible hear , that by this last year voyage the Frenchman get fourteen or fifteen hundred for every one hundred : but how soever it be , it carry good likelihood of some notable profit , in asmuch as they do so great , and thus sudden increase the burden and number of their ship this present year . now , if in so little as two year time this voyage of the northern part be grow to such good pass as have be declare unto you : it be worth the think on to consider what may be hope for from the southern part , which in all reason may promise a great deal more . and so , as one who be never touch with any indirect meaning , i presume to wish and persuade you to some better take of this matter to heart , as a thing which i 146 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . do very think will turn to your great and more assure commodity , than you receive by any other voyage , as yet frequent of so short and safe a course as this have : deal herein no otherwise with you for your several small sum , than i do with my self , both for moor of my own , then be require of any one of you : beside the hazard and travail of my person , and the total employment of my poor credit , which ( i thank God ) have hitherto pass clear and unspotted in matter of great importance and difficulty , then be like to fall out in this matter between you and i .