, for such be the example of the apostle : unto who although the authority and example before allege of emperor , king and prince , aswell before Christ time as since , may sufficient satisfy : yet for further answer , we may say with saint Paul , if we have sow unto you heavenly thing , do you think it much that we shall reap your carnali thing ? and withal , the workman be worthy of his hire . Theise heavenly tiding which those labourer our countryman ( as messenger of god great goodness and mercy ) will voluntary present unto they , do far exceed their earthly riches . Moreover , if the other inferiout worldly and temporali thing which they shall receive from we , be weigh in equal balance , i assure my self , that by equal judgement of any indiff - ” 9 Corinth . 9 This barge can be unjust , where both party be gainer . the english voyage ent person , the benefit which they then receive , shall tarre surmount those which they shall depart withal unto we . and admit that they have ( as they have not ) the knowledge to put their land to some use : yet be bring from brutish ignorance to civility and knowledge , and make then to understand how the ten part of their land may be so manure and employ , as it may yield more commodity to the necessary use of man life , than the whole now do : what just cause of complaint may they have ? and in my private opinion , i do very think that God do create land , to the end that it shall by culture and husbandry yield thing necessary for man life . but this be not all the benefit which they shall receive by the Christians : for , over and beside the knowledge how to till and dress their ground , they ' shall be reduce from unseemly custom to honest manner , from disorder riotous rout and company to a well govern common wealth , and withal , shall teach mechanical occupation , art , and liberali science : and which stand they most upon , they shall | be defend from the cruelty of their tyrannical ! and blood suck neighbour the cannibal , whereby infinite number of their life shall | be preserve . and last , by this mean many of their poor innocent child shall be preserve from the bloody knife of the sacrificer , a most horrible and detestable custom in the sight of God and man , now and ever heretofore use among they . many other thing can i here allege to this purpose , be it not that i do fear lest i have already more than half tire the reader . the seven chapter show that the plant there , be not a matter of such charge or difficulty , as many will make it seem to be . now therefore for proof , that the plant in these part be a thing that may be do without the aid of the prince power and purse , contrary to the allega - 120 cion of many malicious person , who will neither be actor in any good action themselves , nor so much as afford a good word to the set forward thereof : and that worse be , they will take upon they to make molehill seem mountain , and fly elephant , to the end they may discourage other , that be very well or indifferent affect to the matter , be like unto Esop dog , which neither will eat hay himself , nor suffer the poor hungry ass to feed thereon : i say and affirm that God have provide such mean for the furtherance of this enterprise , as do stand we in stead of great treasure : for first by reason that it have please God of his great goodness , of long time to hold his merciful hand over this realm , in preserve the people of the same , both from slaughter by the sword , and great death by plague , pestilence , or otherwise , there be at this day great number ( god he know ) which live in such penury and want , as they can be content to hazard their life , and to serve one year for meat , drink and apparel only , without wage , in hope thereby to amend their estate : which be a matter in such like journey , of no small charge to the prince . Moreover , thing in the like journey of great price and cost as victuali ( whereof there be great plenty to be have in that country without money ) and powder , great artillery , or corselet be not needful in so plentiful and chargeable manner , as the show of such a journey may present : for a small quantity of all these , to furnish the fort only , will suffice until such time as diverse commodity may be find out in those part , which may be think well worthy a great charge . also the peculiar benefit of archer which God have bless this land withal before all other nation , will stand we in great stead among those naked people . another help we have also , which in such like case be a matter of marvellous cost , and will be in this journey procure very easy ( that be to say ) to transport yearly 121 [ three . i78 . i aswell our people , as all other necessary needful for they into those part by the fleet of merchant , that yearly venture for fish in newfoundland , be not far distant from the country mean to be inhabit , who common go with empty vessel in effect , save some little fraught with salt . and thus it appear that the soldier wage , and the transportation may be defray for far less sum of money than the detractor of this enterprise have give out . again , this intend voyage for conquest , have in like manner many other singular privilege wherewith God have , as it be , with his holy hand bless the same before all other . for after once we be depart the coast of England , we may pass straightway thither , without danger of be drive into any the country of our enemy , or doubtful friend : for common one wind serve to bring we thither , which seidome fail from the middle of Januarie to the middle of may , a benefit which the mariner make great account of , for it be a pleasure that they have in a few or none of other journey . also the passage be short , for we may go thither in thirty or forty day at the most , have but a indifferent wind , and return continual in twenty or four and twenty day at the most . and in the same our journey , by reason it be in the ocean , and quite out of the way from the intercourse of other countries , we may safe trade and traffic without peril of piracy : neither shall our ship , people , or good there , be subject to arrest or molestation of any pagan potentate , turkish tyrant , yea , or christian prince , which heretofore sometime upon slender occasion in other part have stay our ship and merchandize , whereby great number of our countryman have be utter undo , diverse put to ransom , yea , and some lose their life : a thing so fresh in memory as it need no proof , and be well worthy of consideration . beside , in this voyage we do not cross the burn line , whereby common both beverage and victuali be 122 corrupt , and man health very much impair , neither do we pass the freeze sea , which yield sundry extreme danger : but have a temperate climate at all time of the year , to serve our turn . and last , there need no delay by the way for take in of fresh water and fuel , ( a thing usual do in long journey ) because , as i say above , the voyage be not long , and the fresh water take in there , our man here in England at their return home have find so wholesome and sweet , that they have make choice to drink it before our beer and ale . behold here , good countryman , the manifold benefit , commodity and pleasure heretofore unknown , by God especial blessing not only reveal unto we , but also as it be infuse into our bosom , who though hitherto like dormouse have slumber in ignorance thereof , be like the cat that be loath for their prey to wet their foot : yet if now therefore at the last we will awake , and with willing mind ( set frivolous imagination aside ) become industrious instrument to our self , questio nlesse we shall not only hereby set forth the glory of our heavenly father , but also easy attain to the end of all good purpose that may be wish or desire . and may it not much encourage we to hope for good success in the country of these savage , be a naked kind of people , void of the knowledge of the discipline of war , see that a noble man , be but a subject in this realm ( in the time of our king Henry the second ) by name Strangbow , than earl of Chepstow in south wale , by himself and his ally and assistant , at their own proper charge pass over into Ireland , and there make conquest of the now country , and then kingdom of Lynester , at which time it be very populous and strong , which history our own chronicle do witness ? and why shall we be dismay more than be the Spaniard , who have be able within these few year to conquer , possess and enjoy so large a 123 2 . Decad . lib . ^ . fol . 77 . of the west Indies , in english . Cano a be a kind of boat . 3 . Decad . lib . 1 . folio 97 . about the year of our lord 1511 . conquest of the west Indies , folio 43 . and 45 . English . the english voyage tract of the earth , in the west Indies , as be between the two tropics of cancer and Capricorn , not only in the main firm land of America , which be 47 . degree in latitude from south to north , and do contain 2820 . English mile at the least , that the king of Spain have there in actuali possession , beside many goodly and rich island , as Hispaniola , now call saint Domingo , Cuba , Jamaica , and diverse other , which be both beautiful and full of treasure , not speak any whit at all , how large the say land be from east to west , which in some place be account to be 1500 . English mile at the least from east to west , between the one sea and the other . or why shall our noble nation be dismay , more than be Vasques nun de Valboa , a private gentleman of Spain , who with the number of 70 . Spaniards at Tichiri , give a overthrow unto that mighty king Chemaccus , have a army of a hundred canoas and 5000 . man , and the say Vasques nun not long after , with his small number , do put to flight king chiape his whole army . likewise Hernando Cortes , be also but a private gentleman of Spain , after his departure from the island of Cuba and Acuzamil , and enter into the firm of America , have many most victorious and triumphant conquest , as that at Cyntla , where be accompany with less than 500 Spanish footman , thirteen horseman and six piece of ordinance only , he overthrow 40000 . Indian . the same Cortes with his say number of Spaniard , take prisoner that mighty emperor Mutezuma in his most chief and famous city of Mexico , which at that instant have in it above the number of 50000 . Indian at the least , and in short time after obtain not only the quiet possession of the say city , but also of his whole empire . and in like manner in the country of Peru , which the king of Spain have now in actuali possession , Francisco Pysarro , with the only aid of Diego de Almagro , 124 and Hernando Luche , be all three but private gentleman , be the principali person that first attempt discovery and conquest of the large and rich country of Peru , which through the aid of the almighty , he bring to pass and achieve in the tambo of caxa - malca , ( which be a large place of ground , enclose with wall ) in which place he take the great and mighty prince Atabalipa prisoner , amid the number of 60000 . Indian his subject , which be ever before that day account to be a warlike kind of people , which his great victory it please God to grant unto he in the marvellous year of our lord God 1533 . he not have in his victorie - company above the number of 210 . Spaniard , whereof there be not pass threescore horseman in all : after the take of which prince Atabalipa , he offer unto Pyzarro for his ransom , to fill a great large hall full of gold and silver , and such gold and silver vessel as they then use , even as high as a man may reach with his arm . and the say prince cause the same hall to be mark round about at the say height , which ransom Pyzarro grant to accept . and after , when as this mighty prince have send to his vassal and