the manner how our admiral be lose . upon Tewsday the 27 of August , towards the evening , August 27 . our general cause they in his frigate to sound , who find white sand at 35 fathom , be then in latitude about 44 degree . Wednesday towards night the wind come south , and we bear with the land all that night , westnorthwest , contrary to the mind of master Cox : nevertheless we follow the admiral , deprive of power to prevent a mischief , which by no contradiction can be bring to hold other course , allege they can not make the ship to work better , nor to lie otherways . the evening be fair and pleasant , yet not without prediction token of storm to ensue , and most part of this t1 , e Wednesday night , like the swan that sing before it her death , they in the admiral , or delight , continue in sound of trumpet , with drum , and fife : also wind the cornet , haughtboye : and in the end of their jollity , leave with the battle and ring of doleful kneel . towards the evening also we catch in the golden hind a very mighty porpose , with a harp iron , have first strike diverse of they , and bring away part of their flesh , stick upon the iron , but can recover only that one . Theise also pass through the ocean , in herd , do portend storm . i omit to recite frivolous report by they in the frigate , of strange voice , the same night , which scar some from the helm . Thursday the 29 of August , the wind rise , and blow vehement at south and by east , bring withal rain , and thick mist , so that we can not see a cable length before we . and betimes in the morning we be all - loss of our together run and fold in among flat and sand , admirdu . among which we find shoal and deep in every three vin 65 e or four ship length , after we begin to sound : but first we be upon they unaware , until master Cox look out , discern ( in his judgement ) white cliff , cry ( land ) withal , though we can not afterward descry any land , it be very likely the break of the sea white , which seem to be white cliff , through the haze and thick weather . immediate token be give unto the delight , to cast about to seaward , which , be the great ship , and of burden 120 ton , be yet foremost upon the breach , keep so ill watch , that they know not the danger , before they feel the same , too late to recover it : for present the admiral strike a ground , and have soon after her stern and hinder part beat in piece : whereupon the rest ( that be to say , the frigate in which be the general and the golden hind ) cast about eastsoutheast , bear to the south , even for our life into the wind eye , because that way carry we to the seaward . make out from this danger , we sound one while seven fathom , than five fathom , than four fathom and less , again deep , immediate four fathom , than but three fathom , the sea go mighty and high . at last we recover ( God be thank ) in some despair , to sea room enough . in this distress , we have vigilant eye unto the admiral , who we see cast away , without power to give the man succour , neither can we espy any of the man that leap overboard to save themselves , either in the same pinnace or cock , or upon rafter , and such like mean , present themselves to man in those extremity : for we desire to save the man by every possible mean . but all in vain , sith God have determine their ruin : yet all that day , and part of the next , we beat up and down as near unto the wrack as be possible for we , look out , if by good hap we may espy any of they . this be a heavy and grievous event , to lose at one blow our chief ship freight with great provision , 66 1583 gather together with much travel , care , long time , and difficulty . but moor be the loss of our man , which perish to the number almost of a hundred soul . among who be drown a learned man , a hun - Stephanus garian , bear in the city of Buda , call thereof Budaeus , Parmeni ™ a who of piety and zeal to good attempt , adventure in sar - tan . this action , mind to record in the latin tongue , the gest and thing worthy of remembrance , happen in this discovery , to the honour of our nation , the same be adorn with the eloquent stile of this orator , and rare poet of our time . here also perish our saxon refiner and discoverer Daniel a of inestimable riches , as it be leave among some of we nfiwof • j i j 1 ° metal . in undoubted hope . no less heavy be the loss of the captain Maurice brown , a virtuous , honest , and discreet gentleman , [ he . 157 . ] oversee only in liberty give late before to man , that aught to have be restrain , who show himself a man resolve , and never unprepared for death , as by his last act of this tragedy appear , by report of they that escape this wrack miraculous , as shall be hereafter declare . for when all hope be pass of recover the ship , and that man begin to give over , and to save themselves , the captain be advise before to shift also for his life , by the pinnace at the stern of the ship : but refuse that counsel , he will not give example with the first to leave the ship , but use all mean to exhort his people not to despair , nor so to leave off their labour , choose rather to die , than to incur infamy , by forsake his charge , which then may be think to have perish through his default , show a ill precedent unto his man , by leave the ship first himself . with this mind he mount upon the high deck , where he attend imminent death , and unavoidable : how long , i leave it to God , who withdraw not his comfort from his servant at such time . in the mean season , certain , to the number of fourteen person , leap into a small pinnace ( than a wmderfull escape and deliverance . a great distress . a desperate resolution . two man famish . the english voyage bigness of a Thames barge , which be make in the new find land ) cut off the rope wherewith it be tow , and commit themselves to God mercy , amid the storm , and rage of sea and wind , destitute of food , not so much as a drop of fresh water . the boat seem overcharge in foul weather with company , Edward Headly a valiant soldier , and well repute of his company , prefer the great to the lesser , think better that some of they perish then all , make this motion to cast lot , and they to be throw overboard upon who the lot fall , thereby to lighten the boat , which otherways seem impossible to live , offer himself with the first , content to take his adventure glad : which nevertheless Richard clarke , that be master of the admiral , and one of this number , refuse , advise to abide God pleasure , who be able to save all , as well as a few . the boat be carry before the wind , continue six day and night in the ocean , and arrive at last with the man ( alive , but weak ) upon the new find land , save that the foresay Headly , ( who have be late sick ) and another call of we Brasile , of his travel into those country , die by the way , famish , and less able to hold out , than those of better health . for such be these poor man extremity , in cold and wet , to have no better sustenance than their own urine , for six day together . thus who God deliver from drown , he appoint to be famish , who do give limit to man time , and ordain the manner and circumstance of die : who again he will preserve , neither sea , nor famine can confound . for those that arrive upon the new find land , be bring into France by certain french man , then be upon that coast . after this heavy chance , we continue in beat the sea up and down , expect when the weather will clear up , that we may yet bear in with the land , which we judge not far off , either the continent or some 68 island . for we many time , and in sundry place find ground at 50 , 45 , 40 fathom , and less . the ground come upon our lead , be sometime oazy sand , and otherwhile a broad shell , with a little sand about it . our people lose courage daily after this ill success , the weather continue thick and bluster , with increase of cold , winter draw on , which take from they all hope of amendment , sell a assurance of worse weather to grow upon we every day . the leeside of we lay full of flat and danger inevitable , if the wind blow hard at south . some again doubt we be ingulf in the bay of S . Laurence , the coast full of danger , and unto we unknown . but above all , provision wax scant , and hope of supply be go , with loss of our admiral . Cautes enforce we to return home again . those in the frigate be already pinch with spare allowance , and want of clothes chief : whereupon they beseech the general to return for England , before they all perish . and to they of the golden hind , they make sign of their distress , point to their mouth , and to their clothes thin and ragged : then immediate they also of the golden hind , grow to be of the same opinion and desire to return home . the former reason have also move the general to have compassion of his poor man , in who he see no want of good will , but of mean fit to perform the action they come for , resolve upon retire : and call the captain and master of the hind , he yield they many reason , enforce this unexpected return , withal protest himself , great satisfy with that he have see , and know already . reiterate these word , be content , we have see enough , and take no care of expense past : i will set you forth royal the next spring , if God send we safe home . therefore i pray you let we no long strive here , where we fight against the element . omit circumstance , how unwilling the captain and master of the hind condescend to this motion , his [ three , 158 . ] a monster of the sea . September 2 . own company can testify : yet comfort with the general promise of a speedy return at spring , and induce by other apparent reason , prove a impossibility , to accomplish the action at that time , it be conclude on all hand to retire . so upon Saturday in the afternoon the 31 of August , we change our course , and return back for England , at which very instant , even in wind about , there pass along between we and towards the land which we now forsake a very lion to our seem , in shape , hair and colour , not swim after the manner of a beast by move of his foot , but rather slide upon the water with his whole body ( except the leg ) in sight , neither yet dive under , and again rise above the water , as the manner be , of whale , dolphin , tunise , porpoise , and all other fish : but confident show himself above water without hide : notwithstanding , we present our self in open view and gesture to amaze he , as all creature will be common at a sudden gaze and sight of man . thus he pass along turn his head to and fro , yawn and gape wide , with ugly demonstration of long tooth , and glare eye , and to bid we a farewell ( come right against the hind ) he send forth a horrible voice , roar or bellow as do a lion , which spectacle we all behold so far as we be able to discern the same , as man prone to wonder at every strange thing , as this doubtless be , to see a lion in the ocean sea , or fish in shape of a lion . what opinion other have thereof , and chief the general himself , i forbear to deliver : but he take it for bonum omen , rejoice that he be to war against such a enemy , if it be the devil . the wind be large for England at our return , but very high , and the sea rough , insomuch as the frigate wherein the general go be almost swallow up . Monday in the afternoon we pass in the sight of cape race , have make as much way in little more than two day and night back again , as before we have do in eight day from cape race , unto the place where our ship perish . which hindrance thitherward , and speed back again , be to be impute unto the swift current , as well as to the wind , which we have more large in our return . This Monday the general come aboard the hind to have the surgeon of the hind to dress his foot , which he hurt by tread upon a nail : at what time we comfort each other with hope of hard success to be all past , and of the good to come . So agree to carry out light always by night , that we may keep together , he depart into his frigate , be by no mean to be entreat to tarry in the hind , which have be more for his security . immediate after follow a sharp storm , which we overpass for that time . praise be God . the weather fair , the general come aboard the hind our last con - again , to make merry together with the captain , ference mth master , and company , which be the last meeting , and on Generatt ‘ continue