inconvenience , as by the tedious tract of time and 112 peril , which the ordinary passage to those part at this day do minister . and to conclude this argument withal , it be well know to all man of sound judgement , that this voyage be of great importance , and will be find more beneficial to our country , than all other voyage at this day in use and trade among we . the five chapter show , that the trade and plant in those country be likely to prove to the particular profit of all adventurer . must now accord to my promise show forth some probable reason that the adventurer in this journey be to take particular profit by the same . it be therefore convenient that i do divide the adventurer into two sort : the nobleman and gentleman by themselves , and the [ three . 175 . ] Merchants by themselves . for , as i do hear , it be mean that there shall be one society of the nobleman and gentleman , and another society of the merchant . and yet not so divide , but that each society may free and frank trade and traffic one with the other . and first to bend my speech to the nobleman and gentleman , who do chief seek a temperate climate , wholesome air , fertile soil , and a strong place by nature whereupon they may fortify , and there either plant themselves , or such other person as they shall think good to send to be lord of that place and country : to they i say , that all these thing be very easy to be find within the degree of 30 and 60 aforesaid , either by south or ■ North , both in the continent , and in island thereunto adjoin at their choice : but the degree certain of the elevation of the pole , and the very climate where these place of force and fertility be to be find , i omit to make public , for such regard as the wise sort can easy conjecture : the rather because i do certain understand , that some of those which have the manage of this vni i13 he hide sell for forty shilling a piece . great grape . wine of the palm tree . the english voyage matter , know it as well or better than i my self , and do mean to reveal the same , when cause shall require , to such person who it shall concern , and to no other : so that they may seat and settle themselves in such climate as shall best agree with their own nature , disposition , and good like : and in the whole tract of that land , by the description of as many as have be there , great plenty of minerail matter of all sort , and in very many place , both stone of price , pearl and crystal , and great store of beast , bird , and fowl both for pleasure and necessary use of man be to be find . and for such as take delight in hunt , there be stag , wild bore , fox , hare , cony , badger , otter , and diverse other such like for pleasure . also for such as have delight in hawk , there be hawk of sundry kind , and great store of game , both for land and river , as fezant , partridge , crane , heronshawe , duck , mallards , and such like . there be also a kind of beast much big than a ox , who hide be more than eighteen foot long , of which sort a countryman of we , one Walker a sea man , who be upon that coast , do for a truth report in the presence of diverse honourable and worshipful person , that he and his company do find in one cottage above two hundred and forty hide , which they bring away and sell in France for forty shilling a hide ; and with this agree David Ingram , and describe that beast at large , suppose it to be a certain kind of buff ; there be likewise beast and fowl of diverse kind , which i omit for brevity sake , great store of fish both in the salt water and in the fresh , plenty of grape as big as a man thumb , and the most delicate wine of the palm tree , of which wine there be diverse of good credit in this realm that have taste : and there be also a kind of grain call Maiz , potato root , and sundry other fruit natural grow there : so that after such time as they be once settle , they shall need to take no great care for victuali . and now for the better contentation and satisfaction 114 of such worshipful , honest mind , and well dispose merchant , as have a desire to the furtherance of every good and commendable action , i will first say unto they , as i have do before to the nobleman and gentleman , that within the degree abovesaid , be doubtless to be find the most wholesome and best temperature of air , fertility of soil , and every other commodity or merchandise , for the which , with no small peril we do travel into Barbary , Spain , Portugal , France , Italy , Moscovie and Eastland . all which may be either present have , or at the least wise in very short time procure from thence with less danger than now we have they . and yet to the end my argument shall not altogether stand upon likelihood and presumption , i say that such person as have discover and travel those part , do testify that they have find in those country all these thing follow , namely : ' of beast for fur . martern . Beavers . fox , black and white . leopard . of worm . silk worm great and large . < of bird . Hawkes . Bitters . curlewe . herons . partridge . crane . mallards . wild goose . stock dove . and sundry other strange Margaus . black bird . parrot . Pengwins . of fish . Codde . Salmon . Seales . herring . of tree . palm tree yield sweet wine . Cedars . firre . sassafras . Oake . Eime . popler . Trees to we unknown . TI5 of fruit . grape very large . muskemellon . lemon . date great . orange . fig . prune . Raisins great and small . Pepper . almond . citron . of metal . ' gold . silver . copper . lead . tin . of stone . turkeis . ruby . pearl great and fair . marble , of diverse kind . Jasper . crystal . sundry other commodity of all sort . ' rosin . pitch . tar . turpentine . frankincense . honey . wax . rhubarb . oil olive . train oil . musk codde . x . salt . ' tallow . Hides . hemp . flax . Cochenello and die of diverse sort . feather of sundry sort , as for pleasure and fill of featherbed . And see that for small cost , the truth of these thing may be understand ( whereof this intend supply will give we more certain assurance ) i do find no cause to the contrary , but that all well mind person shall be willing to adventure some competent portion for the furtherance of so good a enterprise . now for the trial hereof , consider that in the article of the society of the adventurer in this voyage , there be provision make , that no adventurer shall be bind to any further charge than his first adventure : and yet notwithstanding keep still to himself his child , his 116 apprentice and servant , his and their freedom for trade and traffic , which be a privilege that adventurer in other voyage have not : and in the say article it be likewise provide , that none other than such as have adventure in the first voyage , or shall become adventurer in this supply , at any time hereafter be to be admit in the say society , but as redemptionary , which will be very chargeable : therefore general i say unto all such accord to the old proverb , nothing venture , nothing have . for if it do so fall out , accord to the great hope and expectation have , ( as by god grace it will ) the gain which now they reap by traffic into other far country , shall by this trade return with less charge , great gain , and more safety : less charge , i say , by reason of the ample and large deep river at the very bank , whereof there be many , whereby both easy and quiet they may transport from the innermost part of the main land , all kind of merchandise , yea in vessel of great burden , and that three time , or twice in the year at the least . but let we omit all presumption how vehement soever , and dwell upon the certainty of such commodity as be discover by saint Humphrey Gilbert , and his assistant in newfound land in August last . for . there may be very easy make pitch , tar , Rosen , soap 4 *^ 1 last ash in great plenty , yea , as it be think , enough to serve the whole realm of every of these kind : and of train oil such quantity , as if i shall set down the value that they do esteem it at , which have be there , it will seem incredible . it be hereby intend , that these commodity in this abundant manner , be not to be gather from thence , without plant and settle there . and as for other thing of more value , and that of more sort and kind then one or two ( which be likewise discover there ) i do hold they for some respect , more meet for a time to be conceal then utter . of the fish i do speak nothing , because it be general know : and it be not to be forget , what trifle 117 the english voyage they be that the savage do require in exchange of these commodity : yea , for pearl , gold , silver , and precious stone . all which be matter in trade and traffic of great moment . but admit that it shall so fall out , that the above specify commodity shall not happy be find out within this first year : yet it be very clear that such and so many may be find out as shall minister just occasion to think all cost and labour well bestow . for it be very certain , that there be one seat fit for fortification , of great safety , wherein these commodity follow , especial be to be have , that be to say , grape for wine , whale for oil , hemp for cordage , and other necessary thing , and fish of far great size and plenty , than that of newfound land , and of all these so great store , as may suffice to serve our whole realm . beside all this , if credit may be give to the inhabitant of the same soil , a certain river do thereunto adjoin , which lead to a place abound with rich substance : i do not hereby mean the passage to the molucca , whereof before i make mention . and it be not to be omit , how that about two year past , certain merchant of saint Malo in France , do hire a ship out of the island of Jersey , to the end that they will keep that trade secret from their countryman , and they will admit no mariner , other than the ship boy belong to the say ship , to go with they , which ship be about 70 . ton . i do know the ship and the boy very well , and be familiar acquaint with the owner , which voyage prove very beneficial . to conclude , this which be already say , may suffice any man of reasonable disposition to serve for a taste , until such time as it shall please almighty God through our own industry , to send we better tiding . in the mean season , if any man well affect to this journey , shall stand in doubt of any matter of importance touch the same , he may satisfy himself with the judgement and like of such of good call and credit , as be principali dealer herein . for it be not necessary in this 118 the western plant treatise , public to set forth the whole secret of the voyage . the sixth chapter show that the traffic and plant in those country , shall be unto the savage themselves very beneficial and gainful . now to the end it may appear that this voyage be not undertake altogether for the peculiar commodity of our self and our country ( as general other trade and journey be ) it shall fall out in proof , that the savage shall hereby have just cause to bless the hour when this enterprise be undertake . First and chief , in respect of the most happy and gladsome tiding of the most glorious gospel of our saviour Jesus Christ , whereby they may be bring from falsehood to truth , from darkness to light , from the high way of death to the path of life , from superstitious idolatry to sincere Christianity , from the devil to Christ , from hell to heaven . and if in respect of all the commodity they can yield we ( be they many more ) that they shall but receive this only benefit of Christianity , they be more than full recompense . but hereunto it may be object , that the gospel must be free preach