east , the other of the west , who with all stout godliness most careful imitate the forestep of their father , either in enlarge their territory , or increase the christian flock . Moreover , it be report by the say author , that Theodosius junior the emperor , no whit inferior in virtuous life to any of the above name prince , with great study and zeal pursue and prosecute the gentile , subdue their tyrant and country , and utter destroy all their idolatry , convert their soul to acknowledge their only Messiah and creator , and their country to the enlargement of the empire . to be brief , who so list to read Eusebius Pamphilus , Socrates Scholasticus , Theodoritus , Hermia , sozoman , and Euagrius Scholasticus , which all be most sage ecclesiastical ! writer , shall find great store of example of the worthy life of sundry emperor , tend all to the confirmation of my former speech . and for like example of late time , ( yea even in the memory of man ) i shall not need to recite any other than the conquest make of the west and east Indies by the king of Spain and Portugal ! , whereof there be particular mention make in the last chapter of this book . herein have i use more copy of example then otherwise i will have do , save that i have be in pl ^ ce , where this manner of plant the christian faith have be think of some to be scarce lawful , yea , such as do take upon they to be more than mean learn . to these example can encage join many more , but whosoever be not satisfy with these few , may satisfy himself in read at large the author last above recite . thus have i ( as i trust ) prove that we may just trade and traffic with the savage , and lawful plant and inhabit their country . [ the three 107 the three chapter do show the lawful title which the queen most excellent majesty have unto those country , which through the aid of almighty God be mean to be inhabit . 1170 . Owen Gwyneth be then prince of North - wales , nullum tempus occurrit regi . [ he . 173 . ] this island be discover by sir Humphrey and his company , in this his last journey . Mutezuma his oration to his subject in presence of Hernando Cortes , which oration be make about the year 1520 . a nd it be very evident that the plant there shall in time right ample enlarge her majesty territory and dominion , or ( i may rather say ) restore to her highness ancient right and interest in those country , into the which a noble and worthy personage , lineal descend from the blood royal , bear in wale , name Madock ap Owen Gwyneth , depart from the coast of England , about the year of our lord God 1170 . arrive and there plant himself and his colony , and afterward return himself into England , leave certain of his people there , as appear in a ancient welsh chronicle , where he then give to certain hand , beast , and fowl sundry Welsh ' name , as the hand of Pengwin , which yet to this day bear the same . there be likewise a foul in the say country call by the same name at this day , and be as much to say in english , as Whitehead , and in truth the say fowl have white head . there be also in those country a fruit call gwynethe which be likewise a welsh word . Moreover , there be diverse other welsh word at this day in use , as David Ingram aforesaid report in his relation . all which most strong argue , the say prince with his people to have inhabit there . and the same in effect be confirm by Mutezuma that mighty emperor of Mexico , who in a oration unto his subject for the better pacify of they , make in the presence of Hernando Cortes use these speech follow . my kinsman , friend , and servant , you do well know that eighteen year i have be your king , as my father and grandfather be , and always i have - bene unto you a love prince , and you unto i good 108 and obedient subject , and so i hope you will remain unto i all the day of my life . you ought to have in remembrance , that either you have hear of your father , or else our divine have instruct you , that we be not natural of this country , nor yet our kingdom be durable , because our forefather come from a far country , and their king and captain , who bring they hither , return again to his natural country , say that he will send such as shall rule and govern we , if by chance he himself return not , etc Theise be the very word of Mutezuma set down in the spanish chronicle , the which be thorough consider , because they have relation to some strange noble person , who long before have possess those country , do all sufficient argue the undoubted title of her majesty : forasmuch as no other nation can true by any chronicle they can find , make prescription of time for themselves , before the time of this prince Madoc . beside all this , for further proof of her highness title sithence the arrival of this noble briton into those part ( that be to say ) in the time of the queen grandfather of worthy memory , king Henry the seven , letter patent be by his majesty grant to John Cabota a italian , to Lewis , Sebastian and Sancius , his three son , to discover remote , barbarous and heathen country , which discovery be afterwards execute to the use of the crown of England , in the say king time , by Sebastian and Sancius his son , who be bear here in England : in true testimony whereof there be a fair haven in Newfoundland , know , and call until this day by the name of Sancius haven , which prove that they first discover upon that coast from the height of 63 unto the cape of Florida , as appear in the decade . and this may stand for another title to her majesty : but any of the foresay title be as much or more than any other christian prince can pretend to the Indies , before such time as they have actuali possession thereof , 109 m . Oliver Dalbony . m . Edward reow . m . R . H . m . i A . obtain by the discovery of Christopher Columbus , and the conquest of Vasques nun de Balboa , Hernando Cortes , Francisco Pizarro , and other . and therefore i think it needless to write any more touch the lawfulness of her majesty title . the four chapter show how that the trade , traffic , and plant in those country , be likely to prove very profitable to the whole realm in general . now to show how the same be likely to prove very profitable and beneficial general to the whole realm : it be very certain , that the great jewel of this realm , and the chief strength and force of the same , for defence or offence in martial matter and manner , be the multitude of ship , master and mariner , ready to assist the most stately and royal navy of her majesty , which by reason of this voyage shall have both increase and maintenance . and it be well know that in sundry Cox the place of this realm ship have be build and set forth master . of jate jaye } for the trade of fish only : yet notwithstanding the fish which be take and bring into England by the english navy of fisherman , will not suffice for the expense of this realm four month , if there be none else bring of stranger . and the chief cause why our english man do not go so far westerly as the especial fish place do lie , both for plenty and greatness of fish , be for that they have no succour and know safe harbour in those part . but if our nation be once plant there , or near thereabouts ; whereas they now fish but for two month in the year , they may then fish so long as please themselves , or rather at their come find such plenty of fish ready take , salt , and dry , as may be sufficient to fraught they home without long delay ( God grant that salt may be find there ) whereof David [ three . 174 . ] Ingram ( who travel in those country as aforesaid ) say that there be great plenty : and withal the climate do give great hope , that though there be none not natural grow , yet it may as well be make there by art , as it be both at rochel and Bayon , or elsewhere . which be bring to pass , shall increase the number of our ship and mariner , be it but in respect of fish only : but much more in regard of the sundry merchandize and commodity which be there find , and have in great abundance . Moreover , it be well know that all savage , aswell those that dwell in the south , as those that dwell in the north , so soon as they shall begin but a little to taste of civility , will take marvelous delight in any garment , be it never so simple ; as a shirt , a blue , yellow , red , or green cotton cassock , a cap , or such like , and will take incredible pain for such a trifle . for i my self have hear this report make sundry clothier , time by diverse of our countryman , who have dwell wwlman . in the southerly part of the west Indies , some twelve year together , and some of less time ; that the people weaver . in those part be easy reduce to civility both in manner fuller . and garment . which be so , what vent for our steerman . English clothes will thereby ensue , and how great benefit to all such person and artificer , who name be quote capper . in the margin , i do leave to the judgement of such as hatter , be discreet . an man3 te - and questionless , hereby it will also come to pass , cayedt ™ nes that all such town and village as both have be , ’ and now be utter decay and ruinate ( the poor people thereof be not set on work , by reason of the transportation of raw wool of late day more excessive then in time past ) shall by this mean be restore to their pristinate wealth and estate : all which do likewise tend to the enlargement of our navy , and maintenance of our navigation . to what end need i endeavour my self by argument to prove that by this voyage our navy and navigation shall | be enlarge , when as there need none other reason then the manifest and late example of the near neighbour to this realm , the king of Spain and Portugal , who m the idle person of this realm shall by occasion of thisjourneybee well employ y set on work . hemp do grow near saint Laurence river natural . Read the begin of the bookeintitule , diverse voyage touch the discovery of America . the english voyage since the first discovery of the Indies , have not only mighty enlarge their dominion , great enrich themselves and their subject : but have also by just account treble the number of their ship , master and mariner , a matter of no small moment and importance ? beside this , it will prove a general ! benefit unto our country , that through this occasion , not only a great number of man which do now live idle at home , and be burdenous , chargeable , and unprofitable to this realm , shall hereby be set on work , but also child of twelve or fourteen year of age , or under , may be keep from idleness , in make of a thousand kind of trifle thing , which will be good merchandise for that country . and moreover , our idle woman ( which the realm may well spare ) shall also be employ on pluck , dry , and sort of feather , in pull , beat , and work of hemp , and in gather of cotton , and diverse thing right necessary for die . all which thing be to be find in those country most plentiful . and the man may employ themselves in drag for pearl , work for mine , and in matter of husbandry , and likewise in hunt the whale for Trane , and make cask to put the same in : beside in fish for cod , salmon , and herring , dry salt and barrel the same , and fell of tree , hew and saw of they , and such like work , meet for those person that be no man of art or science . many other thing may be find to the great relief and good employment of no small number of the natural subject of this realm , which do now live here idle to the common annoy of the whole state . neither may i here omit the great hope and likelihood of a passage beyond the grand bay into the south sea , confirm by sundry author to be find lead to Cataia , the Moluccas and spicery , whereby may ensue as general a benefit to the realm , or great than yet have be speak of , without either such charge , or other