there from morning until night . during which time there pass sundry discourse , touch affair past , and to come , lament great the loss of his great ship , more of the man , but most of all of his book and note , and what else i know not , for which he be out of measure grieve , the same doubtless being some matter of more importance than his book , which i can not draw from he : yet by circumstance i gather , the same to be the ore which Daniel the saxon have bring unto he in the new find land . whatsoever it be , the remembrance touch he so deep , as not able to contain himself , he beat his boy in great rage , even at the same time , so long after the miscarry of the great ship , because upon a fair day , when we be becalm upon the coast of the new find land , near unto cape race , he send his boy aboard the admiral , to fetch certain thing : among which , this be chief , be yet forget and leave behind . after which time he can never convenient send again 7i circumstance to be well observe in our general , import the ore to be of a silver i . aboard the great ship , much less he doubt her ruin so near at hand . herein my opinion be better confirm diverse , and by sundry conjecture , which make i have the great hope of this rich i . for where as the general have never before good conceit of these north part of the world : now his mind be whole fix upon the new find land . and as before he refuse not to grant assignment liberal to they that require the same into these north part , now he become contrary affect , refuse to make any so large grant , especial of saint Johns , which certain english merchant make suit for , offer to employ their money and travel upon the same : yet neither by their own suit , nor of other of his own company , who he seem willing to pleasure , it can be obtain . also lay down his determination in the spring follow , for dispose of his voyage then to be reattempt : he assign the captain and master of the golden hind , unto the south discovery , and reserve unto himself the north , affirm that this voyage have win his heart from the south , and that he be now become a northern man altogether . last , be demand what mean he have at his arrival in England , to compass the charge of so great preparation as he intend to make the next spring : have determine upon two fleet , one for the south , another for the north : leave that to i ( he reply ) i will ask a penny of no man . i will bring good tiding unto her majesty , who will be so gracious , to lend i 10000 pound , will we therefore to be of good cheer : for he do thank God ( he say ) with all his heart , for that he have see , the same be enough for we all , and that we need not to seek any further . and these last word he will often repeat , with demonstration of great fervency of mind , be himself very confident , and settle in belief of inestimable good by this voyage : which the great number of his follower nevertheless mistrust altogether , not be make partaker of those secret , which the general keep unto himself . yet all of they that be live , may be witness of his word and protestation , which spare i have deliver . leave the issue of this good hope unto God , who know the truth only , 8c can at his good pleasure bring the same to light : i will hasten to the end of this wilfalnes in tragedy , which must be knit up in the person of our then generau - general . and as it be God ordinance upon he , even so the vehement persuasion and intreaty of his friend can nothing avail , to divert he from a wilful resolution of go through in his frigate , which be overcharge upon their deck , with fight , netting , and small artillery , too cumbersome for so small a boat , that be to pass through the ocean sea at that season of the year , when by course we may expect much storm of foul weather , whereof indeed we have enough . but when he be entreat by the captain , master , a ° fa and other his well willer of the hind , not to venture in the frigate , this be his answer : i will not forsake my little company go homeward , with who i have pass so many storm and peril . and in very truth , he be urge to be so over hard , by hard report give of he , that he be afraid of the sea , albeit this be rather rashness , then advise resolution , to prefer the wind of a vain report to the weight of his own life . see he will not bend to reason , he have provision out of the hind , such as be want aboard his frigate . and so we commit he to god protection , 8c set he aboard his pinnace , we be more than 300 league onward of our way home . by that time we have bring the island of Azores south of we , yet we then keep much to the north , until we have get into the height and elevation of England : we meet with very foul weather , and terrible sea , break short and high pyramid wise . the reason whereof seem to proceed either of hilly ground high a resolute and christian - like say in a distress sir Humphrey Gilbert drown . arrival in England of the golden hind . the english voyage and low within the sea , ( as we see hill and dale upon the land ) upon which the sea do mount and fall : or else the cause proceed of diversity of wind , shift often in sundry point : all which have power to move the great ocean , which again be not present settle , so many sea do encounter together , as there have be diversity of wind . howsoever it come to pass , man which all their life time have occupy the sea , never see more outrageous sea . we have also upon our main yard , a apparition of a litde fire by night , which seaman do call Castor and Pollux . but we have only one , which they take a evil sign of more tempest : the same be usual in storm . Monday the nine of September , in the afternoon , the frigate be near cast away , oppress by wave , yet at that time recover : and give forth sign of joy , the general sit abaft with a book in his hand , cry out unto we in the hind ( so oft as we do approach within hear ) we be as near to heaven by sea as by land . reiterate the same speech , well beseem a soldier , resolute in Jesus Christ , as i can testify he be . the same Monday night , about twelve of the clock , or not long after , the frigate be ahead of we in the golden hind , sudden her light be out , whereof as it be in a moment , we lose the sight , and withal our watch cry , the general be cast away , which be too true . for in that moment , the frigate be devour and swallow up of the sea yet still we look out all that night , and ever after , until we arrive upon the coast of England : omit no small sail at sea , unto which we give not the token between we , agree upon , to have perfect knowledge of each other , if we shall at any time be separate . in great torment of weather , and peril of drown , it please God to send safe home the golden hind , which arrive in Falmouth , the 22 day of September , be Sunday , not without as great danger escape in a flaw , come from the southeast , with such thick mist , that we can not discern land , to put in right with the haven . from Falmouth we go to Dartmouth , and lie there at anchor before the range , while the captain go aland , to inquire if there have be any news of the frigate , which sail well , may happy have be before we . also to certify sir John Gilbert , brother unto the general of our hard success , who the captain desire ( while his man be yet aboard he , and be witness of all occurrent in that voyage , ) it may please he to take the examination of every person particular , in fi - ey Gilbert . discharge of he and their faithful endeavour . sir John [ three . 160 . ] a fit motion of the captain unto sir hum - Gilbert refuse so to do , hold himself satisfy with report make by the captain : and not altogether despairing of his brother safety , offer friendship and courtesy to the captain and his company , require to have his bark bring into the harbour : in furtherance whereof , a boat be send to help to tow she in . nevertheless , when the captain return aboard his ship , he find his man bend to depart , every man to his home : and then the wind serve to proceed high upon the coast : they demand money to carry they home , some to London , other to Harwich , and elsewhere , ( if the bark shall be carry into Dartmouth , and they discharge , so far from home ) or else to take benefit of the wind , then serve to draw near home , which shall be a less charge unto the captain , and great ease unto the man , have else far to go . reason accompany with necessity persuade the captain , who send his lawful excuse and cause of his sudden departure unto sir John Gilbert , by the boat of Dartmouth , and from thence the golden hind depart , and take harbour at Waimouth . all the man tire with the tediousness of so unprofitable a voyage to their seem : in which their long expense of time , much toil and anillrecom - labour , hard diet and continual hazard of life be un - pense - recompensed : their captain nevertheless by his great charge , impair great thereby , yet comfort in the the english voyage goodness of God , and his undoubted providence follow he in all that voyage , as it do always those at other time , whosoever have confidence in he alone . yet have we more near feel and perseverance of his powerful hand and protection , when God do bring we together with other into one same peril / in which he leave they , and deliver we , make we thereby the beholder , but not partaker of their ruin . Even so , among very many difficulty , discontentment , mutiny , conspiracy , sickness , mortality , spoiling , and wrack by sea , which be affliction , more than in so small a fleet , or so short a time may be suppose , albeit true in every particularity , as partly by the former relation may be collect , and some i suppress with silence for their sake live , it please God to support this company , ( of which only one man die of a malady inveterate , and long infest ) : the rest keep together in reasonable contentment and concord , beginning , continue , and end the voyage , which none else do accomplish , either not please with the action , or impatient of want , or prevent by death . thus have i deliver the content of the enterprise and last action of sir Humphrey Gilbert knight , faithful , for so much as i think meet to be publish : wherein may always appear , ( though he be extinguish ) some spark of his virtue , he remain firm and resolute in a purpose by all pretence honest and godly , as be this , to discover , possess , and to reduce unto the service of God , and christian piety , those remote and heathen country of America , not actual possess by Christians , and most right appertain unto the crown of England : unto the which , as his zeal deserve high commendation : even so , he may just be tax of temerity and presumption ( rather ) in two respect . first , when yet there be only probability , not a certain and determinate place of habitation select , neither any demonstration of commodity there in esse , to induce his follower : nevertheless , he both be too prodigal of 76 his own patrimony , and too careless of other man expense , to employ both he and their substance upon a ground imagine good . the which fall , very like his associate be promise , and make it their best reckon to be salve some other way , which please not God to prosper in his first and great preparation . second , when by his former preparation he be enfeeble of ability and credit , to perform his designments , as it be impatient to abide in expectation better opportunity and mean , which God may raise , he thrust himself again into the action , for which he be not fit , presume the cause pretend on God behalf , will carry he to the desire end . into which , have thus make reentry , he can not yield again to withdraw , though he see no encouragement to proceed , lest his credit foil in his first attempt , in a second shall utter be disgrace . between extremity , he make a right adventure , put all to God and good fortune , and which be worst , refuse not to entertain every person and mean whatsoever , to furnish out this expedition , the success whereof have be declare . but such be the infinite bounty of God , who from ■ Affllctimis every evil derive good . for beside that fruit may grow in time of our travel into those . northwest land , the cross , turmoil , and affliction , both in the preparation and execution of this voyage , do correct the intemperate humour , which before we note to be in [ three . 161 . ] this gentleman , and make unsavoury , and less delightful his other manifold virtue . then as he be refine , and make near draw unto the image of God : so it please the divine will to resume he unto himself , whither both he , and every other high and noble mind , have always aspire .