a brief and summary discourse upon the intend voyage to the hithermost part of America : write by captain Carlile in April , 1583 . for the better inducement to satisfy such merchant of the moscovian company and other , as in disburse their money towards the furniture of the present charge , do demand forthwith a present return of gain , albeit their say particular disbursement be require but in very slender sum , the high be 25 . livre . the second at 12 . livre . 10 . s . and the low at 6 . pound five shilling . Hen the goldsmith desire to find the certain goodness of a piece of gold , which be new offer unto he , he present bring the same to the touchstone , where , by compare the show or touch of this new piece with the touch or show of that which he [ he . 183 . ] know of old , he forthwith be able to judge what the value be of that , which be new offer unto he . after the example whereof i have think it good to make some brief repetition of the particular estate of many other foreign voyage and trade already frequent and know unto we , whereby we may be the better 134 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . ... they - able to conceive and judge what certain likelihood of good there be to be expect in the voyage , which be present recommend unto your knowledge and resolution . and first to lay down that of Moscovia , who Moscovie . beginning be yet in the remembrance of many : it be well know , that what by the charge of the first discovery , and by the great gift bestow on the emperor and his nobili tie , together with the lewd deal of some of their servant , who thought themselves safe enough from orderly punishment , it cost the company above fourscore thousand pound , before it can be bring to any profitable reckon . and now that after so long a patience and so great a burden of expense , the same begin to frame to some good course and commodity : it rall to very ticklish term , and to as slender likelihood of any further goodness , as any other trade that may be name . for first the estate of those country and the emperor deal , be thing more fickle than be by every body understand . next , the Dutchman be there so creep in as they Dutchmen . daily augment their trade thither , which may well confirm that uncertainty of the emperor disposition to keep promise with our nation . third , the quality of the voyage , such as may not be perform but once the year . four , the charge of all ambassador between that prince and her majesty , be always bear by the merchant stock . and last , the danger of the king of Denmark , who Denmark . beside that present he be like to enforce a tribute on we , have likewise a advantage upon the ship in their voyage , either homeward or outward whensoever he list to take the opportunity . the bid ‘ deal of the Easterling be sufficient Easterling . know to be such towards our merchant of that trade , as they do not only offer they many injury i3 overlong to be write , but do seek all the mean they can , to deprive they whole of their occupy that way : and to the same purpose have of late clean debar they their accustom and ancient privilege in all their great town . Turkle . the traffic into turquoise , beside that by some it be think a hard point to have so much familiarity with the profess and obstinate enemy of Christ : it be likewise a voyage which can not be make but at the devotion , and as it be in the danger of many state , who for sundry respect be apt to quarrel with we upon sudden occasion , and the present to be give away in turquoise this year , cost little less than two thousand pound . Levant . as for the trade into all the part of Italy , it may easy be consider by every one of judgement , that the same stand in the like term touch the passage , as that of turquoise , and that many time our ship be take in the way by the galley of Alger , our poor mariner after the loss of their good and travel ! , be set at such excessive ransom before they can be free of their slavery , as for the most part they be no way able to discharge . as for example , at this instant there be some prisoner , poor ordinary mariner , for who release there must be pay two hundred ducat the man , for some three hundred , yea , four or five hundred ducat the man for some of they . and how envious the venetian do already oppose themselves against our frequent into their part , may appear by the late custom which they have impose as well upon our english merchandise which we bring they , as also upon such their merchandise which we fetch from they . Barbary . the trade into Barbary grow likewise to worse term than before time , and when it be at the best , our merchant have be in danger of all their good they have there , whensoever it happen the king to die . for until a new be choose , the liberty of all disorder person be such , as they spoil and wrong who they listen , without any redress at all . 136 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . 1583 - touch Spain and Portugal , with who we have Spain . very great trade , and much the great , by mean of their vent a good part of our ware in their Indies , as also of the provision they have from the same , wherewith be make many of our return from they again : it fall out that twice the year ordinary we send our fleet into those part : so that whensoever the king of remember the Spain list to take the opportunity , he may at these season deprive we not only of a great number of er . our very good ship , but also of our honest and 1598 . able sort of mariner that be to be find in our whole realm again , which be a matter of no small consequence : for it be to be note , that when he shall take a quarrel in hand , though it be but his own particular , yet have he the mean to put in hazard as well those our ship which be in his own country of Spain and Portugal , as also all other which shall be bind to any the part of all Italy or of turquoise either . and further whosoever he be that be but mean affect in religion , as of necessity become every ordinary man and good Christian to be , can but be aggrieve in his heart to consider , that his child and [ three . 184 . ] servant who he desire to have well bring up , be in these trade of Spain and Portugal , and all Italy , force to deny their own profession , and make to acquaint themselves with that which the parent and master do utter deny and refuse , yea which many of they do in their own heart abhor as a detestable and most wicked doctrine . but who shall look into the quality of this voyage , be direct to the latitude of forty degree or thereabouts , of that hithermost part of America , shall find it have as many point of good moment belong unto it , as may almost be wish for . 1 as first it be to be understand , that it be not any long course , for it may be perform too and fro in four month after the first discovery thereof . 2 second , that one wind suffice to make the pas - 137 commodity of this voyage in shortness . commodity of the country more than those of moscovy . the english voyage sage , whereas most of your other voyage of like length , be subject to 3 . or 4 . wind . 3 third , that it be to be perform at all time of the year . 4 four , that the passage be upon the high sea , whereby you be not bind to the knowledge of danger , on any other coast , more than of that country , and of we hear at home . 5 five , that those part of England and Ireland , which lie apt for the proceed outward or homeward upon this voyage , be very well store of goodly harbour . 6 six , that it be to be account of no danger at all as touch the power of any foreign prince or state , when it be compare with any the best of all other voyage before recite . 7 and to the godly mind , it have this comfortable commodity , that in this trade their factor , be they their servant or child , shall have no instruction or confession of idolatrous religion enforce upon they , but contrary shall be at their free liberty of conscience , and shall find the same religion exercise , which be most agreeable unto their parent and master . as for the merchandise , which be the matter especial look for , albeit that for the present we be not certain able to promise any such like quantity , as be now at the best time of the moscovian trade bring from thence : so likewise be there not demand any such proportion of daily expense , as be at the first , and as yet be consume in that of Moscovia and other . but when this of America shall have be haunt and practise thirty year to a end , as the other have be , i doubt not by God grace , that for the ten ship that be now common employ once the year into Moscovia , there shall in this voyage twice ten be employ well , twice the year at the least . and if for the present time there do fall out nothing else to be find then the bare fish , yet doubt i not after the first year plant , but by that matter only to serve 138 Christopher CARLILE ’ S discourse a . d . 1583 - halfe a dozen of your best sort of ship , although my supply of people do not follow i so substantial , as in all reason may be well look for . but when it be ask what may be hope from thence overall after some year , it be first to be consider , that this merchandtse - situation in fourty degree , shall be very apt to gather the commodity either of those part which stand to the southward of it , as also of those which be to the northward . in the northerly may be expect not only a especial good fish for salmon , Codde , and whale , but also any other such commodity , as the eastern country doe yield we now : as pitch , tar , hemp , and thereof cordage , mast , losshe hide , rich fur , and other such like without be in any sort behold to a king of Denmark , or other prince or state that shall be in such sort able to command our ship at their pleasure , as those do at this day , by mean of their strait passage and strong ship . as for those part which lie west and to the southward , it may well be hope they will yield wine with a small help , since the grape do grow there of themselves already very fair and in great abundance . olive be once plant , will yield the like oil as Spain , province and Italy . the country people be make to know , that for wax and honey , we will give they such trifle thing as they desire of we , and show they once the mean how to provide the same , the labour thereof be so light , no doubt but in short time they will earnest care to have the same in good quantity for we . beside , what great likelihood there be of good mean to make salt , which may serve for the fish of lake of salt those part , may well enough appear unto they , who ™ his can judge the quality of such place as be require to make the same in . thus much for the beginning , because they may be have with a easy kind of travel ! : but when it may have please God to establish our people there any such time 139 as they may have plant among they in sundry part of the country , and that by gentle and familiar entreat they , they be make to see what be better for they than they do as yet understand of , and that in so many sort of occasion as be infinite to be set down : it be to be assure hope , that they will daily by little and little forsake their barbarous and savage live , and grow to such order and civility with we , as there may be well expect from thence no less quantity and diversity of merchandise then be now have out of Dutchland , Italy , France or Spain . and as the border neighbour be common the apt to fall out with we , so these part be somewhat remote , be the like to take , or give less occasion of disquiet . but when it be consider that they be our own kindred , and esteem our own country nation which have the government , mean by those who shall be there plant , who can look for any other than the deal of most love and most assure friend ? there be far to be consider these two point of good importance , concern the matter of trade . the one be , that by the good prosper of this action , there must of necessity fall out a very liberali utterance of our english clothes into a main country , describe to be big than all Europe , the large part whereof bend to the northward , shall have wonderful great use of our say English clothes , after they shall come once to know the commodity thereof . the like will be also of many other thing , over many to be reckon , which be make here by our artificer and labour people , and of necessity must be provide from hence . the other be , if there be any possible mean to find a sea passage or other fresh water course , which may serve in some reasonable and convenient sort , to transport our merchandise into the east Indian sea , through any of these northerly part of America , it shall be soon and most assure perform by these who shall inhabit