, and by south about 35 league from the double cape , where we find very steep and wild hill , among the which be see certain small cabban , which we in the country call grange , and therefore we name they the hill of the grange . 189 A . D . 1534 - [ in . 204 . ] Boats make of the bark of birch tree . the other land and mountain be all craggy , cleave and cut , and betwixt they and the sea , there be other hand , but low . the day before through the dark mist and fog of the weather , we can not have sight of any land , but in the evening we spy a entrance into the land , by a river among the say hill of grange , and a cape lie towards the southwest about 3 league from we . the say cape be on the top of it blunt - pointed , and also towards the sea it end in a point , wherefore we name it the point cape , on the north side of which there be a plain hand . and because we will have notice of the say entrance , to see if there be any good haven , we strike sail for that night . the next day be the 17 of the month we have stormy weather from Northeast , wherefore we take our way towards the southwest until Thursday morning , and we go about 37 league , till we come athwart a bay full of round hand like dove house , and therefore we name they the dove house . and from the bay of S . Julian , from the which to . a cape that lie south and by west , which we call cape royal , there be 7 . league , and towards the west southwest side of the say cape , there be another that beneath be all craggy , and above round . on the north side of which about half a league there lie a low hand : that cape we name the cape of milk . between these two cape there be certain low hand , above which there be also certain other that show that there be some river . about two league from cape royal we sound and find 20 fathom water , and there be the great fish of cod that possible may be : for stay for our company , in less than a hour we take above a hundred of they . 190 of certain hand that lie between cape royal , and the cape of milk . the next day be the 18 of the month , the wind with such rage turn against we , that we be constrain to go back towards cape royal , think there to find some harbour , and with our boat go to discover between the cape royal , and the cape of milk , and find that above the low hand there be a great and very deep gulf , within which be certain hand . the say gulf on the southside be shut up . the foresay low ground be on one of the side of the entrance , and cape royal be on the other . the say low ground do stretch themselves more than half a league within the sea it be a plain country , but a ill soil : and in the midst of the entrance thereof , there be a hand . the say gulf in latitude be fourty eight degree and a half , and in longitude * . that night we find no harbour , and therefore we launch out into the sea , leave the cape towards the west . of the hand call S . John . from the say day until the 24 of the month be saint John day we have both stormy weather and wind against we , with such darkness and mist , that until saint Johns day , we can have no sight of any land , and then have we sigh of a cape of land , that from cape royal lie Southwest about 35 league , but that day be so foggy and misty , that we can not come near land , and because it be S . Johns day , we name it cape S . John . of certain hand call the hand of Margaulx , and [ three . 205 . ] of the kind of beast and bird that there be find . of the hand of Brion , and cape dolphin . the next day be the 25 . of the month , the weather be also stormy , dark , and windy , but yet we sail a part of the day towards west north west , 191 and in the evening we put our self athwart until the second quarter ; when as we depart , then do we by our compass know that we be northwest and by west about seven league and a half from the cape of S . John , and as we be about to hoist sail , the wind turn into the northwest , wherefore we go three hand , southeast , about 15 . league , and come to three hand , two of which be as steep and upright as any wall , so that it be not possible to climb they : and between they there be a little rock . Theise hand be as full of bird , as any field or meadow be of grass , which there do make their nest : and in the great of they , there be a great and infinite number of those that we call Margaulx , that be white , and big than any goose , which be sever in one part . in the other be only Godetz , but towards the shore there be of those Godetz , and great Apponatz , like to those of that hand that we above have mention : we go down to the low part of the least hand , where we kill above a thousand of those Godetz , and Apponatz . we put into our boat so many of they as we please , for in less than one hour we may have fill thirty such boat of the island they : we name they the hand of Margaulx . about of Margaulx . gve ] eague from the say hand on the west , there be another hand that be about two league in length , and so much in breadth : there do we stay all night to take in water and wood . that island be environ round about with sand , and have a very good road about it three or four fathom deep . those hand have the best soil that ever we see , for that one of their field be more worth than all the new land . we find it all full of goodly tree , meadow , field full of wild corn and peason bloom , as thick , as rank , and as fair as any can be see in Britain , so that they seem to have be plow and sow . there be also a great store of gooseberry , strawberry , damask rose , parsley , morse or sea other very sweet and pleasant herb . about the ox . say island be very great beast as great as ox , which 192 have two great tooth in their mouth like unto elephant tooth , and live also in the sea we see one of they sleep upon the bank of the water : we think to take it , go to it with our boat , but so soon as he hear we , he cast himself into the sea we also see bear 8c wolf : we name it brion hand . about brion hand . it towards southeast , and northwest , there be great lake . as far as i can gather and comprehend , i think that there be some passage between new find land , and brion land . if so it be , it will be a great shorten , aswell of the time as of the way , if any perfection can be find in it . about four league from that hand towards west - southwest be the firm land , which seem to be as a hand compass about with little hand of sand . there be a goodly cape which we name cape dolphin , for there be the beginning of good ground . on the 27 . of June we compass the say land about that lie west Southwest : and a far off they seem to be little hill of sand , for they be but low land : we can neither go to they , nor land on they , because the wind be against we . that day we go 15 league . of the hand call Alezai , and of the cape of saint Peter . the next day we go along the say land about 10 . league , till we come to a cape of red land , that be all craggy , within the which there be a brack look towards the north . it be a very low country . there be also between the sea and a certain pool , a plain field : and from that cape of land and the pool unto another cape , there be about 14 league . the land be fashion as it be half a circle , all compass about with sand like a ditch , over which as far as one eye can stretch , there be nothing but marsh ground and stand pool . and before you come to the first cape , very near the main land there be two little hand . about five league from the second cape towards the southwest , viii 193 n there be another island very high and point , which we name Alezai . the first cape we name saint Peter cape , because upon that day we come thither . of the cape call cape Orleans : of the river of boat : of wild man cape : and of the quality and temperature of the country . from brion island to this place there be good anchorage of sand , and have sound towards Southwest even to the shore about five league , we find twenty and five fathom water , and within one league twelve fathom , and very near the shore six fathom , rather more then less , and also good anchorage . but because we will be the better acquaint with this stony and rochie ground , we stroohe our sail low and athwart . the next day be the last of the month save one , the wind blow south and by east . we sail westward until Tuesday morning at sun rise , be the last of the month , without [ he . 206 . ] any sight or knowledge of any land except in the evening towards sun set , that we discover a land which seem to be two hand , that be beyond we west southwest , about nine or ten league . all the next day till the next morning at sun rise we sail westward about fourty league , and by the way we perceive that the land we have see like hand , be firm land , lie south southeast , and north northwest , to a very good cape of land call cape Orleans . a exceed all the say land be low and plain , ’ and the fair goodly land . may possible be see , full of goodly meadow and tree . true it be that we can find no harbour there , because it be all full of shelf and sand . we with our boat go on shore in many place , and among the rest we enter into a goodly river , but very shallow , which we name the river of boat , because that there we see boat full of wild man that be cross the river . we have no other notice of the say wild man : for the wind come from 194 the sea , and so beat we against the shore , that we be constrain to retire our self with our boat towards our ship . till the next day morning at sun rise , be the first of July , we sail Northeast , in which time there rise great mist and storm , and therefore we strike our sail till two of the clock in the afternoon , that the weather become clear , and there we have sight of cape Orleans , and of another about seven league from we , lie north and by east , and that we call wild man cape . on the northside of this cape about half a league , there be a very dangerous shelf , and bank of stone . while we be at this cape , we see a man run after our boat that be go along the coast , who make sign unto we that we shall return towards the say cape again . we see such sign , begin to turn towards he , but he see we come , begin to flee : so soon as we be come on shore , we set a knife before he and a woollen girdle on a little staff , and then come to our ship again . that day we trend the say land about 9 or 10 . league , hope to find some good harbour , but it be not possible : for as i have say already , it be a very low land , and environ round about with great shelf . nevertheless we go that day on shore in four place to see the goodly and sweet smell tree that be there : we varie ^ of find they to be cedar , ewetree , pine , white elm , trees ‘ ash , willow , with many other sort of tree to we unknown , but without any fruit . the ground where no wood be , be very fair , and all full of peason , white and red gooseberry , strawberry , blackebery , and wild corn , even like unto rye , which seem to have be sow and plow . this country be of better temperature than any other that can be see , and very hot . there be many thrush , stockdove , and other bird : to be short , there want nothing but good harborough . [ of the 195 of the bay call saint Lunario , and other notable bay and cape of land , and of the quality , and goodness of those ground . the next day be the second of July we discover and have sight of land on the northern side towards we , that do join unto the land abovesaid , all compass about , and we know that it have about * inn depth , and as much athwart , we name it saint lunarios bay , and with our boat we go to the cape towards the north , and find the shore so shallow , that for the space of a league from land there be but a fathom water . on the north - east side from the say cape about 7 . or 8 . league there be another cape of land , in the midst whereof there be a bay fashion trianglewise , very deep , and as far off as we can ken from it the same lie Northeast . the say bay be compass about with sand and shelf about