10 . league from land , and there be but two fathom water : from the say cape to the bank of the other , there be about 15 . league . we be a cross the say cape , discover another land and cape , and as far as we can ken , it lie north and by east . all that night the weather be very ill , and great wind , so that we be constrain to bear a small sail until the next morning , be the third of July when the wind come from the west : and we sail northward to have a sight of the land that we have leave on the north - east side , above the low land , among which high and low land there be a gulf or breach in some place about 55 . fathom deep , and 15 . league in breadth . by reason of the great depth and breadth of the gulf , and change of the land , we conceive hope that we shall find a passage , like unto the passage of the castle . the say gulf lie east Northeast , and west southwest . the ground that lie on the southside of the say gulf , be as good and easy to be manure , and full of as goodly field and meadow , as any that ever we have see , as 196 plain and smooth as any die : and that which lie on the north be a country altogether hilly , full of wood , and very high and great tree of sundry sort : among the rest there be as goodly ceder , and fir tree , as possible can be see , able to make mast for ship of three hundred tun : neither do we see any place that be not full of the say tree , except two only that be full of goodly meadow , with two very fair lake . the midst of the say bay be 47 . degree and half in latitude . Trees able to mast ship of 300 . ton . of the cape d ’ esperance , or the cape of hope , and [ hl 207 . ] of s . martins creek , and how 7 . boat full of wild man come to our boat , will not retire themselves , but be terrify with our culverin which we shoot at they , and our lance , they flee with great haste . the cape of the say south land be call the cape of hope , through the hope that there we have to find some passage . the four of July we go along the coast of the say land on the northerly side to find some harbour , where we enter into a creek altogether open towards the south , where there be no succour against the wind : we think good to name it saint Martin creek . there we stay from the four of July until the twelve : while we be there , on Monday be the six of the month , service be do , we with one of our boat go to discoyer a cape and point of land that on the western side be about seven or eight league from we , to see which way it do bend , and be within half a league of it , we see two company of boat of wild man forty or 5 ° go from one land to the other : their boat be in a number about fourty or fifty . one part of the which come to the say point , and a great number of the man go on shore make a great noise , beckon unto we that we shall come on land , show we certain skin upon piece of wood , but because we 197 have but one only boat , we will not go to they , but go to the other side lie in the sea : they see we flee , prepare two of their boat to follow we , with which come also five more of they that be come from the sea side , all which approach near unto our boat , dance , and make many sign of joy and mirth , as it be desire our friendship , say in their tongue napeu tondamen assurtah , with many other word that we understand not . but because ( as we have say ) we have but one boat , we will not stand to their courtesy , but make sign unto they that they shall turn back , which they will not do , but with great fury come towards we : and sudden with their boat compass we about : and because they will not away from we by any sign that we can make , we shoot off two piece among they , which do so terrify they , that they put themselves to flight towards the say point , make a great noise : and have stay a while , they begin anew , even as at the first to come to we again , and be come near our boat we strike at they with two lance , which thing be so great a terror unto they , that with great haste they begin to flee , and will no more follow we . how the say wild man come to our ship , and our man go towards they , both party go on land , and how the say wild man with great joy begin to traffic with our man . the next day part of the say wild man with nine of their boat come to the point and entrance of the creek , where we with our ship be at road . we be advertise of their come , go to the point where they be with our boat : but so soon as they see we , they begin to flee , make sign that they come to traffic with we , show we , such skin as they cloth themselves withal , which be of small value . we likewise make sign unto they , that we wish they no evil : and in sign thereof two of our man 198 venture to go on land to they , and carry they knife with other iron ware , and a red hat to give unto their captain . which when they see , they also come on land , and bring some of their skin , and so begin to deal with we , seem to be very glad to have our iron ware and other thing , still dance with many other ceremony , as with their hand to cast sea water on their head . they give we whatsoever they have , not keep any thing , so that they be constrain to go back again naked , and make we sign that the next day they will come again , and bring more skin with they . How that we have send two of our man on land with ware , there come about 300 . wild man with great gladness . of the quality of the country , what it bring forth , and of the bay call bay du chaleur , or the bay of heat . upon Thursday be the eight of the month , because the wind be not good to go out with our ship , we set our boat in a readiness to go to discover the say bay , and that day we go 25 . league within it . the next day the wind and weather be fair , we sail until noon , in which time we have notice of a great part of the say bay , and how that over the low land , there be other land with high mountain : but see that there be no passage at all , we begin to turn back again , take our way along the coast : 8c sailing , we see certain wild man that stand upon the shore of a lake , that be among the low ground , who be make fire and smoke : we go thither , 8c find that there be a chanel of the sea that do enter into the lake , and set our boat at one of the bank of the channel , the wild man with one of their boat come unto we , and bring up piece of seal ready sodden , [ three . 208 . ] put they upon piece of wood : then retire themselves , they will make sign unto we , that they do give they we . we send two man unto they with 199 hatchet , knife , bead , and other such like ware , whereat they be very glad , and by and by in cluster they come to the shore where we be , with their boat , bring with they skin and other such thing as they have , to have of our ware . they be more than 300 . man , woman and child : some of the woman which come not over , we may see stand up to the knee in water , sing and dance : the other that have pass the river where we be , come very friendly to we , rub our arm with their own hand , then will they lift they up towards heaven , show many sign of gladness : and in such wise be we assure one of another , that we very familiar begin to traffic for whatsoever they have , till they have nothing but their naked body ; for they give we all whatsoever they have , and that be but of small value . we perceive that this people may very easy be convert to our religion . they go from place to place . they live only with fish . they have a ordinary time to fish for . their provision . the country be hot than the country of Spain , and the fair that can possible be find , altogether smooth , and level . there be no place be it never so little , but it have some tree ( yea albeit it be sandy ) or else be full of wild corn , that have a ear like unto rye : the corn be like oat , and small peason as thick as if they have be sow and plow , white and red gooseberry , strawberry , blackbery , white and red rose , with many other flower of very sweet and pleasant smell . there be also many goodly meadow full of grass , and lake wherein great plenty of salmon be . they call a hatchet in their tongue Cochi , and a knife bacon : we name it ray du cha - the bay of heat . leur , or the bay of heat . of another nation of wild man : of their manner , live and clothe . be certify that there be no passage through the say bay , we hoist sail , and go from saint Martin creek upon Sunday be the 12 . of July , to go and dis - 200 cover further beyond the say bay , and go along the sea coast eastward about eighteen league , till we come to the cape of Prato , where we find the tide very great , but shallow ground , and the sea stormy , so that we be constrain to draw towards shore , between the say cape and a hand lie eastward , about a league from the say cape , where we cast anchor for that night . the next morning we hoist sail to trend the say coast about , which lie north Northeast . but there rise such a stormy and rage wind against we , that we be constrain to come to the place again , from whence we be come : there do we stay all that day till the next that we hoist up sail , and come to the midst of a river five or six league from the cape of Prato northward , and be overthwart the say river , there arise again a contrary wind , with great fog and storm . so that we be constrain upon Tuesday be the fourteenth of the month to enter into the river , and there do we stay till the sixteenth of the month look for fair weather to come out of it : on which day be Thursday , the wind become so rage that one of our ship lose a anchor , and we be constrain to go up high into the river seven or eight league , into a good harbour and ground that we with our boat find out , and through the evil weather , tempest , and darkness that be , we stay in the say harbour till the five and twenty of the month , not be able to put out : in the mean time we see a great multitude of wild man that be fish for mackerel , whereof there be great store . their boat be about 40 , and the person what with man , woman and child two hundred , which after they have haunt our company a while , they come very familiar with their boat to the side of our ship . we give they knife , comb , bead of glass , and other trifle of small value , for which they make many sign of gladness , lift their hand up to heaven dance and sing in their boat . Theise man may very well and true be call wild , because there be no poor people 201 in the world . for i think all that they have together , beside their boat and net be not ’ worth five souse . they go altogether naked save their privity , which be cover with a little skin , and certain old skin that they cast upon they . neither in nature nor in language , do they any whit agree with they which we find first : their head be altogether shave , except one bush of hair which they suffer to grow upon the top of their crown as long as a horse tail , and then with certain leather string bind it in a knot upon their head . they have no other dwelling but their boat , which they turn upside down , and under they they lie themselves all along upon the bare ground . they eat their flesh almost raw , save only that they heat it a little upon embers of coal , so do they their fish . upon Magdalen day we with our boat go to the bank of the river , and free go on shore among they , whereat they make many sign , and all their man in two or three company begin to sing and dance , seem to be very glad of our come . they have cause all the young woman to flee into the wood , two or three except , that [ three . 209 . ] stay with they , to each of which we give a comb , and a little bell make of tin , for which they be very glad , thank our captain , rub his arm and breast with their hand . when the man see we give something unto those that have stay , it cause all the rest to come out of the wood , to the end they shall have as much as the other : these woman be about twenty , who altogether in a knot fall upon our captain , touch and rub he with