very honest with our man stay in his ship , and come aboard of we : who we use well , not take j any thing from he that be he , but only such thing l as we can find of our own . and when we have dispatch our business , we give he one good cable , one old cable and a anchor , one shallop with mast , sail , and other furniture , and other thing which belong to the ship . in recompense whereof he give we two hogshead of sider , one barrel of pease , and 25 score of fish . the 29 betimes in the morning we depart from that road towards a great biskaine some 7 league off of 300 tun , who man deal most dogged with the chancewels company . the same night we anchor at the mouth of the harbour , where the biskain be . the 30 betimes in the morning we put into the harbour ; and approach near their stage , we see it uncover , and so suspect the ship to be go : whereupon we send our pinnace on shore with a dozen man , who when they come , find great store of fish on shore , but all the man be flee : neither can they perceive whether the ship shall be go , but as they think to sea . this day about twelve of the clock we take a savage boat which our man pursue : but all the savage run away into the 173 the savage of Cape briton come aboard of our ship . Cibo a harbour in the isle of Cape briton . new port . port ingle . the english voyage wood , and our man bring their boat on board . the same day in the afternoon we bring our ship to a anchor in the harbour : and the same day we take three hogshead and a half of train , and some 300 of green fish . also in the evening three of the savage , who boat we have , come unto we for their boat ; to who we give coat and knife , and restore they their boat again . the next day be the first of July , the rest of the savage come unto we , among who be their king , who name be Itarey , and their queen , to who also we give coat and knife , and other trifle . Theise Savages call the harbour Cibo . in this place be the great multitude of lobster that ever we hear of : for we catch at one hawle with a little draw net above 140 . the four of July in the morning we depart from Cibo . and the five we cast anchor in a reasonable good harbour call new port under a island some eight league from Cibo , and within three league from the english port . at this place in pursue certain shallop of a ship of rochel , one of they come aboard , who tell we , that the biskainer who we seek , be in the english port with two biskainer more , and two ship of rochel . thereupon we send one of our man in the rocheller shallop to parley with the admiral and other our friend in the english port , request they aid for the recovery of our thing , which the other ship call the Santa maria of S . Vincent ( whereof be master Johannes de heart , and pilot Adam de lauandote ) have rob from the Chancewell . to which they answer , that if we will come in unto they in peace , they will assist we what they may . this answer we have the sixth day : and the seven in the fornoone we arrive in the english port , and cast anchor aloof from the other ship : which do , i go aboard the admiral , to desire the performance of his promise : who send for Johannes de heart , who be content to restore most of our thing again : whereupon i go aboard his ship to have 174 they restore . this day and the eight i spend in procure such thing as they have rob ; but yet in the end we want a great part thereof . than we be brief with they , and will they either to restore we the rest of our thing which they have , or else we will both enforce they to do it , and also have satisfaction for our victual and merchandise which by their mean be lose in the Chancewell . the nine in the morning we prepare our ship to go near unto they . whereupon their admiral send his boat aboard , and desire to speak with i : than i go aboard unto he , and desire to have our thing with peace and quietness , proffer to make he and the master of the two ship of rochel our umpire , and what they shall advise i will stand unto . hereupon he go aboard the other ship to make peace ; but they will hear no reason , neither yet condescend to restore any thing else which they have of we . than i desire that as i come in peace unto they , they will so set i aboard my ship again : which they deny to do , but most unjust detain i and Stephen van Herwicke who be with i . a while after our shallop come with four man to know how i do , and to fetch i aboard : but so soon as she come to the admiral ship side , his man enter , and take she away , detain our man also as prisoner with we . then present all the three biskainer make towards our ship , which be not careless to get the wind of they all : and have by the mercy of God obtain the same , she then stay for they : but when they see they have lose their advantage , they present turn their course , make as great haste in again as they do out before . afterwards i attempt twice to go aboard , but be still enforce back by the two other biskainer , who seek our life : so that in the end the master of the admiral be enforce to man his great boat to waft we : and yet notwithstanding they bend a piece of great ordinance at we : for we be to pass by they unto our ship : but 175 we rescue our shallop under our master great boat ; and by that mean pass in safety . the next morning be the ten of the month , we purpose if the wind have serve our turn , to have make they to [ three . 199 . ] repent their evil deal , and to restore we our own again , or else to have sink their ship if we can . but the wind serve not our turn for that purpose ; they depart but carry we to sea : so that the same morning we to ° ke our course towards the bay of saint Laurence in ‘ Newfoundland : where we hope to find a spanish ship , which as we have intelligence , do fish at that place . S . Peter the thirteenth day we have sight of saint Peter island . Islands . and the fourteen day be foggy and misty weather , while we make towards the land , we send our shallop before the ship to discover danger : but in the fog , through the man negligence which be in she , she lose we : yet we keep on our course , think that although we can not see they , yet they may see our ship : and coming into sixteen fathom water we cast anchor , suppose our self to be near the shore : and in the evening it please God to give we for the space of one quarter of a hour clear weather , by which we find our self to be imbay , and also have sight of our shallop , which be at the point of a land about one league from we . the same night we go further into the same bay , where we have very good ride . the fifteen we go on shore , and in that place find foot of dear , and before we return we kill one . the eighteenth we depart towards saint Laurence : the same evening we have sight of saint Laurence , and send off our boat in the night with our master and sixteen man to surprise the a spanish . Spaniard , which lie in little saint Laurence ; who pre - shlp take . sent upon the entrance of our man surrender up their ship and good . the nineteenth in the morning before day , the master of our ship with two more , and three Spaniard , take a boat and come forth to meet our ship , but be foggy , he cast anchor by the mouth of the harbour ( think in fair weather to put out to our ship , which through the current and foggy weather be put five or six league to leeward : and while they be at anchor in the boat they be surprise again by certain bask of saint John de Luz who be in great saint Laurence hard by . Theise bask with their force ( have receive intelligence by one of the Spaniard , who sleep on shore , escape unto they overland ) on the sudden surprise the say boat with our master and other : and then present make unto the ship ; but our man aboard defend they off . in the end they threaten that unless they will yield , they will kill m . Crafton and our other man before m . Crafton . their eye . so at last upon m . craftons entreaty and our man , to save their life , they yield up the ship again , upon condition , that they shall not injury any of our man , but shall let they all with their weapon peaceable depart : yet when our man have yield , they break their covenant , proffer they great violence , threaten to kill they , disarm they , strip their clothes from their back , and use they more like dog than man . after they have thus rob our man of their prize and weapon , they present tow the ship with their boat out of that harbour into great saint Laurence , where their own ship do ride , and within less than a hour after they have carry our prize away , our ship arrive in the bay : where after we have be a while at anchor , our shallop come aboard unto we , with most part of our sixteen man , who tell we the whole story before recite , as also that captain Laurence have carry away our master , and Stephen van Herwicke prisoner , and turn the rest of our man on shore in the wood , without either meat , drink , or almost any apparel . the 20 all our man come aboard , except the two prisoner : and the same day we take with our boat three of the Spaniard shallop , with five hogshead of train oil in each of they , and in one boat four Spaniard ; but the man of the other two shall lop flee on shore . the same day also we take vni 177 m the master of one of the ship which be in the harbour with three other of his man , who we detain prisoner to ransom m . Crafton and Stephen van Herwick . the 22 captain Laurence send they aboard , and we also release all our prisoner , except one Spaniard , who be boatswain of the spanish ship , who we keep with we : and the same day we set sail from thence . the 24 we have advice of our Spaniard of certain the harbour leaguer which be in the harbour of cape S . mary . ° Marie § whereupon the same night , be within five or six ' league of the harbour , i send off our two shallop with thirty man to discover the harbour , and to surprise the enemy . the 25 in the morning we approach the harbour with our ship , and in the mouth thereof we espy three shallop , two whereof be we , and the three of a ship of rochel , which they have surprise with four man in she : who tell they that there be but two ship in the harbour , whereof one be of rochel , and the other of bell isle . and as we be discourse with the rocheller , we have sight of the ship : whereupon we send our boat aboard the rocheller to certify he that we be his friend , and to request he not to hinder our fight with the enemy . this message be send , we make all the haste we can unto the ship of bell isle , which first begin with we with three great shot , one whereof hit our maintopsaile , but both the other miss we . and we also send one unto they : then be approach near unto they ten or twelve of we go in a shallop to enter they , and we carry also a warp with we to make fast unto their ship , whereby our ship may the better come up to aid we . and when we board they in our boat , they [ three . 200 . ] betake themselves to their close fight , play chief upon we with shot and pike out at two port , between which we enter very dangerous , escape near danger both by shot and pike . some of our man be wound , but no great harm be do . and i own piece in enter , be shoot out of my hand into 178 the sea ; which shoot also burst one side of the ladder , by which i enter . we have not long be aboard , but through the help of God we cause they to yield unto our mercy . there be of they in the ship above forty A briton ship man , most whereof we send aboard of our ship , there ial °° tunnes ’ to be keep in hold , with order to our chirurgeon to dress the wound man , one of which be wound unto death . that do , we have then time to view our prize , which we find of great defence , and a notable strong ship , almost two hundred tun in burden , very well appoint , and in all thing fit for a man of war . they have also fourteen or fifteen man more , which be then absent from the ship ; otherwise we shall have have the hot fight . the same day we get our sail to the yard , and our top mast on end , and rig the ship what we can . the 26 day we get some oil aboard , and there we tarry until the second of August , fit our self for the sea , and get fish aboard as weather serve we . during our abode there we divide our man , and appoint to each ship their company , my self and my friend be resolve to take our passage in the prize ; wherein when we be ship , and the company , there arise great enmity against we by the other ship , which afterward be quiet . the second day of August , have take in water and wood , we put to sea from that harbour in company of the Hopewell , with purpose to go direct to parlican , which be a harbour in the north part of Newfoundland , where we expect another prize . but when we come to sea we find our sail so old , our rope so rot , and our provision of bread and drink so short , as that we be constrain to make our resolution direct for England : whereupon we draw out our reason the four day of August , and send they aboard the Hopewell , to certify they the cause of our resolution for England : whereat they be general offend , think and say , that we in the prize go about to cousin and deceive they . to conclude , they send we 179 word that they will keep we company for England . but i have give William Crafton commission before to go for the island of the azore , and there to spend his victual for a man of war . the next day be the five of August , have a fair wind , we put off from the coast of Newfoundland , and keep our course direct for England , the Hopewell keep we company until midday , whenas have lose we in a fog , she shoot off two piece of ordinance , and we answer she with three : afterward we speak not with she , suppose that she go for the island . the 27 of August , draw near the coast of England , we sound and find ground at seventy fathom . some of the mariner think we be in Bristol channel , and other in silly channel : so that through variety of judgement , and evil marinership we be fain to dance the hay four day together , sometime run to the north - east , sometime to the southeast , then again to the east , and eastnortheast . thus do we spend fair wind , and lose our time until the last of August . and then it please God that we fall with the island of Lundy within the channel of Bristol ; from whence we shape our course : and after diverse danger , the three of September we meet with the Tramontane of the queen off of Dartmouth ; to the captain whereof we give certain thing that he have need of . the five of September i land on the outside of the isle of wight , and within few day after it please God to bring the ship in safety to London , where she be make prize as belong to the enemy of this land .