a relation of the first voyage and discovery of the isle Ramea , make by for monsieur de la court pre Ravillon , and grand pre , with the ship call the Bonaventure , to kill and make train oil of the beast call the morse with great tooth , which we have perform by god help this year 1591 . or the performance of our say voyage , we depart from s . malo with the fleet that go for Canada , and keep company with the ship call the soudil and the Charles half the way , and then lose they ; a violent wind arise at northwest , which separate we . after which we have fair wether , and come to the coast of cape raze , and have no further knowledge thereof , because the wind be at the southwest but a scarce gale : and we come to the sound southwest of the isle of S . Peter about 10 . league , where we find 20 . fathom water , and we sail northwest one quarter of the north , and come within 12 . league of cape de Rey . the next day be the 6 . of May 1591 , we be come to cape de Rey , and see a ship Southwest off we , and stay there that night . the next day be the seven of the say month , we come to the isle of aponas , where we put forth our boat , because we have not pass 8 . league to our haven , which we ken very clear , although the coast lay very low : and because the night approach , and the wind grow very high , we seek not to seek our port , because it be very hard to find it when the wind be lofty , because of the shoald that be about it . and we think to keep our course until the next morning between the isle of Brion and the isle of the hie of aponas . but there arise so great a tempest at the bmn ' southwest , that without the help of God we have be in great danger among these isle . and we traverse up and down eleven day , make our prayer unto God to end the tempest and to send we fair weather , that we may obtain our haven : which of his goodness he give we . the last of may we range the isle hie ° f Ramea on the northnorthwest side , unto the contrary bamea - part of the land , where it trend to the southsoutheast : and see no land on the west side , we range the say land to the east one quarter to the north at the least 15 . league , and be from the shore some eight league , we find 15 fathom water , and pass between the isle of Duoron and the isle of Ramea , where go high * f a channel of 3 . league breadth ; in the midst whereof uuoron - you shall have 7 . 8 . and 9 fathom water . and the low point of the isle Ramea , and the isle Duoron lie Northnortheast , and southsouthwest . and take heed you come not near the low point of the isle Ramea by a great league , for i have sound it at 3 . fathom water . the isle be mark . and the harbour of the isle Ramea lie Northeast and Southwest , one quarter to the east and west . and if you will enter the say harbour , keep you a league off the shore : for often time there be great danger . and that you may know the say haven , to the the market of eastnortheast of the say isle there be high land appear to they that be without on all side like a * number of island , but in very deed they be all firm land : and if you come on the south and Southwest side , you shall see a hill divide into 3 . part , which i call the three hillock , which be right within the haven . and for another better mark of the say harbour , you shall see a isle like unto a flower de lice , - a isle like a distant from the say haven 6 . league at the least : and f ° ure de llce - this isle and the say haven lie Northeast and Southwest , I51 Cape du Chapt . the main he shall coast . Lisle Blanche . the place where they kill 1500 . morse . the isle Hupp . the english voyage a quarter to the north and south . and on the say isle there be good pebble stone to dry fish upon : but to the west thereof there be a very fair country : and there be a bank of sand , which run the length of a cable , have not pass one fathom water upon it . from the say isle along the firm land the coast lie east and west , and you shall see as it be a great forest run eastward : and the eastern cape be call cape du chapt , and be great and red towards the sea and between the say land you shall see as it be a small island , but it join to the firm land on the southwest part : and there be good shingle to dry fish on . and you must coast the shore with boat and not with ship , by reason of the shallow of the say coast . for i have see without cape du chapt in fair weather the ground in two fathom water , near a league and a half from shore , and i judge by reason of the highness of the land , that there have be above thirty fathom water , which be nothing so : and i have sound come near the shore , in more or less depth . the coast stretch three league to the west from Lisle Blanch , or the white isle , unto the entrance of a river , where we slay and kill to the number of fifteen hundred morse or sea ox , account small and great , where at full sea you may come on shore with boat , and within be two or three fathom water . from thence the coast trend four league to the west i to the northwest unto the isle Hupp , which be twenty league in circuit , and be like the edge of a knife : upon it there be neither wood nor grass : there be morse upon it , but they be hard to be take . from thence the coast trend to the northwest and northnorthwest ; which be all that 1 have see , to wit , the two side and one end of the isle . and if i have have as good luck as my master , when i be on the northwest side with my ship , i will have adventure to have sail southsoutheast , to have discover the eastern shore of the say isle . * 52 in your return to the east , as you come from the sand and haven of cape du chapt unto the say haven , be sh ° ltis - sandes and shold . and three good league from cape - ^ s ^ } san ^ du chapt there be a small island conteimng about a ig ^ gf league of ground : where there be a haven towards ground . the southeast : and as you enter into the say haven on the starreboord side , a dent cape all of red land . and you can enter into the say haven but a hard haven . with the flood , because of a bar which lie half a league without the point of the say haven . the tide be there at southeast and northwest ; but when the wind be very great , it blow much into the haven at half flood . but ordinary it flow five foot and a half . the mark to enter into the say haven market to be to leave the isle Blanche or white island at your c ^ ne ^ lt0 the come in on the starreboord ; and the point of the ’ haven toward the west have a thick island , which you shall see on the other side , and it have a little round buttress , which lie on the east side of the island . there be also two other buttress more easy to be see than hide : these be not to the east but to the west , and they have mark on they . here you shall not have above two fathom and a half at a full sea upon this bar . and the sound be stone and rough ground . at your enter in , when you shall find white sand which lie next the southeast of the cape , than you be upon the bar : and be not afraid the bar . to pass up the channel . and for mark toward the west athwart the bar , when you have bring a island even , which lie to the westward without , with the thick part of the high land which lie most to the west , you shall be pass the bar : and the channel run due north . and for your anchor the best anin the say haven , see that you careful seek the midst of the say thick land , which lie in the bottom of the say haven : for you must anchor between two bank of sand , where the passage be but narrow . and you must anchor sure : for there go T53 the english voyage a great tide : for the sea run there as swift and more than in . there be good ground and ankorage here : and you shall ride in three fathom water . and within the say haven there be nothing to hurt you , for you be free from all wind . and if by chance you shall be drive westward of the say haven , you may seek a entrance , which be right over against the small island name before , which be call the isle of cormorant ; and you may enter in there as at the other haven at a full sea : and you must pass upon the west side , and you shall find on the bar at a full sea fourteen foot water , and great depth when you be enter in : for the sea run very swift in that place : and the entry thereof lie southeast and northwest . right over against you on the other side , you may pass with boat at a full sea . and all these entrance make all but one haven , which be good within . i say this , because i have pass into the main sea by the one and the other passage . and the say isle be not past two league over in the midst . it be but two bank of sand , whereof one be like to that of saint Malo , which let the sea from pass through the midst of all the isle : but the two end be high mountain with island altogether cut and separate with stream and river . to anchor in the say harbour , you must not ride far than five or six cable length from the say haven .