the voyage of m . Charles Leigh , and diverse other to cape Briton and the isle of Ramea . he Hopewell of London of the burden of 120 ton , whereof be m . William Crafton , and the chancewel of London of the burden of 70 ton , whereof be m . Steven Bennet , bind unto the river of Canada , set to sea at the sole and proper charge of Charles Leigh and Abraham Van Herwick of London merchant ( the say Charles Leigh himself , and Steven Van Herwick brother to the say Abraham , go themselves in the say ship as chief commander of the voyage ) depart from gravesend on Friday morning the 8 of April 1597 ^ and after some hindrance , arrive at Falmouth in Cornewal the 28 of the say month put to sea again . and with prosperous wind the 18 of may we be upon the bank of Newfoundland . the 19 we lose the chancewel . the 20 we have sight of land and enter within the bay of Assumption , where our man contrary to my knowledge fight with a french ship : and afterward in the same bay we meet with our consort . whereupon we present put to sea again : and the next day we arrive at caplen bay , where we remain by extremity of foul weather , and to mend a pin of 7 or 8 ton ( which be give we at Farrillon by m . Wil . sayer of Dartmouth the admiral of that place ) until the last of may . on which day depart from thence in the afternoon we put in to Rogneuse to seek shallop but can find none . the first of June we set sail from Rogneuse , and the second we put room to a bay under the northside of cape Raz be enforce in by a extreme storm . the 4 we set sail , and this day we see a great island of ice . the 5 at night we lose the Chancewell in a fog at the mouth of the bay of Placentia . the 11 at sun set we have sight of cape Briton . and the 12 by 166 reason of contrary wind we cast anchor under the north - east end of the isle of Menego to the north of cape isle of Briton in 16 fathom reasonable ground . in that place we catch great store of cod , which be large and better fish than any in Newfoundland . the 13 we weigh anchor again , and be becalm about a league from the shore we fall to fish where the cod do bite at least 20 fathom above ground , and almost as fast as we can hale they into the ship . the 14 we come to the 2 island of bird , some 23 league from Menego : 2 island where there be such abundance of bird , as be almost ° fstrdes - incredible to report . and upon the less of these island of bird , we see great store of morss or sea ox , store of which be a sleep upon the rock : but when we approach near unto they with our boat they cast themselves into the sea and pursue we with such fury as that we be glad to flee from they . the 16 we arrive at Brian island , which lie 5 league west from the island of bird . about this island there be as great abundance of cod as in any place can be find . in little more than a hour we catch with 4 hook 250 of they . here we catch also a great Turbut which be a ell long and a yard broad : which be so great that the hook can not hold she into the ship : but when she be above water she bend the hook and escape . in this i ” Bryans Island we find exceed good ground both for corn and meadow , and great store of wood , but of small grow . for forne and spring of fresh water we find none in all the island , meadow . but some stand pool of rain water . the same day at night we weigh anchor again . the 17 we have stormy weather . the 18 we come to the isle of Ramea , where then be ! e of we appoint to meet with ' our consort . and approach - ramea - ing near unto the harbour of Halabolina we cast anchor in 3 fathom water and send our great boat into the harbour , with the master mate and some dozen more of the company : who when they come in , find 4 ship . namely 2 of saint Malo in Britaigne , and two of Sibiburo adjoin to saint John de luz be the french 167 [ three . 196 . ] king subject , who they suppose to have be of Spain , and so affirm unto we . whereupon we go present into harbour , find but eleven foot and a half of water upon the bar and a mighty great current in , when we have cast anchor we send present to speak with the master of all the ship : but those only of saint Malo come aboard , who we entertain very friendly , and demand of whence the other two ship be . they say as they think of saint John de Luz or Sibiburo . than we present send our boat for the master of both the say ship , to request they to come aboard , and to bring with they their charter party and other evidence , to the end we may know of whence they be . at which message one of the say master come aboard , with the pilot and master mate of the other ship : who when we have examine , they say that they be of Sibiburo , and the french king subject . we request they for our better security in the harbour peaceable to deliver up their powder and munition : promise they that if we find they to be the french king subject it shall be keep in safety for they without diminish . but they will not consent thereunto : whereunto we reply , that unless they will consent thereunto we will hold they to be our enemy . they not consent , we send the boat well man to fetch their powder and munition from aboard their ship : but straight command our man not to touch any thing else in the ship upon their further peril : which they promise to perform . when they come aboard the say ship which be more together , they be resist by force of arm , but quick they get the victory : which do , they fall present to pillage of the bask , contrary to their promise : whereupon we send another to forbid they ; but when he come to they , none be more ready of pillage than he . whereupon i go my self , and take away from our man whatsoever they have pillage , and give it again to the owner : only i send aboard our own ship their powder 168 and munition to be keep in safety until we know far what they be . when i have do , i give the bask possession of their ship again and tell they they shall not loose the value of one penny if they be the french king subject . than i carry away all our man , and also take with i two or three of the chief of they , and when i come aboard go to examine of they , and by circumstance find one of the ship to belong to France : whereupon i tell the master of the say ship , that i be thorough satisfy that he be of France and so dismiss he in peace . of the other ship we have great presumption that she be of Spain , but have no certain proof thereof , wherefore we dismiss they likewise in peace . after i have thus dismiss they , our ship company fall into a mutiny , and more than half of they resolve to carry one of those ship away . but they be prevent of their evil purpose by aid which the say ship receive from their countryman in the other another har - harborough : for the next morning , which be then in twenty of June , very early there be gather it together out of all the ship in both harborough , at the least 200 Frenchman and Briton , who have plant upon the shore three piece of ordinance against we , and have prepare they self in all readiness to fight with we , which so soon as we have descry they give the onset upon we with at least a hundred small shot out of the wood . there be also in a readiness to assault we about three hundred savage . but after we have skirmish a skirmish while with they , we procure a parley by one of the man between the of saint Malo , who ship row hard by we : in which andus . parley they require some of our man to come on shore unto they : whereupon we request m . Ralph hill and the boatswain mate to go on shore to they : who when they have they detain as prisoner ; and then require the powder and munition , which we have of the bask in possession ; which we surrender unto they in safety as our intent always be , which do , there a new treason come aboard unto we one captain Charles , who be of the briton . 169 captain of the great ship of saint Malo , which ride in the other harbour : who challenge our great boat which we have at Farrillon to be he . and while we be in talk with he about the two bask which at first we think to be Spaniards , we have almost be betray . for the say captain Charles with half a dozen more of his company keep themselves aboard of our ship and hold we in a talk , while thirty or forty other shall have enter our ship unaware from one of the ship of saint Malo , which profess to be our friend , and unto who we show all courtesy . but our perceive their treacherous intent , threaten to set fire on the say ship , which be then thwart our hawse , from which they will have enter . by which resolution of we god do discourage they from effect their mischievous purpose . now the say captain Charles when he see himself prevent of his wicked intent , take his boat present to go on shore , and promise that all thing shall be end in peace between we , and that he will send we our two man again . but when he be on shore he present send for our great boat which he claim to be he , and withal command we out of the harbour ; but he send not our man as he promise , we be now the weak side do not only deliver his boat but also deter - [ three . 197 . ] mine to be go and then request they to help we with our anchor which be on shore ; but they will not . than we desire they to cut the bent of the cable upon the anchor on shore ( for we dare not send our boat lest they shall have keep from we both our boat and man ) which they promise to do for we , as also to send our man ; but when they be on shore , they will do neither . we therefore see their falsehood in every thing , dare no long tarry for fear of far treachery ; wherefore we conclude to cut our cable in the hawse ; which we do , and so depart the harbour about 9 of the clock , leave two of our man with our cable and anchor , and 20 fathom of a new hawser behind we . and as we be go away , they make great show of friendship , 170 * 597 - and drink unto we from the shore ; but more for fear then love , and request we to come on shore for our man , who than they deliver . the same morning in pass over the bar before the harborowe mouth , and ar ° f by that time that we have all our man aboard , our ship come on ground upon the sand ; where we lay some 8 ' hour : during which time , at low water we trim our ship without board , and by the great providence of God find our leak which then we stop . about six of the clock at night we get our ship on float again , and that night anchor within part of the bar , which then because of the wind we can not pass . but it please God to send we fair weather all that night , and the next fnm day by noon we have get our ship clean over the bar . the 21 day after we get over the bar the wind arise at east and eastsoutheast , we blow right into the bay : which if it have come before we be clear of the bar , we have both ship and man perish in the sand . the same day , because the wind keep we within the bay , we go to the isle Blanch , where the ship of the other harbour isle Bland or have their stage : but it be at least two league from thewjllielse - their ship : where we hope by friendship to procure a shallope and assurance of our cable and anchor again . but when we have approach near the shore with our ship , and weave they with a white flag , they in stead of come unto we , send their message by a bullet out of a piece of great ordinance , which they have place on shore of purpose against we ; so that they will neither speak with we , nor permit we to come near they . thus we depart , and will have put to sea that night : but there be much wind at east , which keep we within the bay , and enforce we to come to a anchor under isle blanch . the next morning be the 22 , we put to sea , and about 12 of the clock the same day , the wind be at north - east and foul weather , the master say he can not ply up to Grande cost , because of the leeshore , and the wind . against we , and therefore ask what we shall do . i qa ? e Briton . ask then how far we have to the river of cape 171 Briton : he say a little way . then say i , if it be not far , we be best to go thither to trade with the savage while the wind be contrary , and to take in water and balist , which we want . to which the master say , that if i will he will carry we thither . i think it to be the best course , say i be content , so far forth as that from thence we take the first fair wind for grande cost . hereupon the master will he at the helm to keep his course southeast and southeast and by south . present after i ask he how many league we have to the say river , and from the say river to grande cost . he then say that we have 40 league to the river , and from the river to Grande cost 120 league . hereupon i say i will not consent to go so far out of our way , but will he to keep his direct course for Grande cost ; which he do . within one half hour afterward the 23 day the gunner and company of the ship present i and the master with a request in write to return for England or to go for the island of azore for a man of war , for they will not proceed on their voyage to Grande cost ; and therefore do what i can they turn the helm homeward . the their arrival 14 of June we send our boat on shore in a great bay in the hie of upon the jsje of cape Briton for water . the 25 we ape nton . arrjvej on west side of the isle of Menego , where we leave some cask on shore in a sandy bay , but can not tarry for foul weather . the 26 we cast anchor in another bay upon the main of cape Briton . the 27 about ten of the clock in the morning we meet with the chance - eight man of the Chancewell our consort in a shallope ; who tell we that their ship be cast away upon the within cape main of cape Briton , within a great bay eighteen Briton . league within the cape , and upon a rock within a mile of the shore , upon the 23 of this month about one of the clock in the afternoon : and that they have clear their ship from the rock : but be bilge and full of water , they present do run she up into a 172 sandy bay , where she be no soon come on ground , but present after there come aboard many shallop with store of french man , who rob and spoil all they can lay hand on , pillage the poor man even to their very shirt , and use they in savage manner : whereas they shall rather as Christians have aid they in that distress . which news when we hear , we bless God , who by his divine providence and unspeakable mercy have not only preserve all the man , but bring we thither so miraculous to aid and comfort they . so present we put into the road where the Chancewell lie ; where be also one ship of Sibiburo , who man that help to pillage the Chancewell be run away into the wood . but the master thereof which on they have deal