their hand , accord to their manner of cherish and make much of one , who give to each of they a little tin bell : then sudden they begin to dance , and sing many song . there we find great store of mackrel , that they have take upon the shore , with certain net that they make to fish , of a kind of hemfe . hemp that grow in that place where ordinary they abide , for they never come to the sea , but only in fish time . as far as i understand , there grow likewise a 202 kind of millet as big as peason , like unto that which Maiz . grow in Bresil , which they eat in stead of bread . they have great store of it . they call it in their tongue Kapaige . they have also prune ( that be to say dam - tamsin , fig , sin ) which they dry for winter as we do , they call they a ^ es - honesta . they have also fig , nut , apple , and other fruit , and bean , that they call Sahu , their nut Cahehya . if we show they any thing that they have not , nor know not what it be , shake their head , they will say Nohda , which be as much to say , they have it not , nor they know it not . of those thing they have , they will with sign show we how to dress they , and how they grow . they eat nothing that have any taste of salt . they be very great thief , for they will filch and steal whatsoever they can lay hold of , and all be fish that come to net . fl how our man set up a great cross upon the point of the say porte , and the captain of those wild man , after a long oration , be by our captain appease , and content that two of his child shall go with he . upon the 24 of the month , we cause a fair high cross to be make of the height of thirty foot , which be make in the presence of many of they , upon the point of the entrance of the say haven , in the midst whereof we hang up a shield with three flower de Luce inn it , and in the top be carve in the wood with antic letter this posy , vive le kaven roy de France . then before they all we set it upon t0 be the say point . they with great heed behold both they ? y ’ make and set of it up . so soon as it be up , we altogether kneel down before they , with our hand towards heaven , yield God thank : and we make sign unto they , show they the heaven , and that all our salvation depend only on he which in they dwell : whereat they show a great admiration , look first one at another , and then upon 203 the cross . and after we be return to our ship , their captain clad with a old bear skin , with three of his son , and a brother of he with he , come unto we in one of their boat , but they come not so near we as they be wont to do : there he make a long oration unto we , show we the cross we have set up , and make a cross with two finger , then do he show we all the country about we , as if he will say that all be he , and that we shall not set up any cross without his leave . his talk be end , we show he a axe , feign that we will give it he for his skin , to which he listen , for by little and little he come near our ship . one of our fellow that be in our boat , take hold on they , and sudden leap into it , with two or three more , who enforce they to enter into our ship , whereat they be great astonish . but our captain do straightway assure they , that they shall have no harm , nor any injury offer they at all , and entertain they very friendly , make they eat and drink . then do we show they with sign , that the cross be but only set up to be as a light and leader which way to enter into the port , and that we will short come again , and bring good store of iron ware and other thing , but that we will take two of his child with we , and afterward bring they to the say port again : and so we clothe two of they in shirt , and colour coat , with red cap , and put about every one neck a copper chain , whereat they be great content : then give they their old clothes to their fellow that go back again , and we give to each one of those three that go back , a hatchet , and some knife , which make they very glad . after these be go , and have tell the news unto their fellow , in the after noon there come to our ship six boat of they , with five or six man in every one , to take their farewell of those two we have detain to take with we , and bring they some fish , utter many word which we do not understand , 204 i53 +- making sign that they will not remove the cross we have set up . ^ [ how after we be depart from the say port , follow our voyage along the say coast , we go to discover the land lie southeast , and northwest . the next day , be the 25 of the month , we have fair weather , and go from the say port : and be out of the river , we sail Eastnortheast , for after the entrance into the say river , the land be [ three . 210 . ] environ about , and make a bay in manner of half a circle , where be in our ship , we may see all the coast sail behind , which we come to seek , the land lie southeast and northwest , the course of which be distant from the river about twenty league . of the cape S . alvise , and cape Memorancie , and certain other land , and how one of our boat touch a rock and sudden go over it . on Monday be the 27 of the month , about sunset we go along the say land , as we have say , lie southeast and northwest , till Wednesday that we see another cape where the land begin to bend towards the east : we go along about 15 league , then do the land begin to turn northward . about three league from the say cape we sound , and find 24 fathom water . the say land be plain , and the fair and most without wood that we have see , with goodly green field and meadow : we name the say cape S . alvise cape , because that be his day : it be 49 degree and a half in latitude , and in longitude * . on Wednesday morning we be on the east side of the cape , and be almost night we go northwestward for to approach near to the say land , which trend north and south . from saint alvise cape to another call cape Memorancie , about fifteen league , the land begin to bend northwest . about three league from the say cape we will needs sound , 205 but we can find no ground at 150 fathom , yet go we along the say land , about ten league , to the latitude of 50 degree . the Saturday follow , degree be the first of August , by sun rise , we have of latitude , certain other land , lie north and Northeast , that be very high and craggy , and seem to be mountains : between which be other low land with wood and river : we go about the say land , as well on the one side as on the other , still bend northwest , to see if it be either a gulf , or a passage , until the five of the month . the distance from one land to the other be about fifteen league . the middle between they both be 50 degree and a terce in latitude . we have much ado to go five mile far , the wind be so great , and the tide against we . and at five mile end , we may plain see and perceive land on both side , which there begin to spread it self , but because we rather fall , then get way against the wind , we go towards land , purpose to go to another cape of land , lie southward , which be the farthermost out into the sea that we can see , about five league from we , but so soon as we come thither , we find it to be nought else but rock , stone , 8c craggy cliff , such as we have not find any where since we have sail southward from s Johns cape : and then be the tide with we , which carry we against the wind westward , so that as we be sail along the say coast , one of our boat touch a rock , and sudden go over , but we be constrain to leap out for to direct it on accord to the tide . how after we have agree and consult what be best to be do , we purpose to return : and of saint Peter strait , and of cape tiennot . after we have sail along the say coast , for the space of two hour , behold , the tide begin to turn against we , with so swift and rage a course , that it be not possible for we with 13 oar to row 206 or get one stone cast far , so that we be constrain to leave our boat with some of our man to guard they , and io or 12 man go ashore to the say cape , where we find that the land begin to bend Southwest , which have see , we come to our boat again , and so to our ship , which be still ready under sail , hope to go forward : but for all that , they be fall more than four league to leeward from the place where we have leave they , where so soon as we come , we assemble together all our captain , master , and mariner , to have their advice and opinion what be best to be do : and after that every one have say , consider that the easterly wind begin to bear sway , and blow , and that the flood be so great , that we do but fall , and that there be nothing to be get , and that storm and tempest begin to reign in newfound land , and that we be so far from home , not know the peril and danger that be behind , for either we must agree to return home again , or else to stay there all the year . Moreover , we do consider , that if the northern wind do take we , it be not possible for we to depart thence . all which opinion be hear and consider , we altogether determine to address our self homeward . now because upon saint Peter day we enter into the say streite , we name it saint Peter streite . the strait of we sound it in many place , in some we find s - peter - 150 fathom water , in some 100 , and near the shore sixty , and clear ground . from that day till Wednesday follow , we have a good and prosperous gale of wind , so that we trended the say north shore east , southeast , west northwest : for such be the situation of it , except one cape of low land that bend more towards the southeast , about twenty five league from the strait . in this place we see certain smoke , [ three . 211 . ] that the people of the country make upon the say cape : but because the wind blow we towards the coast , we go not to they , which when they see , they come 207 with two boat and twelve man unto we , and as free come unto our ship , as if they have be French man , and give we to understand , that they come from the great gulf , and that Tiennot be their captain , who then be upon that cape , make sign unto we , that they be go home to their country whence we be come with our ship , and that they be lade with fish . we cape Tiennot . name the say cape , cape tiennot . from the say cape all the land trend eastsoutheast , and westnorthwest . all these land lie low , very pleasant , environ with sand , where the sea be intermingle with marsh and shallows , the space of twenty league : then do the land begin to trend from west to Eastnortheast altogether environ with island two or three league from land , in which as far as we can see , be many dangerous shelf more than four or five league from land . how that upon the nine of August we enter within white sand , and upon the five of September we come to the port of s . malo . from the say Wednesday until Saturday follow , we have a great wind from the southwest , which cause we to run Eastnortheast , on which day we come to the easterly part of Newfoundland , between the grange and the double cape . there begin great stormy wind come from the east with great rage : wherefore we coast the cape northnorthwest , to search the northern part , which be ( as we have say ) all environ with island , and be near the say island and land , the wind turn into the south , which bring we within the say gulf , so that the next day be the 9 of August , we by the grace of God enter within the white sand . and this be so much as we have discover . after that , upon the 15 of August , be the feast of the assumption of our lady , after that we have hear service , we altogether depart from the port of white sand , and with a happy and prosperous weather we come into 208 the middle of the sea , that be between Newfoundland and Britain , in which place we be toss and turmoil three day long with great storm and windy tempest come from the east , which with the aid and assistance of God we suffer : then have we fair weather , and upon the five of September , in the say year , we come to the port of saint Malo whence we depart . A . D . 1534 -