the first relation of Jaques Carthier of S . Malo , of the new land call new France , new discover in the year of our lord 1534 . how m . Jaques carthy depart from the port of saint Malo , with two ship , and come to Newfoundland , and how he enter into the port of Buona vista . Fter that sir Charles of Mouy knight lord of Meylleraye , and vice - admiral of France have cause the captain , master , and mariner of the ship to be swear to behave themselves true and faithful in the service of the most christian king of France , under the charge of the say Carthier , upon the twenty day of April 1534 , we depart from the port of saint Malo with two ship of threescore tun apiece burden , and 61 well appoint man in each one : and with such prosperous weather we sail onward , that upon the ten day of may we come to Newfoundland , where we enter into the cape of Buona vista , which be in latitude 48 degree and a half , and in longitude * . but because of the great store of the ice that be alongst the say land , we be constrain to enter into a haven call S . katherins haven , distant from the other port about five league towards southsoutheast : there do we stay ten day look for fair weather ; and in the mean while we mend and dress our boat . 183 a great white bear . how we come to the island of bird , and of the great quantity of bird that there be . upon the 2i of may the wind be in the west , we hoist sail , and sail towards north and by east from the cape of Buona vista until we come to the island of bird , which be environ about with a bank of ice , but break and crack : notwithstanding the say bank , our two boat go thither to take in some bird , whereof there be such plenty , that unless a man do see they , he will think it a incredible thing : for albeit the island ( which contain about a league in circuit ) be so full of they , that they seem to have be bring thither , and sow for the nonce , yet be there a hundred fold as many hover about it as within ; some of the which be as big as jay , black and white , with beak like unto crow : they lie always upon the sea ; they can fly very high , because their wing be so little , and no big than half one hand , yet do they fly as swift as any bird of the air level to the water ; they be also exceed fat ; we name they Aporath . in less than half a hour we fill two boat full of they , as if they have be with stone : so that beside they which we do eat fresh , every ship do powder and salt five or six barrel full of they . of two sort of bird , the one call Godetz , the other Margaulx ; and how we come to Carpunt . beside these , there be another kind of bird which hover in the air , and over the sea , lesser than the other ; and these do all gather themselves together in the island , and put themselves under the wing of other bird that be great : these we name Godetz . there be also of another sort , but big , and white , which bite even as dog : those we name Margaulx . and albeit the say island be 14 league from the main land , notwithstanding bear come swim thither to eat of the say bird : and our man find one there as great 184 as any cow , and as white as any swan , who in their presence leap into the sea ; and upon Whitsunmunday ( follow our voyage towards the land ) we meet she by the way , swim towards land as swift as we can sail . so soon as we see she , we pursue she with our boat , and by main strength take she , who flesh be as good to be eat as the flesh of a calf of two year old . the le Chas - Wednesday follow , be the 27 of the month , we ieaux ' come to the entrance of the bay of the castle ; but because the weather be ill , and the great store of ice we find , we be constrain to enter into a harbour about the say entrance call Carpunt , where , because we can not come out of it , we stay till the nine of June , what time we depart , hope with the help of God to sail further than the say Carpunt , which be in Carpunt . latitude 51 degree . the description of Newfoundland , from cape Razo to cape degrade . the land from cape Razo to cape degrade , which be the point of the entrance of the bay that trend from head to head towards Northnortheast , and southsouthwest . all this part of land be part into island one so near the other , that there be but small river between they ; through the which you may pass with little boat , and therefore there be certain good har - borows , among which be those of Carpunt and degrade . in one of these island that be the high of they all , be the top of it you may plain see the two low island that be near to cape Razo , from whence to the port of Carpunt they count it five and twenty league ; and there be two entrance thereat , one on the east , the other on the south side of the island . but you must take heed of the side and point of the east , because that every where there be nothing else but shelf , and the water be very shallow : you must go about the island towards the west the length of half a cable or thereabouts , and then to go towards the south to the say Carpunt . 185 also you be to take heed of three shelf that be in the channel under the water : and towards the island on the east side in the channel , the water be of three or four fathom deep , and clear ground . the other trend towards Eastnortheast , and on the west you may go on shore . of the island which now be call S . katherins island . go from the point degrade , and enter into the say bay towards the west and by north : there be some doubt of two island that be on the right side , one of the which be distant from the say point three league , and the other seven , either more or less than the first , be a low and plain land , and it seem to be part of the main land . i name it saint Katherine island ; in which , towards the north - east there be very dry soil ; but about a quarter of a league from it , very ill ground , so that you must go a little about . the say island 8c [ three . 203 . ] the port of castle trend towards north north - east , and south southwest , and they be about 15 . league asunder . from the say port of castle to the port of gut , which be in the northern part of the say bay , that trend towards east north - east , and west southwest , there be 12 . league and a half : and about two league from the port of balance , that be to say , the three part athwart the say bay the depth be sound it be about 38 . fathom : and from the say port of balance to the Blanc 8ablon , white sand towards west southwest there be 15 . league , arwhite8and . you must ( - take heed of a shelf that lie about 3 . league outward from the say white sand on the southwest side above water like a boat . of the place call Blanc Sablon , or the white sand : of the hand of breast , and of the hand of bird , of the sort and quantity of bird that there be find : and of the port call the islette . white sand be a road in the which there be no place guard from the south , nor southeast . but towards south southwest from the say road there be two 186 hand , one of the which be call breast hand , and the other the hand of bird , in which there be great store of Godetz , and crow with red beak and red foot : they make their nest in hole under the ground even as cony . a point of land be pass about a league from white sand , there be a port and passage find call the islette , a better place than white sand : and there be great fish . from the say port of the islette unto another call breast , the circuit be about ten league . breast a place this port be in latitude 51 . degree and 55 . minute , and * north . in longitude * . from the islette to that place there be i ” and . m many other hand : and the say port of breast be also among those hand . Moreover the hand do compass more than 3 . league from the say breast , be low , and over they be then other land above mention see . how we with our ship enter into the port of breast , and sail onward towards the west we pass amid the islette , which be so many in number , that it be not possible to tell they : and how we name they the islette . upon the 10 . of June we with our ship enter into the port of breast , to furnish our self with water and wood , and to make we ready to pass the say bay upon saint Barnabas day service be hear , we with our boat go beyond the say port towards the west , to see what harboroughe be there : we pass through the midst of the islette , which be so many in number that it be not possible they may be tell , for they continue about 10 . league beyond the say port . we to rest our self stay in one of they a night , and there we find great store of duck egg , and other bird that there do make their nest , we name they all the islette . 187 [ of they of the port call saint Antony port , saint Servans port , James Cartiers port : of the river call S . James : of the custom and apparel of the inhabitant in the hand of white Sand . the next day we pass the say hand , and beyond they all we find a good haven , which we name saint Antony haven , and one or two league beyond we find a little river toward the southwest coast , that be between two other hand , and be a good harbour . there we set up a cross , and name it saint Servans port : and on the southwest side of the say port and river , about one league there be a small hand as round as a oven , environ about with many other little hand that give notice to the say port . further about two league there be another great river , in which we take good store of salmon , that we name saint James his river . be in the say river , we see a ship of rochel that the night before have pass the port of breast , where they think to have go a fish : but the mariner know not where they be . we with our boat approach near unto it , and do direct it to another port one league more towards the west then the say river of saint James , which i take to be one of the best in all the world , and therefore we name it James carthiers sound . if the soil be as good as the harboroughe be , it be a great commodity : but it be not to be call the new land , but rather stone and wild crag , and a place fit for wild beast , for in all the north hand i do not see a cartload of good earth : yet go i on shore in many place , and in the hand of white sand , there be nothing else but moss and small thorn scatter here and there , wither and dry . to be short , i believe that this be the land that God allot to Cain . there be man of a indifferent good stature and bigness , but wild and unruly : they wear their hair tie on the top like a wreath of hay , and put a wooden pin within it , or any other such thing in stead of a nail , and with they 188 they bind certain bird feather . they be clothe with beast skin as well the man as woman , but that the woman go somewhat strait and close in their garment then the man do , with their waste gird : they paint themselves with certain roan colour : their boat be make of the bark of birch tree , with the which they fish and take great store of seal , and as far as we can understand since our come thither , that be not their habitation , but they come from the main land out of hot country , to catch the say seal and other necessary for their live . of certain cape , that be to say , the double cape , the point cape , cape royal , and the cape of milk : of the mountain of grange : of the hand of dove house : and of the great fish of cod . upon the 13 . of that month we come to our ship again with our boat on purpose to sail forward because the weather be fair , and upon Sunday we cause service to be say : then on Monday be the 15 . of the month we depart from breast , and sail towards the south to take a view of the land that there we have see , that seem unto we to be two hand : but when we be amid the bay , we know it to be firm land , where be a great double cape one above the other , and therefore we name it the double cape . in the entrance of the bay we sound , and find it to be a hundred fathom round about we . from breast to the double cape there be about 20 . league , and about five or six league beyond we sound again and find 40 fathom water . the say land lie north - east and Southwest . the next day be the 16 of the month we sail along the say coast towards the southwest