thereupon begin to sing and dance , as they be wont to do . but for a resolution of the matter Taignoagny and Domagaia tell our captain , that their lord Donnacona will by no mean permit that any of they shall go with he to Hochelaga , unless he will leave he some hostage to stay with he : our captain answer they , that if they will not go with he with a good will , they shall stay , and that for all they he will not leave off his journey thither . how our captain with all his gentleman and fifty mariner depart with our pinnace , and the two boat from Canada to go to Hochelaga : and also there be describe , what be see by the way upon the say river . Chap . 5 . the next day be the 19 of September we hoist sail , and with our pinnace and two boat depart to go up the river with the flood , where on both shore of it we begin to see as goodly a country as possible can with eye be see , all replenish with very goodly tree , and vine lade as full of grape as can be all lade along the river , which rather seem to have be plant 8wes - by man hand than otherwise . true it be , that because they be not dress and wrought as they shall be , their bunch of grape be not so great nor sweet as we : also we see all along the river many house 227 inhabit of fisher , which take all kind of fish , and they come with as great familiarity and kindness unto we , as if we have be their countryman , and bring we great store of fish , with other such thing as they have , which we exchange with they for other ware , who lift up their hand towards heaven , give many sign of hochelay . joy : we stay at a place call Hochelai , about five and twenty league from Canada , where the river waxes very narrow , and run very swift , wherefore it be very dangerous , not only for that , but also for certain great stone that be therein : many boat and bark come unto we , in one of which come one of the chief lord of the country , make a long discourse , who be come near we , do by evident sign and gesture show we , that the high the river go , the more dangerous it be , and bid we take heed of our self . the say lord present and give unto our captain two of his own child , of which our captain take one be [ three . 219 . ] a wench 7 or 8 year old , the man child he give he again , because it be too young , for it be but two or three year old . our captain as friendly and as courteous as he can do entertain and receive the say lord and his company , give they certain small trifle , and so they depart towards the shore again . afterwards the say lord and his wife come unto Canada to visit his daughter , bring unto our captain certain small present . from the nineteenth until the eight and twenty of September , we sail up along the say river , never lose one hour of time , all which time we see as goodly and pleasant a country as possible can be wish for , full ( as we have say before ) of all sort of goodly tree , that be to say , oak , elm , walnut - tree , cedar , firre , ash , box , willow , and great store of vine , all as full of grape as can be , so that if any of our fellow go on shore , they come home lade with they : there be likewise many crane , swan , goose , duck , feasant , partridge , thrush , blackbird , turtle , finche , redbreast , nightingale , 228 sparrow of diverse kind , with many other sort of bird , even as in France , and great plenty and store . upon the 28 of September , we come to a great wide lake in the middle of the river five or six league broad , the la ^ e of and twelve long , all that day we go against the tide , have but two fathom water , still keep the say scantling : be come to one of the head of the lake , we can espy no passage or go out , nay , rather it seem to have be close and shut up round about , and there be but a fathom and a half of water , little more or less . and therefore we be constrain to cast anchor , and to stay with our pinnace , and go with our two boat to seek some go out , and in one place we find four or five branch , which out of the river come into the lake , and they come from Hochelaga . but in the say branch , because of the great fierceness and swiftness wherewith they break out , and the course of the water , they make certain bar and should , and at that time there be but a fathom water . those shoulde be pass , we find four or five fathom , and as far as we can perceive by the flood , it be that time of the year that the water be low , for at other time they flow high by three fathom . all these four or five branch do compass about five or six hand very pleasant , which make the head of the lake : about fifteen league beyond , they do all come into one . that day we land in one of the say hand , and meet with five man that be hunt of wild beast , who as free and familiar come to our boat without any fear , as if we have ever be bring up together . our boat be somewhat near the shore , one of they take our captain in his arm , and carry he on shore , as light and as easy as if he have be a child of five year old : so strong and sturdy be this fellow . we find that they have a great heap of wild rat that live in the water , as big as a cony , rat as and very good to eat , which they give unto our cap - as taine , who for a recompense give they knife and 229 Hochelaga distant from the lake of angolesme 45 . league . the english voyage glassen bead . we ask they with sign if that be the way to Hochelaga , they answer yea , and that we have yet three day sail thither . how our captain cause our boat to be mend and dress to go to Hochelaga : and because the way be somewhat difficult and hard , we leave our pinnace behind : and how we come thither , and what entertainment we have of the people . Chap . 6 . the next day our captain see that for that time it be not possible for our pinnace to go on any further , he cause our boat to be make ready , and as much munition and victual to be put in they , as they can well bear : he depart with they , accompany with many gentleman , that be to say , Claudius of Ponte Briand , cupbearer to the lord dolphin of France , Charles of Pommeraye , John gouion , John Powlet , with twenty 8c eight mariner : and mace Jallobert , and William briton , who have the charge under the captain of the other two ship , to go up as far as they can into that river : we sail with good and prosperous weather until the second of October , on which day we come to the town of Hochelaga , distant from the place where we have leave our pinnace five and forty league . in which place of Hochelaga , and all the way we go , we meet with many of those countryman , who bring we fish and such other victual as they have , still dance and great rejoice at our come . our captain to lure they in , and to keep they our friend , to recompense they , give they knife , bead , and such small trifle , wherewith they be great satisfy . so soon as we be come near Hochelaga , there come to meet we above a thousand person , man , woman and child , who afterward do as friendly and merry entertain and receive we as any father will do his child , which he have not of long time see , the man dance on one side , the woman on another , and likewise the child on 230 * 535 - anoth : after that they bring we great store of fish , and of their bread make of Millet , cast they into our [ three . 220 . ] boat so thick , that you will have think it to fall from heaven . which when our captain see , he with many of his company go on shore : so soon as ever we be aland they come cluster about we , make very much of we , bring their young child in their arm , only to have our captain and his company to touch they , make sign and show of great mirth and gladness , that last more than half a hour . our captain see their love kindness and entertainment of we , cause all the woman orderly to be set in array , and give they bead make of tin , and other such small trifle , and to some of the man he give knife : than he return to the boat to supper , and so pass that night , all which while all those people stand on the shore as near our boat as they may , make great fire , and dance very merry , still cry aguiaze , which in their tongue signify mirth and safety . how our captain with five gentleman and twenty arm man all well in order , go to see the town of Hochelaga , and the situation of it . Chap . 7 . our captain the next day very early in the morning , the three of have very gorgeous attire himself , cause all qct0 ^ r . his company to be set in order to go to see the town and habitation of those people , and a certain mountain that be somewhat near the city : with who go also five gentleman and twenty mariner , leave the rest to keep and look to our boat : we take with we three man of Hochelaga to bring we to the place . all along as we go we find the way as well beat and frequent as can be , the fair and best country that possible can be see , full of as goodly great oak as be in any wood in France , under which the ground be all cover over . with fair acorn . after we have go about four or bernik from five mile , we meet by the way one of the chief lord of the rivet side . 231 the english voyage the city , accompany with many more , who so soon as he see we beckon and make sign upon we , that we must rest we in that place where they have make a great fife and so we do . after that we have rest our self there a while , the say lord begin to make a long discourse , even as we have say above , they be accustom to do in sign of mirth and friendship , show our captain and all his company a joyful countenance , and good will , who give he two hatchet , a pair of knife and a cross which he make he to kiss , and then put it about his neck , for which he give our captain hearty thanks . this do , we go along , and about a mile and a half far , we begin to find goodly and large field , full of such corn as the country yield . it be even as the millet of Bresil , as great and somewhat big than small peason , wherewith they live even as we do with we . in the midst of those field be the city of Hochelaga , place near , and as it be join to a great mountain that be till round about , very fertili , on the top of which you may see very far , we name it mount royal . the city of Hochelaga be round , compass about with timber , with three course of rampire , one within another frame like a sharp spire , but lay across above . the middlemost of they be make and build , as a direct line , but perpendicular . the rampire be frame and fashion with piece of timber , lay along on the ground , very well and cunning join together after their fashion . this enclosure be in height about two rod . it have but one gate or entry thereat , which be shut with pile , stake , and bar . over it , and also in many place of the wall , there be place to run along , and ladder to get up , all full of stone , for the defence of it . there be in the town about fifty house , about fifty pace long , and twelve , or fifteen broad