quality of it : which thing we do , and find it full of goodly tree like to we . also we see many goodly vine , a thing not before of we see in those country , and therefore we name it Bacchus hand . it be in length about twelve league , in sight very pleasant , but full of wood , no part of it manure , unless it be in certain place , where a few cottage be for fisher dwelling as before we have say . the next day we depart with our ship to bring they to the place of the holy cross , and on the 14 of that month we come thither , and the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , with 25 boat full of those people , come to meet we , come from the place whence we be come , and go towards Stadacona , where their abide be , and all come to our ship , show sundry and diverse gesture of gladness 221 A . D . I535 - the lie of Bacchus , or the ik of Orleans . and mirth , except those two that we have bring , to wit , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , who seem to have alter and change their mind and purpose , for by no mean they will come unto our ship , albeit sundry time they be earnest desire to do it , whereupon we begin to mistrust somewhat . our captain ask they if according to promise they will go with he to Hochelaga ? they answer yea , for so they have purpose , and then each one withdraw himself . the next day be the fifteen of the month , our captain go on shore , to cause certain pole and pile to be drive into the water , and set up , that the better and safe we may harbour our ship there : and many of those country people come to meet we there , among who be Donnacona and our two man , with the rest of their company , who keep themselves aside under a point or nook of land that be upon the shore of a certain river , and no one of they come unto we as the other do that be not on their side . our captain understanding that they be there , command part of our man to follow he , and he go to the say point where he find the say Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and diverse other : and after salutation give on each side , Taignoagny settle himself foremost to speak to our captain , say that the lord Donnacona do great grieve and sorrow that our captain and his man do wear warlike weapon , and they not . our captain answer , that albeit it do grieve they , yet will not he leave they off , and that ( as he know ) it be the manner of France . but for all these word our captain and Donnacona leave not off to speak one to another , and friendly to entertain one another . then do we perceive , that whatsoever Taignoagny speak , be only long of himself and of his fellow , for that before they depart thence our captain and Donnacona enter into a marvellous steadfast league of friendship , whereupon all his people at once with a loud voice , cast out three great cry , ( a horrible thing to hear ) and each one have take leave of the 222 other for that day , we go aboard again . the day follow we bring our two great ship within the river and harbour , where the water be at the high , be three fathom deep , and at the low , but half a fathom . we leave our pinnace without the road to the end we may bring it to Hochelaga . so soon as we have safe place our ship , behold we see Donnacona , Taignoagny and Domagaia , with more than five hundred person , man , woman and child , and the say lord with ten or twelve of the chief of the country come aboard of our ship , who be all courteous receive , [ three . 217 . ] and friendly entertain both of our captain and of we all : and diverse gift of small value be give they . then do Taignoagny tell our captain , that his lord do great sorrow that he will go to Hochelaga , and that he will not by any mean permit that any of they shall go with he , because the river be of no importance . our captain answer he , that for all his say , he will not leave off his go thither , if by any mean it be possible , for that that he be command by his king to go as far as possible he can : and that if he ( that be to say Taignoagny ) will go with he , as he have promise , he shall be very well entertain , beside that , he shall have such a gift give he , as he shall well content himself : for he shall do nothing else but go with he to Hochelaga and come again . to who Taignoagny answer , that he will not by any mean go , and thereupon they sudden return to their house . the next day be the 17 of September , Donnacona and his company return even as at the first , and bring with he many eel , with sundry sort of other fish , whereof they take great store in the say river , as more large hereafter shall be show . and as soon as they be come to our ship , accord to their wont use they begin to sing and dance . this do , Donnacona cause all his people to be set on the one side : then make a round circle upon the sand he cause our captain with all his people to enter thereinto , 223 then he begin to make a long oration , hold in one of his hand a maiden child of ten or twelve year old , which he present unto our captain : then sudden begin all his people to make three great shriek , or howl , in sign of joy and league of friendship : present upon that he do present unto he two other young male child one after another , but young than the other , at the give of which even as before they give out shriek and howl very loud , with other ceremony : for which present , our captain give the say lord great and hearty thanks . then Taignoagny tell our captain , that one of the child be his own brother , and that the maiden child be daughter unto the say lord own sister , and the present be only give he to the end he shall not go to Hochelaga at all : to who our captain answer , that if they be only give he to that intent , if so he will , he shall take they again , for that by no mean he will leave his go off , for as much as he be so command of his king . but concern this , Domagaia tell our captain that their lord have give he those child as a sign and token of goodwill and security , and that he be content to go with he to Hochelaga , upon which talk great word arise between Taignoagny and Domagaia , by which we plain perceive that Taignoagny be but a crafty knave , and that he intend but mischief and treason , as well by this deed as other that we by he have see . after that our captain cause the say child to be put in our ship , and cause two sword and two copper basin , the one wrought , the other plain , to be bring unto he , and they he give to Donnacona , who be therewith great content , yield most hearty thanks unto our captain for they , and present upon that he command all his people to sing and dance , and desire our captain to cause a piece of artillery to be shoot off , because Taignoagny and Domagaia make great brag of it , and have tell they marvellous thing , and also , because they have never hear nor see 224 . any before : to who our captain answer , that he be content : and by and by he command his man to shoot off twelve cannon charge with bullet into the wood that be hard by those people and ship , at who noise they be great astonish and amaze , for they think that heaven have fall upon they , and put themselves to flight , howl , cry , and shriek , so that it seem hell be break loose . but before we go thence , Taignoagny cause other man to tell we , that those man which we have leave in our pinnace in the road , have slay two man of their company , with a piece of ordinance that they have shoot off , whereupon the rest have put themselves all to flight , as though they shall all have be slay : which afterward we find untrue , because our man have not shoot off any piece at all that day . how Donnacona and Taignoagny with other , devise a pretty sleight or policy : for they cause three of their man to be attire like devil , feign themselves to be send from their god Cudruaigny , only to hinder our voyage to Hochelaga . Chap . 4 . the next day be the eighteenth of September , these man still endeavour themselves to seek all mean possible to hinder and let our go to Hochelaga , and devise a pretty guile , as hereafter shall show . they go and dress three man like devil , be wrap in dog skin white and black , their face besmear as black as any coal , with home on their head more than a yard long , and cause they secret to be put in one of their boat , but come not near our ship as they be wont to do , for they lie hide within the wood for the space of two hour , [ three . 218 . ] look for the tide , to the end the boat wherein the devil be , may approach and come near we , which when time be , come , and all the rest issue out of the wood come to we , but yet not so near as they be wont to do . there begin Taignoagny to salute viii 225 p our captain , who ask he if he will have the boat to come for he ; he answer , not for that time , but after a while he will come unto our ship : then present come that boat rush out , wherein the three counterfeit devil be with such long home on their head , and the middlemost come make a long oration and pass along our ship without turn or look towards we , but with the boat go towards the land . then do Donnacona with all his people pursue they , and lie hold on the boat and devil , who so soon as the man be come to they , fall prostrate in the boat even as if they have be dead : then be they take up and carry into the wood , be but a stone cast off , than every one withdraw himself into the wood , not one stay behind with we , where be , they begin to make a long discourse , so loud that we may hear they in our ship , which last above half a hour , and be end we begin to espy Taignoagny and Domagaia come towards we , hold their hand upward together , carry their hat under their upper garment , show a great admiration , and Taignoagny look up to heaven , cry three time Jesus , Jesus , Jesus , and Domagaia do as his fellow have do before , cry , Jesus Maria , James Cartier . our captain hear they , and see their gesture and ceremony , ask of they what they ail , and what be happen or chance anew ; they answer , that there be very ill tiding befall , say in french , Nenni est il bon , that be to say , it be not good : our captain ask they again what it be , then answer they , that their god cudruaigny have speak in Hochelaga : and that he have send those three man to show unto they that there be so much ice and snow in that country , that whosoever go thither shall die , which word when we hear , we laugh and mock they say , that their god Cudruaigny be but a fool and a noddy , for he know not what he do or say : then bid we they show his messenger from we , that Christ will defend they all 226 from cold , if they will believe in he . then do they ask of our captain if he have speak with Jesus : he answer no , but that his priest have , and that he tell they they shall have fair weather : which word when they have hear , they thank our captain , and depart towards the wood to tell those news unto their fellow , who sudden come all rush out of the wood , seem to be very glad for those word that our captain have speak , and to show that thereby they have have , and feel great joy , so soon as they be before our ship , they altogether give out three great shriek , and