, still call Agouhanna , think to speak with he , which our captain for that time will not permit , neither all the next day till noon , whereupon they make sign unto we , that we have hang or kill he . about noon , there come as great a number in a cluster , as ever we see , who go to hide themselves in the forest , except some , who with a loud voice will call and cry to Donnacona to speak unto they . our captain then command Donnacona to be bring up on high to speak unto they , and bid he be merry , for after he have speak , and show unto the king of France what he have see in Saguenay and other country , after ten or twelve month , he shall return again , and that the king of France will give he great reward , whereat Donnacona be very glad , and speak to the other , tell it they , who in token of joy , give out three great cry , and then Donnacona and his people have great talk together , which for want of interpreter , can be describe . our captain bid Donnacona that he shall cause they to come to the other side of the river , to the end they may better talk together without any fear , and that he shall assure they : which Donnacona do , and there come a boat full of the chief of they to the ship , and there anew begin to talk together , give great praise to our captain , and give he a present of four and twenty chain of Esurgny , for that be the great 256 and precious riches they have in this world , for they esteem more of that , then of any gold or silver . after they have long talk together , and that their lord see that there be no remedy to avoid his go into France , he command his people the next day , to bring he some victual to serve he by the way . our captain give Donnacona , as a great present , two fry pan of copper , eight hatchet , and other small trifle , as knife , and bead , whereof he seem to be very glad , who send they to his wife and child . likewise , he give to they that come to speak with Donacona , they thank he great for they , and then go to their lodging . how the next day , be the five of May , the say people come again to speak unto their lord , and how four woman come to the shore to bring he victual . Chap . 20 . upon the five of May , very early in the morning , a great number of the say people come again to speak unto their lord , and send a boat , which in their tongue they call Casnoni , wherein be only four woman , without any man , for fear their man shall be retain . Theise woman bring great store of victual , as great millet , which be their corn that they live withal , flesh , fish , and other thing , after their fashion . Theise woman be come to our ship , our captain do very friendly entertain they . then Donnacona pray our captain to tell those woman that he shall come again after ten or twelve month , and bring Donnacona to Canada with he : this he say only to appease they , which our captain do : wherefore the woman , as well by word as sign , seem to be very glad , give our captain thank , and tell he , if he come again , and bring Donnacona with he , they will give he many thing : in sign whereof , each one give our captain a chain of Esurgny , and then pass vin 257 r [ three . 230 . ] coudre . a knife of red copper bring from Saguenay . the isle of hare . the english voyage to the other side of the river again , where stand all the people of Stadacona , who take all leave of their lord , go home again . on Saturday follow , be the sixth of the month , we depart out of the say port of Santa Croix , and come to harbour a little beneath the island of Orleans , about twelve league from the port of the holy cross , and upon Sunday we come to the island of filbert , where we stay until the sixteenth of that month , till the fierceness of the water be pass , which at that time run too swift a course , and be too dangerous to come down along the river , and therefore we stay till fair weather come . in the mean while many of donnaconas subject come from the river of Saguenay to he , but be by Domagaia advertise , that their lord be take to be carry into France , they be all amaze : yet for all that they will not leave to come to our ship , to speak to Donnacona , who tell they that after twelve month he shall come again , and that he be very well use by the captain , gentleman , and mariner . which when they hear , they great thank our captain and give their lord three bundle of beaver , and sea wolves skin , with a great knife of red copper that come from Saguenay , and other thing . they give also to our captain a chain of Esurgny , for which our captain give they ten or twelve hatchet , and they give he hearty thanks , and be very well content . the next day , be the sixteenth of May , we hoist sail , and come from the say island of filbert , to another about fifteen league from it , which be about five league in length , and there , to the end we may take some rest the night follow , we stay that day , in hope the next day we may pass and avoid the danger of the river of Saguenay , which be great . that evening we go aland and find great store of hare , of which we take a great many , and therefore we call it the island of hare : in the night there arise a contrary wind , with such storm and tempest , that we be constrain to 258 return to the island of filbert again , from whence we be come , because there be none other passage among the say island , and there we stay till the one and twenty of that month , till fair weather and good wind come again : and then we sail again , and that so prosperous , that we pass to honguedo , which passage until that time have not be discover : we cause our ship to course athwart cape Prat which be the beginning of the port of Chaleur : and because the wind be good and convenient , we sail all day and all night without stay , and the next day we come to the middle of brion island , which we be not mind lsle ° f to do , to the end we may shorten our way . Theise brion - two land lie northwest , and southeast , and be about fifty league one from another . the say island be in latitude 47 degree and a half . upon Thursday be the twenty six of the month , and the feast of the ascension of our lord , we coast over to a land and shallow of low sand , which be about eight league southwest from brion island , above which be large champain , full of tree and also a enclose sea , whereas we can neither see , nor perceive any gap or way to enter thereinto . on Friday follow , be the 27 of the month , because the wind do change on the coast , we come to brion island again , where we stay till the begin of June , and towards the southeast of this island , we see a land , seem unto we as a island , we coast it about two league and a half , and by the way we have notice of three other high island , lie [ three . 231 . ] towards the sand : after we have know these thing we return to the cape of the say land , which do divide it self into two or three very high cape : the water there be very deep , and the flood of the sea run so swift , that it can possible be swift . that day we come to cape loreine , which be in forty seven degree and a half towards the south : on which cape there be a low land , and it seem that there be some entrance of a river , but there be no haven of any worth . 259 above these land we see another cape towards the south , we name it saint Paul cape , it be at 47 degree and a quarter . the Sunday follow , be the four of June , and Whitsonday , we have notice of the coast lie eastsoutheast , distant from the Newfoundland about two and twenty league : and because the wind be against we , we go to a haven , which we name saint spiritus porte , where we stay till Tewesday that we depart thence , sail along that coast until ! we come to saint Peter island . we find along the say coast many very dangerous island and shelf , which lie all in the way eastsoutheast and westnorthwest , about three and twenty league into the sea . while we be in the say saint Peter island we meet with many ship of France and of Britain , we stay there from saint Barnabas day , be the eleven of the month , until the sixteenth that we depart thence and come to cape raze , and enter into a port call Rognoso , where we take in fresh water , and wood to pass the sea : there we leave one of our boat . then upon Monday , be the nineteenth of June , we go from that port , and with such good and prosperous weather we sail along the sea , in such sort , that upon the sixth of July 1536 we come to the porte of saint Malo , by the grace of God , to who we pray , here end our navigation , that of his infinite mercy he will grant we his grace and favour , and in the end bring we to the place of everlasting felicity . amen . here follow the language of the country , and kingdom of Hochelaga and Canada , of we call new France : but first the name of their number . Secada encage Indahir 6 Tigneni 2 Aiaga 7 Hasche 3 Addigue 8 hannaion 4 madellon 9 Oviscon saint 260 assem 10 here follow the name of the chief part of man , and other word necessary to be know . the head aggonzi God cudragny the brow the eye hegueniascon higata give i " | some drink 1 quazahoaquea the ear abontascon give i to | [ f quaso hoa the mouth esahe breakfast j i [ quascaboa the tooth esgongay give i my ] 1 i quaza hoa | i quatfriam the tongue osnache supper i the throat a gonhon let we go ] 1 i casigno ag - [ ( nydahoa the beard hebelim to bed j the face h tegouascon a man aguehum the hair aganiscon a woman agruaste the arm ajayascon a boy addegesta the flank aissonne a wench agniaquesta thestomacke aggruascon a child exiasta the belly eschehenda a gown cabata the thigh < [ hetnegradas - l con a doublet Hosen caioza hemondoha the knee 1 agochine - [ godascon shoe a shirt atha amgoua the leg [ agouguene - i bind a cap corn castrua osizi the foot onchidascon bread carraconny [ hl 232 . ] the hand aignoascon water ame the finger agenoga flesh quahouascon the nail a gedascon Reisins queion a man 1 damson honnesta member baptize > ainoascon fig absconda a woman 1 grape ozoba member j > castaigne nut quahoya a eel esgueny a hen sahomgahoa a snail l indeguezi a lamprey zisto a tortoise heuleuxima a salmon ondacon wood conda a whale ainne honne leaf of ] i k ioga a goose sadeguenda Trees i r a street 6i add 2 Cucumber 1 seed i to morrow the heaven the earth the sun the moon the star the wind good morrow aignag let we go to play . come and i speak with i i baptize 1 casigno j ( caudy i i assigniquad - [ ( dadia look upon i 1 > quagathoma hold your 1 peace i let we go | with you boat i > aista 1 f casigno cas - j ( novy give i a ] knife j 1 ( buazahca ag - baptize ( oheda a hatchet a bow adogne ahenca casconda achide quenhia damga ysmay assomaha stagnehoham cohoha quahetan h casigno donnascat aionnesta asquenondo sourhanda agaya Canada agogasy coda cohena agacha honnesca camsa athau odazani azista quea canoca sahe adhotathny addathy adanahoe addagrim adhoasseve a dart let we go a hunt a stag a sheep a hare a dog a town the sea the wave of the sea a island a hill the ice snow cold hot fire smoke a house Beanes cinnamom my father my mother my brother my sister they of Canada say , that it be a month sail to go to a land where cinnamom and clove be gather . here end the relation of James Cartiers discovery and navigation toi the Newfoundlands , by he name new France .