of September , until the 16 of May 1536 , and there our ship remain dry , as we have say before . that place be pass , we find the habitation of the people call Teguenondahi , stand upon a high mountain , and the valley of hochelay , which stand in a champagne country . all the say country on both side of the river as far as hochelay and beyond , be as fair and plain as ever be see . there be certain mountain far distant from the say river , which be to be see above the foresay river fall town , from which mountain diverse river descend , from moun - which fall into the say great river . all that country ‘ be full of sundry sort of wood and many vine , unless it be about the place that be inhabit , where they have pull up the tree to till and labour the ground , and to build their house and lodging . there be great store of beast . stag , deer , bear , and other such like sort of beast , as cony , hare , martern , fox , otter , beaver , weasel , badger , and rat exceed great , and diverse other sort of wild beast . they cloth themselves with the skin of those beast , because they have nothing else to make they apparel ! withal . there be bird . also many sort of bird , as crane , swan , bustard , wild goose white and grey , duck , thrush , blackbird , turtle , wild pigeon , Lenites , finche , redbreast , stare , nightingale , sparrow , and other bird , 244 even as in France . also , as we have say before , the say river be the plentifull of fish that ever have of any man fish . be see or hear of , because that from the mouth to the end of it , accord to their season , you shall find all sort of fresh water fish and salt . there be also many whale , porpoise , seahorse , and adhothuis , which be a kind of fish that we have never see nor hear of before . they be as great as porpoise , as white as any snow , their body and head fashion as a grayhound , they be wont always to abide between the fresh and salt water , which begin between the river of Saguenay and Canada . of certain advertisement and note give unto we by those countryman , after our return from Hochelaga . Chap . 12 . after our return from Hochelaga , we deal , traffic , and with great familiarity and love be conversant with those that dwell near unto our ship , except that sometime we have strife and contention with certain naughty people , full sore against the will of the other . we understand of Donnacona and of other , that the say river be call the river of Saguenay , and go to ' Saguenay , be somewhat more than a league far westnorthwest , and that 8 or 9 day journey beyond , it will bear but small boat . but the right and ready the right way way to Saguenay be up that river to Hochelaga , and then t0 Saguenay . into another that come from Saguenay , and then enter into the foresay river , and that there be yet one month sail thither . Moreover , they tell we and give we to understand , that there be people clad with cloth as we be , very honest , and many inhabit town , and that they have great store of gold and red copper : and that tear ° f about the land beyond the say first river to Hochelaga read copper . and Saguenay , be a hand environ round about with that and other river , and that beyond Saguenay the say Twg or three river enter into two or 3 great lake , and that there be great lake . 245 the river of irrouacasfalling into the lake ofango - lesme . [ in . 226 , ] the english voyage a sea of fresh water find , and as they have hear say of those of Saguenay , there be never man hear of that find out the end thereof : for , as they tell we , they themselves be never there . Moreover they tell we , that where we have leave our pinnace when we go to Hochelaga , there be a river that go southwest , from whence there be a whole month sail to go to a certain land , where there be neither ice nor snow see , where the inhabitant do continual war one against another , where be great store of orange , almond , nut , and apple , with many other sort of fruit , and that the man and woman be clad with beast skin even as they : we ask they if there be any gold or red copper , they answer no . i take this place to be towards Florida , as far as i can perceive and understand by their sign and token . of a strange and cruel disease that come to the people of Stadacona , wherewith because we do haunt their company , we be so infect , that there die 25 of our company . Chap . 13 . in the month of December , we understand that the pestilence be come among the people of Stadacona , in such sort , that before we know of it , accord to their confession , there be dead above 50 : whereupon we charge they neither to come near our fort , nor about our ship , or we . and albeit we have drive they from we , the say unknown sickness begin to spread itself among we after the strange sort that ever be either hear of or see , insomuch as some do lose all their strength , and can not stand on their foot , then do their leg swell , their sinew shrink as black as any cole * other also have all their skin spot with spot of blood of a purple colour : then do it ascend up to their ankel , . knee , thigh , shoulder , arm , and neck : their mouth become stink , their gum so rot , that all the flesh do fall off , even to the root of the tooth , which . 246 do also almost all fall out . with such infection do this sickness spread it self in our three ship , that about the middle of February , of a hundred and ten person that we be , there be not ten whole , so that one can not help the other , a most horrible and pitiful case , consider the place we be in , forsomuch as the people of the country will daily come before our fort , and see but few of we . there be already eight dead , and more than fifty sick , and as we think , past all hope of recovery . our captain see this our misery , and that the sickness be go so far , ordain and command , that every one shall devout prepare himself to prayer , and in remembrance of Christ , cause his image to be set upon a tree , about a flight shoot from the fort amid the ice and snow , give all man to understand , that on the Sunday follow , service shall be say there , and that whosoever can go , sick or whole , shall go thither in procession , sing the seven psalm of David , with other litany , pray most hearty that it will please the say our Christ to have compassion upon we . service be do , and as well celebrate as we can , our captain there make a vow , that if it will please God to give he leave to return into France , he will go on pilgrimage to our lady of Rocquemado . that day Philip Rouge - mount , bear in Amboise , die , be 22 year old , and because the sickness be to we unknown , our captain cause he to be rip to see if by any mean possible we may know what it be , and so seek mean to save and preserve the rest of the company : he be find to have his heart white , but rot , and more than a quart of red water about it : his liver be indifferent fair , but his lung black and mortify , his blood be altogether shrink about the heart , so that when he be open great quantity of rot blood issue out from about his heart : his milt towards the back be somewhat perish , rough as if it have be rub against a stone . Moreover , because one of his thigh be very black without , it be 247 open , but within it be whole and sound : that do , as well as we can he be bury . in such sort do the sickness continue and increase , that there be not above three sound man in the ship , and none be able to go under hatch to draw drink for himself , nor for his fellow . sometime we be constrain to bury some of the dead under the snow , because we be not able to dig any grave for they the ground be so hard freeze , and we so weak . beside this , we do great fear that the people of the country will perceive our weakness and misery , which to hide , our captain , who it please God always to keep in health , will go out with two or three of the company , some sick and some whole , who when he see out of the fort , he will throw stone at they and chide they , feign that so soon as he come again , he will beat they , and then with sign show the people of the country that he cause all his man to work and labour in the ship , some in calk they , some in beat of chalk , some in one thing , and some in another , and that he will not have they come forth till their work be do . and to make his tale seem true and likely , he will make all his man whole and sound to make a great noise with knock stick , stone , hammer , and other thing together , at which time we be so oppress and grieve with that sickness , that we have lose all hope ever to see France again , if God of his infinite goodness and mercy have not with his pitiful eye look upon we , and reveal a singular and excellent remedy against all disease unto we , the best that ever be find upon earth , as hereafter shall follow . 248 how long we stay in the port of the holy cross amid the snow and ice , and how many die of the say disease , from the begin of it to the midst of march . Chap . 14 . from the midst of November until the midst of march , we be keep in amid the ice above two fathom thick , and snow above four foot high and more , high than the side of our ship , which last till that time , in such sort , that all our drink be freeze in the vessel , and the ice through all the ship be above a handbreadth thick , as well above hatch as beneath , and so much of the river as be fresh , even to Hochelaga , be freeze , in which space there die five and twenty of our best and chief man , and all the rest be so sick , that we think they shall never recover again , only three or four except . than it please God to cast his pitiful eye upon we , and send we the knowledge of remedy of our health and recovery , in such manner as in the next chapter shall be show . How by the grace of God we have notice of a certain [ he . 227 . ] tree , whereby we all recover our health : and the manner how to use it . Chap . 15 . our captain consider our estate ( and how that sickness be increase and hot among we ) one day go forth of the fort , and walk upon the ice , he see a troop of those countryman come from Stadacona , among which be Domagaia , who not pass ten or twelve day afore , have be very sick with that disease , and have his knee swell as big as a child of two year old , all his sinew shrink together , his tooth spoil , his gum rot , and stink . our captain see he whole and sound , be thereat marvellous glad , hope to understand and 249 a perfect remedy against the french pock . the english voyage know of he how he have heal himself , to the end he may ease and help his man . so soon as they be come near he , he ask Domagaia how he have do to heal himself : he answer , that he have take the juice and sap of the leaf of a certain tree , and therewith have heal himself : for it be a singular remedy against that disease . than our captain ask of he if any be to be have thereabouts , desire he to show he , for to heal a servant of he , who while he be in Canada with Donnacona , be strike with that disease : that he do because he will