very shallow , we return and sail down the river . how we come to the port of the holy cross , and in what state we find our ship : and how the lord of the country come to visit our captain , and our captain he : and of certain particular custom of the people . Chap . 9 upon Monday be the 11 of October we come to the port of the holy cross , where our ship be , and find that the master and mariner we have leave there , have make and rear a trench before the ship , altogether close with great piece of timber set upright [ three . 223 . i and very well fasten together : then have they beset the say trench about with piece of artillery and other necessary thing to shield and defend themselves from the power of all the country . so soon as the lord of the country hear of our come , the next day be the twelve of October , he come to visit we , accompany with Taignoagny , Domagaia and many other , feign to be very glad of our come , make 238 much of our captain , who as friendly as he can , entertain they , albeit they have not deserve it . Donnacona their lord desire our captain the next day to come and see Canada , which he promise to do : for the next day be the 13 of the month , he with all his gentleman and fifty mariner very well appoint , go to visit Donnacona and his people , about a league from our ship . the place where they make their abode be call Stadacona . when we be about a stone cast from their house , many of the inhabitant come to meet we , be all set in a rank , and ( as their custom be ) the man all on one side , and the woman on the other , still dance and sing without any cease : and after we have salute and receive one another , our captain give they knife and such other sleight thing : than he cause all the woman and child to pass along before he , give each one a ring of tin , for which they give he hearty thanks : that do , our captain be by Donnacona and Taignoagny , bring to see their house , which ( the quality consider ) be very well provide , and store with such victual as the country yield , to pass away the winter withal . than they show we the skin of five man head spread upon board as we do use parchment : Donnacona tell we that they be skin of Toudamani , a people dwell towards the south , who continual do war against they . Moreover they tell we , that it be two year past that those toudamans come to assault they , yea even into the say river , in a hand that lie over against Saguenay , where they have be the night before , as they be go a warfaring in Hognedo , with 200 person , man , woman , and child , who be all asleep in a fort that they have make , they be assault by the say Toudamans , who put fire round about the fort , and as they will have come out of it to save themselves , they be all slay , only five except , who escape . for which loss they yet sorrow , show Stadacona . Toudamani dwell southward of Canada . 239 with sign , that one day they will be revenge : that do , we come to our ship again . the manner how the people of that country live : and of certain condition : of their faith , manner , and custom . Chap . io . this people believe no whit in God , but in one who they call Cudruaigni : they say that often he speak with they and tell they what weather shall follow , whether good or bad . Moreover they say , that when he be angry with they he cast dust into their eye : they believe that when they die they go into the star , and thence by little and little descend down into the horizon , even as the star do , and that then they go into certain green field full of goodly fair and precious tree , flower , and fruit . after that they have give we these thing to understand , we show they their error , and tell that their Cudruaigni do but deceive they , for he be but a devil and a evil spirit : affirm unto they , that there be but one only God , who be in heaven , and who give we all necessary , be the creator of all himself , and that only we must believe in he : moreover , that it be necessary for we to be baptise , otherwise we be damn into hell . Theise and many other thing concern our faith and religion we show they , all which they do easy believe , call their Cudruaigni , Agouiada , that be to say , nought , so that very earnest they desire and pray our captain that he will cause they to be baptise , and their lord , and Taignoagny , doma - they desire io gaia , and all the people of the town come unto we , be baptize , hope to be baptise : but because we do not thorough know their mind , and that there be no body can teach they our belief and religion , we excuse our self , desire Taignoagny , and Domagaia , to tell the rest of their countryman , that he will come again another time , and bring priest and chrisome with we , for 240 without they they can not be baptise : which they do easy believe , for Domagaia and Taignoagny have see many child baptise in Britain while they be there . which promise when they hear they seem to be very glad . they live in common together : and of such commodity as their country yield they be indifferent well store , the inhabitant of the country cloth themselves with the skin of certain wild beast , but very miserable . in winter they be hose and shoe make of wild beast skin , and in summer they go barefooted . they keep and observe the rite of matrimony , save that every one wed 2 or 3 wife , which ( their husband be dead ) do never marry again , but for the death of their husband wear a certain black weed all the day of their life , besmear all their face with coaldust and grease mingle together as thick as the back of a knife , and by that they be know to be widow . they have a filthy [ three . 224 . ] and detestable use in marry of their maiden , and that be this , they put they all ( after they be of lawful age to marry ) in a common place , as harlot free for every man that will have to do with they , until such time as they find a match . this i say , because i have see by experience many house full of those damosel , even as our school be full of child in France to learn to read . Moreover , the misrule and riot that they keep in those house be very great , for very wanton they sport and dally together , show whatsoever God have send they . they be no man of great labour . they dig their ground with certain piece of wood , as big as half a sword , on which ground grow their corn , which they call Offici : it their Maiz . be as big as our small peason : there be great quantity of it grow in bresill . they have also great store of musk - millions , pompion , gourd , cucumber , peason and Beanes * of every colour , yet differ from we . there grow also a certain kind of herb , whereof in summer they make great provision for all the year , vin 241 q make great account of it , and only man use of it , and first they cause it to be dry in the sun , then wear it about their neck wrap in a little beast skin make like a little bag , with a hollow piece of stone or wood like a pipe : then when they please they make powder of it , and then put it in one of the end of the say cornet or pipe , and lay a coal of fire upon it , at the other end suck so long , that they fill their body full of smoke , till that it come out of their mouth and nostril , even as out of the tonnell of a chimney . they say that this do keep they warm and in health : they nev ^ r go without some of it about they . we our self have try the same smoke , and have put it in our mouth , it seem almost as hot as pepper . the woman of that country do labour much more than the man , as well in fish ( whereto they be great give ) as in till and husband their ground , and other thing : as well the man as woman and child , be very much more able to resist cold then savage beast , for we with our own eye have see some of they , when it be cold ( which cold be extreme raw and bitter ) come to our ship stark naked go upon snow and ice , which thing seem incredible to they that have not see it . when as the snow and ice lie on the ground , they take great store of wild beast , as faun , stag , bear , martern , hare and fox , with diverse other sort who flesh they eat raw , have first dry it in you sun or smoke , and so they do their fish . as far forth as we can perceive and understand by these people , it be a very easy thing to bring they to some familiarity and civility , and make they learn what one will . the lord God for his mercy sake set thereunto his help hand when he see cause . amen . 242 of the greatness and depth of the say river , and of the sort of beast , bird , fish , and other thing that we have see , with the situation of the place . Chap . 11 . the say river begin beyond the hand of the assumption , over against the high mountain of Hognedo , and of the seven hand . the distance over from one side to the other be about 35 or 40 league . in the midst it be above 200 fathom deep . the sure way to sail upon it be on the south side . and towards the north , that be to say , from the say 7 hand , from side to side , there be seven league distance , where be also two great river that come down from the hill of Saguenay , and make diverse very dangerous shelf in the sea . at the entrance of those two river we see many and great store of whale and sea horse . overthwart the say hand there be another little river that run along those marsh ground about 3 or 4 league , wherein there be great store of water fowl . from the entrance of that river to Hochelaga there be about 300 league distance : the originali beginning of it be in the river that come from Saguenay , which rise and spring among high and steep hill : it enter into that river before it come to the province of Canada on the north side . that river be very deep , high , and straight , wherefore it be very dangerous for any vessel to go upon it . after that river follow the province of Canada , wherein be many people dwell in open borough and village . there be also in the circuit and territory of Canada , along , and within the say river , many other hand , some great and some small , among which there be one that contain above ten league in length , full of goodly and high tree , and also many vine . you may go into it from both side , but yet the sure passage be on the south side . on the shore or bank of that river westward , there be a goodly , fair , and delectable bay or creek , convenient and fit for to 243 it be now find to be but 200 league . harbour ship . hard by there be in that river one place very narrow , deep , and swift run , but it be not pass the three part of a league , over against the which there be a goodly high piece of land , with a town therein : and the country about it be very well till and wrought , and as good as possible can be see . that be the place and abode of Donnacona , and of our two man we take in our first voyage , it be call Stadacona . but before we come to it , there be 4 other people town , [ three . 225 . ] that be to say , Ayraste , Starnatan , Tailla , which stand upon a hill , Scitadin , and then Stadagona , under which town towards the north the river and port of the holy cross be , where we stay from the 15