, build all of wood , cover over with the bark of the wood as broad as any board , very fine and cunning join together . within the say house , there be many room , lodging and chamber . in the midst of every one there be a great 232 court , in the middle whereof they make their fire . they live in common together : then do the husband , wife and child each one retire themselves to their chamber . they have also on the top of their house certain garret , wherein they keep their corn to make their bread withal : they call it carraconny , which they make as hereafter shall follow . they have certain piece of wood , make hollow like those whereon we beat our hemp , and with certain beetle of wood they beat their corn to powder : than they make paste of it , and of the paste , cake or wreathe , than they lie they on a broad and hot stone , and then cover it with hot stone , and so they bake their bread in stead of oven . they make also sundry sort of pottage with the say corn and also of pease and of bean , whereof they have great store , as ... - ... 0 - cumber , and also with other fruit , as musk - millions , and very great other fruit . cucumber . they have also in their house certain vessel as big as any but or tun , wherein they preserve and keep their fish , cause the same in summer to be dry in the sun , and live therewith in winter , whereof they make great provision , as we by experience have see . all their viand and meat be without any taste or savour of salt at all . they sleep upon bark of tree lay all along upon the ground be overspread with the skin of certain wild beast , wherewith they also cloth and cover themselves . the thing most precious that they have in all the world they call Asurgny : it be as white as any snow : they take it in the say river of Cornibotz , in the manner follow . when any one have deserve death , or that they take any of their enemy in war , first they kill he , then with certain knife they give great slash and stroke upon their buttock , flank , thigh , and shoulder : then they cast the same body so mangle down to the bottom of the river , in a place where the say Esurgny be , and there leave it ten dr 12 hour , than they take it up again , and in the cut find the say Esurgny or Cornibotz . of they they make bead , and wear they about their 233 Matz , pease , bean , muskmillton , cu - plenty offish and the preserve thereof . [ Iii . 221 . ] neck , even as we do chain of gold and silver , account it the precious thing in the world . they have this virtue and property in they , they will stop or staunch bleed at the nose , for we have prove it . Theise people be give to no other exercise , but only to husbandry and fish for their sustenance : they have no care of any other wealth or commodity in this world , for they have no knowledge of it , and that be , because they never travel and go out of their country , as those of Canada and Saguenay do , albeit the Canadians with eight or nine village more alongst that river be subject unto they . how we come to the town of Hochelaga , and the entertainment which there we have , and of certain gift which our captain give they , with diverse other thing . Chap . 8 . so soon as we be come near the town , a great number of the inhabitant thereof come to present themselves before we after their fashion , make very much of we : we be by our guide bring into the midst of the town . they have in the middlemost part of their house a large square place , be from side to side a good stone cast , whither we be bring , and there with sign be command to stay : then sudden all the woman and maiden of the town gather themselves together , part of which have their arm full of young child , and as many as can came to rub our race , our arm , and what part of the body soever they can touch , weep for very joy that they see we , show we the best countenance that possible they can , desire we with their sign , that it will please we to touch their child . that do , the man cause the woman to withdraw themselves back , than they every one sit down on the ground round about we , as if they will have show and rehearse some comedy or other show : then present come the woman again , 234 every one bring a four square mat in manner of carpet , and spread they abroad on the ground in that place , they cause we to sit upon they . that do , the lord and king of the country be bring upon 9 or 10 man shoulder , ( who in their tongue they call Agouhanna ) sit upon a great stag skin , and they lay he down upon the foresay mat near to the captain , every open beckon unto we that he be their lord and king . This Agouhanna be a man about fifty year old : he be no whit better apparel than any of the rest , only except , that he have a certain thing make of the skin of hedgehog like a red wreath , and that be in stead of his crown . he be full of the palsy , and his member shrink together . after he have with certain sign salute our captain and all his company , and by manifest token bid all welcome , he show his leg and arm to our captain , and with sign desire he to touch they , and so he do , rub they with his own hand : then do Agouhanna take the wreath or crown he have about his head , and give it unto our captain : that do they bring before he diverse disease man , some blind , some cripple , some lame and impotent , and some so old that the hair of their eyelid come down and cover their cheek , and lay they all along before our captain , to the end they may of he be touch : for it seem unto they that God be descend and come down from heaven to heal they . our captain see the misery and devotion of this poor people , recite the gospel of saint John , that be to say , in the beginning be the word ; touch every one that be disease , pray to God that it will please he to open the heart of this poor people , and to make they know his holy word , and that they may receive baptism and Christendom : that do , he take a service - book in his hand , and with a loud voice read all the passion of Christ , word by word , that all the standard by may hear he : all which while this poor people keep silence , and be 235 marvellous attentive , look up to heaven , and imitate we in gesture . than he cause the man all orderly to be set on one side , the woman on another , and likewise the child on a other , and to the chief of they he give hatchet , to the other knife , and to the woman bead and such other small trifle . then where you child be , he cast ring , counter , and brooch make of tin , [ three . 222 . ] whereat they seem to be very glad . that do , our captain command trumpet and other musical instrument to be sound , which when they hear , they be very merry . than we take our leave and go to our boat : the woman see that , put themselves before to stay we , and bring we out of their meat that they have make ready for we , as fish , pottage , bean , and such other thing , think to make we eat , and dine in that place : but because the meat have no savour at all of salt , we like they not , but thank they , and with sign give they to understand that we have no need to eat . when we be out of the town , diverse of the man and woman follow we , and bring we to the top mount royal . of the foresay mountain , which we name mount royal , it be about a league from the town . when as we be on the top of it , we may discern and a ridge of plain see thirty league about . on the northside of mountain to ; it there be many hill to be see run west and Hochelaga h . ast , and as many more on the south , among and and another between the which the country be as fair and as to the south , pleasant as possible can be see , be level , smooth , and very plain , fit to be husband and till : and in the midst of those field we see the river further up a great way than where we have leave our boat , where be the great and the swift fall of water that any where have be see , and as great , wide and large as our sight may discern , go Southwest along three fair the 3 fault and round mountain that we see , as we judge about late in ? afteene league from we . those which bring we degree of ^ thither tell and show we , that in the say river there latitude . be three such fall of water more , as that be where we 236 1535 - had leave our boat : but because we can not understand their language , we can not know how far they be one from another . Moreover they show we with sign , that the say three false be pass , a man may sail the space of three month more alongst that river , and that along the hill that be on the north side there be a great river , which ( even as the other ) come from the west , we think it to be the river that run 2 % mor of through the country of Saguenay : and without any a & uenay sign or question move or ask of they , they take west the chain of our captain whistle , which be of silver , where there be and the dagger - haft of one of our fellow mariner , gold and hang on his side be of yellow copper guilt , and show we that such stuff come from the say river , and that there be Agouionda , that be as much to say , as evil people , who go all arm even to their finger end . also they show we the manner and make of their armour : they be make of cord and wood , fine and cunning wrought together . they give we also to understand that those Agouionda do continual war one against another , but because we do not understand they well , we can not perceive how far it be to that country . our captain show they red copper , which in their language they call caignetadze , and look toward that country , with sign ask they if any come from thence , they shake their head answer no : but they show we that it come from Saguenay , and that lie clean contrary to the other . Red copper in after we have hear and see these thing of they , we draw to our boat accompany with a great multitude of those people : some of they when as they see any of our fellow weary , will take they up on their shoulder , and carry they as on horseback . so soon as we come to our boat we hoist sail to go towards our pinnace , doubt of some mischance . our departure grieve and displease they very much , for they follow we along the river as far as they can : we go so fast that on Monday be the four of October 237 we come where our pinnace be . the Tuesday follow be the five of the month , we hoist sail , and with our pinnace and boat depart from thence towards the province of Canada , to the port of the holy cross , where we have leave our ship . the seven day we come against a river that come from the north , and enter into that river , at the entrance whereof be four little hand full of fair and goodly tree : we name that river the river of Fovetz : but because one of those island stretch it self a great way into the river , our captain at the point of it cause a goodly great cross to be set up , and command the boat to be make ready , that with the next tide he may go up the say river , and consider the quality of it , which we do , and that day go up as far as we can : but because we find it to be of no importance , and