a short and brief narration of the navigation make by the commandment of the king of France , to the island of Canada , Hochelaga , Saguenay , and diverse other which now be call new France , with the particular custom , and manner of the inhabitant therein . Chap . i . n the year of our lord 1535 , upon Whitsunday , be the 16 . of may , by the commandment of our captain James Cartier , and with a common accord , in the cathedral church of S . Malo we devout each one confess our self , and receive the sacrament : and all enter into the quire of the say church , we present our self before the reverend father in Christ , the lord bishop of S . Malo , who bless we all , be in his bishop robe . the Wednesday follow , be the 19 of may , there arise a good gale of wind , and therefore we hoist sail with three ship , that be to say , the great Hermina , be in burden about a hundredth , or a hundred and twenty ton , wherein the foresay captain James Cartier be general , and master Thomas Frosmont chief master , accompany with master Claudius de Pont Briand , son to the lord of Montcevell , and cupbearer to the dolphin of France , Charles of pomeray , John Powlet , and other gentleman . in the second ship call the little Hermina , be of 210 threescore ton burden , be captain under the say Cartier , mace Salobert , and master William marry . in the three ship call the Hermerillon , be of forty ton in burden , be captain m . William Britton , and m . James Maingare . so we sail with a good and prosperous wind , until the 20 of the say month , at which time the weather turn into storm and tempest , the which with contrary wind , and darkness , endure so long that our ship be without any rest , suffer as much as any ship that ever go on sea : so that the 25 of June , by reason of that foul and foggy weather , all our ship lose sight one of another again till we come to newfound land where we have appoint to meet . after we have lose one another , we in the general ship be with contrary wind toss to and fro on the sea , until the seven of July , upon which day we arrive in new find land , and come to the island call the island of bird , which lie from the main land 14 league . this island be so full of bird , that all our ship may easy have be freight with they , and yet for the great number that there be , it will not seem that any be take away . we to victuali our self fill two boat of they . this island have the pole elevate 49 degree , and 40 minute . upon the eight of the say month we sail further , and with a prosperous weather come to the port call the port of white sand , that be in the bay call the bay of castle , where we have purpose to meet and stay together the 15 of the say month . in this place therefore we look for our fellow , that be to say , the other two ship , till the 26 of the month , on which day both come together . so soon as our fellow be come , we set our ship in a readiness , take in both water , wood , and other necessary . and then on the 29 of the say month , early in the morning we hoist sail to pass on further , and sail along the northern coast that run north - east and Southwest , till two hour after sunset or thereabouts , than we cross along two island , which 211 the isle oj bird in 49 degree 40 minute . the bay des chaste aux ere the grand bay the english voyage do stretch further forth than the other , which we call saint William island , be distant about 20 league or more from the port of breast . all the coast from the castle to that place lie east and west , Northeast and Southwest , have between it sundry little island , altogether barren and full of stone , without either earth or tree , except certain valley only . the next day be the 30 of July , we sail on westward to find out other island which as yet we have not find 12 league and a half , among which there be a great bay towards the north all full of island and great creek where many good harborough seem to be : they we name saint Martha island , from which about a league and a half further into the sea there be a dangerous shallow , wherein be five rock , which lie from saint Martha island about seven league as you pass into the say island , on the east and on the west side , to which we come the say day a hour after noon , and from that hour until midnight we sail about fifteen league athwart a cape of the low island , which we name saint germane island southeastward , from which place about three league , there be a very dangerous shallow . likewise between saint germane cape and saint Martha , about two league from the say island , there lie a bank of sand , upon which bank the water be but four fathom deep , and therefore see the danger of the coast , we strike sail and go no further that night : the next day be the last of July , we go all along the coast that run east and west , and somewhat southeasterly which be all environ about with island and dry sand , and in truth be very dangerous . the length from saint germane cape to the say island be about 17 league and a half , at the end of which there be a goodly plot of ground full of huge and high tree , albeit the rest of the coast be compass about with sand without any sign or show of harborough , till we come to cape thiennot , which trend northwest about seven league from the foresay island , which cape thiennot we note in 212 our former voyage , and therefore we sail on all that night west and westnorthwest , till it be day , and then the wind turn against we , wherefore we go to seek a haven wherein we may harbour our ship , and by good hap , find one fit for our purpose , about seven league and a half beyond cape thiennot , and that we name saint Nicholas haven , it lie amid 4 island that stretch into the sea : upon the near we for a token Nicholas . set up a wooden cross . but note by the way , that this cross must be bring Northeast , and then bend towards it , leave it on the left hand and you shall find six fathom water , and within the haven four . also you be to take heed of two shelf that lean outward half a league . all this coast be full of should and very dangerous , albeit in sight many good haven seem to be there , yet be there nought else but shelf and sand . we stale and rest our self in the say haven , until the seven of August be Sunday : on which day we hoist sail , and come towards land on the south side towards cape Rabast , distant from the cape Rabast . say haven about twenty league northnortheast , and southsouthwest : but the next day there rise a stormy and a contrary wind , and because we can find no haven there towards the south , thence we go coast along towards the north , beyond the abovesaid haven about ten league , where we find a goodly great gulf , full of island , passage , and entrance towards what wind soever you please to bend : for the knowledge of this gulf there be a great island that be like to a cape of land , stretch somewhat further forth than the other , and about two league within the land , there be a hill fashion as it be a heap of corn . we name the say gulf saint Laurence his bay . the twelve of they the gulf of say month we go from the say saint Laurence s - laurence - his bay , or gulf , sail westward , and discover a cape of land towards the south , that run west and cape of by south , distant from the say saint Laurence his we of bay , about five and twenty league . and of the two tm " 213 wild man which we take in our former voyage , it be tell we , that this be part of the southern coast , and that there be a island , on the southerly part of which be the way to go from honguedo ( where the year before we have take they ) to Canada , and that two day journey from the say cape , and island begin the kingdom of Saguenay , on the north shore extend towards Canada , and about three league athwart the say a mighty cape , there be above a hundred fathom water . Moreover shale i believe that there be never so many whale see ‘ as we see that day about the say cape . the next day after be our lady day of August the fifteen of the month , have pass the straight , we have notice of certain land that we leave towards the south , which land be full of very great and high hill , and this the isle of cape we name the island of the assumption , and Assumption . one qape of the sajj high country lie Eastnortheast , and westsouthwest , the distance between which be about five and twenty league . the country lie north may plain be perceive to be high than the southerly , more than thirty league in length . we trended the say land about towards the south : from the say day until Tewesday noon follow , the wind come west , and therefore we bend towards the north , purpose to go and see the land that we before have spy . be arrive there , we find the say land , as it be join together , and low towards the sea and the northerly mountain that be upon the say low land stretch east , and west , and a quarter of the south . our wild man tell we that there be the begin of Saguenay , and that it be land inhabit , and that thence come the red copper , of they name caignetdaze . there be between the southerly land , and the northerly about thirty league distance , the mouth of and more than two hundred fathom depth . the say ocheu f man moreover certify unto we , that there be then about thirty and begin of the great river of Hochelaga league broad , and ready way to Canada , which river the further it 214 go the narrow it come , even into Canada , and that then there be fresh water , which go so far upward , that they have never hear of any man who have go to the head of it , and that there be no other passage but with small boat . our captain hear their talk , and how they do affirm no other passage to be there , will not at that time proceed any further , till he have see and note the other land , and coast towards the north , which he have omit to see from saint Laurence his gulf , because he will know , if between the land towards the north any passage may be discover . how our captain cause the ship to return back [ three . 214 . ] again , only to know if in saint Laurence gulf there be any passage towards the north . Chap . 2 . upon the 18 of August be Wednesday , our captain cause his ship to wind back , and bend towards the other shore , so that we trended the say northerly cost , which run Northeast and Southwest , be fashion like unto half a bow , and be a very high land , but yet not so high as that on the south part . the Thursday follow we come to seven very the seven high island , which we name the round island . Theise islesislands be distant from the south shore about 40 league , and stretch out into the sea about 3 or 4 league . against these there be goodly low ground to be see full of goodly tree , which we then Friday follow , with our boat compass about . overthwart these land there be diverse sandy shelf more than two league into the sea , very dangerous , which at a low water remain almost dry . at the further bound of these low land , that contain about ten league , there be a river of fresh water , that with such swiftness run a swift river . into the sea , that for the space of one league within it the water be as fresh as any fountain water . we with our boat enter into the say river , at the entrance of which we find about one fathom and a half of water . 215 sea - horse . there be in this river many fish shape like horse , which as our wild man tell we