not show the number of his sick man . Domagaia straight send two woman to fetch some of it , which bring ten or twelve branch of it , and therewithal ! show the way how to use it , and that be thus , to take the bark and leaf of the say tree , and boil they together , then to drink of the say decoction every other day , and to put the dregs of it upon his leg that be sick : moreover , they tell we , that the virtue of that tree be , to heal any other disease : the tree be in their language call Ameda or Hanneda , this be think to be the sassafras tree . our captain present cause some of that drink to be make for his man to drink of it , but there be none dare taste of it , except one or two , who venture the drink of it , only to taste and prove it : the other see that do the like , and present recover their health , and be deliver of that sickness , and what other disease soever , in such sort , that there be some have be disease and trouble with the french pock four or five year , and with this drink be clean heal . after this medicine be find and prove to be true , there be such strife about it , who shall be first to take of it , that they be ready to kill one another , so that a tree as big as any oak in France be spoil and lop bare , and occupy all in five or six day , and it wrought so well , that if all the physician of Mountpelier and Louvain have be there with all the drug of Alexan - 250 dria , they will not have do so much in one year , as that tree do in six day , for it do so prevail , that as many as use of it , by the grace of God recover their health . how the lord Donnacona accompany with Taignoagny and diverse other , feign that they will go to hunt stag , and deer , tarry out two month , and at their return bring a great multitude of people with they , that we be not wont to see before . A . D . * 535 - Chap . 16 . while that disease last in our ship , the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , with many other go from home , feign that they will go to catch stag and deer , which be in their tongue call Ajounesta , and asquenoudo , because the ice and snow be not so break along the river that they can sail : it be tell we of Domagaia and other , that they will stay out but a fortnight , and we believe it , but they stay above two month , which make we mistrust that they have be go to raise the country to come against we , and do we some displeasure , we see our self so weak and faint . albeit we have use such diligence and policy in our fort , that if all the power of the country have be about it , they can have do nothing but look upon we : and while they be forth , many of the people come daily to our ship , and bring we fresh meat , as stag , deer , fish , with diverse other thing , but hold they at such a excessive price , that rather then they will sell they any thing cheap , many time they will carry they back again , because that year the winter be very long , and they Alongwmter . have some scarcity and need of they . [ how Donnacona 25x how Donnacona come to Stadacona again with a great number of people , and because he will not come to visit our captain , feign himself to be sore sick , which he do only to have the captain come see he . Chap . 17 . on the one and twenty day of April Domagaia come to the shore side , accompany with diverse lusty and strong man , such as we be not wont to see , and tell we that their lord Donnacona will the next day come and see we , and bring great store of dear flesh , and other thing with he . the next day he come and bring a great number of man to Stadacona , to what end , and for what cause we know not , but ( as the proverb say ) he that take heed and shield himself from all man , may hap to escape from some : for we have need to look about we , consider how in number we be diminish , and in strength great weaken , both by reason of our sickness and also of the number that be dead , so that we be constrain to leave one of our ship in the port of the holy cross . our captain be warn of their come , and how they have bring a great number of man with they , for Domagaia come to tell it we , and dare not pass the river that be betwixt Stadacona and we , as he be wont to do , whereupon we mistrust some treason . our captain see this , send one of his servant to they , accompany with John Poulet be best belove of those people , to see who be there , and what they do . the say Poulet and the other feign themselves only to be come to visit Donnacona , and bring he certain present , because they have be together a good while in the say donnaconas town . so soon as he hear of their come , he get himself to bed , feign to be very sick . that do , they go to Taignoagny his house to see he , and wheresoever they go , they see so many people , that in a manner one 252 can not stir for another , and such man as they be never wont to see . Taignoagny will not permit our man to enter into any other house , but still keep they company , and bring they half way to their ship , and tell they that if it will please our captain to show he so much favour as to take a lord of the country , who name be agonna , of who he have receive some displeasure , and carry he with he into France , he shall therefore for ever be bind unto he , and will do for he whatsoever he will command he , and bid the servant come again the next day , and bring a answer . our captain be advertise of so many people that be there , not know to what end , purpose to play a pretty prank , that be to say , to take their lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and some more of the chief of they prisoner , in so much as before he have purpose , to bring they into France , to show unto our king what he have see in those western part , and marvel of the world , for that Donnacona have tell we , that he have be in the country of Saguenay , in which be infinite ruby , gold , and other riches , and Rubles , gold , that there be white man , who clothe themselves with woollen cloth even as we do in France . Moreover he riches in report , that he have be in another country of a Saguenay . people call picquemians , and other strange people . a people call the say lord be a old man , and even from his picquemians . childhood have never leave off nor cease from travail into strange country , as well by water and river , as by land . the say Poulet , and the other have tell our captain their embassage , and show he what Taignoagny his will be , the next day he send his servant again to bid Taignoagny come and see he , and show what he shall , for he shall be very well entertain , and also part of his will shall be accomplish . Taignoagny send he word , that the next day he will come and bring the lord Donnacona with he , and he that have so offend he , which he do not , but stay two day , in which time none come from Stadacona to 253 our ship , as they be wont to do , but rather flee from we , as if we will have slay they , so that than we plain perceive their knavery . the town of but because they understand , that those of Sidatin do tdatm . frequent our company , and that we have forsake the bottom of a ship which we will leave , to have the old nail out of it , the three day follow they come from Stadacona , and most of they without difficulty do pass from one side of the river to the other with small skiff : but Donnacona will not come over : Taignoagny , and Domagaia stand talk together above a hour before they will come over , at last they come to speak with our captain . there Taignoagny pray he that he will cause the foresay man to be take and carry into France . our captain refuse to do it , say , that his king have forbid he to bring any man or woman into France , only that he may bring two or three young boy to learn the language , but that he will willing carry he to Newfoundland , and there leave he in a island . our captain speak this , only to assure they , that they shall bring Donnacona with they , who they have leave on the other side : which word , when Taignoagny hear , he be very glad , think he shall never return into France again , and therefore promise to come the next day , which be the day of the holy cross , and to bring Donnacona and all the people with he . [ Iii . 229 . ] how that upon Holy - rood day our captain cause a cross to be set up in our fort : and how the lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , Domagaia , and other of their company come : and of the take of the say lord . Chap . 18 . the three of May be Holyroode day , our captain for the solemn nitie of the day , cause a goodly fair cross of 35 foot in height to be set up , under the crosset of which he cause a shield to be hang , 254 wherein be the arm of France , and over they be write in antique letter , Franciscus primus dei gratia francorum rex regnat . and upon that day about noon , there come a great number of the people of Stadacona , man , woman , and child , who tell we that their lord Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia be come , whereof we be very glad , hope to retain they . about two of the clock in the afternoon they come , and be come near our ship , our captain go to salute Donnacona , who also show he a merry countenance , albeit very fearful his eye be still bend towards the wood . Shortly after come Taignoagny , who bid Donnacona that he shall not enter into our fort , and therefore fire be bring forth by one of our man , Sc kindle where their lord be . our captain pray he to come into our ship to eat and drink as he be wont to do , and also Taignoagny , who promise , that after a while he will come , and so they do , and enter into our ship : but first it be tell our captain by Domagaia that Taignoagny have speak ill of he , and that he have bid Donnacona he shall not come aboard our ship . our captain perceive that , come out of the fort , and see that only by Taignoagny his warning the woman run away , and none but man stay in great number , wherefore he straight command his man to lay hold on Donnacona , Taignoagny , and Domagaia , and Donnacona , two more of the chief who he point unto : then Taignoagny , he command they to make the other to retire . present after , the say lord enter into the fort with the captain , but by and by Taignoagny come to make he come out again . our captain see that there be no other remedy , begin to call unto they to take they , at who cry and voice all his man come forth , and take the say lord with the other , who they have appoint to take . the Canadians see their lord take , begin to run away , even as sheep before the wolf , some cross over the river , some through the wood , each one seek for his own advantage . that 255 four and twenty chain of Esurgny the english voyage do , we retire our self , and lay up the prisoner under good guard and safety . how the say Canadians the night follow come before our ship to seek their man , cry and howl all night like wolves : of the talk and conclusion they agree upon the next day : and of the gift which they give our captain . Chap . 19 the night follow they come before our ship , ( the river be betwixt we ) strike their breast , and cry and howl like wolf