, all the day long lie in the water , and the night on land : of which we see therein a great number . the next day be the 21 of the month , by break of day we hoist sail , and sail so long along the say coast , that we have sight of the rest of the say northern coast , which as yet we have the isle of not see , and of the island of the assumption which Assumption , we go to discover , depart from the say land : ' which thing so soon as we have do , and that we be certify not other passage to be there , we come to our ship again , which we have leave at the say island , where be a good harbour , the water be about nine or ten fathom . in the same place by occasion of contrary wind and foggy mist , we be constrain to stay , not be either able to come out of it , or hoist sail , till the 24 of the month : on which day we depart and come to a haven on the southerly coast about 80 league from a haven on the say island . this haven be over against three flat the southern isiand that lie amid the river , because on the midway ’ between those island , and the say haven towards the great north , there be a very great river that run between rwer ' the high and low land , and more than three league into the sea it have many shelf , and there be not altogether two fathom water , so that the place be very dangerous : and near unto the say shelf , there be either fifteen or 20 fathom from shore to shore . all the northerly coast run north - east and by north , and Southwest 8c by south . the say haven wherein we stay on the south side , be as it be but a sluice of the water that rise by the flood , 8c but of small saint Johns islet , account : we name they saint Johns islet , because we find they , 8c enter into they the day of the behead of that saint . and before you come to the say haven , there be a island lie eastward about 5 league distant from the same : between which and the land there be no passage save only for small boat . the haven of saint Johns islet dry up all the water that rise 216 by flow , although they flow two fathom at the least . the best place to harbour ship therein be on the south part of a little island that be over against the say haven , whereby the bank or shore of the island rise . upon the first of September we depart out of the say haven , purpose to go towards Canada ; and about 15 league from it towards the west , and westsouthwest , amid the river , there be three island , over against the which there be a river which run swift , and be of a great depth , and it be that which lead , and run into the country and kingdom of Saguenay , as by the two wild man of Canada it be tell we . this river pass and run along very high and steep hill of bare stone , where very little earth be , and notwithstanding there be great quantity of sundry sort of tree that grow in the say bare stone , even as upon good and fertile ground , in such sort that we have see some so great as well will suffice to make a mast for a ship of 30 ton burden , and as green as possible can be , grow in a stony rock without any earth at all . at the entrance of the say river we meet with 4 boat full of wild man , which as far as we can perceive , very fearful come towards we , so that some of they go back again , and the other come as near we as easy they may hear and understand one of our wild man , who tell they his name , and then take acquaintance of they , upon who word they come to we . the next day be the 2 of September , we come out of the say river to go to Canada , and by reason of the sea flow , the tide be very swift and dangerous , for that on the south part of it there lie two island , about which , more than three league compass , lie many rock and great stone , and but two fathom water : and the flow amid those island be very unconstant and doubtful , so that if it have not be for our boat , we have be in great dailger to lose our pinnace : and coast along the say dry sand , there be more than 30 fathom water . 217 this be the river of Tadascu or of Saguenay . [ Iii . 215 . ] about five league beyond the river of Saguenay Southwest , there be another hand on the northside , aguenay . wherein be certain high land , and thereabouts we think to have cast anchor , on purpose to stay the next tide , but we can sound no ground in a 120 fathom , within a flight shoot from shore , so that we be constrain to wind back to the say hand , where we sound again and find 3 5 fathom . the next morning we hoist sail and go thence , sail further on , where we have notice of a certain kind of fish never before of any man see or know . they be about the bigness of a porpose , yet nothing like they , of body very well proportion , head like grayhound , altogeth as white as snow without any spot , within which river there be great quantity of they : they do live altogether between the sea and the fresh water . Theise people of the country call they Adhothuys , they tell we that they be very savoury and good to be eat . Moreover they affirm none to be find elsewhere but in the mouth of that river . the six of the month , the weather be calm and fair , we go about 15 league more upward into the river , and there light on a hand that look northward , and it make a little innumerable haven or creek wherein be many and innumerable great tortoise . tortoyze , continual lie about that hand . there be likewise great quantity of the say Adhothuys take by the inhabitor of the country , and there be as great a current in that place as be at Bourdeaux in France at every tide . this hand be in length about three league , and in breadth two , and be a goodly and fertile plot of ground , replenish with many goodly and great tree of many sort . among the rest there be many filbert - tree , which we find hang full of they , somewhat big and better in savour than we , but somewhat than we of hard , and therefore we call it the hand of filbert . iaerds ^ sevent ^ month be our lady even , after ‘ service we go from that hand to go up high into the river , and come to 14 hand seven or eight league 218 from the hand of filbert , where the country of Canada begin , one of which land be ten league in length , and five in breadth , great inhabit of such man as only live by fish of such sort of fish as the river afford , accord to the season of they . after we have cast anchor between the say great hand , and the this great northerly coast , we go on land and take our two wild man with we , meet with many or those country qriean 0 people , who will not at all approach unto we , but rather flee from we , until our two man begin to speak unto they , tell they that they be Taignoagny and Domagaia , who so soon as they have take acquaintance of they , begin great to rejoice , dance and show many sort of ceremony : and many of the chief of they come to our boat and bring many eel and other sort of fish , with two or three burden of great millet Matz . wherewith they make their bread , and many great musk million . the same day come also many other boat full of those countryman and woman , to see and take acquaintance of our two man , all which be as courteous receive and friendly entertain of our captain , as possible can be . and to have they the better acquaint with he , and make they his friend , he give they many small gift , but of small value : nevertheless they be great content with they . the next day follow , the lord of Canada ( who proper name be Donnacona , but by the name of lord they call he Agouhanna ) with twelve boat come to our ship , accompany with many people , who cause ten of his boat to go back with the other two , approach unto we with sixteen man . then begin the say Agouhanna over against the small of our ship , accord to their manner and fashion , to frame a long oration , move all his body and member after a strange fashion , which thing be a ceremony and sign of gladness and security among they , and then come to the general ship , where Taignoagny and Domagaia be , he speak with they and they with he , where they begin 219 to tell and show unto he what they have see in France , and what good entertainment they have have : hear which thing the say lord seem to be very glad thereof , and pray our captain to reach he his arm , that he may kiss it , which thing he do : their lord take it , lay it about his neck , for so they use to do when they will make much of one . than our captain enter into agouhannas boat , cause bread and wine to be bring to make the say lord and his company to eat and drink , which thing they do , and be great thereby content and satisfy . our captain for that time give they nothing , because he look for a fit opportunity . Theise thing be do , each one take leave of other , and the say lord go with his boat again to his place of abode . our captain then cause our boat to be set in order , that with the next tide he may go up high into the river , to find some safe harbour for our ship : and we pass up the river against the stream about ten league , coast the say hand , at the end whereof , we find a goodly and pleasant sound , where be a little river and haven , where by reason of the flood there be about three fathom water . this place seem to we very fit and commodious to harbour our ship therein , and so we do very safe , Santa Croix , we name it the holy cross , for on that day we come [ three . 216 . ] thither . near unto it , there be a village , whereof donna - cona be lord , and there he keep his abode : it be call Stadacona . Stadacona , as goodly a plot of ground as possible may be see , and therewithal ! very fruitful , full of goodly tree even as in France , as Okes , elm , ash , walnut tree , maple tres , cydron , vine , and white thorn , that bring forth fruit as big as any damson , and many other sort of tree , under which grow as fair tall goodly hemp , hemp , as any in France , without any seed or any man work or labour at all . have consider the place , and find it fit for our purpose , our captain withdraw himself on purpose to return to our ship : but behold , as we be come out of the river we meet come 220 against we one of the lord of the say village of stada - cona , accompany with many other , as man , woman , and child , who after the fashion of their country , in sign of mirth and joy , begin to make a long oration , the woman still sing and dance up to the knee in water . our captain know their good will and kindness towards we , cause the boat wherein they be , to come unto he , and give they certain trifle , as knife , and bead of glass , whereat they be marvellous glad , for be go about three league from they , for the pleasure they conceive of our come , we may hear they sing , and see they dance for all they be so far . how our captain go to see and note the bigness of the hand , and the nature of it , and then return to the ship , cause they to be bring to the river of the holy cross . Chap . 3 . after we be come with our boat unto our ship again , our captain cause our bark to be make ready to go on land in the say hand , to note the tree that in show seem so fair , and to consider the nature and