time the assembly be hold at Chawanook about we , as i find at my come thither , which be unlooked for do so dismay they , as it make we have the better hand at they . but this confederacy against we of the choanist and Mangoaks be altogether and whole procure by Pemisapan him - 326 self , as Menatonon confess unto i , who send they continual word , that our purpose be full bend to destroy they : on the other side he tell i , that they have the like meaning towards we . he in like sort have send word to the mangoak of my intention to pass up into their river , and to kill they ( as he say ) both they and the moratok , with who before we be enter into a league , and they have ever deal kind with we , abandon their town along the river , and retire themselves with their * crenepos , and their corn within the main : * then - insomuch as have pass three day voyage up the women ‘ river , we can not meet a man , nor find a grain of corn in any their town : whereupon consider with my self that we have but two day victuali leave , and that we be then 160 . mile from home , beside casualty of contrary wind or storm , and suspect treason of our own Savages in the discovery of our voyage intend , though we have no intention to be hurtful to any of they , otherwise then for our [ three . 258 . ] copper to have have corn of they : i at night upon the corpse of guard , before the put forth of centinel , advertise the whole company of the case we stand in for victuali , and of my opinion that we be betray by our own Savages , and of purpose draw forth by they upon vain hope to be in the end starve , see all the country flee before we , and therefore while we have those two day victuali leave , 1 thought it good for we to make our ■ return homeward , and that it be necessary for we to get the other side of the sound of weopomeiok in time , where we may be relieve upon the wear of Chypanum , and the woman town , although the people be flee . thus much i signify unto they , as the safe way : nevertheless i do refer it to the great number of voice , whether we shall adventure the spend of our whole victuali in some further view of that most goodly river in hope to meet with some better hap , 327 a marvellous mineral in the country of Chaunls Temoatan . the english voyage or otherwise to retire our self back again . and for that they may be the better advise , i will they to deliberate all night upon the matter , and in the morning at our go aboard to set our course accord to the desire of the great part . their resolution full and whole be ( and not three find to be of the contrary opinion ) that while there be leave but one half pint of corn for a man , we shall not leave the search of that river , and that there be in the company two mastiff , upon the pottage of which with sassafras leave ( if the worst fell out ) the company will make shift to live two day , which time will bring they down the current to the mouth of the river , and to the entry of the sound , and in two day more at the far they hope to cross the sound and to be relieve by the wear , which two day they will fast rather than be draw back a foot till they have see the mangoaks , either as friend or foe . this resolution of they do not a little please i , since it come of themselves , although for mistrust of that which afterward do happen , i pretend to have be rather of the contrary opinion . and that which make i most desirous to have some do with the mangoak either in friendship or otherwise to have have one or two of they prisoner , be , for that it be a thing most notorious to all the country , that there be a province to the which the say mangoak have recourse and traffic up that river of Moratoc , which have a marvelous and most strange Minerali . this mine be so notorious among they , as not only to the savage dwell up the say river , and also to the savage of Chawanook , and all they to the westward , but also to all they of the main : the country name be of fame , and be call Chaunis Temoatan . the minerail they say be wassador , which be copper , but they call by the name of wassador every mettle 328 whatsoever : they say it be of the colour of our copper , but our copper be better than they : and the reason be for that it be red and hard , whereas that of Chaunis Temoatan be very soft , and pale : they say that they take the say mettle out of a river that fall very swift from high rock and hill , and they take it in shallow water : the manner be this . they take a great bowl by their description as great as one of our target , and wrap a skin over the hollow part thereof , leave one part open to receive in the minerail : that do , they watch the come down of the current , and the change of the colour of the water , and then sudden chap down the say bowl with the skin , and receive into the same as much oar as will come in , which be ever as much as their bowl will hold , which present they cast into a fire , and forthwith it melt , and do yield in five part , at the first melt , two part of metal for three part of oar . of this metal the mangoak have so great store , by report of all the savage adjoin , that they beautify their house with great plate of the same : and this to be true , i receive by report of all the country , and particular by young Skiko , the king of Chawanooks son my prisoner , who also himself have be prisoner with the mangoak , and set down all the particularity to i before mention : but he have not be at chawnis Temoatan himself : for he say , it be twenty day journey overland from the mangoak , to the say mineral country , and that they pass through certain other territory between they and the mangoak , before they come to the say country . upon report of the premise , which i be very inquisitive in all place where i come to take very particular information of , by all the savage that dwell towards those part , and especial of Menatonon himself , who in every thing do very particular inform i , and promise i guide of his own man , who shall pass over with i , even to the say country 329 of Chaunis Temoatan ( for overland from Chawanook to the mangoak be but one day journey from sun rise to sun set , whereas by water it be seven day with the soon : ) these thing , i say , make i very desirous by all mean possible to recover the mangoak , and to get some of that their copper for a assay , and therefore i willing yield to their [ three . 259 . ] resolution : but it fall out very contrary to all expectation , and likelihood : for after two day travel , and our whole victuali spend , lie on shore all night , we can never see man , only fire we may perceive make alongst the shore where we be to pass , and up into the country , until the very last day . in the evening whereof , about three of the clock we hear certain savage call as we think , Manteo , who be also at that time with i in the boat , whereof we all be very glad , hope of some friendly conference with they , and make he to answer they , they present begin a song , as we think , in token of our welcome to they : but Manteo present betake he to his piece , and tell i that they mean to fight with we : which word be not so soon speak by he , and then a conflict light horseman ready to put to shore , but there light begin by they a vopje of their arrow among they in the boat , * s ' but do no hurt ( God be thank ) to any man . in - mediate , the other boat lie ready with their shot to skoure the place for our hand weapon to land upon , which be present do , although the land be very high and steep , the savage forthwith quit the shore , and betake themselves to flight : we land , and have fair and easy follow for a small time after they , who have wooded themselves we know not where : the sun draw then towards the set , and be then assure that the next day if we will pursue they , though we may happen to meet with they , yet we shall be assure to meet with none of their victuali , which we then have good cause to think of : therefore choose for the company a con - 330 venient ground in safety to lodge in for the night , make a strong corpse of guard , and put out good centinel , i determine the next morning before the rise of the sun to be go back again , if possible we may recover the mouth of the river , into the broad sound , which at my first motion i find my whole company ready to assent unto : for they be now come to their dog porridge , that they have bespeak for themselves if that befall they which do , and i before do mistrust we shall hardly escape . the end be , we come the next day by night to the river mouth within four or five mile of the same , have row in one day down the current , as much as in , four day we have do against the same : we lodge upon a hand , where we have nothing in the world to eat but pottage of sassafras leave , the like whereof for a meat be never use before as i think . the broad sound we have to pass the next day all fresh and fast : that day the wind blow so strong , and the billow so great , that there be no possibility of passage without sink of our boat . this be upon easter eve , which be fast very true . upon Easter day in the morning the wind come very calm , we enter the sound , and by four of the clock we be at Chipanum , whence all the savage that we have leave there be flee , but their wear do yield we some fish , as God be please not utter to suffer we to be lose : for some of our company of the light horseman be far spend . the next morning we arrive at our home Roanoak . i have set down this voyage somewhat particular , to the end it may appear unto you ( as true it be ) that there want no great good will from the most to the least among we , to have perfect this discovery of the mine : for that the discovery of a good i , by the goodness of God , or a passage to the Southsea , or some way to it , and nothing else can bring this country in request to be inhabit by our nation . 331 the great current of the river of Morattico . and with the discovery of either of the two above show , it will be the most sweet and healthfull climate , and therewithal ! the most fertile soil ( be manure ) in the world : and then will sassafras , and many other root and gum there find make good merchandise and lade for ship , which otherwise of themselves will not be worth the fetch . provide also , that there be find out a better harbour than yet there be , which must be to the northward , if any there be , which be my intention to have spend this summer in the search of , and of the mine of Chawnis Temoatan : the one i will have do , if the bark that i shall have have of sir Francis Drake , by his honourable courtesy , have not be drive away by storm : the other if your supply of more man , and some other necessary have come to we in any convenient sufficiency . for this river of Moratico promise great thing , and by the opinion of m . hariot the head of it by the description of the country , either rise from the bay of Mexico , or else from very near unto the same , that open out into the south sea . And touch the minerali , thus do m . Youghan affirm , that though it be but copper , see the savage be able to melt it , it be one of the rich mineral in the world . wherefore a good harbour find to the northward , as before be say , and from thence four day overland , to the river of Choanoak sconce be raise , from whence again overland through the province of Choanoak one day voyage to the first town of the mangoak up the river of Moratico by the way , as also upon the say river for the defence of our boat like sconce be set , in this course of proceed you shall clear your self from all those danger and broad shallow sound before mention , and gain within four day travel ! into the heart of the main 200 . mile at the least , and so pass your discovery into that most notable 332 1585 - 86 . country , and to the likely part of the main , with far great felicity than otherwise can be perform . thus sir , i have though simple , yet true set down unto you , what my labour with the rest of the gentleman , and poor man of our company ( not without both pain and peril , which the lord in his mercy many way deliver we from ) can yield unto you , which may have be perform in some more perfection , if the lord have be please that only that which you have provide for we have at the first be leave with we , or that he have not in his