[ Iii . 266 . ] a brief and true report of the new find land of Virginia : of the commodity there find , and to be raise , aswell merchantable as other : Written by Thomas Heriot , servant to sir Walter Ralegh , a member of the colony , and there employ in discover a full twelvemonth . Ralph lane one of her majesty esquire , and governor of the colony in Virginia , above mention , for the time there resident , to the gentle reader wish all happiness in the lord . lbeit ( gentle reader ) the credit of report in this treatise contain the can little be further by the testimony of one as my self , through affection judge partiali , though without desert : nevertheless , forsomuch as i have be request by some my particular friend , who conceive more right of i , to deliver free my knowledge of the same , not only for the satisfy of they , but also for the true information of any other whosoever , that come not with a prejudicate mind to the read thereof : thus much upon my credit i be to affirm , that thing universal be so true set down 348 in this treatise by the author thereof , a actor in the colony , and a man no less for his honesty then learn commendable , as that i dare bold avouch , it may very well pass with the credit of truth even among the most true relation of this age . which as for my own part i be ready any way with my word to acknowledge , so also ( of the certainty thereof assure by my own experience ) with this my public assertion i do affirm the same . farewell in the lord . to the adventurer , favourer , and well - willer of the enterprise for the inhabit and plant in Virginia . Ince the first undertake by sir Walter Ralegh to deal in the action of discover of that country which be now call and know by the name of Virginia , many voyage have be thither make at sundry time to his great charge ; as first in the year 1584 , and afterward in the year 1585 , 1586 , and now of late this last year 1587 : there have be diverse and variable report , with some slanderous and shameful speech bruit abroad by many that return from thence : especial of that discovery which be make by the colony transport by sir Richard Grinvile in the year 1585 , be of all other the most principali , and as yet of most effect , the time of their abode in the country be a whole year , when as in the other voyage before they stay but six week , and the other after be only for supply and transportation , nothing more be discover then have be before . which report have not do a little wrong to many that otherwise will have also favour and adventure in the action , to the honour and benefit of our nation , beside the particular profit and credit which will redound to themselves the dealer therein , as i hope by the sequel of 349 event , to the shame of those that have avouch the contrary , shall be manifest , if you the adventurer , favourer and well - willer do but either increase in number , or in opinion continue , or have be doubtful , renew your good like and furtherance to deal therein accord to the worthiness thereof already find , and as you shall understand hereafter to be requisite . touch which worthiness through cause of the diversity of relation and report , many of your opinion can not be firm , nor the mind of some that be well dispose be settle in any certainty . i have therefore think it good , be one that have be in the discovery , and in deal with the natural inhabitant special employ : and have therefore see and know more than the ordinary , to impart so much unto you of the fruit of our labour , as that you may know how injurious the enterprise be slander , and that in public manner at this present , chief for two respect . first , that some of you which be yet ignorant or doubtful of the state thereof , may see that there be sufficient cause why the chief enterpriser with the favour of her majesty , notwithstanding such report , have not only since continue the action by send into the country again , and replant this last year a new colony , but be also ready , accord as the time and mean will affbord , to follow and prosecute the same . second , that you see and know the continuance of the action , by the view hereof you may general know and learn what the country be , and thereupon consider how your deal therein , if it proceed , may return you profit and gain , be it either by inhabit and plant , or otherwise in further thereof . and lest that the substance of my relation shall be doubtful unto you , as of other by reason of their diversity , i will first open the cause in a few word , wherefore they be so different , refer my self to 35 ° your favourable construction , and to be adjudge of , as by good consideration you shall find cause . of our company that return , some for their misdemeanour and ill deal in the country have be there worthy punish , who by reason of their bad nature , have malicious not only speak ill of their governor , but for their sake slander the country it self . the like also have those do which be of their consort . some be ignorant of the state thereof , notwithstanding since their return among their friend and acquaintance , and also other , especial if they be in company where they may not be gainsay , will seem to know so much as no man more , and make no man so great traveller as themselves . they stand so much , as it may seem , upon their credit and reputation , that have be a twelvemonth in the country , it will have be a great disgrace unto they , as they think , if they can not have say much , whether it be true or false . of which some have speak of more than ever they see , or otherwise know to be there . other sum have not be ashamed to make absolute denial of that , which although not by they , yet by other be most certain and there plentiful know , and other some make difficulty of those thing they have no skill of . the cause of their ignorance be , in that they be of that many that be never out of the island where we be seat , or not far , or at the least wise in few place else , during the time of our abode in the country : or of that many , that after gold and silver be not so soon find , as it be by they look for , have little or no care of any other thing but to pamper their belly : or of that many which have little understanding , less discretion , and more tongue then be needful or requisite . some also be off a nice bring up , only in city or town , or such as never ( as i may say ) have see 351 A . D . I587 - the world before . because there be not to be find any english city , nor such fair house , nor at their own wish any of their old accustom dainty food , nor any soft bed of down or feather , the country be to they miserable , and their report thereof accord . because my purpose be but in brief to open the cause of the variety of such speech , the particularity of they , and of many envious , malicious , and slanderous report and device else , by our own countryman beside , as trifle that be not worthy of wise man to be think upon , i mean not to trouble you withal , but will pass to the commodity , the substance of that which i have to make relation of unto you . the treatise whereof , for your more ready view and easy understanding , i will divide into three speciali part . in the first i will make declaration of such commodity there already find or to be raise , which will not only serve the ordinary turn of you which be and shall be the planter and inhabitant , but such a overplus sufficient to be yield , or by man of skill to be provide , as by way of traffic and exchange with our own nation of England , will enrich your self the provider : those that shall deal with you , the enterpriser in general , and great profit our own countryman , to supply they with most thing which heretofore they have be fain to provide either of stranger or of our enemy , which commodity , for distinction sake , i call merchantable . in the second i will set down all the commodity which we know the country by our experience do yield of it self for victuali and sustenance of man life , such as be usual feed upon by the inhabitant of the country , as also by we during the time we be there . in the last part i will make mention general of such other commodity beside , as i be able to remember , and as i shall think behooveful for those that shall 352 1586 . inhabit , and plant there , to know of , which special concern building , as also some other necessary use : with a brief description of the nature and manner of the people of the country . the first part of merchantable commodity . like of grass , or grass silk . there be a kind of grass in the country , upon the blade whereof there grow very good silk in form of a thin glitter skin to be strip off . it grow two foot and a half high or better : the blade be about two foot in length , and half a inch broad . the like grow in Persia , which be in the self same climate as Virginia , of which very many of the silk work that come from thence into Europe be make . hereof if it be plant and order [ three . 268 . ] as in Persia , it can in reason be otherwise , but that there will rise in short time great profit to the dealer therein , see there be so great use and vent thereof aswell in our country as elsewhere . and by the mean of sow and plant it in good ground , it will be far great , better , and more plentiful than it be . although notwithstanding there be great store thereof in many place of the country grow natural and wild , which also by proof here in England , in make a piece of silk grogran , we find to be excellent good . worm silk . in many of our journey we find silkworm fair and great , as big as our ordinary walnut . although it have not be our hap to have find such plenty , as elsewhere to be in the country we have hear of , yet see that the country do natural breed and nourish they , there be no doubt but if art be add in plant of mulberry tree , and other , fit . for they in commodious place , for their feed and nourish , and some of they careful gather and husband in that sort , as by man of skill they 353 z be know to be necessary : there will rise as great profit in time to the Virginians , as thereof do now to the persian , Turks , Italians and Spaniard . flax and hemp . the truth be , that of hemp and flax there be no great store in any one place together , by reason it be not plant but as the soil do yield of it self : and howsoever the leaf and stem or stalk do differ from we , the stuff by judgement of man of skill be altogether as good as we : and if not , as further proof shall find otherwise , we have that experience of the soil , as that there can be show any reason to the contrary , but that it will grow there excellent well , and by plant will be yield plentiful , see there be so much ground whereof some may well be apply to such purpose . what benefit hereof may grow in cordage and linen who can easy understand ? alum . there be a vein of earth along the sea coast for the space of forty or fifty mile , whereof by the judgement of some that have make trial here in England , be make good alum , of that kind which be call Roch alum . the richness of such a commodity be so well know , that i need not to say any thing thereof . the same earth do also yield white coprasse , nitrum , and Alumen plumeum , but nothing so plentiful as the common alum , which be also of price , and profitable . Wapeih . a kind of earth so call by the natural inhabitant , very like to terra sigillata , and have be refine , it have be find by some of our physician and Chyrurgians , to be of the same kind of virtue , and more effectual . the inhabitant use it very much for the cure of sore and wound : there be in diverse place great plentv . and in some place of a blue sort . pitch , tar , resin and turpentine . there be those kind of tree which yield they abundant and great store . in the very same island where we be seat , be fifteen mile of length , and five or six 35 + mile in breadth , there be few tree else but of the same kind , the whole island be full . sassafras , call by the inhabitant winauk , a kind of wood of most pleasant and