eternal providence now at the last set some other course in these thing , than the wisdom of man can look into , which true the carry away by a most strange and unlooked for storm of all our provision , with bark , master , mariner , and sundry also of my own company , all have be so courteous supply by the generail sir Francis Drake , the same have be most sufficient to have perform the great part of the premise , must ever make i to think the hand of God only ( for some his good purpose to my self yet unknown ) to have be in the matter . the second part touch the conspiracy of Pemisapan , the discovery of the same , and at the last , of our request to depart with sir Francis drake for England . Nsenore a savage father to Pemisapan be the only friend to our nation that we have among they , and about the king , die the 20 . of April 1586 . he alone have before oppose himself in their consultation against all matter propose against we , which both the king and all the rest of they after grangemoes death , be very willing to have prefer . and he be not only by the mere providence of God during his life , a mean to save we from hurt , as poison and such like , 333 this skill of make wear will he learn . the english voyage but also to do we very great good , and singular in this . the king be advise and of himself dispose , as a ready mean to have assure bring we to ruin in the month of march 1586 . himself also with all his savage to have run away from we , and to have leave his ground in the hand unsowed : which if he have do , there have be no possibility in common reason , ( but by the immediate hand of God ) that we can have be preserve from starve out of hand . for at that time we have no wear for fish , neither can our man skill of the make of they , neither have we one grain of corn for seed to put into the ground . in my absence on my voyage that i have make against the chaonist , and mangoak , they have raise a brute among themselves , that i and my company be part slay , and part starve by the chaonist , and mangoak . one part of this tale be too true , that i and i be like to be starve , but the other false . nevertheless until my return it take such effect in Pemisapan breast , and in those against we , that they grow not only into contempt of we , but also ( contrary to their former reverend opinion in show , of the almighty god of heaven , and Jesus Christ who we serve and worship , who before they will acknowledge and confess the only God ) now they begin to blaspheme , and flat to say , that our lord God be not God , since he suffer we to sustain much hunger , and also to be kill of the renapoak , for so they call by that generail name all the inhabitant of the whole main , of what province soever . insomuch as old Ensenore , neither any of his fellow , can for his sake have no more credit for we : and it come so far that the king be resolve to have present go away as be aforesaid . but even in the begin of this bruit i return , which when he see contrary to his expectation , and the advertisement that he have receive : that not only my self , and my company be all safe , but also by report of 334 his own 3 . Savages which have be with i beside Manteo in that voyage , that be to say , Tetepano , his sister husband Eracano , and Cossine , that the chanoist and mangoak ( who name and multitude beside their valour be terrible to all the rest of the province ) dare not for the most part of they abide we , and that those that do abide we be kill , and that we have take Menatonon prisoner , and bring his son that he best love to Roanoak with i , it do not a little assuage all devise against we : on the other side , it make ensenores opinion to be receive again with great respect . for he have often before tell they , and then renew those his former speech , both to the king and the rest , that we be the servant of God , and that we be not subject to be destroy by they : but contrary wise , that they among they that seek our destruction , shall find their own , and not be able to work we , and that we be dead man be able to do they more hurt , then now we can do be alive : a opinion very confident at this day hold by the wise among they , and of their old man , as also , that they have be in the night , be 100 mile from any of we , in the air shoot at , and strike by some man of we , that by sickness have die among they : and many of they hold opinion , that we be dead man return into the world again , and that we do not remain dead but for a certain time , and that then we return again . all these speech then again grow in fui credit with they , the king , and all , touch we , when he see the small troop return again , and in that sort from those who very name be terrible unto they : but that which make up the matter on our side for that time be a accident , yea rather ( as all the rest be ) the good providence of the almighty for the save of we , which be this . within certain day after my return from the say journey , Menatonon send a messenger to visit his son the prisoner with i , and send i certain pearl 33 [ three . 261 . ] the beginning of their harvest in July . the english voyage for a present , or rather , as Pemisapan tell i , for the ransom of his son , and therefore i refuse they : but the great cause of his send then , be to signify unto i , that he have command Okisko king of weo - pomiok , to yield himself servant , and homager , to the great Weroanza of England , and after she to sir Walter Raleigh : to perform which commandment receive from Menatonon , the say Okisko joyht with this menatonons messenger send four ' and twenty of his principall man to Roanoak to Pemisapan , to signify that they be ready to perform the same , and so have send those his man to let i know that from that time forward , he , and his successor be to acknowledge her majesty their only sovereign , and next unto she , as be aforesaid . all which be do , and acknowledge by they all , in the presence of Pemisapan his father , and all his savage in counsel then with he , it do for the time thorough ( as it seem ) change he in disposition towards we : insomuch as forthwith Ensenore win this resolution of he , that out of hand he shall go about , and withal , to cause his man to set up wear forthwith for we : both which he at that present go in hand withal , and do so labour the expedition of it , that in the end of April he have sow a good quantity of ground , so much as have be sufficient , to have feed our whole company ( God bless the growth ) and that by the belly , for a whole year : beside that he give we a certain plot of ground for our self to sow . all which put we in marvelous comfort , if we can pass from April until the begin of July , ( which be to have be the begin of their harvest , ) that than a new supply out of England or else our own store will well enough maintain we : all our fear be of the two month betwixt , in which mean space if the savage shall not help we with Cassavi , and china , arid that our wear shall fail we , ( as often they do , ) we may very well starve , notwithstanding the grow corn , like the starve 336 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv 1585 - 86 . horse in the stable , with the grow grass , as the proverb be : which we very hardly have escape but only by the hand of God , as it please he to try we . for within few day after , as before be say , Ensenore our friend die , who be no soon dead , but certain of our great enemy about Pemisapan , as osacan a wero - ance , tanaquiny and Wanchese most principal , be in hand again to put their old practise in ure against we , which be ready embrace , and all their former devise against we , reneue , and new bring in question . but that of starve we , by their forbear to sow , be break by Ensenore in his life , by have make the king all at one instant to sow his ground , not only in the hand , but also at Dasamonquepeio in the main , within two league over against we . nevertheless there want no store of mischievous practise among they , and of all they resolve principal of this follow . first that Okisko king of weopomeiok with the man - conspira - doages shall be move , and with great quantity of ° fpemisa ~ copper entertain to the number of 7 . or 8 . hundred p ' bow , to enterprise the matter thus to be order . they of weopomeiok shall be invite to a certain kind of month mind which they do use to solemnise in their savage manner for any great personage dead , and shall have be for Ensenore . at this instant also shall the mandoak , who be a great people , with the chesepians and their friend to the number of 700 . of they , be arm at a day appoint to the main of Dasamonquepeio , and there lie close at the sign of fierce , which shall interchangeable be make on both side , when Pemisapan with his troop above name shall have execute i , and some of our weroance ( as they call all our principali officer , ) the main force of the rest shall have come over into the hand , where they mean to have dispatch the rest of the company , who they do imagine to find both dismay and disperse abroad in the island , seek of crab and fish to live withal . the manner of their enterprise be this . vni 337 y the sufficiende of our man to deal against the savage . 10 . to a hundredth . the Savages Uve by fish , and hunt , till harvest . the english voyage Tarraquine and Andacon two principali man about Pemisapan , and very lusty fellow , with twenty more appoint to they have the charge of my person to see a order take for the same , which they mean shall in this sort have be execute . in the dead time of the night they will have beset my house , and put fire in the reed that the same be cover with : mean ( as it be likely ) that my self will have come run out of a sudden amaze in my shirt without arm , upon the instant whereof they will have knock out my brain . the same order be give to certain of his fellow , for m . heriot : so for all the rest of our better sort , all our house at one instant be set on fire as afore be say , and that as well for they of the fort , as for we at the town . now to the end that we may be the few in number together , and so be the more easy deal withal ( for in deed ten of we with our arm prepare , be a terror to a hundred of the best sort of they , ) they agree and do immediate put it in practice , that they shall not for any copper sell we any victual whatsoever : beside that in the night they shall send to have our wear rob , and also to cause they to be break , and once be break never to be repair again by they . by this mean the king stand assure , that i must be enforce for lack of sustenance there , to disband my company into sundry place to live upon shell fish , for so the savage themselves do , go to Hatorask , croatoan , and other place , fish and hunt , while their ground be in sow , and their corn grow : which fail not his expectation . for the famine grow so extreme among we , or wear fail we of fish , that i be enforce to send captain Stafford with 20 . with he to croatoan my lord admiral hand to serve two turn in one , that be to say , to feed himself and his company , and also to keep watch if any ship come upon the coast to warn we of the same . i send m . pridiox with the pinnace to Hatorask , and ten with he , with the provost marshal to live there , and also to wait 338 for ship : also i send every week ten 6 . or 20 . of the rest of the company to the main over against we , to live of Casada and oyster . in the mean while Pemisapan go of purpose to Dasamonquepeio for three cause : the one to see his ground there break up , and sow for a second crop : the other to withdraw himself from my daily send to he for supply of victuali for my company , for he be afraid to deny i any thing , neither dare he in my presence but by colour and with excuse , which t be content to accept for the time , mean in the end as i have reason , to give he the jump once for all : but in the mean while , as i have ever do before , i and i bear all wrong , and accept of all excuse . my purpose be to have rely my self with menatonon , and the chaonist , who in