wooden instrument make almost in form of mattock or hoe with long handle : the woman with short pecker or parer , because they use they sit , of a foot long , and about five inch in breadth , do only break the upper part of the ground to raise up the weed , grass , and old stub of corn stalk with their root . the which after a day or two day dry in the sun , be scrap up into many small heap , to save they labour for carry they away , they burn into ash . and whereas some may think that they use the ash for to better the ground , i say that then they will either disperse the ash abroad , which we observe they do not , except the heap be too great , or else will take speciali care to set their corn where the ash lie , which also we find they be careless of . and this be all the husband of their ground that they use . than their set or sow be after this manner . first for their corn , begin in one corner of the plot , with a pecker they make a hole , wherein they put four grain , with care that they touch not one another ( about a inch asunder ) and cover they with the mould 361 again : and so throughout the whole plot make such hole , and use they after such manner , but with this regard , that they be make in rank , every rank differ from other half a fathom or a yard , and the hole also in every rank as much . by this mean there be a yard spare ground between every hole : where accord to discretion here and there , they set as many bean and Peaze ; in diverse place also among the seed of macocquer , Melden , and Planta solis . the ground be thus set accord to the rate by we experiment , a english acre contain forty perch in length , and four in breadth , do there yield in crop or ofcome of corn , bean and Peaze , at the least two hundred London bushel , beside the macocquer , Melden , and Planta solis ; when as in England forty bushel of our wheat yield out of such a acre be think to be much . i think also good to note this unto you , that you which shall inhabit , and plant there , may know how special that country corn be there to be prefer before we : beside , the manifold way in apply it to victual , the increase be so much , that small labour and pain be needful in respect of that which must be use for we . for this i can assure you that accord to the rate we have make proof of , one man may prepare and husband so much ground ( have once bear corn before ) with less than four and twenty hour labour , as shall yield he victual in a large proportion for a twelvemonth , if he have nothing else but that which the same ground will yield , and of that kind only which i have before speak of : the say ground be also but of five and twenty yard square . and if need require , but that there be ground enough , there may be raise out of one and the selfsame ground two harvest or ofcome : for they sow or set , and may at any time when they think good , from the midst of march until the end of June : so that they also set when they have eat of their first crop . in some 362 1586 . place of the country notwithstanding they have two harvest , as we have hear , out of one and the same ground . for english corn nevertheless , whether to use or not to use it , you that inhabit may do as you shall have further cause to think best . of the growth you need not to doubt : for barley , oat , and pease , we have see proof of , not be purposely sow , but fall casual in the worst sort of ground , and yet to be as fair as any we have ever see here in England . but of wheat , because it be musty , and have take salt water , we can make no trial : and of rye we have none . thus much have i digress , and i hope not unnecessary : now will i return again to my course , and entreat of that which yet remain , appertain to this chapter . there be a herb which be sow apart by it self , and be call by the inhabitant Uppowoc : in the west Indies it have diverse name , accord to the several place and country where it grow and be use : the Spaniard general call it tobacco . the leaf thereof tobacco . be dry and bring into powder , they use to take the fume or smoke thereof , by suck it through pipe make of clay , into their stomach and head ; from whence it purge superfluous flame and other gross humour , and open all the pore and passage of the body : by which mean the use thereof not only preserve the body from obstruction , but also ( if any be , so that they have not be of too long continuance ) in short time break they : whereby their body be notable preserve in health , and know not many grievous disease , wherewithal ! we in England be often time afflict . This Uppowoc be of so precious estimation among they , that they think their god be marvellous delight therewith : whereupon sometime they make hallow fire , and cast some of the powder therein for a sacrifice : be in a storm upon the water , to pacific their god , they cast some up into the air and into the [ three . 272 . ] 363 water : so a wear for fish be new set up , they cast some therein and into the air : also after a escape of danger , they cast some into the air likewise : but all do with strange gesture , stamp , sometime dance , clap of hand , hold up of hand , and stare up into the heaven , utter therewithal ! , and chatter strange word and noise . we our self , during the time we be there , use to suck it after their manner , as also since our return , and have find many rare and wonder experiment of the virtue thereof : of which the relation will require a volume by it self : the use of it by so many of late man and woman of great call , as else , and some learned physician also , be sufficient witness . and these be all the commodity for sustenance of life , that i know and can remember , they use to husband : all else that follow , be find grow natural or wild . of root . OPenauk be a kind of root of round form , some of the bigness of walnut , some far great , which be find in moist and marish ground grow many together one by another in rope , as though they be fasten with a string . be boil or sodden , mmardes they be very good meat . monardes call these root , part z . lib . 1 . gea ( js or pater nostri of Santa Helena . cap - 4 - okeepenauk be also of round shape , find in dry ground : some be of the bigness of a man head . they be to be eat as they be take out of the ground : for by reason of their dryness they will neither roast nor seethe . their taste be not so good as of the former root : notwithstanding for want of bread , and sometime for variety the inhabitant use to eat they with fish or flesh , and in my judgement they do as well as the household bread make of rye here in England . Kaishucpenauk , a white kind of root about the bigness of hen egg , and near of that form : their taste be not so good to our seem as of the other , and 364 1586 . therefore their place and manner of grow not so much care for by we : the inhabitant notwithstanding use to boil and eat many . Tsinaw , a kind of root much like unto that which in England be call the china root bring from the east Indies . and we know not any thing to the contrary but that it may be of the same kind . Theise root grow many together in great cluster , and do bring forth a brier stalk , but the leaf in shape far unlike : which be support by the tree it grow near unto , will reach or climb to the top of the high . from these root while they be new or fresh , be chop into small piece , and stamp , be strain with water a juice that make bread , and also be boil , a very good spoonmeat in manner of a jelly , and be much better in taste , if it be temper with oil . This Tsinaw be not of that sort , which by some be cause to be bring into England for the china root ; for it be discover since , and be in use as be aforesaid : but that which be bring hither be not yet know , neither by we nor by the inhabitant to serve for any use or purpose , although the root in shape be very like . Coscushaw some of our company take to be that kind of root which the Spaniard in the west Indies call cassavy , whereupon also many call it by that name : it grow in very muddy pool , and moist ground . be dress accord to the country manner , it make a good bread , and also a good spoonmeat , and be use very much by the inhabitant . the juice of this root be the juice of poison , and therefore heed must be take before any thing cofushaw u be mad therewithal ! : either the root must be first slice and dry in the sun , or by the fire , and then be pun into flower , will make good bread : or else while they be green they be to be pare , cut in piece , and stamp : loaf of the same to be lay near or over the fire until it be sour ; and then be well pun again , bread or spoonmeat very good in taste and wholesome may be make thereof . 365 Habascon be a root of hot taste , almost of the form and bigness of a parsnip : off it self it be no victuali , but only a help , be boil together with other meat . there be also leek , differ little from we in England , that grow in many place of the country ; of which , when we come in place where they be , we gather and eat many , but the natural inhabitant never . of fruit . chestnut there be in diverse place great store : some they use to eat raw , some they stamp and boil to make spoonmeat , and with some be sodden , they make such a manner of dough bread as they use of their bean before mention . [ Iii . 273 . ] walnut . there be two kind of walnut , and of they infinite store : in many place , where be very great wood for many mile together , the three part of tree be walnut tree . the one kind be of the same taste and form , or little differ from we of England , but that they be hard and thick shell : the other be great , and have a very ragged and hard shell : but the kernel great , very oily and sweet . beside their eat of they after our ordinary manner , they break they with stone , and pun they in mortar with water , to make a milk which they use to put into some sort of their spoonemeat : also among their sod wheat , pease , bean and pompion , which make they have a far more pleasant taste . medlar , a kind of very good fruit : so call by we chief for these respect : first in that they be not good until they be rot , then in that they open at the head as our medlar , and be about the same bigness : otherwise in taste and colour they be far different ; for they be as red as cherry , and very sweet : but whereas the cherry be sharp sweet , they be luscious sweet . Mutaquesunnauk , a kind of pleasant fruit almost of the shape and bigness of english pear , but that they be 366 of a perfect red colour aswell within as without . they there be Hi . grow on a plant who leaf be very thick , and full of ^ dfofTmua prickle as sharp as needle . some that have be in the Indies , where they have see that kind of red die of nofruithbring - great price , which be call cochinile , to grow , do de - eth forth . the scribe his plant right like unto this of Metaquesunnauk ; Gothinillo . but whether it be the true cochinile , or a bastard or wild kind , it can yet be certify , see that also , as i hear , cochinile be not of the fruit , but find on the leaf of the plant : which leave for such matter we have not so special observe . grape there be of two sort , which i mention in the merchantable commodity . strawberry there be as good and as great as those which we have in our english garden . mulberry , applecrab , hurt or hurtlebery , such as we have in England . Sacquenummener , a kind of berry almost like unto caper , but somewhat great , which grow together in cluster upon a plant or herb that be find in shallow water :