a account of the particularity of the employments of the english man leave in Virginia by sir Richard greenevill under the charge of master Ralph lane general of the same , from the 17 . of August 1585 . until the 18 . of June 1586 . at which time they depart the country : send and direct to sir Walter Ralegh . hat i may proceed with order in this discourse , i think it requisite to divide it into two part . the first shall declare the particularity of such part of the country within the main , as our weak number , and supply of thing necessary do inable we to enter into the 2 . part of this discourse . discovery of . the second part shall set down the reason general move we to resolve on our departure at the instant with the general sir Francis Drake , and our common request for passage with he , when the bark , pinnace , and boat with the master and mariner mean by he to be leave in the country , for the supply of such , as for a further time mean to have stay there , be carry away with tempest and foul weather : in the beginning whereof shall be declare the conspiracy of Pemisapan , with the savage of the main to have cut we off , etc 320 the material original position here be too large for reproduction in this reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv they Cambridge core . term oh ? usej - u - vaiabieathttpsv / www . cambridge . org / core / term . the first part declare the particularity of the country of Virginia . irst therefore touch the particularity of the country , you shall understand that our discovery of the same have be extend from the hand of Roanoak , ( the same have be the place of our settlement or inhabitation ) into the south , into the north , into the north - west , and into the west . the uttermost place to the southward of any discovery be Secotan , be by estimation fourscore mile distant from Roanoak . the passage from thence be through a broad sound within the main , the same be without ken of land , and yet full of flat and shoald : we have but one boat with four oar to pass through the same , which boat can not carry above fifteen man with their furniture , baggage , and victuali for seven day at the most : and as for our pinnace , beside that she draw too deep water for that shallow sound , she will not stir for a oar : for these and other reason ( winter also be at hand ) we think good whole to leave the discovery of those part until our strong supply . to the northward our further discovery be to the chesepians , distant from Roanoak about 130 . mile , the passage to it be very shallow and most dangerous , by reason of the breadth of the sound , and the little succour that upon any flaw be there to be have . but the territory and soil of the chesepians ( be distant fifteen mile from the shore ) be for pleasantness of seat , for temperature of climate , for fertility of soil , and for the commodity of the sea , beside multitude of bear ( be a excellent good victuali ) with great wood of sassafras , and walnut tree , be not to be excel by any other whatsoever . there be sundry king , who they call weroance , and country of great fertility adjoin to the same , as the excellende of the seat of cheseplook . Viii 321 the town of Chawanook able to make 700 . man of war . the english voyage the mandoage , tripanick , and opossians , which all come to visit the colony of the english , which i have for a time appoint to be resident there . to the northwest the far place of our discovery be to Chawanook distant from Roanoak about 130 . mile . our passage thither lie through a broad sound , but all fresh water , and the channel of a great depth , navigable for good ship , but out of the channel full of shoald . the town about the water side situate by the way be these follow : Passaquenoke the woman town , Chepanoc , weapomeiok , muscamunge , and metackwem : all these be under the jurisdiction of the king of weapomeiok , call Okisco : from muscamunge we enter into the river , and jurisdiction of Chawanook : there the river begin to straighten until it come to Chawanook , and then grow to be as narrow as the Thames betewene Westminster , and Lambeth . between muscamunge and Chawanook upon the left hand as we pass thither , be a goodly high land , and there be a town which we call the blind town , but the savage call it Ohanoak , and have a very goodly corn field belong unto it : it be subject to Chawanook . Chawanook it self be the great province and signiory lie upon that river , and the very town it self be able to put 700 . fight man into the field , beside the force of the province it self . the king of the say province be call Menatonon , a man impotent in his limb , but otherwise for a savage , a very grave and wise man , and of a very singular good discourse in matter concern the state , not only of his own country , and the disposition of his own man , but also of his neighbour round about he as well far as near , and of the commodity that each country yield . when i have he prisoner with i , for two day that we be together , he give i more under - 322 1585 - 86 . stand and light of the country than i have receive by all the search and savage that before i or any of my company have have conference with : it be in march last past 1586 . among other thing he tell i , that go three day journey in a Canoa , up his river of Chawanook , and then descend to the land , you be within four day journey to pass over land Northeast to a certain king country , who province lie upon the sea , but his place of great strength be a island - a i ^ nd in situate , as he describe unto i , in a bay , the water a Ba9 ‘ round about the island very deep . out of this bay he signify unto i , that this purksm ex ~ king have so great quantity of pearl , and do so c ™ ding quan - ordinarily take the same , as that not only his own ’ skin that he wear , and the better sort of his gentleman and follower be full set with the say pearl , but also his bed , and house be garnish with they , and that he have such quantity of they , that it be a wonder to see . he show i that the say king be with he at Chawanook two year before , and bring he certain pearl , but the same of the worst sort , yet be he fain to buy they of he for copper at a dear rate , as he think . he give i a rope of the same pearl , but they be black , and nought , yet many of they be very great , and a few among a number very orient and round , all which i lose with other thing of i , come aboard sir Francis Drake his fleet : yet he tell i that the say king have great store of pearl that be white , great , and round , and that his black pearl his man do take out of shallow water , but the white pearl his man fish for in very deep water . it seem to i by his speech , that the say king have traffic with white man that have clothes as we have , for these white pearl , and that be the reason that he will not depart with other then with black pearl , to those of the same country . 323 a enterprise of speciali importance . [ Iii . 257 . ] the english voyage the king of Chawanook promise to give i guide to go over land into that king country whensoever i will : but he advise i to take good store of man with i , and good store of victuali , for he say , that king will be loath to suffer any stranger to epter into his country , and especial to meddle with the fish for any pearl there , and that he be able to make a great many of man into the field , which he say will fight very well . hereupon i resolve with my self , that if your supply have come before the end of April , and that you have send any store of boat or man , to have have they make in any reasonable time , with a sufficient number of man and victual to have find we until the new corn be come in , i will have send a small bark . with two pinnace about by sea to the northward to have find out the bay he speak of , and to have sound the bar if there be any , which shall have ride there in the say bay about that hand , while i with all the small boat i can make , and with two hundred man will have go up to the head of the river of Chawanook with the guide that menatonon will have give i , which i will have be assure shall have be of his best man , ( for i have his best belove son prisoner with i ) who also shall have keep i company in a handlocke with the rest , foot by foot , all the voyage over land . my meaning be further at the head of the river in the place of my descent where i will have leave my boat , to have raise a sconce with a small trench , and a palisado upon the top of it , in the which , and in the guard of my boat i will have leave five and twenty , or thirty man , with the rest will i have march with as much victuali as every man can have carry , with their furniture , mattock , spade and axe , two day journey . in the end of my march upon some convenient plot will i have raise another sconce accord to the former , where i will have 324 leave fifteen or twenty . and if it will have fall out convenient , in the way i will have raise my say sconce upon some corn field , that my company may have live upon it . and so i will have hold this course of insconse whither m . every two day march , until i have be arrive at the bay or port he speak of : which find to be move 0 worth the possession , i will there have raise a main fort , both for the defence of the harbour , and our ship also , and will have reduce our whole habitation from Roanoak and from the harbour and port there ( which by proof be very nought ) unto this other beforemention , from whence , in the four day march before specify , can i at all time return with my company back unto my boat ride under my sconce , very near whereunto direct from the west run a most notable river , and in all those part most famous , call the river of Moratoc . this river open into the broad sound of weapomeiok . and whereas the river of Chawanook , and all the other sound , and bay , salt and fresh , show no current in the world in calm weather , but be move altogether with the wind : this river of Moratoc have so violent a current from the west and Southwest , that it make i almost of opinion that with oar it will scarce be navigable : it pass with many creek and turn , and for the space of thirty mile row , and more , it be as broad as the Thames betwixt greenwich and the isle of dog , in some place more , and in some less : the current run as strong , be enter so high into the river , as at London bridge upon a vale water . and for that not only Menatonon , but also the savage of Moratoc themselves do report strange thing of the head of that river , and that from Moratoc it self , which be a principali town upon that river , it be thirty day as some of they say , and some say fourty day voyage to the head thereof , which head 325 cmspiracie oj the savage against the english . the english voyage they say spring out of a main rock in that abundance , that forthwith it make a most violent stream : and further , that this huge rock stand so near unto a sea , that many time in storm ( the wind come outward from the sea ) the wave thereof be beat into the say fresh stream , so that the fresh water for a certain space , grow salt and brackish : i take a resolution with my self , have dismiss Menatonon upon a ransom agree for , and send his son into the pinnace to Roanoak , to enter present so far into that river with two double whirry , and fourty person one or other , as i can have victuali to carry we , until we can meet with more either of the moratok , or of the mangoak , which be another kind of savage , dwell more to the westward of the say river : but the hope of recover moor victuali from the savage make i and my company as narrow to escape starve in that discovery before our return , as ever man do , that miss the same .. for Pemisapan , who have change his name of win - gina upon the death of his brother Granganimo , have give both the choanist , and mangoak word of my purpose touch they , i have be enforce to make he privy to the same , to be serve by he of a guide to the mangoak , and yet he do never rest to solicit continual my go upon they , certify i of a generail assembly even at that time make by Menatonon at Chawanook of all his weroance , and ally to the number of three thousand bow , prepare to come upon we at Roanoak , and that the mangoak also be join in the same confederacy , who be able of themselves to bring as many more to the enterprise : and true it be that at that