be boil eight or nine hour accord to their kind , be very good meat and wholesome ; otherwise if they be eat they will make a man for the time frantic or extreme sick . there be a kind of reed which bear a seed almost like unto our rye or wheat ; and be boil be good meat . in our travel in some place we find wild pease like unto we in England , but that they be less , which be also good meat . of a kind of fruit or berry in form of acorn . there be a kind of berry or acorn , of which there be five sort that grow on several kind of tree : the one be call sagatemener , the second osamener , the three pummuckoner . Theise kind of acorn they use to dry upon hurdle make of reed , with fire underneath , almost after the manner as we dry malt in England . when they 367 be to be use , they first water they until they be soft , and then be sodden , they make a good victuali , either to eat so simple , or else be also pun to make loaf or lump of bread . Theise be also the three kind , of which i say before the inhabitant use to make sweet oil . another sort be call sapummener , which be boil or parch , do eat and taste like unto chestnut . they sometime also make bread of this sort . the five sort be call Mangummenauk , and be the acorn of their kind of oak , the which be dry after the manner of the first sort , and afterward water , they boil they , and their servant , or sometime the chief themselves , either for variety or for want of bread , do eat they with their fish or flesh . of beast . deer , in some place there be great store : near unto the sea coast they be of the ordinary bigness of we in England , and some less : but further up into the country , where there be better food , they be great : they differ from we only in this , their tail be long , and the snag of their home look backward . cony . those that we have see , and all that we can hear off be of a grey colour like unto hare : in some place there be such plenty that all the people of some town make they mantle of the fur or fly of the skin of those which they usual take . Saquenuckot and Maquowoc , two kind of small beast great than cony , which be very good meat . we never take any of they our self but sometime eat of such as the inhabitant have take and bring unto we . squirrel , which be of a grey colour , we have take and eat . bear , which be off black colour . the bear of this country be good meat . the inhabitant in time of winter do use to take and eat many : so also sometime do we . they be take common in this sort : in 368 some island or place where they be , be hunt for , assoon as they have espial of a man , they present run away , and then be chase , they climb and get up the next tree they can : from whence with arrow they be shoot down stark dead , or with those wound that they may after easy be kill . we sometime shoot they down with our caliver . i have the name of eight and twenty several sort of beast , which i have hear of to be here and there disperse in the country , especial in the main : of which there be only twelve kind that we have yet discover ; and of those that be good meat we know only they before mention . the inhabitant sometime kill the lion , and eat he : and we sometime as they come to our hand of their wolves or wolvish dog , which i have not set down for good meat , lest that some will understand my judgement therein to be more simple than need , although i can allege the difference in taste of those kind from we , which by some of our company have be experiment in both . of fowl . TUrkie cock and turquoise hen , stockdove , partridge , crane , Hernes , and in winter great store of swan and goose . of all sort of foul i have the name in the country language of fourscore and six , of which number , beside those that be name , we have take , eat , and have the picture as they be there draw , with the name of the inhabitant , of several strange sort of water foul eight , and seventeen kind more of land foul , although we have see and eat of many more , which for want of leisure there for the purpose , can not be picture : and after we be better furnish and store upon further discovery with their strange beast , fish , tree , plant , and herb , they shall | be also publish . there be also parrot , falcon , and Marlin hauk , vin 369 2 a in the gulf of California they use the like fish . which although with we they be not use for meat , yet for other cause i think good to mention . of fish . for four month of the year , February , march , April and may , there be plenty of sturgeon . and also in the same month of herring , some of the ordinary bigness of we in England , but the most part far great , of eighteen , twenty inch , and some two foot in length and better : both these kind of fish in those month be most plentiful ! , and in best season , which we find to be most delicate and pleasant meat . there be also trout , porpoise , ray , oldwife , mullet , plaice , and very many other sort of excellent good fish , which we have take and eat , who name i know not but in the country language : we have the picture of twelve sort more , as they be draw in the country , with their name . the inhabitant use to take they two manner of way ; the one be by a kind of wear make of reed , which in that country be very strong : the other way , which be more strange , be with pole make sharp at one end , by shoot they into the fish after the manner as irish man cast dart , either as they be row in their boat , or else as they be wade in the shallows for the purpose . there be also in many place plenty of these kind which follow : sea - crab , such as we have in England . oyster , some very great , and some small , some round , and some of a long shape : they be find both in salt water and brackish , and those that we have out of salt water be far better than the other , as in our country . also muscle , scalop , periwinkle , and crevice . Seekanauk , a kind of crusty shellfish , which be good meat , about a foot in breadth , have a crusty tail many leg like a crab , and her eye in her back . they 37 ° 1586 . be find in shallows of water , and sometime on the shore . there be many tortoise both of land and sea kind , their back and belly be shell very thick ; their head , foot , and tail , which be in appearance , seem ugly , as though they be member of a serpent or venomous beast ; but notwithstanding they be very good meat , as also their egg . some have be find of a yard in breadth and better . and thus have i make relation of all sort of victuali that we feed upon for the time we be in Virginia , as also the inhabitant themselves , as far forth as i know and can remember , or that be special worthy to be remember . the three and last part of such other thing as be [ in . 275 . ] behooveful for those which shall plant and inhabit to know of , with a description of the nature and manner of the people of the country . of commodity for building and other necessary use . hose other thing which i be more to make rehearsal of , be such as concern building , and other mechanical necessary use , as diverse sort of tree for house and ship - timber , and other use else : also lime , stone , and brick , lest that be not mention some might have be doubt of , or by some that be malicious the contrary report . Okes there be as fair , straight , tall , and as good timber as any can be , and also great store , and in some place very great . Walnut tree , as i have say before very many , some have be see excellent fair timber of four and five 371 fathom , and above fourscore foot straight without bough . fir tree fit for mast of ship , some very tall and great . Rakiock , a kind of tree so call that be sweet wood , of which the inhabitant that be near unto we do common make their boat or canoas of the form of trow , only with the help of fire , hatchet of stone , and shell : we have know some so great be make in that sort of one tree , that they have carry well 20 . man at once , beside much baggage : the timber be great , tall , strait , soft , light , and yet tough enough i think ( beside other use ) to be fit also for mast of ship . cedar , a sweet wood good for ceiling , chest , box , bedstead , lute , virginal , and many thing else , as i have also say before . some of our company which have wander in some place where i have not be , have make certain affirmation of Cyprus , which for such and other excellent use be also a wood of price and no small estimation . Maple , and also which - hazel , whereof the inhabitant use to make their bow . Holly , a necessary thing for the make of birdlime . willow good for the make of wear and weeles to take fish after the english manner , although the inhabitant use only reed , which because they be so strong as also flexible , do serve for that turn very well and sufficient . Beech and Ashe , good for cask - hoop , and if need require , plow work , as also for many thing else . Eime . } { sassafras tree . Ascopo a kind of tree very like unto laurel , the bark be hot in taste and spicy , it be very like to that tree which monardes describe to be cassia Lignea of the west Indies . there be many other strange tree who name i know not but in the virginian language , of which i be 372 not now able , neither be it so convenient for the present to trouble you with particular relation : see that for timber and other necessary use , i have name sufficient . and of many of the rest , but that they may be apply to good use , 1 know no cause to doubt . now for stone , brick , and lime , thus it be . near unto the sea coast where we dwell , there be no kind of stone to be find ( except a few small pebble about four mile off ) but such as have be bring from further out of the main . in some of our voyage we have see diverse hard raggy stone , great pebble , and a kind of grey stone like unto marble of which the inhabitant make their hatchet to cleave wood . upon inquiry we hear that a little further up into the country be of all sort very many , although of quarry they be ignorant , neither have they use of any store whereupon they shall have occasion to seek any . for if every household have one or two to crack nut , grind shell , whet copper , and sometime other stone for hatchet , they have enough : neither use they any dig , but only for grave about three foot deep : and therefore no marveile that they know neither quarry , nor lime - stone , which both may be in place near than they wot of . in the mean time until there be discovery of sufficient store in some place or other convenient , the want of you which be and shall the planter therein may be as well supply by brick : for the make whereof in diverse place of the country there be clay both excellent good , and plenty , and also by lime make of oyster shell , and of other burn , after the manner as they use in the isle of tenet and shepy , and also in diverse other place of England : which kind of lime be well know to be as good as any other . and of oyster shell there be plenty enough : for beside diverse other particular place where be abundance , there be one shallow sound along the coast , where for the space of many mile together in length , and two or three mile in breadth , the ground be 373 [ three . 276 . ] Jaques Cartier , voyage 2 , chapter 8 . nothing else , be but half a foot or a foot under water for the most part . thus much can i say furthermore of stone , that about 120 . mile from our fort near the water in the side of a hill , be find by a gentleman of our company , a great vein of hard rag stone , which i think good to remember unto you .