the first voyage make to the coast of America , with two bark , where in be captain m . Philip Amadas , and m . Arthur Barlowe , who discover part of the country now call Virginia , anno 1584 . write by one of the say captain , and send to sir Walter Ralegh knight , at who charge and direction , the say voyage be set forth . [ in . 246 . ] he 27 day of April , in the year of our redemption , 1584 we depart the west of England , with two bark well furnish with man and victual , have receive our last and perfect direction by your letter , confirm the former instruction , and commandment de liver by your self at our leave the river of Thames . and i think it a matter both unnecessary , for the manifest discovery of the country , as also for tediousness sake , to remember unto you the diurnal of our course , sail thither and return : only i have presume to present unto you this brief discourse , by which you may judge how profitable this land be likely to succeed , as well to your self , ( by who direction and charge , and by , who servant this our discovery have be perform ) as also to her highness , and the common wealth , in which we hope your wisdom will | be satisfy , consider that as much by we have be bring to light , as by those small mean , and number of man we have , can any way have be expect , or hope for . the ten of May we arrive at the canary , and the ten of June in this present year , we be fall with the island of the west Indies , keep a more south - a southerly course not easterly course then be needful , because we doubt . .. that the current of the bay of Mexico , disbogging be - ^ Virginia . between the cape of Florida and Havana , have be of 297 great force then afterwards we find it to be . at which island , we find the air very unwholesome , and our man grow for the most part ill dispose : so that have refresh our self with sweet water , and fresh victuali , we depart the twelve day of our arrival there . Theise Islands , with the rest adjoin , be so well know to your self , and to many other , as i will not trouble you with the remembrance of they . a sweet smell the second of July , we find shoal water , where we from the land . smejt so sweet } anj so strong a smell , as if we have be in the midst of some delicate garden abound with all kind of odoriferous flower , by which we be assure , that the land can not be far distant : and keep good watch , and bear but slack sail , the four of the same month we arrive upon the coast , which we suppose to be a continent and firm land , and we sail along the same a hundred and twenty english mile before we can find any entrance , or river issue into the sea the first the first that appear unto we , we enter , though not n ^ r - without some difficulty , and cast anchor about - three harque - buz - shot within the haven mouth , on the left hand of the same : and after thanks give to God for our safe arrival thither , we man our boat , and go to view “ July x ^ pos - the land next adjoin , and “ to take possession of the session take . samej | n the right of the queen most excellent majesty , as rightful queen , and princess of the same , and after deliver the same over to your use , accord to her majesty grant , and letter patent , under her highness great seal . which be perform , accord to the ceremony use in such enterprise , we view the land about we , be , whereas we first land , very sandy and abundance of low towards the water side , but so full of grape , as the grape . very beat ancl surge of the sea overflow they , of which we find such plenty , as well there as in all place else , both on the sand and on the green soil on the hill , as in the plain , as well on every little shrub , as also climb towards the top of high cedar , that i think in all the world the like abundance be not to be find : and 298 my self have see those part of Europe that most abound , find such difference as be incredible to be write . we pass from the sea side towards the top of the isle of those hill next adjoin , be but of mean highth , and from thence we behold the sea on both side to the north , and to the south , find no end any of both way . this land lie stretch it self to the west , which after we find to be but a island of twenty mile long , and not above six mile broad . under the bank or hill whereon we stand , we behold the valley replenish with goodly cedar tree , and have discharge our harquebus - shot , such a flock of crane ( the most part white ) arise under we , with such a cry redouble by many echo , as if a army of man have shout all together . this island have many goodly wood full of deer , cony , hare , and foul , even in the midst of summer in incredible abundance . the wood be not such as you find in Bohemia , Moscovia , or Hercynia , barren and fruitless , but the high and red cedar of the world , goodly far better the ceder of the azore , of the Indies , or ^ ars ' 0 Lybanus , Pynes , cypress , sassafras , the lentisk , or the saphras ^ ' tree that bear the mastic , the tree that bear the rind of black cinnamon , of which master winter bring [ in . 247 . ] from the strait of Magellan , and many other of excellent smell and quali tie . we remain by the side of this island two whole day before we see any people of the country : the three day we espy one small boat row towards we have in it three person : this boat come to the island side , four harquebus - shot from our ship , and there two of the people remain , the three come along the shoreside towards we , and we be then all within board , he walk up and down upon the point of the land next unto we : then the master and the pilot conference of the admiral , Simon Ferdinando , and the captain wthasavage . Philip Amadas , my self , and other row to the land , who come this fellow attend , never make any 299 show of fear or doubt . and after he have speak of many thing not understand by we , we bring he with his own good like , aboard the ship , and give he a shirt , a hat and some other thing , and make he taste of our wine , and our meat , which he like very well : and after have view both bark , he depart , and go to his own boat again , which he have leave abundance of in a little cove or creek adjoin : assoon as he be two bow shoot into the water , he fall to fish , and in less than half a hour , he have lade his boat as deep , as it can swim , with which he come again to the point of the land , and there he divide his fish into two part , point one part to the ship , and the other to the pinnace : which , after he have ( as much as he may ) requite the former benefit receive , depart out of our sight . the arrival the next day there come unto we diverse boat , and nther ^ * n one the king brother , accompany with ’ forty or fifty man , very handsome and goodly people , and in their behaviour as mannerly and civil as any of Europe . his name be Granganimeo , and the king be call Wingina , the country Wingandacoa , and now by her majesty Virginia . the manner of his come be in this sort : he leave his boat altogether as the first man do a little from the ship by the shore , and come along to the place over against the ship , follow with forty man . when he come to the place , his servant spread a long mat upon the ground , on which he sit down , and at the other end of the mat four other of his company do the like , the rest of his man stand round about he , somewhat a far off : when we come to the shore to he with our weapon , he never move from his place , nor any of the other four , nor never mistrust any harm to be offer from we , but sit still he beckon we to come and sit by he , which we perform : and be set he make all sign of joy and welcome , strike on his head and his breast and afterwards on we , to show we 300 be all one , smile and make show the best he can of all love , and familiarity . after he have make a long speech unto we , we present he with diverse thing , which he receive very joyful , and thankful . none of the company dare speak one word all the time : only the four which be at the other end , speak one in the other ear very soft . the king be great obey , and his brother and child reverence : the king himself in person be at our being there , sore wound in a fight which he have with the king of the next country , call Wingina , and be shoot in two place through the body , and once clean through the thigh , but yet he recover : by reason whereof and for that he lie at the chief town of the country , be six day journey off , we see he not at all . after we have present this his brother with such thing as we think he like , we likewise give somewhat to the other that sit with he on the mat : but present he arise and take all from they and put it into his own basket , make sign and token , that all thing ought to be deliver unto he , and the rest be but his servant , and follower . a day or two after this , we fall to trade with they , exchange some thing traffickemth that we have , for chamoy , buff , and dear skin : the savage . when we show he all our packet of merchandise , of all thing that he see , a bright tin dish most please he , which he present take up and clap it before his tin much breast , and after make a hole in the brim thereof and hang it about his neck , make sign that it will defend he against his enemy arrow : for those people maintain a deadly and terrible war , with the people and king adjoin . we exchange our tin dish for twenty skin , worth twenty crown , or twenty noble : and a copper kettle for fifty skin worth fifty crown . they offer we good exchange for our hatchet , and axe , and for knife , and will have give any thing for sword : but we will not 3oi the english voyage depart with any . after two or three day the king brother come aboard the ship , and drink wine , and eat of our meat and of our bread , and like exceed thereof : and after a few day overpass , he bring his wife with he to the ship , his daughter and two or three child : his wife be very well favour , of mean stature , and very bashful : she have on her back a long cloak of leather , with the fiirre side next to her body , and before she a piece of the same : about her forehead she have a band of white corail , and so have her husband many time : in her ear she have bracelet of pearl hang down to her middle , ( whereof we deliver your worship a little bracelet ) and those be of the bigness of good pease . the rest of her woman of the better sort have pendant of copper hang in either ear , and some of the child of the king brother and other noble man , have five or six in either ear : he himself have upon his head a broad plate of gold , or copper , for be unpolished we know not what metal it shall be , neither will he by any mean suffer we to take it off his head , but feel it , it will bow very easy . his apparel be as his wife , only the woman wear their hair long on both side , and the man but on one . they be of colour yellowish , and their hair black for the most part , and yet we see child that have very fine aburne , and chestnut colour hair . after that these woman have be there , there come down from all part great store of people , bring with they leather , coral , diverse kind of die very excellent , and exchange with we : but when Granganimeo the king brother be present , none dare trade but himself : except such as wear red piece of copper on their head like himself : for that be the difference between the noble man , and the governor of country , and the mean sort . and we both note there , and you have understand since by these man , which we bring home , that no people in the world carry more respect to their king , nobili tie , and governor , than these doe . the 302 king brother wife , when she come to we ( as she do many time ) be follow with forty or fifty woman always : and when she come into the ship , she leave they all on land , save she two daughter , her nurse and one or two more . the king brother always keep this order , as many boat as he will come withal to the ship , so many fire will he make on the shore a far off , to the end we may understand with what strength and company he approach . their boat be make of one tree , either of pine or of pitch tree : a pitch tree . wood not common know to our people , nor find grow in England . they have no edge - tool to make they withal : if they have any they be very few , and those it seem they have twenty year since , which , as those two man declare , be out of a wreck which happen upon their coast of some christian ship , be beat that way by some storm and outrageous weather , whereof none of the people be save , but only the ship , or some part of her be cast upon the sand , out of who side they draw the nail and the spike , and with those they make their best instrument . the man - manner ner of make their boat be thus : they burn down some great tree , or take such as