leave it unpunished or not revenge ( because we seek by all mean possible to win they by gentleness ) but that within a few day after our departure from every such town , the people begin to die very fast , and many in short space , in some town about twenty , in some fourty , and in one six score , which in truth be very many in respect of their number . This happen in no place that we can learn , but where we have be , where they use some practise against we , and after such time . the disease also be so strange , that they neither know what it be , nor how to cure it , the like by report of the old man in the country never happen before , time out of mind . a thing special observe by we , as also by the natural inhabitant themselves . insomuch that when some of the inhabitant which be our friend , and especial the wiroan Wingina , have observe such effect in four or five town to follow their wicked practise , they be persuade that it be the work of our god through our mean , and that we by he it may kill and slay who we will without weapon , and not come near they . and thereupon when it have happen that they have understanding that any of their enemy have abuse we in our journey , hear that we have wrought no revenge with our weapon , and fear upon some cause the matter shall so rest : do come and entreat we that we will be a mean to our God that they as other that have deal ill with we might in like sort die , 380 allege how much it will be for our credit and profit , as also they , and hope furthermore that we will do so much at their request in respect of the friendship we profess they . who entreaty although we show that they be ungodly , affirm that our god will not subject himself to any such prayer and request of man : that indeed all thing have be and be to be do according to his good pleasure as he have ordain : and that we to show our self his true servant ought rather to make petition for the contrary , that they with they may live together with we , be make partaker of his truth , and serve he in righteousness , but notwithstanding in such sort , that we refer that , as all other thing , to be do according to his divine will and pleasure , and as by his wisdom he have ordain to be best . yet because the effect fall out so sudden and short after accord to their desire , they think nevertheless it come to pass by our mean , and that we in use such speech unto they , do but dissemble the matter , and therefore come unto we to give we thanks in their manner , that although we satisfy they not in promise , yet in deed and effect we have fulfil their desire . this marvelous accident in all the country wrought so strange opinion of we , that some people can not tell whether to think we god or man , and the rather because that all the space of their sickness , there be no man of we know to die , or that be special sick : they note also that we have no woman among we , neither that we do care for any of they . some therefore be of opinion that we be not bear of woman , and therefore not mortal , but that we be man of a old generation many year past , then rise again to immortality . some will likewise seem to prophecy that there [ three . 279 - ] be more of our generation yet 3 » i to come to kill they and take their place , as some think the purpose be , by that which be already do . those that be immediate to come after we they imagine to be in the air , yet invisible and without body , and that they by our intreaty and for the love of we , do make the people to die in that sort as they do , by shoot invisible bullet into they . to confirm this opinion , their physician ( to excuse their ignorance in cure the disease ) will not be ashamed to say , but earnest make the simple people believe , that the string of blood that they suck out of the sick body , be the string wherewithal ! the invisible bullet be tie and cast . some also think that we shoot they our self out of our piece , from the place where we dwell , and kill the people in any town that have offend we , as we list , how far distant from we soever it be . and other some say , that it be the speciali work of God for our sake , as we our self have cause in some sort to think no less , whatsoever some do , or may imagine to the contrary , special some astrologer , know of the eclipse of the sun which we see the same year before in our voyage thitherward , which unto they appear very terrible . and also of a comet which begin to appear but a few day before the begin of the say sickness . but to exclude they from be the speciali cause of so speciali a accident , there be further reason than i think fit at this present to be allege . Theise their opinion i have set down the more at large , that it may appear unto you that there be good hope they may be bring through discreet deal and government to the embracing of the truth , and consequent to honour , obey , fear and love we . and although some of our company towards the end of the year , show themselves too fierce in slay some of the people in some town , upon cause that on our part may easy enough have be bear 382 withal : yet notwithstanding , because it be on their part just deserve , the alteration of their opinion general and for the most part concern we be the less to be doubt . and whatsoever else they may be , by carefulness of our self need nothing at all to be fear , the conclusion . owe i have ( as i hope ) make relation not of so few and small thing , but that the country ( of man that be indifferent and well dispose ) may be sufficient like : if there be no more know than i have mention , which doubtless and in great reason be nothing to that which remain to be discover , neither the soil , nor commodity . as we have reason so to gather by the difference we find in our travail , for although all which i have before speak of , have be discover and experiment not far from the sea coast , where be our abode and most of our travail : yet sometime as we make our journey further into the main and country ; we find the soil to be fat , the tree great and to grow thin , the ground more firm and deep mould , more and large champion , fine grass , and as good as ever we see any in England ; in some place rocky and far more high and hilly ground , more plenty of their fruit , more abundance of beast , the more inhabit with people , and of great policy and large dominion , with great town and house . why may we not then look for in good hope from the inner part of more and great plenty , as well of other thing , as of those which we have already discover ? unto the Spaniard happen the like in discover the main of the west Indies . the main also of this country of Virginia , extend some way so many hundred of league , as otherwise then by the relation of the inhabitant we have most certain knowledge of , where yet no christian prince have 383 any possession or deal , can but yield many kind of excellent commodity , which we in our discovery have not yet see . what hope there be else to be gather of the nature of the climate , be answerable to the hand of Japan , the land of China , Persia , jury , the hand of Cyprus and Candy , the south part of Greece , Italy and Spain , and of many other notable and famous country , because i mean not to be tedious , i leave to your own consideration . whereby also the excellent temperature of the air there at all season , much warm than in England , and never so vehement hot , as sometime be under and between the tropike , or near they , can be know unto you without further relation . for the wholesomeness thereof i need to say but thus [ three . 280 . ] much : that for all the want of provision , as first of English victuali , except for twenty day , we live only by drink water , and by the victuali of the country , of which some sort be very strange unto we , and may have be think to have alter our temperature in such sort , as to have bring we into some grievous and dangerous this want be disease : second the want of english mean , f ° r take beast , fish and foul , which ' by the help only of the inhabitant and their mean can not be so sudden and easy provide for we , nor in so great number and quantity , nor of that choice as otherwise may have be to our better satisfaction and contentment . some want also we have of clothes . Furthermore in all our travail , which be most special and often in the time of winter , our lodging be in the open air upon the ground . and yet i say for all this , there be but r four of our whole company ( be one hundred and eight ) that die all the year , and that but at the latter end thereof , and upon none of the aforesaid cause . for all four , especial three , be feeble , weak , and 384 sickly person before ever they come thither , and those that know they , much marvel that they live so long be in that case , or have adventure to travail . see therefore the air there be so temperate and wholesome , the soil so fertile , and yield such commodity , as i have before mention , the voyage also thither to and fro be sufficient experiment to be perform twice a year with ease , and at any season thereof : and the deal of sir Walter Ralegh so liberali in large give and grant land there , as be already know , with many help and furtherance else : ( than least that he have grant have be five hundred acre to a man only for the adventure of his person ) i hope there remain no cause whereby the action shall be mislike . if that those which shall thither travail to inhabit and plant be but reasonable provide for the first year , as those be which be transport the last , and be there , do use but that diligence and care , that be requisite , and as they may with ease : there be no doubt , but for the time follow , they may have victual that be excellent good and plenty enough , some more english sort of cattle also hereafter , as some have be before , and be there yet remain , may , and shall be ( god will ) thither transport . so likewise , our kind of fruit , root , and herb , may be there plant and sow , as some have be already , and prove well : and in short time also they may raise so much of those sort of commodity which i have speak of , as shall both enrich themselves , as also other that shall deal with they . and this be all the fruit of our labour , that i have think necessary to advertise you off at this present : what else concern the nature and manner of the inhabitant of Virginia , the number with the particularity of the voyage thither make , and of the action of such as have be by sir Walter Ralegh therein , and there employ , many worthy to be remember , as of Viii 385 2b the first discoverer of the country , of our general for the time sir Richard grinvil , and after his departure of our governor there master Ralph lane , with diverse other direct and employ under their government : of the captain and master of the voyage make since for transportation , of the governor and assistant of those already transport , as of many person , accident , and thing else , i have ready in a discourse by it self in manner of a chronicle , accord to the course of time : which when time shall be think convenient , shall be also publish . thus refer my relation to your favourable construction , expect good success of the action , from he which be to be acknowledge the author and governor , not only of this , but of all thing else , i take my leave of you , this month of February 1587 .