willing receive they again , and that all unfriendly deal past on both part , shall be utter forgive and forget . to this the chief man of croatoan answer , that they will glad do the best they can , and within seven day , bring the wiroance and chief governor of those town with they , to our governor at Roanoak , or their answer . we also understand of the man of croatoan , that our man master how be slay by the remnant of winginos man dwell then at Dasamonguepeuk , with who Wanchese keep company : and also we understand by they of croatoan , how that the 15 Englishman leave at Roanoak the year before , by sir Richard Grinvile , be sudden set upon , by 30 of the man of Secota , Aquascogoc , and Dasamonguepeuk , in manner follow . they convey themselves secret behind the tree , near the house where our man careless live : and have perceive that of those fifteen they can see but eleven only , two of those savage appear to the 11 Englishman , call to they by friendly sign , that but two of their chief man shall come arm to speak with those two savage , who seem also to be unarm . wherefore two of the chief of our Englishman go glad to they : but while one of those savage traitorous embrace one of our man , the other with his sword of wood , which he have secret hide under his manteli , strike he on the head and slay he , and present the other eight and twenty Savages show they self : the other Englishman perceive this , flee to his company , who the savage pursue with their bow , and arrow , so fast , that the Englishman be force to take the house , wherein all their victuali , and weapon be : but the 394 the four voyage to Virginia a . d . . 1587 - savage forthwith set the same on fire : by mean whereof our man be force to take up such weapon as come first to hand , and without order to run forth among the savage , with who they skirmish above a hour . in this skirmish another of our man be shot into the mouth with a arrow , where he die : and also one of the Savages be shoot into the side by one of our man , with a wild fire arrow , whereof he die present . the place where they fight be of great advantage to the savage , by mean of the thick tree , behind which the savage through their nimbleness , defend themselves , and so offend our man with their arrow , that our man be some of they hurt , retire fight to the water side , where their boat lie , with which they flee towards Hatorask . by that time they have row but a quarter of a mile , they espy their four fellow come from a creek thereby , where they have be to fetch oyster : these four they receive into their boat , leave Roanoak , and land on a little island on the right hand of our entrance into the harbour of Hatorask , where they remain a while , but afterward depart , whither as yet we know not . have now sufficient dispatch our business at croatoan , the same day we depart friendly , take our leave , and come aboard the fleet at Hatorask . the eight of August , the governor have long expect the come of the wiroanse of pomeiok , Aquascogoc , Secota , and Dasamonguepeuk , see that the seven day be pass , within which they promise to come in , or to send their answer by the man of croatoan , and no tiding of they hear , be certain also inform by those man of croatoan , that the remnant of Wingina his man , which be leave alive , who dwell at Dasamonquepeuk , be they which have slay George Howe , and be also at the drive of our eleven Englishman from Roanoak , he think to defer the revenge thereof no long . wherefore the same night about midnight , he pass over the water , 395 accompany with captain Stafford , and 24 man , whereof Manteo be one , who we take with we to be our guide to the place where those savage dwell , where he behave himself towards we as a most faithful Englishman . the next day , be the 9 of August , in the morning so early that it be yet dark , we land near the dwell place of our enemy , and very secret convey our self through the wood , to that side , where we have their house between we and the water : and have espy their fire , and some sit about it , we present set on they : the miserable soul herewith amaze , flee into a place of thick reed , grow fast by , where our man perceive they , shoot one of they through the body with a bullet , and therewith we enter the reed , among which we hope to acquit their evil do towards we , but we be deceive , for those savage be our friend , and be come from croatoan to gather the corn and fruit of that place , because they understand our enemy be flee immediate after they have slay George Howe , and for haste have leave all their corn , tobacco , and pompion stand in such sort , that all have be devour of the bird , and deer , if it have not be gather in time : but they have like to have pay dear for it : for it be so dark , that they be naked , and their man and woman apparel all so like other , we know not but that they be all man : and if that one of they which be a wiroances wife have not have a child at her back , she have be slay in stead of a man , and as hap be , another Savage know master Stafford , and run to he , call he by his name , whereby he be save . find our self thus disappoint of our purpose , we gather all the corn , pease , pompion , and tobacco that we find ripe , leave the rest unspoiled , and take menatoan his wife , with the young child , and the other savage with we over the water to Roanoak . 396 the four voyage to Virginia a . d . although the mistake of these savage somewhat grieve Manteo , yet he impute their harm to their own folly , say to they , that if their wiroance have keep their promise in come to the governor at the day appoint , they have not know that mischance . the 13 of August our savage Manteo , by the commandment of sir Walter Ralegh , be christen in [ three . 285 . ] Roanoak , and call lord thereof , and of dasamonguepeuk , in reward of his faithful service . the 18 Elinor , daughter to the governor , and wife to Ananias dare one of the assistant , be deliver of a daughter in Roanoak , and the same be christen there the Sunday follow , and because this child be the first christian bear in Virginia , she be name Virginia . by this time our ship have unlade the good and victual of the planter , and begin to take in wood , and fresh water , and to new calk and trim they for England : the planter also prepare their letter and token to send back into England . Oure two ship , the lion and the flyboat almost ready to depart , the 21 of August , there arise such a tempest at Northeast , that our admiral then ride out of the harbour , be force to cut his cable , and put to sea , where he lie beat off and on six day before he can come to we again , so that we fear he have be cast away , and the rather for that at the time that the storm take they , the most and best of their sailor be leave aland . at this time some controversy arise between the governor and assistant , about choose two out of the twelve assistant , which shall go back as factor for the company into England : for every one of they refuse , save only one , which all other think not sufficient : but at length by much persuade of the governor , Christopher Cooper only agree to go for England : but the next day , through the persuasion of diverse of his familiar friend , he change his mind , so that now the matter stand as at the first . 397 the next day , the 22 of August , the whole company both of the assistant and planter come to the governor , and with one voice request he to return himself into England , for the better and soon obtain of supply , and other necessary for they : but he refuse it , and allege many sufficient cause , why he will not : the one be , that he can not so sudden return back again without his great discredit , leave the action , and so many who he partly have procure through his persuasion , to leave their native country , and undertake that voyage , and that some enemy to he and the action at his return into England will not spare to slander false both he and the action , by say , he go to Virginia , but politic , and to no other end but to lead so many into a country , in which he never mean to stay himself , and there to leave they behind he . theirmeaning also he allege , that see they intend to remove to remove 50 mne far up into the main present , he be country . then absent , his stuff and good may be both spoil , and most of they pilfer away in the carriage , so that at his return he shall be either force to provide himself of all such thing again , or else at his come again to Virginia find himself utter unfurnish , whereof already he have find some proof , be but once from they but three day . wherefore he conclude that he will not go himself . the next day , not only the assistant but diverse other , as well woman as man , begin to renew their request to the governor again , to take upon he to return into England for the supply , and dispatch of all such thing as there be to be do , promise to make he their bond under all their hand and seal for the safe preserve of all his good for he at his return to Virginia , so that if any part thereof be spoil or lose , they will see it restore to he , or his assign , whensoever the same shall be miss 398 the four voyage to Virginia a . d . 1587 . and demand : which bond , with a testimony under their hand and seal , they forthwith make , and deliver into his hand . the copy of the testimony i think good to set down . may it please you , her majesty subject of England , we your friend and countryman , the planter in Virginia , do by these present let you and every of you to understand , that for the present and speedy supply of certain our know and apparent lack and need , most requisite and necessary for the good and happy plant of we , or any other in this land of Virginia , we all of one mind 8c consent , have most earnest entreat , and uncessant request John white , governor of the planter in Virginia , to pass into England , for the better and more assure help , and set forward of the foresay supply : and know assure that he both can best , and will labour and take pain in that behalf for we all , and he not once , but often refuse it , for our sake , and for the honour 8c maintenance of the action , have at last , though much against his will , through our importunacy , yield to leave his government , and all his good among we , and himself in all our behalf to pass into England , of who knowledge and fidelity in handle this matter , as all other , we do assure ourselves by these present , and will you to give all credit thereunto , the 25 of August 1587 . the governor be at the last through their extreme entreat constrain to return into England , have then but half a day respite to prepare himself for the same , depart from Roanoak the seven and twenty of August in the morning , and the same day about midnight , come aboard the flyboat , who [ ill . 286 . ] already have weigh anchor , and ride without the bar , the admiral ride by they , who but the same morning be new come thither again . the same day both the ship weigh anchor , and set sail for England : at this weigh their anchor , twelve of the man which 399 be in the flyboat be throw from the Capstone , which by mean of a bar and brake , come so fast about upon they , that the other two bar thereof strike and hurt most of they so sore , that some of they never recover it : nevertheless they assay present again to weigh their anchor , but be so weaken with the first fling , they be not able to weigh it , but be throw down and hurt the second time . wherefore have in all but fifteen man aboard , and most of they by this unfortunate beginning so bruise , and hurt , they be force to cut their cable , and lose their anchor . nevertheless , they keep company with the admiral , until the seventeenth of September , at which time we fall with Corvo , and see Flores . September . the eighteenth , perceive of all our fifteen man in the flyboat there remain but five , which by mean of the former mischance , be able to stand to their labour : and that the admiral mean not to make any haste for England , but to linger about the island of Tercera for purchase : the flyboat depart for England with letter , where we hope by the help of God to arrive short : but by that time we have continue our course homeward about twenty day , have have sometime scarce and variable wind , our fresh water also by leak almost consume , there arise a storm at Northeast , which for six day cease not to blow so exceed , that we be drive further in those six then we can recover in thirteen day : in which time other of our sailor begin to fall very sick and two of they die , the weather also continue so close , that our master sometime in four day together can see neither sun nor star , and all the beverage we can make , with stink water , dregs of beer , and lees of wine which remain , be but three gallon , and therefore now we expect nothing but famine to perish at sea 400 the 16 of October we make land , but we know not what land it be , bear in with the same land at that day : about sun set we put into a harbour , where we find a hulk of Dublin , and a pinnace of Hampton ride , but we know not as yet what place . this be , neither have we any boat to go ashore , until the pinnace send off their boat to we with 6 or 8 man , of who we understand we be in Smerwick in the west part of Ireland : they also relieve we present with fresh water , wine , and other fresh meat . the 18 the governor and the master rid to dingen a cushe , 5 mile distant , to take order for the new victual of our flyboat for England , and for relief of our sick and hurt man , but within four day after the boatswain , the steward , and the boatswain mate die aboard the flyboat , and the 28 the master mate and two of our chief sailor be bring sick to dingen . Smerwick in the west of Ireland . November . the first the governor ship himself in a ship call the monkey , which at that time be ready to put to sea from dingen for England , leave the flyboat and all his company in Ireland . the same day we set sail , and on the three day we fall with the north side of the land end , and be shut up the Severne , but the next day we double the same for mount bay the 5 the governor land in England at martasew , near saint Michael mount in Cornwall . the 8 we arrive at Hampton , where we understand that our consort the admiral be come to Portsmouth , and have be there three week before : and also that Ferdinando the master with all his company be not only come home without any purchase , but also in such weakness by sickness , and death of their chief man , that they be scarce able to bring their ship into harbour , but be force to let fall anchor without , which they vin 401 2 c can not weigh again , but may all have perish there , if a small bark by great hap have not come to they to help they . the name of the chief man that die be these , Roger large , John Matthew , Thomas smith , and some other sailor , who name i know not at the write hereof . An . Dom . 1587 .