sweet smell , and of most rare virtue in physic for the cure of many disease . it be find by experience to be far better and of more use than the wood which be call Guaiacum , or lignum vitas . for the description , the manner of use , and the manifold virtue thereof , i refer you to the book of monardes , translate and entitle in english , the joy full news from the west Indies . Cedar . a very sweet wood , and fine timber , whereof if nest of chest be there make , or timber thereof fit for sweet and fine bedsted , table , desk , lute , virginal , and many thing else , ( of which there have be proof make already ) to make up fraught with other principali commodity , will yield profit . wine . there be two kind of grape that the soil do yield natural , the one be small and sour , of the ordinary bigness as we in England , the other far great and of himself luscious sweet . when they be plant and husband as they ought , a principali commodity of wine by they may be raise . oil . there be two sort of walnut , both hold oil ; but the one far more plentiful than the other . when there be mill and other device for the purpose , a commodity of they may be raise , because there be infinite store . there be also three several kind of berry in the form of oke - akorne , which also by the experience and use of the inhabitant , we find to yield very good and sweet oil . Furthermore , the bear of the country be common very fat , and in some place there be many . their fatness , because it be so liquid , may well be term oil , and have many speciali use . fur . all along the sea coast there be great store of otter , which be take by wear and other engine make for the purpose , will yield good profit . we hope 355 A . D . 1586 . also of marten fur , and make no doubt by the relation of the people , but that in some place of the [ three . 269 . ] country there be store , although there be but two skin that come to our hand . Luzernes also we have understanding of , although for the time we see none . deer skin dress after the manner of chamoes , or undress , be to be have of the natural inhabitant thousand yearly by way of traffic for trifle , and no more waste or spoil of deer then be and have be ordinary in time before . civet - cat . in our travel there be find one to have be kill by a savage or inhabitant , and in another place the smell where one or more have late be before , whereby we gather , beside then by the relation of the people , that there be some in the country : good profit will rise by they . iron . in two place of the country special , one about fourscore , and the other six score mile from the fort or place where we dwell , we find near the water side the ground to be rocky , which by the trial of a minerali man be find to hold iron rich . it be find in many place of the country else : i know nothing to the contrary , but that it may be allow for a good merchantable commodity , consider there the small charge for the labour and feed of man , the infinite store of wood , the want of wood and deerenesse thereof in England , and the necessity of ballast of ship . copper . a hundred and fifty mile into the main in two town we find with the inhabitant diverse small plate of copper , that have be make as we understand by the inhabitant that dwell further into the country , where as they say be mountain and river that yield also white grain of mettle , which be to be deem silver . for confirmation whereof , at the time of our first arrival in the country , i see , with some other with i , two small piece of silver gross beat , about the weight of a testron , hang in the ear of a 356 wiroan or chief lord that dwell about fourscore mile from we : of who through inquiry , by the number of day and the way , i learn that it have come to his hand from the same place or near , where i after understand the copper be make , and the white grain of metal find . the aforesaid copper we also find by trial to hold silver . pearl . sometime in feed on muscle we find some pearl : but it be our hap to meet with rag , or of a pied colour : not have yet discover those place where we hear of better and more plenty . one of our company , a man of skill in such matter , have gather together from among the savage people about five thousand : of which number he choose so many as . thousand make a fair chain , which for their likeness and fea ^ s uniformity in roundness , orientness , and pidenesse of * ‘ many excellent colour , with equality in greatness , be very fair and rare : and have therefore be present to her majesty , have we not by casualty , and through extremity of a storm lose they , with many thing else in come away from the country . sweet gum of diverse kind , and many other apothecary drug , of which we will make speciali mention , when we shall receive it from such man of skill in that kind , that in take reasonable pain shall discover they more particular than we have do , and then now i can make relation of , for want of the example i have provide and gather , and be now lose , with other thing by casualty before mention . die of diverse kind : there be Shoemake well know , and use in England for black : the seed of a herb call Wasebur , little small root call chap - pacor , and the bark of the tree call by the inhabitant tangomockonomindge : which die be for diverse sort of red : their goodness for our english clothes remain yet to be prove . the inhabitant use they only for the die of hair , and colour of their face , and mantle make of dear skin : and also for the die 357 of rush to make artificiali work withal in their mat and basket : have no other thing beside that they account of , apt to use they for . if they will not prove merchantable , there be no doubt but the planter there shall find apt use for they , as also for other colour which we know to be there . woad : a thing of so great vent and use among English dyer , which can not be yield sufficient in our own country for spare of ground , may be plant in Virginia , there be grind enough . the growth thereof need not to be doubt , when as in the island of the azore it grow plentiful , which be in the same climate . so likewise of mad . we carry thither sugar - cane to plant , which be not so well preserve as be requisite , and beside the time of the year be pass for their set when we arrive , we can not make that proof of they as we desire . notwithstanding , see that they grow in the same climate , in the south part of Spain , and in Barbary , our hope in reason may yet continue . so likewise for orange and Limmons . there may be plant also Quinses . whereby may grow in reasonable time , if the action be diligent prosecute , no small commodity in sugar , sucket , and Marmelades . many other commodity by plant may there also [ three . 270 . ] be raise , which i leave to your discreet and gentle consideration : and many also may be there , which yet we have not discover . two more commodity of great value , one of certainty , and the other in hope , not to be plant , but there to be raise and in short time to be provide , and prepare , i may have specify . so likewise of those commodity already set down i may have say more : as of the particular place where they be find , and best to be plant and prepare : by what mean , and in what reasonable space of time they may be raise to profit , and in what proportion : but because other than well - willer may be there withal acquaint , not to the good of the action , i have witting omit 358 they : know that to those that be well dispose , i have utter , accord to my promise and purpose , for this part sufficient . the second part of such commodity as Virginia be know to yield for victuali and sustenance of man life , usual feed upon by the natural inhabitant ; as also by we , during the time of our abode : and first of such as be sow and husband . agatowr , a kind of grain so call by the inhabitant : the same in the west Indies be call Mayz : English man call it guiny - wheat or turkey - wheat , accord to the name of the country from whence the like have be bring . the grain be about the bigness of our ordinary english pease , and not much different in form and shape : but of diverse colour : some white , some red , some yellow , and some blue . all of they yield a very white and sweet flower : be use accord to his kind , it make a very good bread . we make of the same in the country some malt , whereof be brew as good ale as be to be desire . so likewise by the help of hop , thereof may be make as good beer . it be a grain of marvellous great increase : of a thousand , fifteen hundred , and some two thousand fold . there be three sort , of which two be ripe in eleven and twelve week at the most , sometime in ten , after the time they be set , and be then of height in stalk about six or seven foot . the other sort be ripe in fourteen , and be about ten foot high , of the stalk some bear four head , some three , some one , and some two : every head contain five , six , or seven hundred grain , within a few more or less . of these grain , beside bread , the inhabitant make victuali , either by parch they , or seethe they whole until they 359 be break : or boil the flower with water into a pap - .... Okindgier , call by we bean , because in greatness and partly in shape they be like to the bean in England , save that they be flatter , of more diverse colour , and some pied . the leaf also of the stem be much different . in taste they be altogether as good as our english pease . wickonzowr , call by we pease , in respect of the bean , for distinction sake , because they be much less , although in form they little differ : but in goodness of taste much like , and be far better than our english pease . both the bean and pease be ripe in ten week after they be set . they make they victuali either by boil they all to piece into a broth , or boil they whole until they be soft , and begin to break , as be use in England , either by themselves , or mixed together : sometime they mingle of the wheat with they : sometime also , be whole sodden , they bruise or pun they in a mortar , and thereof make loaf or lump of doughish bread , which they use to eat for variety . macocquer , accord to their several form , call by we pompion , melon , and gourd , because they be of the like form as those kind in England . in Virginia such of several form be of one taste , and very good , and do also spring from one seed . there be of two sort : one be ripe in the space of a month , and the other in two month . there be a herb which in dutch be call Melden . some of those that i describe it unto take it to be a kind of orage : it grow about four or five foot high : of the seed thereof they make a thick broth , and pottage of a very good taste : of the stalk by burn into ash they make a kind of salt earth , wherewithal ! many use sometime to season their broth : other salt they know not . we our self use the leaf also for potherb . 360 there be also another great herb , in form of a marigold , about six foot in height , the head with the flower be a span in breadth . some take it to be Planta solis : of the seed hereof they make both a kind of bread and broth . all the aforesaid commodity for victuali be set or sow , sometime in ground apart and several by themselves , but for the most part together in one ground mixed : the manner thereof , with the dress and prepare of the ground , because i will note unto you the fertility of the soil , i think good brief to describe . the ground they never fatten with muck , dung , or [ three . 271 . ] any other thing , neither plow nor dig it as we in England , but only prepare it in sort as follow . a few day before they sow or set , the man with