be wind fall , and put gum and rosin upon one side thereof , they set fire into it , and when it have burn it hollow , they cut out the coal with their shell , and ever where they will burn it deep or wide they lie on gum , which burn away the timber , and by this mean they fashion very fine boat , and such as will transport twenty man . their oar be like scoop , and many time they set with long pool , as the depth serve . the king brother have great like of our armour , a sword , and diverse other thing which we have : and offer to lay a great box of pearl in gage for they : but we refuse it for this time , because we will not make they know , that we esteem thereof , until we have understood in what place of the country the pearl grow : which now your worship do very well understand . 3 ° 3 he be very just of his promise : for many time we deliver he merchandise upon his word , but ever he come within the day and perform his promise . he send we every day a brace or two of fat buck , cony , hare , fish the best of the world . he send we diverse kind of fruit , melon , walnut , cucumber , gourd , pease , and diverse root , and fruit very excellent good , and of their country corn , which be very white , fair and well taste , and grow three time in five month : in may they sow , in July they reap , in June they sow , in August they reap : in July they sow , in September they reap : only they cast the corn into the ground , break a little of the soft turf with a wooden mattock , or pickeaxe : our self prove the soil , and put some of our pease in the ground , and in ten day they be of fourteen inche high : they have also bean very fair of diverse colour and wonderful plenty : some grow natural , and some in their garden , and so have they both wheat and oat . the soil be the most plentiful , sweet , fruitful and wholesome of all the world : there be above fourteen several sweet smell timber tree , and the most part of their underwoods be bay and such like : they have those oak that we have , but far great and better . after they have be diverse time aboard our ship , my self , with seven moor go twenty mile into the river , that run toward the city of skicoak , which river they call Occam : and the evening follow , we come to a koanoak island , which they call Raonoak , distant from the harbour island , by which we enter , seven league : and at the north end thereof be a village of nine house , build of cedar , and fortify round about with sharp tree , to keep out their enemy , and the entrance into it ' make like a turn pike very artificial ; when we come towards it , stand [ three . 249 . ] near unto the water side , the wife of Granganimo the king brother come run out to meet we very cheerfully and friendly , her husband be not then in the village ; some of her people she command to draw 3 ° 4 1584 - our boat on shore for the beat of the billoe : other 2 % great she appoint to carry we on their back to the dry ground , and other to bring our oar into the house for ers fear of steal . when we be come into the utter room , have five room in her house , she cause we to sit down by a great fire , and after take off our clothes and wash they , and dry they again : some of the woman pluck off our stocking and wash they , some wash our foot in warm water , and she she self take great pain to see all thing order in the best manner she can , make great haste to dress some meat for we to eat . after we have thus dry our self , she bring we a solemn into the inner room , where she set on the board stand - banquet . ing along the house , some wheat like furmentie , sodden venison , and roast , fish sodden , boil , and roast , Melon raw , and sodden , root of diverse kind , and diverse fruit : their drink be common water , but while the grape last , they drink wine , and for want of cask to keep it , all the year after they drink water , but it be sodden with ginger in it , and black cinnamon , and sometime sassafras , and diverse other wholesome , and medi - cinable herb and tree . we be entertain with all love and kindness , and with as much bounty ( after their manner ) as they can possible devise . we find the people most gentle , love , and faithful , void of all guile and treason , and such as live after the manner of the golden age . the people only care how to defend themselves from the cold in their short winter , and to feed themselves with such meat as the soil afford : there meat be very well sodden and they make broth very sweet and savoury : their vessel be earthen pot , very large , white and sweet , their dish be wooden platter of sweet timber : within the place where they feed be their lodging , and within that their idol , which their i dole . they worship , of who they speak incredible thing . while we be at meat , there come in at the gate two or three man with their bow and arrow from hunt , vin 305 u who when we espy , we begin to look one toward another , and offer to reach our weapon : but assoon as she espy our mistrust , she be very much move , and cause some of her man to run out , and take away their bow and arrow and break they , and withal beat the poor fellow out of the gate again . when we depart in the evening and will not tarry all night , she be very sorry , and give we into our boat our supper half dress , pot and all , and bring we to our boat side , in which we lay all night , remove the same a pretty distance from the shore : she perceive our jealousy , be much grieve , and send diverse man and thirty woman , to sit all night on the bank side by we , and send we into our boat five mat to cover we from the rain , use very many word to entreat we to rest in their house : but because we be few man , and if we have miscarry , the voyage have be in very great danger , we dare not adventure any thing , though there be no cause of doubt : for a more kind and love people there can not be find in the world , as far as we have hitherto have trial . beyond this island there be the main land , and over against this island fall into this spacious water , the great river call Occam by the inhabitant on which stand a town call Pomeiock , and six day journey from the same be situate their great city , call skicoak , which this people affirm to be very great : but the savage be never at it , only they speak of it by the report of their father and other man , who they have hear affirm it to be above one hour journey about . into this river fall another great river , call Cipo , in which there be find great store of muscle in which there be pearl : likewise there descend into this Occam , another river , call Nomopana , on the one side whereof stand a great town call Chawanook , and the lord of that town and country be call Pooneno : this Pooneno be not subject to the king of Wingandacoa , 306 but be a free lord : beyond this country be there another king , who they call Menatonon , and these three king be in league with each other . towards the southwest , four day journey be situate a town call Sequotan , which be the southermost town of Wingandacoa , near unto which , six and twenty year pass there be a ship s ^ p cast cast away , whereof some of the people be save , and aw ^‘ those be white people , who the country people preserve . and after ten day remain in a out island unhabit , call Wocokon , they with the help of some of the dweller of Sequotan , fasten two boat of the country together and make mast unto they , and sail of their shirt , and have take into they such victual as the country yield , they depart after they have remain in this out island 3 week : but short after it seem they be cast away , for the boat be find upon the coast , cast a land in another island adjoin : other then these , there be never any people apparel , or white of colour , either see or hear of among these [ he . 250 . ] people , and these aforesaid be see only of the inhabitant of Seco tan , which appear to be very true , for they wonder marvelous when we be among they at the whiteness of our skin , ever covet to touch our breast , and to view the same . beside they have our ship in marvelous admiration , and all thing else be so strange unto they , as it appear that none of they have ever see the like . when we discharge any piece , be it but a hargubuz , they will tremble thereat for very fear , and for the strangeness of the same : for the weapon which themselves use be bow and arrow : the arrow be but of small cane , head with a sharp shell or tooth of a fish sufficient enough to kill a naked man . their sword be of wood harden : likewise they their wa - use wooden breastplate for their defence . they have pan ' beside a kind of club , in the end whereof they fasten the sharp horn of a stag , or other beast . when they go to war they carry about with they their idol , 307 of who they ask counsel , as the roman be wont of the oracle of Apollo . they sing song as they march towards the battle in stead of drum and trumpet : their war be very cruel and bloody , by reason whereof , and of their civil dissension which have happen of late year among they , the people be marvelous waste , and in some place the country leave desolate . adjoin to this country aforesaid call Secotan begin a country call Pomovik , belong to another king who they call piamacum , and this king be in league with the next king adjoin towards the set of the sun , and the country newsiok , situate upon a goodly river call Neus : these king have mortali war with Wingina king of Wingandacoa : but about two year pass there be a peace make between the king Piemacum , and the lord of Secotan , as these man which we have bring with we to England , have give we to understand : but there remain a mortali malice in the secotane , for many injury and slaughter do upon they by this Piemacum . they invite diverse man , and thirty woman of the best of his country to their town to a feast : and when they be altogether merry , and pray before their idol , ( which be nothing else but a mere illusion of the devil ) the captain or lord of the town come sudden upon they , and slay they every one , reserve the woman and child : and these two have oftentimes since persuade we to surprise Piemacum his town , have promise and assure we , that there will be find in it great store of commodity . but whether their persuasion be to the end they may be revenge of their enemy , or for the love they bear to we , we leave that to the trial hereafter . beyond this island call Roanoak , be main island very plentiful of fruit and other natural increase , together with many town , and village , along the side of the continent , some bound upon the island , and some stretch up further into the land . when we first have sight of this country , some think 308 the first land we see to be the continent : but after we enter into the haven , we see before we another mighty long sea : for there lie along the coast a tract of island , two hundred mile in length , adjoin to the ocean sea , and between the island , two or three entrance : when you be enter between they ( these island be very narrow for the most part , as in most place six mile broad , in some place less , in few more ) than there appear another great sea , contain in breadth in some place , forty , and in some fifty , in some twenty mile over , before you come unto the continent : and in this enclose sea there be above a hundred island of diverse bigness , whereof one be sixteen mile long , at which we be , find it a most pleasant and fertile ground , replenish with goodly cedar , and diverse other sweet wood , full of corrant , of flax , and many other notable commodity , which we at that time have no leisure to view . beside this island there be many , as i have say , some of two , or three , of four , of five mile , some more , some less , most beautiful and pleasant to behold , replenish with deer , cony , hare and diverse beast , and about they the goodly and best fish in the world , and in great abundance . thus sir , we have acquaint you with the particular of our discovery , make this present voyage , as far forth as the shortness of the time we there continue will affbord we take view of : and so content our self with this service at this time , which we hope hereafter to enlarge , as occasion and assistance shall | be give , we resolve to leave the country , and to apply our self to return for England , which we do accord , and arrive safe in the west of England about the midst of September . and whereas we have above certify you of the country take in possession by we , to her majesty use , and so to you by her majesty grant , we think good for the better assurance thereof to record some of the particular gentleman , and man of account , who then be 3 ° 9 Roanoak sixteen mile long . present , as witness of the same , that thereby all occasion of cavil to the title of the country , in her majesty behalf may be prevent , which otherwise , such as like not the action may use and pretend , who name be : master Philip Amadas , master Arthur Barlow , j - captain . it William Greenevile , John wood , James Browewich , ! Henry green , ’ Benjamin wood , Simon Ferdinando , Nicholas Petman , John Hewes , ► of the company . we bring home also two of the savage be lusty man , who name be Wanchese and Manteo .