feather of fowl of diverse colour : they come towards we very cheerful , make great shout of admiration ; show we where we may come to land most safe with our boat . we enter up the say river into the land about half a league , where it make a most pleasant lake about 3 . league in compass : on the which they row from the one side to the other to the number of 30 . of their small boat , wherein be many people which pass from one shore to the other to come and see we . and behold upon the sudden ( as it be wont to fall out in sail ) a contrary flaw of wind come from the sea , we be enforce to return to our ship , leave this land to our great discontentment , for the great commodity and pleasantness thereof , which we suppose be not without some riches , all the hill show minerali matter in they . we weigh anchor , and sail towards the east , for so the coast trend , and so always for 50 . league be in the sight thereof , we discover a hand in form of a triangle , distant from the main land 10 . league , about the bigness of the hand of the Rhodes : it be full of hill cover with tree , well people , for we see fire all along the coast : we give it the name of your majesty mother , not stay there by reason of the weather be contrary . and we come to another land be 15 . league distant from the hand , where we find a pass good haven , wherein be enter , we find about 20 . small boat of the people , which with diverse cry and wondering come about our ship , come no near than 50 . pace towards we : they stay and behold the artificialness of our ship , our shape and apparel : than they all make a loud shout together , 431 people clad with feather of diverse colour . the pleasantness and riches of the land . the coast trend to the east . the descrip - tionofclaudia hand , ten league from the may ne . Claudia be mother of king Francis . a pass good haven . declare that they rejoice . when we have something animate they , use their gesture , they come so near we , that we cast they certain bell and glass , and many toy , which when they have receive , they look on they with laugh , and come without fear aboard our ship . there be among these people 2 . king of so goodly stature and shape as be possible to declare : the elder be about 40 . year of age , the second be a young man of 20 . year old . their apparel be on this manner : the elder have upon his naked body a heart skin wrought artificial with diverse branch like damask : his head be bare with the hair tie up behind with diverse knot : about his neck he have a large chain , garnish with diverse stone of sundry colour : the young man be almost apparel after you same manner . this be the goodly people , and of the fair condition that we have find in this our voyage . they exceed we in bigness : they be of the colour of brass , some of they incline more to whiteness : other be of yellow colour , of comely visage , with long and black hair , which they be very careful to trim and deck up : they be black and quick eye , and of sweet and pleasant countenance , imitate much the old fashion . i write not to your majesty of the other part of their body , have all such proportion as appertain to any handsome man . the woman be of the like conformity and beauty : very handsome and well favour , of pleasant countenance , and comely to behold : they be as well manner and continent as any woman , and of good education : they be all naked save their privy part , which they cover with a dear skin branch or embroider as the man use : there be also of they which be on their arm very rich skin of Luzernes : they adorn their head with diverse ornament make of their own hair , which hang down before on both side their breast : other use other kind of dress themselves like unto 432 the woman of Egypt and Syria , these be of the elder sort : and when they be marry , they be diverse toy , accord to the usage of the people of the east , aswell man as woman . among who we see many plate of wrought copper , which they esteem more than gold , which for the colour they make no account of , for that among all other it be count the base : they make most account of azure and Red . the thing that they esteem most of all those which we give they , be bell , crystal of azure colour , and other toy to hang at their ear or about their neck . they do not desire cloth of silk or of gold , much less of any other sort , neither care they for thing make of steel and iron , which we often show they in our armour which they make no wonder at , and in behold they they only ask the art of make they : the like they do at our glass , which when they behold , they sudden laugh and give they we again . they be very liberali , for they give that which they have : we become great friend with these , and one day we enter into the haven with our ship , whereas before we ride a league off at sea by reason of the contrary weather . they come in great company of their small boat unto the ship with their face all bepaint with diverse colour , show we that it be a sign of joy , bring we of their victual , they make sign unto we where we may safe ride in the haven for the safeguard of our ship keep still our company : and after we be come to a anchor , we bestow 15 day in provide our self many necessary thing , whither every day the people repair to see our ship bring their wife with they , whereof they be very jealous : and they themselves enter aboard the ship and stay there a good space , cause their wife to stay in their boat , and for all the intreaty we can make , offer to give they diverse thing , we can never obtain that Viii 1524 . copper more esteem than guide . [ Iii . 299 . ] 433 2 e they will suffer they to come aboard our ship . and oftentimes one of the two king come with his queen , and many gentleman for their pleasure to see we , they all stay on the shore 200 pace from we , send a small boat to give we intelligence of their come , say they will come to see our ship : this they do in token of safety , and assoon as they have answer from we , they come immediate , and have stay a while to behold it , they wonder at hear the cry and noise of the mariner . the queen and her maid stay in a very light boat , at a hand a quarter of a league off , while the king abide a long space in our ship utter diverse conceit with gesture , view with great admiration all the furniture of the ship , demand the property of every thing particular . he take likewise great pleasure in behold our apparel , and in taste our meat , and so courteous take his leave depart . and sometime our man stay 2 or 3 day on a little hand near the ship for diverse necessary ( as it be the use of seaman ) he return with 7 or 8 of his gentleman to see what we do , and ask of we oftentimes if we mean to make any long abode there , offer we of their provision : then the king draw his bow and run up and down with his gentleman , make much sport to gratify our man : we be oftentimes within the land 5 or 6 league , which we find as pleasant as be possible to declare , very apt for any kind of husbandry of corn , wine and oil : for that there be plain 25 or 30 league broad , open and without any impediment , of tree of such fruitfulness , that any seed be sow therein , will bring forth most excellent fruit . we enter afterward into the wood , which we find so great and thick , that any army be it never so great may have hide it self therein , the tree whereof be oak , cypress tree , and other sort unknown in Europe . we find Pomi appii , damson tree , and nut tree , and 434 many other sort of fruit differ from we : there be beast in great abundance , as heart , dear , luzern , and other kind which they take with their net and bow which be their chief weapon : the arrow which they use be make with great cunning , and in stead of iron , they head they with flint , with jasper stone and hard marble and other sharp stone which they use in stead of iron to cut tree , and to make their boat of one whole piece of wood , make it hollow with great and wonderful art , wherein io . or 12 . man may sit commodious : their oar be short and broad at the end , and they use they in the sea without any danger , and by main force of arm , with as great speediness as they listen themselves . we see their house make in circular or round form io the fashion of or 12 pace in compass , make with half circle of their houses - timber , separate one from another without any order of building , cover with mat of straw wrought cunning together , which save they from the wind and rain : and if they have the order of building and perfect skill of workmanship as we have , there be no doubt but that they will also make eftsoons great and stately building . for all the sea coast be full of clear and glister stone , and alabaster , and therefore it be full of good haven and the coast full harborough for ship . they move the foresay house from one place to another accord to the commodity of the place and season wherein they will make their abode , and only take off the mat , they have other house bud incontinent . the father and the whole family dwell together in one house in great number : in some of they we see 25 or 30 person . they feed as the other doe aforesaid of pulse which grow in that country with better order of husbandry then in the other . they observe in their sow the course of the moon and the rise of certain star , and diverse other custom speak of by antiquity . Moreover they live by 435 their cure with tobacco and perfume . [ in . 300 . ] ^ . degree and 2 . tierce . the description of a notable haven in 41 . deg . and 2 . tierce . 150 league . a show of minerail . the english voyage hunt and fish . they live long , and be seidome sick , and if they chance to fall sick at any time , they heal themselves with fire without any physician , and they say that they die for very age . they be very pitiful and charitable towards their neighbour , they make great lamentation in their adversity : and in their misery , the kindred reckon up all their felicity . at their departure out of life , they use mourning mix with sing , which continue for a long space . this be as as we can learn of they . this land be situate in the Paralele of Rome , in 41 . degree and 2 terce : but somewhat more cold by accidentali cause and not of nature , ( as i will declare unto your highness elsewhere ) describe at this present the situation of the foresay country , which lie east and west , i say that the mouth of the haven lie open to the south half a league broad , and be enter within it between the east and the north , it stretch twelve league : where it wax broad and broad , and make a gulf about 20 . league in compass , wherein be five small island very fruitful and pleasant , full of hie and broad tree , among the which island any great navy may ride safe without any fear of tempest or other danger . afterwards turn towards the south in the enter into the haven on both side there be most pleasant hill , with many river of most clear water fall into the sea in the midst of this entrance there be a rock of free stone grow by nature apt to build any castle or fortress there , for the keep of the haven . the five of May be furnish with all thing necessary , we depart from the say coast keep along in the sight thereof , and we sail 150 . league find it always after one manner : but the land somewhat high with certain mountain , all which bear a show of minerail matter , we seek not to land there in any place , because the weather serve our turn for sail : but we suppose that it be like the former , the coast 436 the coast runningeastward 50 . league . here the people be ^ n to be more savage . run eastward for the space of fifty league . and trending afterward to the north , we find another land high full of thick wood , the tree whereof be firre , cipress and such like as be wont to grow in cold country . the people differ much from the other , and look how much the former seem to be courteous and gentle : so much be these full of rudeness and ill manner , and so barbarous that by no sign that ever we can make , we can have any kind of traffic with they . they cloth themselves with bear skin and luzerne and seal and other beast skin . their food , as far as we can perceive , repair often unto their dwelling , we suppose to be by hunt and fish , and of certain fruit , which be a kind of root which the earth yield of her own accord . they have no grain , neither saw we any kind or sign of tillage , neither be the land , for the barrenness thereof , apt to bear fruit or seed . if at any time we desire by exchange to have any of their commodity , they use to come to the sea shore upon certain craggy rock , and we stand in our boat , they let down with a rope what it please they to give we , cry continual that we shall not approach to the land , demand immediate the exchange , take nothing but knife , fishooke , and tool to cut withal , neither do they make any account of our courtesy . and when we have nothing leave to exchange with they , when we depart from they , the people show all sign of discourtesy and disdain , as be possible for any creature to invent . we be in despite of they 2 or 3 league within the land , be in number 25 arm man of we : and when we go on shore they shoot at we with their bow make great outcry , and afterward flee into the wood . we find not in this land any thing notable , or of importance , save very great wood and certain hill , they may have some minerali matter in they , because we see many of they bead of have beadstone of copper hang at their ear . we copper . 437 the english voyage depart from thence keep our course Northeast along the coast , which we find more pleasant champion and without wood , with high mountain within the land continue direct along the coast for the space of fifty league , we discover 32 island lie all near the land , be small and pleasant to the view , high and have many turn and wind between they , make many fair harborough and channel as they do in the gulf of Venice in Sclavonia , and Dalmatia , we have no knowledge or acquaintance with the people : we suppose they be of the same manner and nature as the other be . sail Northeast for the space of 150 . league we approach to the land that in time past be discover by the briton , which be in fifty degree . have now spend all our provision and victual , and have discover about 700 league and more of new country , and be furnish with water and wood , we conclude to return into France . touch the religion of this people , which we have find , for want of their language we can not understand neither by sign nor gesture that they have any religion or law at all , or that they do acknowledge any first cause or mover , neither that they worship the heaven or star the sun or moon or other planet , and much less whither they be idolater , neither can we learn whither that they use any kind of sacrifice or other adoration , neither in their village have they any temple or house of prayer . we suppose that they have no religion at all , and that they live at their own liberty . and that all this proceed of ignorance , for that they be very easy to be persuade : and all that they see we christian do in our divine service , they do the same with the like imitation as they see we to do it .