it happen one day , as certain of they be in cut of root in the grove , that they espy on the sudden a Indian that hunt the deer , which find himself so near upon they , be much dismay , but our man begin to draw near unto he and to use he so courteous , that he become assure and follow they to charles - fort , where every man seek to do he pleasure . captain Albert be very joyful of his come , which after he have give he a shirt and some other trifle , he ask he of his dwell : the Indian answer he that it be far up within the river , and that he be vassal of king Audusta : he also show he with his hand the limit of his habitation . after much other talk the Indian desire leave to depart , because it draw towards night , which captain Albert grant he very willing . certain day after the captain determine to sail towards Audusta , where be arrive , by reason of the honest entertainment which he have give to the Indian , he be so courteous receive , that the king talk with he of nothing else but of the desire which he have to become his friend : give he beside to understand that he be his friend and ally , he shall have the amity of four other king , which in might and authority be able to do much for his sake : beside all this , in his necessity they may be able to succour he with victual . one of these king be call Mayon , another Hoya , the three Touppo , and the four stalame . he tell he moreover , that they will be very glad , when they shall understand the news of his come , and 474 therefore he pray he to vouchsafe to visit they . the captain willing consent unto he , for the desire that he have to purchase friend in that place . therefore they depart the next morning very early , and first arrive at the house of king Touppa , and afterward go into the other king house , except the house of king stalame . he receive of each of they all the amiable courtesy that may be : they show themselves to be as affection friend unto he as be possible , and offer unto he a thousand small present . after that he have remain by the space of certain day with these strange king , he determine to take his leave : and be come back to the house of Audusta , he command all his man to go aboard their pinnace : for he be mind to go towards the country of king stalame , the country which dwell towards the north the distance of 15 great league from charles - fort . therefore as they sail up kagfus north - the river they enter into a great current , which they ward of it follow so far till they come at the last to the house of charles - fort . stalame : which bring he into his lodging , where he seek to make they the best cheer he can devise . he present immediate unto captain Albert his bow and arrow , which be a sign and confirmation of alliance between they . he present he with chamoy chamoy skin . the captain see the best part of the day s ^ nnes - was now past , take his leave of king stalame to return to charles - fort , where he arrive the day follow . by this time the friendship be grow so great between our man and king Audusta , that in a manner all thing be common between he and they : in such sort that this good Indian king do nothing of importance , but he call our man thereunto . for when the time draw the feast of near of the celebrate their feast of Toya , which be ceremony most strange to recite , he send ambassador pjj j to our man to request they on his behalf to be there present . whereunto they agree most willing for the desire that they have to understand what this may be . they embark themselves therefore and sail towards 475 The Indian trim of themselves with rich feather . the english voyage the king house , which be already come forth on the way towards they , to receive they courteous , to bid they welcome and bring they to his house , where he seek to entreat they the best he may . in the mean while the Indian prepare themselves to celebrate the feast the morrow after , and the king bring they to see the place , wherein the feast shall be keep : where they see many woman round about , which labour by all mean to make the place clean and neat . this place be a great circuit of ground with open prospect and round in figure . on the morrow therefore early in the morning , all they which be choose to celebrate the feast , be paint and trim with rich feather of diverse colour , put themselves on the way to go from the king house towards the place of Toya : whereunto when they be come they set themselves in order , and follow three Indian , which in paint and in gesture be differ from the rest : each of they bear a Tabret in their hand , dance and sing in a lamentable tune , when they begin to enter into the midst of the round circuit , be follow of other which answer they again . after that they have sing , dance , and turn 3 time , they fall on run like unbridle horse , through the midst of the thick wood . and then the Indian woman continue all the rest of the day in tear as sad and woeful as be possible : and in such rage they cut the arm of the young girl , which they lance so cruel with sharp shell of muscle that the blood follow which they fling into the air , cry out three time , he Toya . the king Audusta have gather all our man into his house , while the feast be celebrate , and be exceed offend when he see they laugh . this he do , because the Indian be very angry when they be see in their ceremony . notwithstanding one of our man make such shift that by subtle mean he get out of the house of Audusta , and secret go and hide himself behind a very thick bush , where at his pleasure , he may easy descry the ceremony of the feast . they three that begin 476 1587 - the feast be name Jawas : and they be as it be three Jawas be priest of the Indian law : to who they give credit and their rtestes - beliefe partly because that by kindred they be ordain to be over their sacrifice , and partly also because they be so subtle magician that any thing that be lose be Maidans . straightway recover by their mean . again they be position . not only reverence for these thing , but also because they heal disease by i wot not what kind of knowledge and skill they have . those that run so through the wood return two day after : after their return they begin to dance with a cheerful courage in the midst of the fair place , and to cheer up their good old Indian father , which either by reason of their too great age , or by reason of their natural indisposition and feebleness be not call to the feast . when all these dance be end , they fall on eat with such a greediness , that they seem rather to devour their meat then to eat it , for they have neither eat nor drink the day of the feast , nor the two day follow . our man be not forget at this good cheer , for the Indian send for they all thither , show themselves very glad of their presence . while they remain certain time with the Indian , a man of we get a young boy for certain trifle , and inquire of he , what the Indian do in the wood during their absence : which boy make he understand by sign , that the Jawas have make invocation to Toya , and that by magical character invocation of they have make he come that they may speak with the Jawas or he and demand diverse strange thing of he , which for unt ° fear of the Jawas he dare not utter . they have also y ’ many other ceremony , which i will not here rehearse for fear of molest the reader with a matter of so small importance . when the feast therefore be finish our man return unto charles - fort : where have remain but a while their victual begin to wax short , which force they their victual to have recourse unto their neighbour , and to pray they fail they . to succour they in their necessity : which give they 477 the Indian manner of live in the winter time of mast and root . king Covexis mighty and renown . king ovade . king Maccou . [ he . 316 . ] ovade country in the river Belle . the english voyage part of all the victual which they have , and keep no more unto themselves then will serve to sow their field . they tell they far that for this cause it be needful for they to retire themselves into the wood , to live of mast and root until the time of harvest , be as sorry as may be that they be not able any far to aid they . they give they also counsel to go towards the country of king Covexis a man of might and renown in this province , which make his abode towards the south abound at all season and replenish with such quantity of mill , corn , and bean that by his only succour they may be able to live a very long time . but before they shall come into his territory , they be to repair unto a king call ovade the brother of Covexis , which in mill , bean , and corn be no less wealthy , and withal be very liberali , and which will be very joy full if he may but once see they . our man perceive the good relation which the Indian make they of those two king resolve to go thither ; for they feel already the necessity which oppress they . therefore they make request unto king Maccou , that it will please he to give they one of his subject to guide they the right way thither : whereupon he condescend very willing , know that without his favour they shall have much ado to bring their interprize to pass . wherefore after they have give order for all thing necessary for the voyage , they put themselves to sea , and sail so far that in the end they come into the country of ovade , which they find to be in the river Belle . be there arrive they perceive a company of Indian , which assoon as they know of their be there come before they . assoon as they be come near they , their guide show they by sign that ovade be in this company , wherefore our man set forward to salute he . and then two of his son which be with he , be goodly and strong man salute they again in very good sort , and use very friendly entertainment on their part . the king immediate begin to make a oration in his Indian language of the great pleasure and contentment which he have to see they in that place , protest that he will become so loyal a friend of they hereafter , that he will be their faithful defendor against all they that will offer to be their enemy . after these speech he lead they towards his house , where he seek to entreat they very courteous . his house be hang about with tapestry of feather of diverse colour the height of a tapistrieof pike . Moreover the place where the king take his rest be cover with white coverlette embroider ietsedgedwlth with devise of very witty and fine workmanship , and red fringe . fringe round about with a fringe die in the colour of scarlet . they advertise the king by one of the guide which they bring with they , how that ( have hear of his great liberality ) they have put to the sea to come to beseech he to succour they with victual in their great want and necessity : and that in so do , he shall bind they all hereafter to remain his faithful friend and loyal defender against all his enemy . this good Indian assoon ready to do they pleasure , as they be to demand it , command his subject that they shall fill our pinnace with will and bean . afterwards he thehberahtie cause they to bring he six piece of his tapestry ofkingqvade . make like little coverlet , and give they to lour man with so liberal a mind , as they easy perceive the desire which he have to become their friend . in recompense of all these gift our man give he two cut hook and certain other trifle , wherewith he hold himself great satisfy . This be do , our man take their leave of the king , which for their farewell , say nothing else but that they shall return if they