their cask a shore for fresh water , so we defer our 414 i59 °- going to Roanoak until the next morning , and cause some of those sailor to dig in those sandy hill for fresh water whereof we find very sufficient . that water night we return aboard with our boat and our tn san whole company in safety . the next morning be the 17 of August , our boat and company be prepare again to go up to Roanoak , but captain Spicer have then send his boat ashore for fresh water , by mean whereof it be ten of the clock aforenoon before we put from our ship which be then come to a anchor within two mile of the shore . the admiral boat be half way towards the shore , when captain Spicer put off from his ship . the admiral boat first pass the breach , but not without some danger of sink , for we have a sea break into our boat which fill we half full of water , but by the will of God and careful styrage of captain cook we come safe ashore , save only that our furniture , victual , match and powder be much wet and spoil . for at this time the wind blue at Northeast and direct into the harbour so great a gale , that the sea break extreme on the bar , and the tide go very forcible at the entrance . by that time our admiral boat be hail ashore , and most of our thing take out to dry , captain Spicer come to the entrance of the breach with his mast stand up , and be half pass over , but by the rash and undiscreet styrage of Ralph Skinner his master mate , a very dangerous sea break into their boat and overset they quite , the man keep the boat some in it , and some hang on it , but the next sea set the boat on ground , where it beat so , that some of they be force to let go their hold , hope to wade ashore ; but the sea still beat they down , so that they can neither stand nor swim , and the boat twice or thrice be turn the keel upward , whereon captain Spicer and captain Skinner hang until they sink , and be see no more . but four that can swim a little keep themselves in ' deep water and be save by captain cook mean , 415 who so soon as he see their oversetting , strip himself , and four other that can swim very well , and with all haste possible row unto they , and save four . they be a 11 in all , and 7 of the chief be drown , who name be Edward Spicer , Ralph Skinner , Edward Kelley , Thomas Bevis , Hance the surgeon , Edward Kelborne , Robert Coleman . this mischance do so much discomfort the sailor , that they be all of one mind not to go any further to seek the planter . but in the end by the commandment and persuasion of i and captain cook , they prepare the boat : and see the captain and i so resolute , they seem much more willing . our boat and all thing fit again , we put off from Hatorask , be the number of 19 person in both boat : but before we can get to the place , where our planter be leave , it be so exceed dark , that we overshoot the place a quarter of a mile : there we espy towards the north end of the hand you light of a great fire through the wood , to the which we present row : when we come right over against it , we let fall our Grapnel near the shore , and sound with a trumpet a call , and afterwards many familiar english tune of song , and call to they friendly ; but we have no answer , we therefore land at daybreak , and coming to the fire , we find the grass and sundry rot tree burn about the place . from hence we go through the wood to that part of the hand direct over against Dasamongwepeuk , and from thence we return by the water side , round about the north point of the hand , until we come to the place where i leave our colony in the year 1586 . in all this way we see in the sand the print of the savage foot of 2 or 3 sort tread you night , and as we enter up the sandy bank upon a tree , in the very brow thereof be curious carve these fair roman letter c r o : which letter present we know to signify the place , where i shall find the planter seat , accord to a secret token agree upon between they and i at my last departure 416 from they , which be , that in any way they shall not fail to write or carve on the tree or post of the door the name of the place where they shall be seat ; for at my come away they be prepare to remove from Roanoak 50 mile into the main . therefore at my departure from they in An . 1587 i will they , that if they shall happen to be distress in any of those place , that than they shall carve over the letter or name , a cross and in this form , but we find no such sign of distress . and have well consider of this , we pass towards the place where they be leave in [ three . 293 . ] sundry house , but we find the house take down , and the place very strong enclose with a high palisado of great tree , with cortynes and flanker very fort - like , and one of the chief tree or post at the right side of the entrance have the bark take off , and 5 foot from the ground in fair capitali letter be grave croatoan without any cross or sign of distress ; this do , we enter into the palisado , where we find many bar of iron , two pig of lead , four iron fowler , iron sacker - shotte , and such like heavy thing , throw here and there , almost overgrow with grass and weed . from thence we go along by the water side , towards the point of the creek to see if we can find any of their boat or pinnisse , but we can perceive no sign of they , nor any of the last falcon and small ordinance which be leave with they , at my departure from they . at our return from the creek , some of our sailor meet we , tell we that they have find where diverse chest have be hide , and long sithence dig up again and break up , and much of the good in they spoil and scatter about , but nothing leave , of such thing as the savage know any use of , undefaced . present captain cook and i go to the place , which be in the end of a old trench , make two year pass by captain Amadas : wheere we find five chest , that have be careful hide of the planter , and of the same chest three be my own , and about the place Viii 417 2d many of my thing spoil and break , and my book tear from the cover , the frame of some of my picture and map rot and spoil with rain , and my armour almost eat through with rust ; this can be no other but the deed of the Savages our enemy at Dasamongwepeuk , who have watch the departure of our man to croatoan ; and assoon as they be depart , dig up every place where they suspect any thing to be bury : but although it much grieve i to see such spoil of my good , yet on the other side i great joy that i have safe find a certain token of their safe be at croatoan , which be the place where Manteo be bear , and the savage of the hand our friend . when we have see in this place so much as we can , we return to our boat , and depart from the shore towards our ship , with as much speed as we can : for the weather begin to overcast , and very likely that a foul and stormy night will ensue . therefore the same evening with much danger and labour , we get our self aboard , by which time the wind and sea be so great rise , that we doubt our cable and anchor will scarce hold until morning : wherefore the captain cause the boat to be man with five lusty man , who can swim all well , and send they to the little hand on the right hand of the harbour , to bring aboard six of our man , who have fill our cask with fresh water : the boat the same night return aboard with our man , but all our cask ready fill they leave behind , unpossible to be have aboard without danger of cast away both man and boat : for this night prove very stormy and foul . the next morning it be agree by the captain and my self , with the master and other , to weigh anchor , and go for the place at croatoan , where our planter be : for that then the wind be good for that place , and also to leave that cask with fresh water on shore in the hand until our return . so then 418 they bring the cable to the Capston , but when the anchor be almost apecke , the cable break , by mean whereof we lose another anchor , wherewith we drive so fast into the shore , that we be force to let fall a three anchor : which come so fast home that the ship be almost aground by Kenricks mount : so that we be force to let slip the cable end for end . and if it have not chance that we have fall into a channel of deep water , close by the shore than we account of , we can never have go clear of the point that lie to the southward of Kenricks mount . be thus clear of some danger , and get into deep water , but not without some loss : for we have but one cable and anchor leave we of four , and the weather grow to be foul and foul ; our victual scarce , and our cask and fresh water lose : it be therefore determine that we shall go for saint John or some other hand to the southward for fresh water . and it be further purpose , that if we can any way supply our want of victual and other necessary , either at Hispaniola , Sant John , or Trynidad , that than we shall continue in the Indies all the winter follow , with hope to make 2 . rich voyage of one , and at our return to visit our countryman at Virginia . the captain and the whole company in the admiral ( with my earnest petition ) thereunto agree , so that it rest only to know what the master of the moonlight our consort will do herein . but when we demand they leave the coast of Virpnia , they if they will accompany we in that new determination , they allege that their weak and leak ship be not able to continue it ; wherefore the same night we part , leave the moonlight to go direct for England , and the admiral set his course for Trynidad , which course we keep two day . on the 28 . the wind change , and it be set on [ three . 294 . ] foul weather every way : but this storm bring the wind west and northwest , and blow so forcible , that we be able to bear no sail , but our forecourse 419 half mast high , wherewith we run upon the wind perforce , the due course for England , for that we be drive to change our first determination for Trynidad , and stand for the hand of azore , where we purpose to take in fresh water , and also there hope to meet with some english man of war about those hand , at who hand we may obtain some supply of our want . and thus continue our course for the azore , sometime with calm , and sometime with very scarce wind , on the fifteen of September the wind come south southeast , and blow so exceed , that we be force to lie atry all that day . at this time by account we judge our self to be about twenty league to the west of Cuervo and Flores , but about night the storm cease , and fair weather ensue . on Thursday the seventeenth we see Cuervo and Flores , but we can not come to anchor that night , by reason the wind shift . the next morning be the eighteenth , stand in again with Cuervo , we escry a sail ahead we , to who we give chase : but when we come near he , we know he to be a Spaniard , and hope to make sure purchase of he : but we understand at our speak with he , that he be a prize , and of the Domingo fleet already take by the John our consort , in the Indies . we learn also of this prize , that our vice - admiral and pinnace have fight with the rest of the Domingo fleet , and have force they with their admiral to flee unto Jamaica under the fort for succour , and some of they run themselves aground , whereof one of they they bring away , and take out of some other so much as the time will permit . and further we understand of they , that in their return from Jamaica about the organ near cape saint Anthony , our vice - admiral meet with two ship of the main land , come from Mexico , bind for Havana , with who he fight : in which fight our viceadmirals lieutenant be slay , 420 and the captain right arm strike off , with four other of his man slay , and sixteen hurt . but in the end he enter , and take one of the spanish ship , which be so sore shoot by we under water , that before they can take out her treasure she sink ; so that we lose thirteen pipe of silver which sink with she , 13 - Pfa * ° f beside much other rich merchandise . and in the stlver ’ mean time the other spanish ship be pierce with nine shot under water , get away ; who our vice - admiral intend to pursue : but some of their man in the top make certain rock , which they see above water near the shore , to be galley of Havana and Cartagena , come from Havana to rescue the two ship ; wherefore they give over their chase , and go for England . after this intelligence be give we by this our prize , he depart from we , and go for England . on Saturday the 19 of September we come to a anchor near a small village on the north side of Flores , where we find ride 5 . English man of war , of who we understand that our vice - admiral and prize be go thence for England . one of these five be the moonlight our consort , who upon the first sight of our come into Flores , set sail and go for England , not take any leave of we . on Sunday the 20 . the mary rose , admiral of the queen fleet , wherein be general sir John Hawkins , stand in with flores , and diverse other of the queen ship , namely the hope , the Nonpareilia , the rainbow , the swift - sure , the foresight , with many other good merchant ship of war , as the Edward Bonaventure , the merchant royal , the amity , the eagle , the dainty of sir John Hawkins , and many other good ship and pinnace , all attend to meet with the king of Spain fleet , come from terra firma of the west Indies . the 22 . of September we go aboard the rainbow , and towards night we speak with the swift - sure , and give he 3 . piece . the captain desire our 421 company ; wherefore we willing attend on they : who at this time with io . other ship stand for faial . but the general with the rest of the fleet be separate from we , make two fleet , for the sure meeting with the spanish fleet . on Wednesday the 23 . we see gratiosa , where the admiral and the rest of the queen fleet be come together . the admiral put forth a flag of counsel , in which be determine that the whole fleet shall go for the main , and spread themselves on the coast of Spain and Portugal , so far as convenient they may , for the sure meeting of the spanish fleet in those part . the 26 . we come to faial , where the admiral with some other of the fleet anchor , othersome ply up and down between that and the Pico until midnight , at which time the Antony shoot off a piece and weigh , show his light : after who the whole fleet stand to the east , the wind at Northeast by east . on Sunday the 27 . towards evening we take our [ three . 295 . ] leave of the admiral and the whole fleet , who stand to the east . but our ship accompany with a flyboat stand in again with saint George , where we purpose to take in more fresh water , and some other fresh victual . on Wednesday the 30 . of September , see the wind hang so northerly , that we can not attain the hand of S . George , we give over our purpose to water there , and the next day frame our due course for England . October . the 2 . of October in the morning we see saint Michael hand on our star board quarter . the 23 . at 10 . of the clock afore noon , we see Ushant in Britaigne . on Saturday the 24 . we come in safety , God be thank , to a anchor at Plymmouth .