want victual , and that they may assure themselves of he , that they shall qvade coun - neve want any thing that be in his power . wherefore trey twenty - they embark themselves , and sail towards charles - fort , which from this place may be some five and f ^ m ^ charles tcn & alCf league distant . but as soon as our man first . 479 the fort set on fire by casualty . the fort reedify by the savage in the space of sz hour . the english voyage think themselves at their ease , and free from the danger whereunto they have expose themselves night and day in gather together of victual here and there : lo , even as they be asleep , the fire catch in their lodging with such fury , be increase by the wind , that the room that be build for they before our man departure , be consume in a instant , without be able to save any thing , save a little of their victual . whereupon our man be far from all succour , find themselves in such extremity , that without the aid of almighty God , the only searcher of the heart and thought of man , which never forsake those that seek he in their affliction , they have be quite and clean out of all hope . for the next day betimes in the morning the king Audusta and king Maccou come thither , accompany with a very good company of Indian , which know the misfortune , be very sorry for it . and then they utter unto their subject the speedy diligence which they be to use in build another house , show unto they that the Frenchman be their love friend , and that they have make it evident unto they by the gift and present which they have receive : protest that whosoever put not his help hand unto the work with all his might , shall be esteem as unprofitable , and as one that have no good part in he , which the savage fear above all thing . this be the occasion that every man begin to endeavour himself in such sort , that in less than 12 hour , they have begin and finish a house which be very near as great as the former . which be end , they return home full content with a few cut hook , and hatchet , which they receive of our man . within a small while after this mischance , their victual begin to wax short : and after our man have take good deliberation , think and bethink themselves again , they find that there be no better way for they then to return again to the king ovade and Covexis his brother . wherefore they resolve to send thither some of their company the 480 next day follow : which with a Indian Canoa sail up into the country about io league : afterward they find a very fair and great river of fresh water , which they fail not to search out : they find therein a great number of crocodile , which in greatness pass those of crocodile . the river Nilus : moreover , all along the bank thereof , there grow mighty high cypress . after they have cypress . stay a small while in this place , they purpose to follow sec ^ he their journey , help themselves so well with the tide , countrey0of ‘ that without put themselves in danger of the continual ! ovade . peril of the sea , they come into the country of ovade : of who they be most courteous receive . they advertise he of the occasion wherefore they come [ three . 317 . ] again to visit he , and tell he of the mischance , which happen unto they since their last voyage : how they have not only lose their household stuff by casualty of fire , but also their victual which he have give they so bountiful : that for this cause they be so bold as to come once again unto he , to beseech he to vouchsafe to succour they in such need and necessity . after that the king have understand their case , he send messenger unto his brother Covexis , to request he upon his behalf to send he some of his mill and bean , which thing he do : and the next morning , they be come again with victual , which the king cause to be bear into their Canoa . our man will have take their leave of he , find themselves more then satisfy with this liberality . but for that day he will not suffer they , but retain they , and seek to make they the best cheer he can devise . the next day very early in the morning , he take they with he to show they the place where his corn grow , and say unto they that they shall not want as long as all that will do last . afterwards he give . they a certain number of exceed fair pearl , and two stone of fine crystal , and certain silver oar . our yne man forget not to give he certain trifle in recom - silver ore , vin 481 2 h the flace where crystal gp - oweth in very good quantity ten day journey from the river Belle . note . mutiny against the captain , and the cause thereof . the english voyage penny of these present , and require of he the place whence the silver oar and the crystal come . he make they answer , that it come ten day journey from his habitation up within the country : and that the inhabitant of the country do dig the same at the foot of certain high mountain , where they find of it in very good quantity . be joyful to understand so good news , and to have come to the knowledge of that which they most desire , they take their leave of the king , and return by the same see , by which they come . behold therefore how our man behave themselves very well hitherto , although they have endure many great mishap . but misfortune or rather the just judgement of God will have it , that those which can not be overcome by fire nor water , shall be undo by their own self . this be the common fashion of man , which can continue in one state , and have rather to overthrow themselves , than not to attempt some new thing daily . we have infinite example in the ancient history , especial of the roman , unto which number this little handful of man , be far from their country and absent from their countryman , have also add this present example . they enter therefore into partiality and dissension , which begin about a soldier name Guernache , which be a drummer of the french band : which , as it be tell i , be very cruel hang by his own captain , and for a small fault : which captain also use to threathen the rest of his soldier which stay behind under his obedience , and peradventure ( as it be to be presume ) be not so obedient to he as they shall have be , be the cause that they fall into a mutiny , because that many time he put his threaten in execution : whereupon they so chase he , that at the last they put he to death . and the principali occasion that move they thereunto be , because he degrade another soldier name la cheer ( which he have banish ) and because he have not perform his 482 • .. 15871 promise : for he have promise to send he victual , from 8 day to 8 day , which thing he do not , but say on the contrary , that he will be glad to hear of his death . he say moreover , that he will chastise other also , and use so evil sound speech , that honesty forbid i to repeat they . the soldier captain . see his madness to increase from day to day , and Albert slay rear to rail into the danger or the other , resolve to soul < liar . kill he . have execute their purpose , they go to seek the soldier that be banish , which be in a small island distant from charles - fort about 3 league , where they find he almost half dead for hunger . when they be come home again , they assemble themselves together to choose one to be governor over they who name be Nicolas bar a man worthy of commendation , Nicolas and one which know so well to quite himself of his bar . > c ! t0 ! en charge , that all rancour and dissension cease among ca ^ tain ' they , and they live peaceable one with another . during this time , they begin to build a small pinnace , with hope to return into France , if no succour come unto they , as they expect from day to day . and though there be no man among they that have any skill , notwithstanding necessity , which be the mistress of all science , teach they the way to build it . after that it be finish , they think of nothing else save how to furnish it with all thing necessary to undertake the voyage . but they want those thing that of all other be most needful , as cordage and sail , without which the enterprise can not come to effect . have no mean to recover these thing , they be in worse case than at the first , and almost ready to fall into despair . but that good God , which never forsake the afflict , do succour they in their necessity . as they be in these perplexity king Audusta and Maccou come to they , accompany with two hundred [ three . 318 . ] Indian at the least , who our Frenchman go forth to meet withal , and show the king in what need of cordage they stand : who promise they to return 483 cordage for tackle . they put to the sea without sufficient victual . the english voyage within two day , and to bring so much as shall suffice to furnish the pinnace with tackle . our man be please with these good news and promise , bestow upon they certain cut hook and shirt . after their departure our man seek all mean to recover rosin in the wood , wherein they cut the pine tree round about , out of which they draw sufficient reasonable quantity to bray the vessel . also they gather a kind of moss which grow on the tree of this country , to serve to calk the same withal . there now want nothing but sail , which they make of their own shirt and of their sheet . within few day after the Indian king return to Charles fort with so good store of cordage , that there be find sufficient for tackle of the small pinnace . our man as glad as may be , use great liberality towards they , and at their leave of the country , leave they all the merchandise that remain , leave they thereby so full satisfy , that they depart from they with all the contentation of the world . they go forward therefore to finish the brigandine , and use so speedy diligence , that within . a short time afterward they make it ready furnish with all thing . in the mean season the wind come so fit for their purpose that it seem to invite they to put to the sea : which they do without delay , after they have set all their thing in order . but before they depart they embark their artillery , their forge , and other munition of war ' re which captain Ribault have leave they , and then as much mill as they can gather together . but be drunken with the too excessive joy , which they have conceive for their return into France , or rather deprive of all foresight and consideration , without regard the inconstancy of the wind , which change in a moment , they put themselves to sea , and with so slender victual , that the end of their enterprise become unlucky and fortunate . for after they have sail the three part ot their way , they be surprise with calm which do so much hinder they , that in three week they sail not above 484 five and twenty league . during this ti ’ me their victual consume , and become so short , that every man be their victual constrain to eat not past twelve grain of mill by the utterh con day , which may be in value as much as twelve peason . fume ' yea , and this felici tie last not long : for their victual fail they altogether at once : and they have nothing for their moor assure refuge but their shoe and leather jerkin which they do eat . touch their beverage , some of they drink the sea water , other do drink their they drink own urine : and they remain in such desperate necessity a very long space , during the which part of water 0 they die for hunger . beside this extreme famine , which do so grievous oppress they , they fall every minute of a hour out of all hope ever to see France again , insomuch that they be constrain to cast the water continual out , that on all side enter into their bark .