my lord admiral of Chastillon , a noble man more desirous of the public then of his private benefit , understand the pleasure of the king his prince , which be to discover new and strange country , cause vessel fit for this purpose to be make ready with all diligence , and man to be levy meet for such a enterprise : among who he choose captain John Ribault , a man in truth expert in sea cause : which have receive his charge , set himself to sea the year 1562 . the eighteenth of February , accompany only with two of the king ship , but so well furnish with gentleman , ( of who number i my self be one ) and with old soldier , that he have mean to achieve some notable thing and worthy of eternal memory . have therefore sail two month , never hold the usual course of the Spaniard , he arrive in Florida , land near a cape or promontory , which be no high land , because the coast be all flat , but only rise by reason of the high wood , which at his arrival he call cape Francois in honour of our France . this cape be distant from the equator about thirty degree . coast from this place towards the north , he discover a very fair and great river , which give he occasion to cast anchor that he may search the same the next day very early in the morning : which be do by the break of day , accompany with captain Fiquinville and diverse other soldier of his ship , he be no soon arrive on the brink of the shore , but straight he perceive many Indian man and woman , which come of purpose to that place to receive the Frenchman with all gentleness and amity , as they well declare by the oration which their king make , and the present of chamois skin wherewith he honour our captain , which the day follow cause a pillar of hard stone to be plant within the say river , and not far from the mouth of the same upon a little sandy knap , in which pillar the 457 A . D . 1587 . [ he . 308 . ] the first voyage of John ri - baulttoflorida 1562 . the course of the Spaniard not altogether necessary . cape Francois in 30 . degree . apillar setup . Armes of France be carve and engrave . This be do he embark himself again , to the end always to discover the coast towards the north which be his chief desire . after he have sail a certain time he cross over to the other side of the river , and then in the presence of certain Indian , which of purpose do attend he , he command his man prayer and to make their prayer , to give thanks to God , for thankestogod . tjjat of grace he have conduct the french nation unto these strange place without any danger at all . the prayer be end , the Indian which be very attentive to hearken unto they , think in my judgement , that we worship tbe sun , because we always have our eye lift up towards heaven , rise all up and come to salute the captain John Ribault , promise to show he their king , which rise not up as they do , but remain still sit upon green leaf of bay and palmetree : towards who the captain go and sit down by he , and hear he make a long discourse , but with no great pleasure , because he can not understand his language , and present give much less his meaning . the king give our captain to Ribault . at h - s departure a plume or fan of hernshawes feather die in red , and a basket make of pa { me - boughe after the Indian fashion , and wrought very artificial , and a great skin paint and draw throughout with the picture of diverse wild beast so lively draw and portray , that nothing lack but life . the captain to show himself not unthankful , give he pretty tin bracelet , a cut hook , a look glass , and certain knife : whereupon the king show himself to be very glad and full content . have spend the most part of the day with these Indian , the captain embark himself to pass over to the north side of the river , whereat the king seem to be very sorry . nevertheless be not able to stay we , he command that with all diligence they shall take fish for we : which they do 458 with all speed . for be enter into their wear their fish - or enclosure make of reed and frame in the fashion of a labirynth or maze , they load we with trout , great mullet , Plaise , turbut , and marvelous store of other sort of fish altogether different from we . this do , we enter into our boat and go they pass towards the other shore . but before we come to the shore , we be salute with a number of other Indian , which enter into the water to their armpit , bring we many little basket full of Maiz , and goodly mui - goodly mulberry both red and white : other offer themselves to bear we on shore , where be land our per - ’ ceive their king sit upon a place dress with bough , and under a little arbour of cedar and bay tree somewhat distant from the water side . he be accompany with two of his son which be exceed fair and strong , and with a troop of Indian who have all their bow and arrow in marvelous good order . his two son receive our captain very gracious : but the king their father , represent i wot not what kind of gravity , do nothing but shake his head a little : then the captain go forward to salute he , and without any other move of himself he retain so constant a kind of gravity , that he make it seem unto we that by good and lawful right he bear the title of a king . our captain know not what to judge of this man behaviour , though he be jealous because we go first unto the other king , or else that he be not well please with the pillar or column which he have plant . while thus he know not what hereof to [ three . 309 . ] think , our captain show he by sign , that he be come from a far country to seek he , to let he understand the amity which he be desirous to have with he : for the better confirmation whereof , he draw out of a budget certain trifle , as certain bracelet cover as it be with silver and guilt , which he present he withal , and give his son certain 459 other trifle . whereupon the king begin very love to entreat both our captain and we . and after these gentle entertainment , we go our self into the wood , hope there to discover some singularity : where be great store of mulberry tree white and red , great store of on the top whereof there be a infinite number of silkworm . sjlkeworme . follow our way we discover a fair and great meadow , divide notwithstanding with diverse marsh , which constrain we by reason of the water , which environ it about , to return back again toward the river side . find not the king there , which by this time be go home to his house , we enter into our boat and sail toward our ship : the river of where after we arrive , we call this river the river of May , because we discover it the first day of the say month . soon after we return to our ship , we weigh our anchor and hoist our sail to discover the coast far forward , along the which we discover another fair river , which the captain himself be mind to search out , and have search it out with the king and the river of inhabitant thereof , he name it Seine , because it be very ke unto the river of Seine in France . from this river we retire towards our ship , where be arrive , we trim our sail to sail further towards the north , and to descry the singularity of the coast . but we have not sail any great way before we discover another very fair river , which cause we to cast anchor over against it , and to trim out two boat to go to search it out . we find there an he the river of anJ a king no less affable than the rest , afterward we r name this river Somme . from thence we sail about six league , after we discover another river , the river of which after we have view be name by we by the cherente , name of Loire . and consequent we there discover Grande $ ve ot ^ ers : whereof the first be name Cherente , the belle ’ second Garonne , the three Gironde , the four Belle , the Grande . five Grande : which be very well discover with such 460 thing as be in they , by this time in less than the space of threescore league we have find out many singularity along nine river . nevertheless not full satisfy we say lead yet further to ward the north , follow the course that may bring we to the river of Jordan one of the fair river of the north , and hold our wont course , great fog and tempest come upon we , which constrain we to leave the coast to bear towards the main sea , which be the cause that we lose the sight of our pinnace a whole day and a night until the next day in the morning , what time the weather wax fair and the sea calm , we discover a river which we call bellei a veoir . after we have . sail three or four league , we begin to espy our a veoir . pinnace which come straight towards we , and at their arrival they report to the captain , that while the foul weather and fog endure , they harbour themselves in a mighty river which in bigness and beauty exceed the former : wherewithal ! the captain be exceed joyful , for his chief desire be to find out a haven to harbour his ship , and there to refresh our self for a while . thus make thitherward we arrive athwart the say river , ( which because of the fairness and largeness thereof we name port royal ) river ° f we strike our sail and cast anchor at ten fathom of water : for the depth be such , namely when the sea ° begin to flow , that the great ship of France , yea , the arguze of Venice may enter in there . have cast anchor , the captain with his soldier go on shore , and he himself go first on land : where we find the place as pleasant as be possible , for it be all cover over with mighty high oak and infinite store of cedar , and with lentisk grow underneath they , smell so sweet , that the very fragrant odour only make the place to seem exceed pleasant . as we pass through these wood we see nothing but , , turkeycock fly in the forest , partridge grey and porridges * ' red , little different from we , but chief in bigness . grey and red . 461 we hear also within the wood the voice of stag , of bear , off luserne , of leopard , and diverse other sort of beast unknown unto we . be delight with this place , we set our self to fish with net , and fish in abun - we catch such a number of fish , that it be wonderful ! . dance . and among other we take a certain kind of fish which we call Sallicoques , which be no less than crevice , so that two draught of the net be sufficient to feed all the company of our two ship for a whole the river 3 . day . the river at the mouth thereof from cape to leaguesat cape be no less than 3 . French league broad ; it be m ° u ’ divide into two great arm , whereof the one run towards the west , the other towards the north : and i believe in my judgement that the arm which stretch . toward the north run up into the country as a passage by far as the river Jordan , the other arm run into a river into g as be know anj understand by those of [ three . 310 ] our company , which be leave behind to dwell in this place . Theise two arm be two great league broad : and in the midst of they there be a he , which be point towards the open of the great river , in which hand there be infinite number of all sort of store of rare strange beast . there be simple grow there of so simples . rare property ) anJ in so great quantity , that it be a excellent thing to behold they . on every side there be nothing to be see but palmetree , and other sort of tree bear blossom and fruit of very rare shape and very good smell . but see the evening approach , and that the captain determine to return unto the ship , we pray he to suffer we to pass the night in this place . in our absence the pilot and chief mariner advertise the captain that it be needful to bring the ship further up within the river , to avoid the danger of the wind which may