i think there be none of you that be ignorant of how his compete ° great consequence this our enterprise be , and also how acceptable it be unto our young king . therefore my friend ( as one desire your honour and benefit ) i will not fail to advertise you all of the exceed good hap which shall fall to they , which , as man of valour and worthy courage , will make trial in this our first discovery of the benefit and commodity of this new land : which shall be , as i assure my self , the great occasion that ever can happen unto they , to arise unto the title and degree of honour . and for this cause i be desirous to propose unto you and set down before your eye the eternal memory which of right they deserve , which forget both their parent and their country have have the courage to enterprise a thing of such importance , which even king themselves understand to be man aspire to so high degree of 468 magnanimity and increase of their majesty , do not disdain so well to regard , that afterward employ they in matter of weight and of high enterprise , they make their name immortali for ever . howbeit , i will not have you persuade your self , as many do , that you shall never have such good fortune , as not be know neither to the king nor the prince of the realm , and beside descend of so poor a stock , that few or none of your parent , have ever make profession of arm , have be know unto the great estate . for albeit that from my tender year i my self have apply all my industry to follow they , and have hazard my life in so many danger for the service of my prince , yet can i never attain thereunto ( not that i do not deserve this title and degree of government ) as i have see it happen to many other , only because they descend of a noble race , since more regard be have of their birth then of their virtue . for well i know that if virtue be regard , there will moor be find worthy to deserve the title , and by good right to be name noble and valiant . i will therefore make sufficient answer to such proposition and such thing as you may object against i , lay before you the infinite example which we have of the roman ; which concern the point of honour be the first that triumph over the world . for how many find we among they , which for their so valiant enterprize , not for the greatness of their parentage , have obtain the honour to triumph ? if we have recourse unto their ancestor , we shall find that their parent be of so mean condition , that by labour with their hand they live very base . as the father of / Elius - ^ Rus Perti - Pertinax , which be a poor artisan , his grandfather nfx ^ scend - likewise be a bond man , as the historiographer do parentage witness : and nevertheless , be move with a valiant become em - courage , • he be nothing dismay for all this , but perour of rather desirous to aspire unto high thing , he begin rome - with a brave stomach to learn feat of arm , and 469 Rusten Bassha of a herdsmans son through his valour become the great Turk son in law . Agathocles a potters son become king of sicibe . the english voyage profit so well therein , that from step to step he become at length to be emperor of the roman . for all this dignity he despise not his parent : but contrariwise , and in remembrance of they , he cause his father shop to be cover with a fine wrought marble , to serve for a example to man descend of base and poor lineage , to give they occasion to aspire unto high thing notwithstanding the meanness of their ancestor . i will not pass over in silence the excellency and prowess of the valiant and renown Agathocles the son of a simple potter , and yet forget the contemptible estate of his father , he so apply himself to virtue in his tender year , that by the favour of arm he come to be king of Sicily : and for all this title he refuse not to be count the son of a potter . but the more to eternize the memory of his parent and to make his name renown , he command that he shall be serve at the table in vessel of gold and silver and other of earth : declare thereby that the dignity wherein he be place come not unto he by his parent , but by his own virtue only . if i shall speak of our time , i will lay before you only Rusten Bassha , which may be a sufficient example to all man : which though he be the son of a poor herdsman , do so apply his youth in all virtue , that be bring up in the service of the great Turk , he seem to aspire to great and high matter , in such sort that grow in year he increase also in courage , so far forth , that in fine for his excellent virtue he marry the daughter of the great Turk his prince . Howe much then ought so many worthy example to move you to plant here ? consider also that hereby you shall | be registered for ever as the first that inhabit this strange country . i pray you therefore all to advise your self thereof , and to declare your mind free unto i , protest that i will so well imprint your name in the king ear , and the other prince , that your re - 470 1587 - nowme shall hereafter shine unquenchable through our realm of France . he have scarce end his oration , but the great part of our soldier reply : that a soldier great pleasure can never betide they , perceive ^ eretori - well the acceptable service which by this mean they shall do unto their prince : beside that this thing shall be for the increase of their honour : therefore they beseech the captain , before he depart out of the place , to begin to build they a fort , which they hope afterward to finish , and to leave they munition necessary for their defence , show as it seem that they be displease , that it be so long in do . whereupon John Ribault be as glad as may be to see his man so well willing , determine the next day to search the most fit and convenient place to be inhabit . wherefore he embark himself very early in the morning and command they to follow he that be desirous to inhabit there , to the intent that they may like the better of the place . Having sail up the great river on the north side , in coast a isle which end with a sharp point towards the mouth of the river , have sail a while , he discover a small river , which enter into the island , which he will not fail to search out . which do , and find the same deep enough to harbour therein galley and galliot in good number , proceed further , he find a very open place , join upon the brink thereof , where he go on land , and see the place fit to build a fortress in , and commodious for they that be willing to plant there , he resolve incontinent to cause the bigness of the fortification to be measure out . And consider that there stay but six and twenty there , he cause the fort to be make in length but the length and sixteen fathom , and thirteen in breadth , with flank p ^ ak ^ by accord to the proportion thereof . the measure be Laudonnier ? take by " i and captain Salles , we send unto they and captain ship for man , and to bring shovel , pickax and other instrument necessary to make the fortification . 471 a fort build we travail so diligent , that in a short space the fort in port royal be make in some sort defenciable . in which mean by Ribault . time john Ribault cause victual and warlike munition to be bring for the defence of the place . after he have furnish they with all such thing as they have need of , he determine to take his leave of they . but before his departure he use this speech unto captain Albert , which he leave in this place . ribaults captain Albert , i have to request you in the speech to cap - presence of a ] these man , that you will quit your tame ere | it . se | pe so w | sejy your charge , and govern so modest your small company which i leave you , which with so good cheer remain under your obedience , that i never have occasion but to commend you , and to recount unto the king ( as i be desirous ) the faithful service which before we all you undertake to do he in his new France : and you companion , ( quoth he to the soldier ) i beseech you also to esteem of captain Albert as if he be my self that stay here with you , yield he that obedience which a true soldier owe unto his general and captain , live as brethren one with another , without all dissension : and in so do god will assist you and bless your enterprise . have end his exhortation , we take our leaf of each of they , and sail towards our ship , call the fort by the name of charles - fort , and the river by the name Chenonceau . the next day we determine to depart from this place be as well content as be possible that we have so happy end our business , with good hope , if occasion will permit , to discover perfect the river of Jordan . for this cause we hoist our sail about ten of the clock in the morning : after we be ready to depart captain Ribault command to shoot off our ordinance to give a farewell unto our Frenchman , which fail not to do the like on their part . This be do we sail towards the north : and then we name this river porte royal , because of the largeness and excellent 472 then aforesaid fort be call charles - fort . port royal . fairness of the same . after that we have sail about 15 league from thence , we espy a river , whereupon we send our pinnace thither to discover it . at their return they bring we word that they find not past ward of port half a fathom water in the mouth thereof . which royal . when we understand , without do any thing else , we continue our way , and call it the base or shallow river . as we still go on sound we find not shallow water . past five or six fathom water , although we be six P ^ ' good league from the shore : at length we find not past three fathom , which give we occasion great to muse . and without make any far way we strike our sail , partly because we want water , and partly because the night approach : during which time captain John Ribault bethink with himself whether it be best for he to pass any far , because of the eminent danger which every hour we see before our eye : or whither he shall content himself with that which he have certain discover , and also leave man to inhabit the country . be not able for that time to resolve with himself , he refer it until the next day . the morning be come he propose to all the company what be best to be do , to the end that with good advisement every man may deliver his opinion . some make answer , that accord to their judgement he have occasion full to content himself , consider he can do no more : lay before his eye , that he have discover more in six week , than the Spaniard have do in two year in the conquest of their new Spain : and that he shall do the king very great service , if he do bring he news in so short a time of his happy discovery . other show unto he the loss and spoil of his victual , and on the other side the inconvenience that may happen by the shallow water that they find continual along the coast . which thing be well and at large debate we resolve to leave the coast , forsake the north , to take our way towards the east , which be the right way and course to our 473 their arrwall France , where we happy arrive the twenty day of in France July , the year 1562 . 1562 . ^ 20 7 7 i of my . the state and condition of those which be leave behind in charles - fort . KingAudusta . note . Mayon . Hoya . Touppa . stalame . our man after our departure never rest , but night and day do fortify themselves , be in good hope that after their fort be finish , they will begin to discover far up within the river .