the five voyage of m . John white into the west Indies and part of America call Virginia , in the year 1590 . the 20 of march the three ship the Hopewell , the John Evangelist , and the little John , put to sea from Plymmouth with two small shallop . the 25 at midnight both our shallop be sink be tow at the ship stearne by the boatswain negligence . on the 30 we see a head we that part of the coast of Barbary , lie east of cape Cantyn , and the bay of Asaphi . the next day we come to the he of mogador , where ride , at our pass by , a pinnace of London call the moonshine . [ Iii . 289 . ] April . on the first of April we ankor in Santa Cruz ride , where we find two great ship of London lade in sugar , of who we have 2 shipboat to supply the loss of our shallop . 406 on the 2 we set sail from the road of Santa Cruz , for the canary . on Saturday the 4 we see Alegranza , the east lie of the canary . on Sunday the 5 of April we give chase to a double flyboat , the which , we also the same day fight with , and take she , with loss of three of their man slay , and one hurt . on Monday the 6 we see grand canary , and the next day we land and take in fresh water on the southside thereof . on the 9 we depart from grand canary , and . frame our course for Dominica . the last of April we see Dominica , and the same night we come to a anchor on the southside thereof . May . the first of May in the morning many of the savage come aboard our ship in their canow , and do traffic with we ; we also the same day land and enter their town from whence we return the same day aboard without any resistance of the savage ; or any offence do to they . the 2 of May our admiral and our pinnace depart from Dominica leave the John our viceadmiral play off and on about Dominica , hope to take some Spaniard outward bind to the Indies ; the same night we have sight of three small hand call los Santos , leave Guadalupe and they on our starboard . the 3 we have sight of saint Christopher hand , bear Northeast and by east off we . on the 4 we sail by the virgin , which be many break hand , lie at the east end of saint Johns hand : and the same day towards evening we land upon one of they call Blanca , where we kill a incredible number of fowl : here we stay 4 ° 7 but three hour , and from thence stand into the shore northwest , and have bring this hand southeast off we , we put towards night through a open or swatch , call the passage , lie between the virgin , and the east end of saint John : here the pinnace leave we and sail on the south side of saint John . the 5 and 6 the admiral sail along the northside of saint John , so near the shore that the Spaniard discern we to be man of war ; and therefore make fire along the coast as we sail by , for so their custom be , when they see any man of war on their coast . the 7 we land on the northwest end of saint John , where we water in a good river call Yaguana , and the same night follow we take a frigate of ten tun come from Gwathanelo lade with hide and ginger . in this place Pedro a Mollato , who know all our state , run from we to the Spaniard . on the 9 we depart from Yaguana . the 13 we land on a hand call Mona , whereon be 10 or 12 house inhabit of the Spaniard ; these we burn and take from they a pinnace , which they have draw a ground and sink , and carry all her sail , mast , and rudder into the wood , because we shall not take he away ; we also chase the Spaniard over all the hand ; but they hide they in cave , hollow rock , and bush , so that we can not find they . on the 14 we depart from Mona , and the next day after we come to a hand call Saona , about 5 league distant from Mona , lie on the southside of Hispaniola near the east end : between these two hand we lie off and on 4 or 5 day , hope to take some of the Domingo fleet double this hand , as a near way to Spain then by cape Tyburon , or by cape S . Anthony . on Thursday be the 19 our vice - admiral , from who we depart at Dominica , come to we at Saona , 408 with who we leave a spanish frigate , and appoint he to lie off and on other five day between Saona and Mona to the end aforesaid ; then we depart from they at Saona for cape Tyburon . here i be inform that our man of the vice - admiral , at their departure from Dominica bring away two young savage , which be the chief cacique son of that country and part of Dominica , but they short after run away from they at Santa Cruz hand , where the vice - admiral land to take in ballast . on the 21 the admiral come to the cape Tyburon , where we find the John Evangelist our pinnace stay for we : here we take in two Spaniard almost starve on the shore , who make a fire to our ship as we pass by . those place for a 100 mile in length be nothing else but a desolate and mere [ three . 290 . ] wilderness , without any habitation of people , and full of wild bull and boar , and great serpent . the 22 our pinnace come also to a anchor in aligato bay at cape Tyburon . here we understand of m . lane , captain of the pinnace ; how he be set William upon with one of the king galley belong to Santo lay ' Domingo , which be man with 400 man , who after he have fight with he 3 or 4 hour , give over the fight and forsake he , without any great hurt do on either part . the 26 the John our vice - admiral come to we to cape Tyburon , and the frigate which we leave with he at Saona . this be the appoint place where we shall attend for the meeting with the Santo Domingo fleet . on Whitsunday even at cape Tyburon one of our boy run away from we , and at ten day end return to our ship almost starve for want of food . in sundry place about this part of cape Tyburon we find the bone and carcase of diverse man , who have perish ( as we think ) by famine in those wood , be either straggle from their company , or land there by some man of war . 409 on the 14 of June we take a small spanish frigate which fall among we so sudden , as he double the point at the bay of cape Tyburon , where we ride , so that he can not escape we . this frigate come from Santo Domingo , and have but 3 man in she , the one be a expert pilot , the other a mountainer , and the three a vintner , who escape all out of prison at Santo Domingo , purpose to fly to Yaguana which be a town in the west part of his - spanishfap - paniola where many fugitive Spaniard be gather together . the 17 be Wednesday captain lane be send to Yaguana with his pinnace and a frigate to take a ship , which be there take in fraught , as we understand by the old pilot , who we have take three day before . the 24 the frigate return from captain lane at Yaguana , and bring we word to cape Tyburon , that captain lane have take the ship , with many passenger and negro in the same ; which prove not so rich a prize as we hope for , for that a Frenchman of war have take and spoil she before we come . nevertheless her load be think worth 1000 or 1300 pound , be hide , ginger , cannafistula , copper - pan , and Casavi . July - Edward t ^ he second of July Edward Spicer who we leave in Spicer . 1 England come to we at cape Tyburon , accompany with a small pinnace , whereof one m . harp be captain . and the same day we have sight of a fleet of 14 sail all of Santo Domingo , to who we present give chase , but they upon the first sight of we flee , and separate themselves scatter here and there : wherefore we be force to divide our self and so make after they until 12 of the clock at night . 410 but then by reason of the darkness we lose sight of each other , yet in the end the admiral and the moonlight happen to be together the same night at the fetch up of the vice - admiral of the spanish fleet , against who the next morning we fight and this fight take he , with loss of one of our man and two hurt , and of they 4 slay and 6 hurt . but what be become of our vice - admiral , our pinnace , and prize , and two frigate , in all this time , we be ignorant . the 3 of July we spend about rifle , rummage and fit the prize to be sail with we . the 6 of July we see Jamayca then which we leave on our larboard , keep Cuba in sight on our starboard . upon the 8 of July we see the hand of Pinos , which lie on the southside of Cuba nigh unto the west end or cape call cape S . Anthony . and the same day we give chase to a frigate , but at night we lose sight of she , partly by the slow sail of our admiral , and lack of the moonlight our pinnace , who captain Cooke have send to the cape the day before . on the both we come to cape S . Anthony , where we find our consort the moonlight and her pinnace abide for our come , of who we understand that the day before there pass by they 22 sail , some of they of the burden of 300 and some 400 ton load with the king treasure from the main , bind for Havana ; from this 11 of July until 22 we be much becalm : and the wind be very scarce , and the weather exceed hot , we be much pester with the Spaniard we have take : wherefore we be drive to land all the Spaniard save three , but the place where we land they be of their own choice on the southside of Cuba near unto the organ and Rio de puercos . the 23 we have sight of the cape of Florida , and the break hand thereof call the martyr . 411 the state of the current from the cape of Florida to Vir ^ nia . the english voyage the 25 be s . James day in the morning , we fall with the matan ^ as , a headland 8 league towards the east of Havana , where we purpose to take fresh water in , and make our abode two or three day . on Sunday the 26 of July ply too and fro between the matan ^ as and Havana , we be espy of three small pinnace of saint John de ullua bind for Havana , which be exceed rich load . Theise 3 pinnace come very bold up unto we , and so continue until they come within musket shoot of we . and we suppose they to be captain harp pinnace , and two small frigate take by captain harp : wherefore we show our flag . but they present upon the sight of it turn about and make all the sail they can from we towards the shore , and keep themselves in so shallow water , that we be not able to follow they , and therefore give they over with expense of shot and powder to no purpose . but if we have not so rash set out our flag , we may have take they all three , for they will not have know we before they have be in our hand . this chase bring we so far to leeward as Havana : wherefore not find any of our consort at you Matan ^ as , we put over again to the cape of Florida , and from thence through the chanel of Bahama . on the 28 the cape of Florida bear west of we . the 30 we lose sight of the coast of Florida , and stand to sea for to gain the help of the current which run much swift a far off then in sight of the coast . for from the cape to Virginia all along the shore be none but eddy current , set to the south and Southwest . the 31 our three ship be clear disbock , the great prize , the admiral , and the moonshine , but our prize be thus disbock depart from we without take leave of our admiral or consort , and sail direcdy for England . 412 on the first of August the wind scant , and from thence forward we have very foul weather with much rain , thunder , and great spout , which fall round about we nigh unto our ship . the 3 we stand again in for the shore , and at midday we take the height of the same . the height of that place we find to be 34 degree of latitude . towards night we be within three league of the low sandy hand west of Wokokon . but the weather sandy hand continue so exceed foul , that we can not come to a anchor nigh the coast : wherefore we stand off it again to sea until Monday the 9 of August . on Monday the storm cease , and we have very great likelihood of fair weather : therefore we stand in again for the shore : and come to a anchor at 11 fathom in 3 5 tty in degree of latitude , within a mile of the shore , where degree , we go on land on the narrow sandy hand , be one of the island west of Wokokon : in this hand we take in some fresh water and catch great store of fish in the shallow water . between the main ( as we suppose ) and that hand it be but a mile over and three or four foot deep in most place . on the 12 in the morning we depart from thence and towards night we come to a anchor at the north - east end of the island of croatoan , by reason of a breach 2 which we perceive to lie out two or three league into ° . rSagues the sea : here we ride all that night . tn ° ea ' the 13 in the morning before we weigh our anchor , our boat be send to sound over this breach : our ship ride on the side thereof at 5 fathom ; and a ship length from we we find but 4 and a quarter , and then deep and shallow for the space of two mile , so that sometime we find 5 fathom , and by great diverge by 7 , and within two cast with the lead 9 , and then ! Ounci ' 8 , next cast 5 , and then 6 , and then 4 , and then 9 again , and deep ; but 3 fathom be the last , 2 league off 413 from the shore . this breach be in 35 degr . and a half , and lie at the very north - east point of croatoan , whereas go a fret out of the main sea into the inner water , which part the island and the main land . the 15 of August towards evening we come to a Hatorask in anchor at Hatorask , in 36 degr . and one three , in five 36 degr . in a fajom water , three league from the shore . at our ierce ’ first come to anchor on this shore we see a great smoke rise in the he Raonoak near the place where i leave our colony in the year 1587 , which smoke put we in good hope that some of the colony be there expect my return out of England . the 16 and next morning our 2 boat go a shore , and captain cook , and Cap . Spicer , and their company with i , with intent to pass to the place at Raonoak where our countryman be leave . at our put from the ship we command our master gunner to make ready 2 minion and a falkon well load , and to shoot they off with reasonable space between every shot , to the end that their report may be hear to the place where we hope to find some of our people . this be accord perform , and our twoe boat put [ three . 292 . ] off unto the shore , in the admiral boat we sound all the way and find from our ship until we come within a mile of the shore nine , eight , and seven fathom : but before we be half way between our ship and the shore we see another great smoke to the southwest of kindriker mount : we therefore think good to go to that second smoke first : but it be much further they land . from the harbour where we land , than we suppose it to be , so that we be very sore tire before we come to the smoke . but that which grieve we more be that when we come to the smoke , we find no man nor sign that any have be there late , nor yet any fresh water in all this way to drink . be thus weary with this journey we return to the harbour where we leave our boat , who in our absence have bring