annoy we , by reason of our be so near to the mouth of the river : and for this cause the captain send for we . be come to our ship , we sail three league further up within the river , and there we cast anchor . a little while 462 after , John Ribault accompany with a good number Gibault sall of soldier embark himself , desirous to sail further • * i th a RtVfgf up into the arm that run towards the west , and to ' search the commodity of the place . Having sail twelve league at the least , we perceive a troop of Indian , which assoon as ever they espy the pinnace , be so afraid that they flee into the wood leave behind they a young Lucerne which they be a turn upon a spit : for which cause the place be call cape cape Lucerne . Lucerne : proceed forth on our way , we find another arm of the river , which run towards the east , up which the captain determine to sail and to leave the great current . a little while after they begin to espy diverse other Indian both man and woman half hide within the wood : who know not that we be such as desire their friendship , be dismay at the first , but soon after be embolden , for the captain cause store of merchandise to be show they open whereby they know that we mean nothing but well unto they : and then they make a sign that we shall come on land , which we will not refuse . at our come on shore diverse of they come to salute our general accord to their barbarous fashion . some of they give he skin of chamois , other little basket make of chamois . palm leave , some present he with pearl , but no pearl . great number . afterwards they go about to make a arbour to defend we in that place from the parch heat of the sun . but we will not stay as then . wherefore the captain thank they much for their good will , and give present to each of they : wherewith he please they so well before he go thence , that his sudden departure be nothing pleasant unto they . for know he to be so liberali , they will have wish he to have stay a little long , seek by all mean to give he occasion to stay , show he by sign that he shall stay but that day only , and that they desire to advertise a great Indian lord which have toreofpeary pearl in great abundance , and silver also , all which and silver . 463 thing shall be give unto he at the king arrival : say further that in the mean time while that this great lord come thither , they will lead he to their house , and show he there a thousand pleasure in shoot , and see the stag kill , therefore they pray he not to deny they their request . notwithstanding we return to our ship , where after we have be but one night , the captain in the morning command to put into the pinnace a pillar of hard stone fashion like a column , wherein the arm of the king of France be grave , to plant the same in the fair place that he can find . this do , we embark our self , and sail three league towards the west : where we discover a little river , up which we sail so long , that in the end we find it return into the great current , and in his return to make a little hand separate from the firm land , where we go on shore : and by commandment of the captain , because it be exceed fair and pleasant , there we plant they a pillar of pillar upon a hillock open round about to the view , and free stone environ with a lake half a fathom deep of very good arm of and sweet water . in which hand we see two stag France be of exceed bigness , in respect of those which we have grave , set up see before , which we may easy have kill with our he ^ lvertf11 harquebus , if the captain have not forbid we , port Royal . move with the singular fairness and bigness of they . but before our departure we name the little river which the river of environ . this he , the river of Liborne . afterwards 1 orne - embark our self to search another he not far distant from the former : wherein after we have go a land , we find nothing but tall cedar , the fair that the lie of be see in this country . for this cause we call cedar . it jie of ceciar : so we return into our pinnace to go towards our ship . a few day afterward John Ribault determine to return once again towards the Indian which inhabit that arm of the river which run towards the west , and to carry with he good store of soldier . for 464 his meaning be to take two Indian of this place to bring they into France , as the queen have command he . with this deliberation again we take our former course so far forth , that at the last we come to the self same place where at the first we find the Indian , from thence we take two Indian by the permission of the king , which think that they be more favour [ three . 311 . ] than the rest , think themselves very happy to stay with we . but these two Indian see we make no two Indian show at all that we will go on land , but rather that take awa ^ we follow the midst of the current , begin to be somewhat offend , and will by force have leap into the water , for they be so good swimmer that immediate they will have get into the forest . nevertheless be acquaint with their humour , we watch they narrow and seek by all mean to appease they : which we can not by any mean do for that time , though we offer they thing which they much esteem , which thing they disdain to take , and give back again whatsoever be give they , think that such gift shall have altogether bind they , and that in restore they they shall be restore unto their liberty . in fine , perceive that all that they do avail they nothing , they pray we to give they those thing which they have restore , which we do incontinent : than they approach one towards the other and begin to sing , the doleful agree so sweet together , that in hear their song it seem that they lament the absence of their friend . it they continue their song all night without cease : all which time we be constrain to lie at anchor by reason of the tide that be against we , but we hoist sail the next day very early in the morning , and return to our ship . assoon as we be come to our ship , every one seek to gratify these 2 Indian , and to show they the best countenance that be possible : to the intent that by such courtesy they may perceive the good desire and affection which we have to remain their friend in time to come . than we offer they meat to eat , but they vin 465 2 g the Indian eat not before the sun be set . Laudonniers put down in write the word and phrase of the Indian speech . the feast of Toya . This seem to be la grand Gopal , the english voyage refuse it , and make we understand that they be accustom to wash their face and to stay until the sun be set before they do eat , which be a ceremony common to all the Indian of new France . nevertheless in the end they be constrain to forget their superstition , and to apply themselves to our nature , which be somewhat strange unto they at the first . they become therefore more jocunde , every hour make we a 1000 discourse , be merveilous sorry that we can not understand they . a few day after they begin to bear so good will towards i , that , as i think , they will rather have perish with hunger and thirst , then have take their refection at any man hand but i . see this their good will , i seek to learn some Indian word , and begin to ask they question , show they the thing whereof i desire to know the name , how they call it . they be very glad to tell it i , and know the desire that i have to learn their language , they encourage i afterward to ask they every thing . so that put down in write the word and phrase of the Indian speech , i be able to understand the great part of their discourse . Every day they do nothing but speak unto i of the desire that they have to use i well , if we return unto their house , and cause i to receive all the pleasure that they can devise , aswell in hunt as in see their very strange and superstitious ceremony at a certain feast which they call Toya . which feast they observe as straight as we observe the Sunday . they give i to understand , that they will bring i to see the great lord of this country which they call Chiquola , which exceed they in height ( as they tell i ) a good foot and a half . they say unto i that he dwell within the land in a very large place and enclose exceed high , but i can not learn wherewith . and as far as i can judge , this place whereof they speak unto i , be a very fair city . for they say unto i that within the enclosure there be great store of house which be build very high , wherein there be a infinite number of man like 466 unto themselves , which make none account of gold , of silver , nor of pearl , see they have thereof in abundance . i begin then to show they all the part of heaven , to the intent to learn in which quarter they dwell . and straightway one of they stretch out his hand show i y ‘ they dwell towards the north , which make i think that it be the river of Jordan . and now i remember , that in the reign of the emperor Charles the five , certain Spaniards inhabitant of saint Domingo ( which make a voyage to get certain slave to work in their mine ) steal away by subtlety the inhabitant of this river , to the number of 40 , think to carry they into their new Spain . but they lose their labour : for in despite they die all for hunger , save one that be bring to the emperor , which a little while after he cause to be baptise , and give he his own name and call he Charles of Chiquola , because he speak so much of this lord of Chiquola who subject he be . also , he report continual , that Chiquola make his abode within a very great enclose city . beside this proof , those which be leave in the first voyage have certify i , that the Indian show they by evident sign , that far within the land towards the north , there be a great enclosure or city , where Chiquola dwell . after they have stay a while in our ship , they begin to be sorry , and still demand of i when they shall return . i make they understand that the captain will be to send they home again , but that first he will bestow apparel of they , which few day after be deliver unto they . but see he will not give they licence to depart , they resolve with themselves to [ three . 312 . ] steal away by night , and to get a little boat which we have , and by die help of the tide to sail home towards their dwelling , and by this mean to save themselves . which thing they fail not to do , and put their enter - than 2 Indian prize in execution , yet leave behind they the apparel escafe awa3 - which the captain have give they , and carry away nothing but that which be their own , show well 467 hereby that they be not void of reason . the captain care not great for their departure , consider they have not be use otherwise then well : and that therefore they will not estrange themselves from the Frenchman . captain Ribault therefore know the singular fairness of this river , desire by all mean to encourage some of his man to dwell there , well foresee that this thing may be of great importance for the king service , and the relief of the common wealth of France . therefore proceed on with his intent , he command the anchor to be weigh and to set thing in order to return unto the open of the river , to the end that if the wind come fair he may pass out to accomplish the rest of his meaning . when therefore we be come to the mouth of the river , he make they cast anchor , whereupon we stay without discover any thing all the rest of the day . the next day he command that all the man of his ship shall come up upon the deck , say that he have somewhat to say unto they . they all come up , and immediate the captain begin to speak unto they in this manner .