certain voyage to Florida , and the late and more perfect discovery thereof , to wit , of all the seacoast , river , bay , haven , isle , and main land far up into the country , and a report of some colony and fort there plant and displant , with a description of the government , disposition and quality of the natural inhabitant , and a declaration of the temperature of the climate , and of the manifold good commodity find in those region . to the most christian king of France , Francis the first . the relation of John de Verrazzano a florentine , of the land by he discover in the name of his majesty . write in diepe the eight of July , 1524 . write not to your majesty , most christian king , since the time we suffer the tempest in the north part , of the success of the four ship , which your majesty send forth to discover new land by the ocean , think your majesty have be already due inform thereof . now by these present i will give your majesty to understand , how by the violence of the wind we be force with the two ship , the norman and the dolphin ( in such evil case as they be ) to land in Britain . where after we have repaired they in all point as be needful , and arm they very well , we take our course along by the coast of Spain , which your majesty shall understand by the profit that we receive thereby . afterwards with the dolphin alone we determine to make dis - 423 [ three . 296 . ] the english voyage coverie of new country , to prosecute the navigation we have already begin , which i purpose at this present to recount unto your majesty to make manifest the whole proceed of the matter . the 17 . of January the year 1524 . by the grace of God we depart from the dishabit rock by the isle of Madera , appertain to the king of Portugal , with 50 . man , with victual , weapon , and other shipmunition very well provide and furnish for 8 . month : and sail westwards with a fair easterly wind , in 25 . day we run 500 league , and the 20 . of February we be overtake with as sharp and terrible a tempest as ever any sailor suffer : whereof with the divine help and merciful assistance of almighty God , and the goodness of our ship , accompany with the good hap of her fortunate name , we be deliver , and with a prosperous wind follow our course west and by north . and in other 25 . day we make above 400 . league more , where we discover a new land , never before see of any man either ancient or modern , and at the first sight it seem somewhat low , but be within a quarter of a league of it , we perceive by the great fire that we see by the sea coast , that it be inhabit : and see that the land stretch to the southward . in seek some convenient Harboro ugh wherein to anchor and to have knowledge of the place , we sail fifty league in vain , and see the land to run ne still to the southward , we resolve to return back again towards the north , where we find our self trouble with the like difficulty . at length be in despair to find any port , we cast anchor upon the coast , and send our boat to shore , where we see great store of people which come to the sea side ; and see we approach , they flee away , and sometime will stand still and look back , behold we with great admiration : but afterward be animate and assure with sign that we make they , some of they come hard to the sea 424 side , seem to rejoice very much at the sight of we , and marvel great at our apparel , shape and whiteness , show we by sundry sign where we may most command odious come aland with our boat , offer we also of their victual to eat . now i will brief declare to your majesty their life and manner , as far as we can have notice thereof : these people go altogether naked , except only that they cover their privy part with certain skin of beast like unto martern , which they fasten unto a narrow girdle make of grass very artificial wrought , hang about with tail of diverse other beast , which round about their body hang dangle down to their knee . some of they wear garland of bird feather . the people be of colour russet , and not much unlike the Saracen : their hair black , thick and not very long , which they tie together in a knot behind and wear it like a little tail . they be well feature in their limb , of mean stature , and common somewhat big than we : broad breast , strong arm , their leg and other part of their body well fashion , and they be disfigure in nothing , save that they have somewhat broad visage , and yet not all of they : for we see many of they well favour , have black and great eye , with a cheerful and steady look , not strong of body , yet sharp witted , nimble and exceed great runner , as far as we can learn by experience , and in those two last quality they be like to the people of the east part of the world , and especial to they of the uttermost part of China . we can not learn of this people their manner of live , nor their particular custom , by reason of the short abode we make on the shore , our company be but small , and our ship ride far off in the sea and not far from these we find another people , who live we think to be like unto they ; ( as hereafter i will declare unto your majesty ) show at this present the situation and nature of the foresay land . the shore 425 A . D . i524 - be all cover with small sand , and so ascend upward for the space of 15 . foot , rise in form of little hill about 50 . pace broad . And sail forward , we find certain small river and arm of the sea , that fall down by certain creek , wash the shore on both side as the coast lie . and beyond this we see the open country rise in height above the sandy shore with many fair field and plain , full of mighty great wood , some very thick , and some thin , replenish with diverse sort of tree , as pleasant and delectable to behold , as be possible to imagine . and your majesty may not think that these be like the wood of Hercynia or the wild desert of Tartary , and the northern coast full of ffuitlesse tree : but they be full of palm tree , bay tree , and high cypress tree , and many other sort of tree unknown in Europe , which yield most sweet savour far from the shore , the property whereof we can not learn for the cause aforesaid , and not for any difficulty to pass through the wood , see they be not so thick but that a man may pass through they . neither do we think that they partake of the east world round about they , be altogether void of drug or spicery , and other riches of gold , see the colour of the land do so much argue it . and the land be full of many beast , as stag , deer and hare , and likewise of lake and pool of fresh water , with great plenty of fowl , convenient for all kind of pleasant game . this land be in latitude 34 . degree , with good and wholesome air , temperate , between hot and cold , no vehement wind do blow in those region , and those that do common reign in those coast , be then northwest and west wind in tlje summer season , ( in the beginning whereof we be there ) the sky clear and filire with very little rain : and if at any time the air be cloudy and misty with the southern wind , immediate it be dissolve and wax clear and fair again . the sea be calm , not 426 boisterous , the wave gentle : and although all the shore be somewhat shall and without harbour , yet be it not dangerous to the sailor , be free from rock and deep , so that within 4 or 5 . foot of the shore , there be 20 . foot deep of water without ebb or flood , the depth still increase in such uniform proportion . there be very good ride at sea : for any ship be shake in a tempest , can never perish there by break of her cable , which we have prove by experience . for in the begin of march ( as it be usual in all region ) be in the sea oppress with northern wind , and ride there , we find our anchor break before the earth fail or move at all . we depart from this place , still run along the the coast coast , which we find to trend towards the east , and we t0 the see every where very great fire , by reason of the j ^- eesof multitude of the inhabitant . while we ride on that latitude . coast , partly because it have no harbour , and for that we want water , we send our boat ashore with 25 . man : where by reason of great and continual wave that beat against the shore , be a open coast , without succour , none of our man can possible go ashore without loose our boat . we see there many people which come unto the shore , make diverse courteous and sign of friendship , and show that they be content we shall come aland , and by trial we find they to be very courteous and gentle , as your majesty shall understand by the success . to the intent we may send they of our thing , which the Indian common [ three . 297 . ] desire and esteem , as sheet of paper , glass , bell , and such like trifle ; we send a young man one of our mariner ashore , who swim towards they , and be within 3 . or 4 . yard of the shore , not trust they , cast the thing upon the shore : but seek afterward to return , he be with such violence of the wave beat upon the shore , that he be so bruise that he lie there almost dead : which the Indian perceive , run to catch he , and draw he out , they 427 carry he a iide way off from the sea . the young man perceive they carry he , be at the first dismayed , begin then great to fear , and cry out piteous : likewise do the Indian which do accompany he , go about to cheer he and to give he courage , and then set he on the ground at the foot of a little hill against the sun , they begin to behold he with great admiration , marvel at the whiteness of his flesh : and put off his clothes , they make he warm at a great fire , not without our great fear which remain in the boat , that they will have roast he at that fire , and have eat he . the young man have recover his strength , and have stay a while with they , show they by sign that he be desirous to return to the ship : and they with great love clap he fast about with many embrace , accompany he unto the sea , and to put he in more assurance , leave he alone , go unto a high ground and stand there , behold he until he be enter into the boat . this young man observe , as we do also , that these be of colour incline to black as the other be , with their flesh very shine , of mean stature , handsome visage , and delicate limb , and of very little strength , but of prompt wit : far we observe not .. depart from hence , follow the shore which trend somewhat towards the north , in 50 . league space we come to another land which show much more fair and full of wood , be very great , where we ride at anchor : and that we may have some knowledge thereof , we . send 20 . man aland , which enter into the country about 2 . league , and they find that the people be flee to the wood for fear . they see only one old woman with a young maid of 18 . or 20 . year old , which see our company , hide themselves in the grass for fear : the old woman carry two infant on her shoulder , and behind her neck a child of 8 . year old . the young woman be lade 428 likewise with as many : but when our man come unto they , the woman cry out : the old woman make sign that the man be flee unto the wood . assoon as they see we to quiet they and to win their favour , our man give they such victual as they have with they , to eat , which the old woman receive thankful : but the young woman disdain they all , and throw they disdainful on the ground . they take a child from the old woman to bring into France , and go about to take the young woman which be very beautiful and of tall stature , they can not possible , for the great outcry that she make , bring she to the sea : and especial have great wood to pass through , and be far from the ship , we purpose to leave she behind , bear away the child only . we find those folk to be more white than those that we find before , be clad with certain leaf that hang on bough of tree , which they few together with thread of wild hemp : their head be truss up wild after the same manner as the former be : their ordinary food be of pulse , whereof they have great store , differ in colour and taste from we ; of good and pleasant taste . Moreover they live by fish and fowl , which they take with begin , and bow make of hard wood , the arrow of cane , be head with the bone of fish , and other beast . the beast in these part be much wild than in our Europe , by reason they be continual chase and hunt . we see many of their boat make of one tree 20 . foot long , and 4 . foot broad , which be not make with iron or stone , or any other kind of metal ( because that in all this country for the space of 200 . league which we run , tty run we never see one stone of any sort : ) they help alon & coast themselves with fire , burn so much of the tree as be make sufficient for the hollowness of the boat , ; then like hollow their they do in make the stern and the forepart , until it canoas with be fit to sail upon the sea . the land be in situation re ‘ goodness and fairness like the other : it have wood 429 100 league sayrng . a mighty river . the english voyage like the other , thin and full of diverse sort of tree : but not so sweet , because the country be more northerly and cold . we see in this country many vine grow natural , which grow up , take hold of the tree as they do in Lombardie , which if by husbandman they be dress in good order , without all doubt they will yield excellent wine : for have oftentimes see the fruit thereof dry , which be sweet and pleasant , and not differ from we , we think that they do esteem the same , because that in every place where they grow , they take away the under branch grow round about , that the fruit thereof may ripen the better . we find also rose , violet , lily , and many sort of herb , and sweet and odoriferous flower different from we . we know not their dwelling , because they be far up in the land , and we judge by many sign that we see , that they be of wood and of tree frame together . we do believe also by many conjecture and sign , that many of they sleep in the field , have no other covert than the open sky . further knowledge have we not of they : we think that all the rest who country we pass , live all after one manner . have make our abode three day in this country , and riding on the coast for want of harborough , we conclude to depart from thence , trending along the shore between the north and the east , sail dne in the daytime , and ride at anchor by night . in the space of 100 league sail we find a very pleasant place situate among certain little steep hill : from amid the which hill there run down into the sea a exceed great stream of water , which wlin the mouth be very deep , and from the sea to the mouth of the same with you tide which we find to rise 8 . foot , any great ship lade may pass up . but because we ride at anchor in a place well fence 43 ° from the wind , we will not venture our self without knowledge of the place : and we pass up with our boat only into the say river , and see the country very well people . the people be almost like unto the other , and be clad with the