do , the Indian come accord to their good custom , to present their drink Cassine to the Paracoussy , and then to certain of his chief friend , and the Frenchman . than he which bring it set the cup aside , and [ three . 328 . ] draw out a little dagger stick up in the roof of the house , and like a mad man he lift his head aloft , and run apace , and go and smite a Indian which sit alone in one of the corner of the hall , cry with a loud voice , hyou , the poor Indian stir not at all for the blow , which he seem to endure patient . he which hold the dagger go quick to put the same in his former place , and begin again to give we drink as he do before : but he have not long continue , and have scarce give three or four thereof , but he leave his bowl again , take the dagger in his hand , and quick return unto he which he have strocken before , to who he give a very sore blow on the side , cry Hyou , as he have do before : and then he go to put the dagger in his place , and set himself down among the rest . a little while after he that have be strike fall down backward , stretch out his arm and leg , as if he have be ready to yield up the latter gasp . and then the young son of the Paracoussy apparel in a long white skin , fall down at the foot of he that be fall backward , weep bitter half a quarter of a hour : after , two other of his brethren clad in like apparel , come about he that be so strike , and begin to sigh pitiful . their mother bear a little infant in her arm come from another part , and go to the place where her son be , at the first she use infinite number of outcry , than one while lift up her eye to heaven , another while fall down unto the ground , she cry so doleful , that her lamentable mourning will have move the most hard and stony heart in the world with pity . yet this suffice not , for there come in a company of young girl , which do never leave weep for a long while in the place where the Indian be fall down , who afterward they take , and with the sad gesture they can devise , carry he away into another house a little way off from the great hall of the Paracoussy , and continue their weep and mourn by the space of two long hour : in which mean while the Indian cease not to drink Cassine , but with such silence that one word be not hear in the parlour . Vasseur be grieve that he understand not these ceremony , demand of the Paracoussy what these thing mean : which answer he slow , Thimogoa , Thimogoa , without say any more . be more displease than he be before with so slight a answer , he turn unto another Indian the paracoussyes brother , who be a Paracoussy as well as his brother , call Malica , which make he a like answer as he do at the KlngMalica . first , pray he to ask no more of these matter , and to have patience for that time . the subtle old Paracoussy pray he within a while after , to show he his sword , which he will not deny he , think that he will have behold the fashion of his weapon : but he soon perceive that it be to another end : for the old man hold it in his hand , behold it a long while on every place , to see if he can find any blood upon it , which may show that any of their enemy have be kill : for the Indian be wont to bring their weapon wherewith their enemy have be defeat , with some blood upon they , for a token of their victory . but see no sign thereof upon it , he be upon the point to say unto he , that he have kill none of the man of Thimogoa : when as Vasseur prevent that which he may object , declare and show unto he by sign , the manner of his enterprise , add , that by reason of the two Indian which he have slay , his sword be so bloody , that he be enforce to wash and make it clean a long while in the river : which the old man believe to be like to be true , and make no manner of reply thereunto . Vasseur , la caille , and their other companion go out of the hall to go into the room whither they have carry the Indian : there they find the Paracoussy sit upon tapestry make of small reed , which be tapistrymade at meat after the Indian fashion , and the Indian that qfsmailreeds - was smite hard by he , lie upon the self same tapestry , about who stand the wife of the Paracoussy , with all the young damsel which before bewail he in they lap the hall ; which do nothing else but warm a great deal moss about of moss instead of napkin to rub the Indian side . their wound tt i j t * • r and use it in hereupon our man ask the Paracoussy again for stead of nap - what occasion the Indian be so persecute in his kin . presence : he answer , that this be nothing else but a ceremony a kind of ceremony , whereby they will call to mind death ' of death and persecution of the paracoussy their their ancestor ancestor execute by their enemy Thimogoa : allege slalne by their moreover , that as often as he himself , or any of his enemy . friend and ally return from the country , without they bring the head of their enemy , or without bring home some prisoner , he use for a perpetuali memory of all his predecessor , to beat the best belove of all his child with the self same weapon wherewith they have be kill in time past : to the end that by renew of the wound their death shall be lament afresh . now when they be thus inform of those ceremony , they thank the Paracoussy for their good intertai nement which they have receive , and so set sail come to i unto the fort : [ he . 329 . ] where they declare all unto i as i have recite it the return of heretofore . the eight and twenty of July our ^ ardfrance s ^ tpes depart to return into France . and within a the 28 . of while , about two month after our arrival in Florida , July . the Paracoussy Satourioua send certain Indian unto i to know whether i will stand to my promise which i have make he at my first arrival in that country , which be that i will show my self friend to his friend , and enemy unto his - enemy , and also to accompany he with a good number of harquebus , when he shall see it expedient , and shall find a fit occasion to go to war . now see he rest upon this promise , he pray i not to defer the same : see also that make account thereof , he have take such good order for the execution of his enterprise , that he be ready , and be furnish with all thing that be necessary for the voyage : i make he answer , that for his amity i will not purchase the enmity of the other , and that albeit i will , yet notwithstanding i want mean to do it . for it behoove i at that present to make provision of victual and munition for the defence of my fort on the other side , that my bark be nothing ready , and that this enterprise will require time : moreover , that the Paracoussy Satourioua may hold himself ready to depart within two month , and that then i will think of fulfil my promise to he . the Indian carry this answer to their Paracoussy , which be little please with it , because he can not defer his execution or expedition , aswell because all his victual be ready , as also because ten other paracoussy be assemble with he for the performance of this enterprise . the ceremony which this savage use before he embark his army deserve not to be forget . for when he be set down by the river side , be compass about with ten other paracoussy , he command water to be bring he speedy . this do , look up into heaven , he fall to discourse of diverse thing with gesture that show he to be in exceed great choler , which make he one while shake his head hither and thither , and by and by with i wot not what fury to turn his face towards the country of his enemy , and to threaten to kill they . he oftentimes look upon the sun , pray he to grant he a glorious victory of his enemy . which when he have do by the space of half a hour , he sprinkle with his hand a little of the water which he hold in a vessel A . D . i564 . the ceremony which they use before they go to war . upon the head of the paracoussy , and cast the rest as it be in a rage and despite into a fire which be there prepare for the purpose . this do , he cry out thrice , he Thimogoa , and be follow with five hundred Satourioua fol - Indian at the least , which be there assemble , which low with cry all with one voice , he Thimogoa . this ceremony , as a certain Indian tell i familiar , signify nothing else , but that Satourioua beseech the sun to grant unto he so happy a victory , that he may shed his enemy blood , as he have shed that water at his pleasure . Moreover , that the paracoussy which be sprinkle with a part of that water , may return with the head of their enemy , which be the only and chief triumph of their victory . the Paracoussy Satourioua have no soon end his ceremony and have take a view of all his company , but he embark himself , and use such diligence with his Almadies or boat , that the next day two hour before the sun set , he arrive on the territory of his enemy about eight or ten league from their village . consultation afterwards cause they all to go on land , he assemble ^ { saulnheir counse ^ > wherein it be agree that five of the paraenemy , coussy shall sail up the river with half of the troop , and by the break of the day shall approach unto the dwell of their enemy : for his own part , that he will take his journey through the wood and forest as secret as he can : that when they be come thither , as well they that go by water as he which go by land shall not fail by the break of the day to enter into the village , and cut they all in piece , except the woman and little child . how they use these thing which be thus agree upon , be ^ hch ^ the ^ execute with as great fury as be possible : which when take in war they have do , they take the head of their enemy which they have slay , and cut off their hair round about with a piece of their skull : they take also four and twenty prisoner , which they lead away , and retire themselves immediate unto their boat which wait for they . be come thither , they begin to singe praise unto the sun , to who they attribute their victory . and afterward they put the skin of those head on the end of their javelin , and go altogether towards the king Omoloa . territory of Paracoussy Omoloa , one of they which be in the company . be come thither , they divide their prisoner equal to each of the paracoussy , and leave thirteen of they to Satourioua , which straightway dispatch a Indian his subject , to carry news before of the victory to they which stay at home to guard their 28 ... i564 ' house , which immediate begin to weep . but assoon as night be come , they never leave dance and play a thousand gambol in honour of the feast . the next day the Paracoussy Satourioua come home , who before he enter into his lodging cause all the [ three . 330 . ] hairy skull of his enemy to be set up before his door , and crown they with branch of laurel , show by this glorious spectacle the triumph of the victory which ° f triumfh - hee have obtain . straightway begin lamentation and mourning , which assoon as the night begin be turn into pleasure and dance . after that i be advertise of these thing , i send a soldier unto Satourioua , pray he to