day , and in the mean while do all that they can to take i : which present i discover , and therefore stand diligent upon my guard . wherefore perceive they can not have their purpose , and that they be already desire of revenge root in the savage . the english voyage discover , they send to advertise i that as yet they can not help i to victual , and that the corn be not yet ripe . thus i be constrain to return and to carry back utina home , where i have much ado to save he from the rage of my soldier : which perceive the maliciousness of the Indian , go about to have murder he . Moreover it seem they be content that they have get the son , and that they care not great for the father . now my hope fail i on this side , i devise to send my man to the village where i think the maiz be by this time ripe ; i go to diverse place , and continue so do 15 day after , when as utina beseech i again to send he unto his village , assure himself that his subject will not stick to give i victual : and that in case they refuse so to do , he be content that i shall do what i think good with he . i undertake this voyage the second time with the two bark furnish as before . at my come unto the little river , we find his subject there , which fail not to come thither with some quantity of bread , bean , and fish , to give my soldier . nevertheless return again to their former practice they seek all mean to entrap i , hope to cry quittance for the imprisonment of their king , if they may have get the victory of i . but after that they see the small mean , which they have to annoy i , they return to entreaty , and offer that if i will give they their king with certain of my soldier , they will conduct they unto the village , and that the subject see he , will be more willing to give we victual . which thing notwithstanding i will not grant unto they ( mistrust their subtility , which be not so covert , but that one may espy day at a little hole ) until they have first give i two man in pledge with charge that by the next day they shall bring i victual . which thing they grant , and give i two man which i put in chain for fear they shall escape away , as i know well they be instruct to do . four day be spend in these conference , at the end whereof they declare unto i , that they can not full and whole perform their promise : and that the uttermost that they can do for the present , be to cause each subject to bring his burden of mill . to conclude , they be content to do so on condition that i will send they their two pledge within ten day . as my lieutenant be ready to depart , i warn he above all a necessary thing to take heed he fall not into the Indian hand : admonition . because i know they to be very subtle and crafty to enterprise and execute any thing to our disadvantage . he depart therefore with his troop , and come to the small river whereinto we be accustom to enter to approach as near as we can unto the village of utina , be six french league distant from thence . there he go on shore , put his man in good array , and draw straight towards the great house that be the king , where the chief man of the country be assemble , which cause very great store of victual to be bring now one and then another , in do whereof they spend notwithstanding three or four day : in which mean while they gather man together , to set upon we in our retreat . they use therefore many mean to hold the we still in breath . for one while they demand their floridians pledge , another while ( see my lieutenant will not stt ill yield to they , until such time as they have bring the victual unto the boat ; accord to the agreement pass between we ) they signify unto he that the woman and young child be afiraide out of all measure to see fire in their match so near their harquebus : and that therefore they most earnest beseech they to put they out , that they may more easy get people enough to carry the victual , and that they for their part will leave their bow and arrow , and will be content that their servant shall carry they . this second request be as flat deny they as the former : for it be a easy matter to smell out their intention . but while these thing be thus in handle , utina by no mean be to be [ three . 346 . ] 71 see , but hide and keep himself secret in a little house apart , where certain choose man of i go to see he show themselves aggrieve with he for the long delay of his subject : whereunto he answer , that his subject be so much incense against we , that by no mean possible he be able to keep they in such obedience as he willing will have do , and that he can not hold they from wage of war against monsieur de Ottigny . that he also call to mind , that even while he be prisoner , at what time our man lead he into his country to obtain some victual , he see along the high way arrow stick up , at the end whereof long hair be fasten , which be a certain sign of open war proclaim , which arrow the captain also carry with he to the fort . he say further that in respect of the good will he bear to the captain , he forewarn his lieutenant that his subject be determine to cut down the tree , and cause they to fall a thwart the little river where the boat be , to keep they from depart thence , that they may fight with they at their ease , and that if it thus fall out , he assure he for his part he will not be there to meddle in the matter . and that which much moor augment the suspicion of war be , that as my messenger depart from utina , they hear the voice of one of my man , which during the voyage have always be among the Indian , and who as yet they will never render , until they have get their pledge home . this poor fellow cry out a main because two Indian will have carry he into the wood to have cut his throat : whereupon he be succour and deliver . Theise admonition be well understood , after ripe deliberation thereof Monsieur de Ottigny resolve to retire himself the seven and twenty of July . wherefore he set his soldier in order , and deliver to each of they a sack full of mill : and afterward he march towards his bark , think to prevent the enterprise of the savage . there be at the a alley of 3 or 4 hundred pace long . come forth of the village a great alley about three or four hundred pace long , which be cover on both side with great tree . my lieutenant dispose his man in this alley and set they in such order as they desire to march : for he be well assure that if there be any ambush , it will be at the come out of the tree . therefore he cause Monsieur de Arlac my ensign to march somewhat before with 8 harquebusier to discover whether there be any danger : beside he command one of my sergeant and corporal to march on the out side of the alley with four harquebusier while he himself conduct the rest of his company through it . now as he suspect , so it fall out : for monsieur de Arlac meet with two or three hundred Indian at the end of the alley , which salute he with a infinite number of their arrow , and with such fury that it be easy to see with what desire they seek to charge we . howbeit they be so well sustain in the first assault which my ensign give they , that they which fall down dead , do somewhat abate the choler of those which remain alive . this do my lieutenant haste to gain ground in such sort as i have already say . after he have march about four hundred pace , he be charge afresh with a new troop of savage which be in number about 300 , which assail he before , while the rest of the former set upon he behind . this second assault be so valiant sustain , that i may just say that monsieur de Ottigny so well discharge his duty , as be possible for a good captain to do . and so it stand they upon : for he have to deal with such kind of man , as know well how to fight and to obey their head which conduct they , and which know so well to behave themselves in this conflict , as if Ottigny have not prevent their practice , he have be in danger to have be defeat . their manner in this fight be , that when two hundred have shoot , they retire themselves and give place to the rest that be behind , and all a skirmish between the savage and the french . a second fresh charge of savage . theflorldians manner of fight . the while have their eye and foot so quick and ready , that assoon as ever they see the harquebus lay to the cheek , so soon be they on the ground , and eftsoon up to answer with their bow and to fly their way , if by chance they perceive we go about thefloridians to take they : for there be nothing that they fear so mefe fear . much , because of our sword and dagger . this conflict continue and last from nine of the clock in the morning , until the night depart they . and if Ottigny have not bethink himself to cause his man to break the arrow which they find in the way , and so to deprive the savage of the mean to begin again , without all doubt he shall have have very much to do : for by this mean they lack arrow , and so be constrain to retire themselves . during the time of the conflict they cry and make sign that they be the captain and lieutenant friend : and that they fight for none other cause but to be revenge on the soldier , which be their mortali enemy . my lieutenant be come unto his boat take a re - two slalne . view of his company , and find two man want which be kill , of who the one be call James sale , and the other name be Mesureur . he find two and twen - moreover 22 of they wound , which with much ado ty wound . causecj to be bring unto the boat . all the mill that he find among his company come but to two man burden , which he divide equal among they . for [ three . 34 - 7 - ] assoon as the conflict begin , every man be constrain to leave his sack to put his hand to his weapon . in this mean while i remain at the fort , and cause every man diligent to travel , hope that my lieutenant will bring we victual . but see the time consume away , i begin to suspect the truth of that which fall out , whereof i be assure immediate after at their return . see therefore my hope frustrate of | it on at side , i make my prayer unto God , and thank God for their he of his grace which he have show unto my poor deliverance , soldier which be escape : afterwards i think upon new mean to obtain victual , aswell for our return into France , as to drive out the time until our embark . i be advertise by certain of our company , which usual go on hunt into the wood and through the village , that in the village Sarauahi situate on the other side of the river , and two league distant from the fort , and in the village emoloa there be field wherein the mill be very forward , and that there be thereof in those part in great abundance . wherefore i cause my boat to be make ready , and send my sergeant thither with certain soldier , which use such diligence , that we have good store of mill . i send also to the river which the savage call Iracana , name by captain Ribault the river of Somme , where captain Vasseur and my sergeant arrive with two boat and their ordinary furniture , and find there a great assembly of the lord of the country , among who be athore the son of Satourioua , Apalou , and Tacadocorou , which be there assemble to make merry : because that in this place be the fair maid and woman of all the country . captain Vasseur in my name give certain small trifle to all the lord , to the queen , to the maid and woman of the village . whereupon the boat be forthwith lade with mill , after they have make our man as good cheer as they can devise . the queen send i two small mat so artificial wrought as it be unpossible to make better . now find our self by this mean sufficient furnish with victual , we begin each of we in his place , to travail and use such diligence , as the desire to see our native country may move we . but because two of our carpenter be slay by the Indian ( as heretofore i mention ) John de Hais , master Carpenter , a man very worthy of his vocation , repair unto i , and tell i that by reason of want of man he be not able to make i up the ship against the time that he have promise i : which speech cause such a mutiny among the soldier that very hardly he escape kill : howbeit i appease they aswell as i 75 the village Sarauahi . the village Emoloa . the river of Iracana call by Ribault the river of Somme . courtesy and liberality the best mean to deal with the savage . Most artificiali mat . the beat