get victual of the inhabitant of the country : see also that we have enough to serve we for four month to come . for i fear great , that under pretence of search victual , they will enterprise somewhat against the king of Spain subject , which in time to come may just be lay to my charge , consider that at our departure out of France , the queen have charge i very express , to do no kind of wrong to the king of Spain subject , nor any thing whereof he may conceive any jealousy . they make as though they be content with this 40 answer . but eight day after , as i continue in work upon our fort , and on my bark , i fall sick . than my seditious companion forget all honour and duty , suppose that they have find good occasion to execute their rebellious enterprise , begin to practise afresh their former design , handle their business so well , during my sickness , that they open vow that they will seize on the corpse de guard , and on the fort , yea , and force i also , if i will not consent unto their wicked desire . my lieutenant be hereof advertise , come and tell i that he suspect some evil practice : and the next day in the morning i be salute at my gate with man in complete harness , what time my soldier be about to play i a shrewd trick : then i send to seek a couple of gentleman who i most trust , which bring i word that the soldier be determine to come to i to make a request unto i : but i tell they that this be not the fashion to present a request unto a captain in this manner , and therefore they shall send some few unto i to signify unto i what they will have . hereupon the five chief author of the sedition arm with corslet , their pistol in their hand already bend , press into my chamber , say unto i , that they will go to new Spain to seek their adventure . than i warn they to be well advise what they mean to do : but they forthwith reply , that they be full advise already , and that i must grant they this request . see then ( quoth i ) that i be enforce to do it , i will send captain Vasseur and my sergeant , which will make answer and give i a account of every thing that shall be do in this voyage : and to content you , i think it good that you take one man out of every chamber , that they may accompany captain Vasseur and my sergeant . whereupon , blaspheme the name of God , they answer that they must go thither : and that there 41 A . D . [ 564 . lack nothing , but that i shall deliver they the armour which i have in my custody , for fear least i may use they to their disadvantage ( be so villan - ously abuse by they : ) wherein notwithstanding i will not yield unto they . but they take all by force , and carry it out of my house , yea and after they have hurt a gentleman in my chamber , which speak against their do , they lay hand on i , and carry i very sick , as i be , prisoner into a ship which ride at anchor in the midst of the Laudonniere river , wherein i be the space of fifteen day , ft " attend upon with one man only without permission owne ^ uldiers . f ° r any my servant to come to visit i : from every one of who , as also from the rest that take my part , they take away their armour . and they send i a passport to sign , tell i plain [ three . 335 . ] after i have deny they , that if i make any difficulty , they will all come and cut my throat in the ship . thus be i constrain to sign their passport , and Trenchanta forthwith to grant they certain mariner , with tren - skilfull pilot . c } ! of | it a honest and skilful pilot when the bark be finish , they arm they with the king munition , with powder , with bullet , and artillery , asmuch as they need , and choose one of my sergeant for their captain , name Bertrand conferrent , and for their ensign one name la Croix . they compel captain Vasseur to deliver they the flag of his ship . then have determine to sail unto a place of the Antilles call leauguave , belong unto the king of Spain , and there to go on land on Christmas night , with intention to enter into the church while the mass be say after midnight , and to murder all those that they find there , they set sail the eight of December . but because the great part of they by this time repent they of their enterprise , and that now they begin to fall into mutiny among themselves , when they come forth of the mouth of the river , the two bark divide themselves ; the one keep along the coast unto Cuba , to double the cape more easy , and the other go right forth to pass athwart the isle of Lucaya : by reason whereof they meet not until six week after their departure . during which time the bark that take her way along the coast , wherein one of the chief conspirator name de Orange be captain , and trenchant his pilot , near unto a place call Archaha , take a brigantine lade with a certain quantity of Cassavi , cassavi , bread which be a kind of bread make of root , and yet make of root . nevertheless be very white , and good to eat , and some little wine , which be not without some loss of their man : for in one assault that the inhabitant of Archaha make upon they , two of their man be take , to wit , Steven Gondeau , and one name grand Pr £ , beside two more that be slay in the place , namely Nicolas master and doublet : yet nevertheless they take the brigantine , wherein they put all their stuff that be in their own bark , because it be of great burden and better of sail then their own . afterwards they sail right unto the cape of Santa Maria near to leauguave , where they go on land to calk and bray their ship which have a great leak . in this mean baracouavil - while they resolve to sail to Baracou , which be a vil - luge in the isle lage of the isle of Jamaica : where at their arrival they ° f ^ amaica - found a caravel of fifty or threescore ton burden , which they take without any body in it : and after they have make good cheer in the village the space of five or six day , they embark themselves in it , leave their second ship : than they return to the cape of Tiburon , the cape of where they meet with a patach , which they take by Tiburon . force after a long conflict . in this patach the governor the governor of Jamaica be take , with great store of riches , aswell of of Jamaica gold and silver as of merchandise and wine , and many taken - oth thing ; wherewith our seditious companion not content , determine to seek more in their caravel , and their governor of Jamaica also . after they be come to Jamaica , they miss of another caravel which do save it self in the haven . the governor be fine and subtle , see himself bring unto the place which he desire and where he command , obtain so much by his fair word , that they which have take he let he put two little boy which be take with he into a little cock boat , and send they to his wife into the village , to advertise she that she shall make provision of victual to send unto he . but in stead of write unto his wife , he speak unto the boy secret that with all diligence she shall send the vessel that be in the haven near that place to succour and rescue he . which she do so cunning , that on a morning about the break of the day , as our seditious companion be at the haven mouth ( which reach above two league up malguallre a within the land ) there come out of the haven a malgualire kind of vessel which make sail both forward and backward , and then two great ship , which may be each of they off fourscore or a hundred ton a piece , with good store of ordinance , and well furnish with man : at who come our mutinous fellow be surprise , be not able to see they when they come , aswell because of the darkness of the weather , as also by reason of the length of the haven , consider also they mistrust nothing . true it be that five or six and twenty that be in the brigantine discover these ship when they be near they , which see themselves press for want of leisure to weigh their anchor , cut their cable , and the trumpeter which be in it advertise the rest : whereupon the Spaniard see themselves descry , discharge a volley of canon shoot against the french man , which they follow by the space of three league , and recover their own ship : the brigantine which escape away , pass in the sight of the cape des Aigrettes , and the cape of S . Anthony situate in the isle of Cuba , and from thence pass within the sight of Havana ; but trenchant their pilot , and the trumpeter , and certain other mariner of this brigantine , which be lead away by force in this voyage ( as elsewhere we have declare ) desire nothing 44 the cape of S . Antony in Cuba . Havana . more than to return to i : wherefore these man agree together ( if peradventure the wind serve they well ) to pass the channel of Bahama , while their seditious come - the channel of panion be asleep : which they do accomplish with Bahama . such good success , that in the morning towards the break £ 111 . 336 . ] of the day about the five and twenty of march they arrive upon the coast of Florida : where know the fault which they have commit , in a kind of mockery they counterfeit the judge : but they play not this prank until they have tipple well of the wine which remain yet in their prize . one counterfeit the judge , another present my person : one other after he have hear the matter plead , conclude thus : make you your cause as good as it please you , but if when you come to the fort Caroline the captain cause you not to be hang , i will never take he for a honest man : other think that my choler be pass , i will easy forget this matter . their sail be no soon descry upon our coast , but the king of the place name patica , dwell eight league distant from our fort , and king patica . be one of our good friend , send a Indian to advertise i that he have descry a ship upon the coast , and that he think it be one of our nation . hereupon the the return of brigantine oppress with famine , come to a anchor at the fart oflau - mouth of the river of May , when at the first blush we donnleressedi - thought they have be ship come from France ; which Aous sou iers ' give we occasion of great joy : but after i have cause she to be better view , i be advertise that they be our seditious companion that be return . therefore i send they word by captain Vasseur and my sergeant , that they shall bring up their brigantine before the fortress : which they promise to do . now there be not above two league distance from the mouth of the river where they cast anchor unto the fortress . the next day i send the same captain and sergeant with thirty soldier , because i see they much delay their come . than they bring they : and because certain of they have swear at their departure , that they will never come again within the fort , i be well please they shall keep their oath . for this purpose i wait for they at the river mouth , where i make my bark to be build , and command my sergeant to bring the four chief author of the mutiny on shore ; who i cause immediately to be put in fetter : for my meaning be not to punish the rest , consider that they be suborn , and because my council express assemble for this purpose have conclude that these four only shall die , to serve for a example to the rest . in the same place i make a oration unto they in this manner .