damosel that accompany she ; which they carry unto their isle ; which thing in all the Indian country they esteem to be the great victory : for afterward they marry these virgin , and love they above all measure . the Spaniard that make this relation , tell i that after this defeat he go to dwell with oathcaqua , and have be with he full eight year , even until the time that he be send unto i . the place of Calos be situate upon a river which be beyond the cape of Florida , forty or fifty league towards the southwest : and the dwell of Oathcaqua be on this side the cape towards the north , in a place which we call in the chart cannaveral , which be in 28 degree . about the five and twenty of January Paracoussy Satourioua my neighbour send i certain present by two of his subject , to persuade i to join with he , and to make war upon ouae utina which be my friend : and further beseech i to retire certain of my man which be with utina ; for who if it have not be , he have often time set upon he , and defeat he . he beseech i herein by diverse other king his ally , which for three week or a month space send messenger unto i to this end and purpose : but i will not grant unto they that they shall make war upon he ; yea rather contrariwise i endeavour to make they friend ; wherein they condescend unto i , so far forth that they be content to allow of any thing that i will set down : whereupon the two Spaniard which of long time know well the nature of the Indian , warn i that in any case i shall not trust unto they , because that when they show good countenance and the best cheer unto man , then be the time that they will surprise and betray they ; and that of their nature they be the great traitor and most deep dissembler of the world . beside i never trust they but upon good ground , as one that have discover a thousand of their craft and subtlety , aswell by experience as by read of the history of late year . Oure two bark be not so soon finish , but i send captain Vasseur to discover along the coast lie towards the north , and command he to sail unto a river , the king whereof be call Audusta , which be lord of that place , where those of the year 1562 inhabit . i send he two suit of apparel , with certain hatchet , knife , and other small trifle , the better to insinuate my [ three . 339 . ] self into his friendship . and the better to win he , i send in the bark with captain Vasseur a soldier call Aimon , which be one of they which return home in the first voyage , hope that king Audusta may remember he . but before they be embark i command they to make inquiry what be become of another call Rouffi , which remain alone in those part when Nicolas Masson and those of the first voyage embark themselves to return into France . they understand at their arrival there , that a bark pass that way have carry away the same soldier : and afterward i know for a certainty that they be Spaniards which have carry he to Havana . the king Audusta send i back my bark full of mill , with a certain quantity of bean , two stag , some skin paint after their manner , and certain pearl of small value , because they be burn : and send i word that if i will dwell in his quarter , he will give i a great country : and that after he have gather his mill , he will spare i as much as i will have . in the mean while there come unto our fort a flock of stock - dove in so great number , and that for the space of seven week together , that every day we kill with harquebus shoot two hundred in the wood about our fort . after that captain Vasseur ' Nicolas Masson otherwise call Nicolas bar . king a adustas great humanity . pearl burn . Peter martyr write the cap . I . decade . 7 . that the like flock of pigeon be in the isle oj be return , i cause the two bark to be furnish ikeLucayos . again with soldier and mariner , and send they to carry a present from i unto the widow of king Hiocaia , who dwelling be distant from our fort about twelve league northward . she courteous receive our man , send i back my bark full of mill and acorn with 53 the widow of king hioa - caia , or hihou - hacara . certain basket full of the leaf of Cassine , wherewith they make their drink . and the place where this widow dwell be the most plentiful of mill that be in this queen all the coast , and the most pleasant . it be think that name be Nia the queen be the most beautiful of all the Indian , and Cubacam . off they make most account : yea , and her subject honour she so much , that almost continual they bear she on their shoulder , and will not suffer she to go on foot . within a few day after the return of my bark , she send to visit i by her hiatiqui , which be as much thefift voyage to say , as her interpreter . now while i think i be up the river furnish with victual until the time that our ship of may . may come out of France ( for fear of keep my people idle ) i send my two bark to discover along the river , and up towards the head thereof , which go so far up that they be thirty league good beyond a Mathiaqua . place name Mathiaqua , and there they discover they the discovery entrance of a lake , upon the one side whereof no land can be see , accord to the report of the Indian , ride ° whererf6 which have oftentimes climb on the high tree in no land can be the country to see land , and notwithstanding can not see . discern any : which be the cause that my man go no further , but return back ; and in come home the isle of go to see the island of Edelano situate in the midst Edelano . of the river , as fair a place as any that may be see through the world : for in the space of some three league , that it may contain in length and breadth , a man may see a exceed rich country , and marvellous people . at the come out of the village of Edelano to go unto the river side a man must pass through a alley about three hundred pace long and fifty pace broad : on both side whereof great tres be plant , the bough a excellent whereof be tie together like a arch , and meet together work of so artificial that a man will think it be a arbour nature . make of purpose , as fair i say , as any in all Christendom , although it be altogether natural . our man depart patica ' . from this p ^ ace row to eneguape , than to chily , from Coya . thence to patica , and last they come unto Coya : where leave their bark in a little creek of the river with man to guard they , they go to visit utina , which receive they very courteous : and when they depart from his house , he entreat they so earnest , that six of my man remain with he ; of which number there be one gentleman , name groutaid , which after he have abode there about two month , and take great pain to discover the country , with another which i have leave a great while there to that intent , come unto i to the fort , and tell i that he never see a fair country . among other thing , he report unto i that he have see a place name Hostaqua , and that the king thereof be so mighty , that he be able to bring three or four thousand savage to the field ; with who if i will join and enter into league , we may be able to reduce all the rest of the inhabitant unto our obedience : beside that this king know the passage unto the mountain of Apalatci , which the french man desire so great to attain unto , and where the enemy of Hostaqua make his abode ; which be easy to be subdue , if so be we will enter into league together . this king send i a plate of a minerail that come out of this mountain , out of the foot whereof there run a stream of gold or copper , as the savage think , out of which they dig up the sand with a hollow and dry cane of reed until the cane be full ; afterward they shake it , and find that there be many small grain of copper and silver among this sand : which give they to understand , that some rich i must needs be in the mountain . and because the king of Hostaqua or Oustaca able to bring three or four thousand savage to the field . the mountain of Apalatci . there be a mine of gold or rich cope in the mountain of Apalatci . the mountain be not pass five or six day journey from our fort , lie towards the northwest , i determine assoon as our supply shall come out of France , to [ three . 340 . ] remove our habitation unto some river more towards the north , that i may be near thereunto . one of my soldier who name be Peter Gamby , which have Peter Gamby remain a long space before in this country to learn the language and traffic with the Indian , at the last the mlage come to the village of Edelano , where have get Edelano . gold wonderful together a certain quantity of gold and silver , and silver . purpose to return unto i , he pray the king of the village to lend he a canoa ( which be a vessel ! make of one whole piece of wood , which the Indian use to fish withal , and to row upon the river ) which this lord of Edelano grant he . 6ut be greedy of the riches which he have , he command two Indian , which he have charge to conduct he in the canoa , to murder he and bring he the merchandise and the gold which he have . which the two traitor villanous execute : for they knock he on the head with a hatchet , as he be blow of the fire in the canoa to seethe fish . utina send the Paracoussy utina send certain day afterward , to pray i to lend a dozen or fifteen of my shot , to jor be pe . jnvaje g enemy Potanou , and send i word , that this enemy once vanquish , he will make i passage , yea , and will conduct i unto the mountain in such sort , that no man shall be able to hinder i . than i assemble my man to demand their advice , as i be a good note , wont to do in all my enterprise . the great part be of opinion , that i shall do well to send succour unto this Paracoussy , because it will be hard for i to discover any further up into the country without his help : and that the Spaniard when they be employ in their conquest , do always enter into alliance with some one king to ruin another . notwithstanding , because i do always mistrust the Indian , and that the more after the last advertisement that the Spaniard have give i , i doubt lest the small number which utina demand may incur some danger ; wherefore i send he thirty shot under the charge of my lieutenant Ottigny , which stay not above two day with utina , while he prepare victual for his voyage , which ordinary and accord to the custom of the country be carry by woman and young boy , and by hermaphrodite . threehundr utina set forward with three hundred of his subject , Indian . have each of they their bow and quiver full of arrow , cause our thirty shot to be place in the foreward , and 56 1565 - made they march all the day , until that the night approach , and have not go past half the way , they be enforce to lie all night in the wood , near a great lake , and there to encamp themselves : they separate themselves by six and six , make each of they a fire about the place where their king lie , for who guard they ordain a certain number of those archer , in who he put most confidence . assoon as day be come , the camp of the Indian march within three league of Potanou : there king utina request my lieutenant to grant he four or five of his man to go and discover the country ; which depart immediately , and have not go far , but they perceive upon a lake , distant about three league from the village of a lake three Potanou , three Indian which fish in a canoa . now league distant the custom be that when they fish in this lake , they / w ‘ have always a company of watchman , arm with bow potanou . and arrow to guard the fisher . our man be hereof advertise by those of the company , dare not pass any further , for fear of fall into some ambush : wherefore they return towards utina , which sudden send they back with a great company to surprise the fisher , before they may retire and advertise their king Potanou of the come of his enemy . which they can not execute so politic , but that two of they escape ; the three also do the best he can to save himself by swim , in which mean while he be stay with shot of arrow , and they draw he stark dead unto the bank side , where our Indian flay off the skin of his head , cut off both his arm in the high way , reserve his hair for the triumph , which their king hope to make for the defeat of his enemy . utina fear least Potanou advertise by the fisher which be escape ,