we , cry very far off , Antipola , Antipola : and be so joyful that he can not contain himself , he come to meet we , accompany then .... i564 ' with two of his son , as fair and mighty person as may be find in all the world , which have nothing in their mouth but this word , Amy , Amy : that be to say , friend , friend : yea , and know those which be there in the first voyage , they go principal to they to use this speech unto they . there be in their train a great number of man and woman , which still make very much of we , and by evident sign make we understand how glad they be of our arrival . this good entertainment past , the Paracoussy pray i to go see the pillar which we have erect in the voyage of John Ribault ( as we have declare heretofore ) as a thing which they make great account of . have yield unto he and be come to the place the f ^ ar set where it be set up , we find the same crown with crown of bay , and at the foot thereof many little crownedwith basket full of mill which they call in their language garland of Tapaga Tapola . then when they come thither they Laurelland kiss the same with great reverence and beseech we ironedmth to do the like , which we will not deny they , to the f ^ rne end we may draw they to be more in friendship worshipped ' by with we . this do , the Paracoussy take i by the the savage . hand , as if he have desire to make i understand some great secret , and by sign show i very well up within the river the limit of his dominion , and say that he be call Paracoussy Satourioua , which be as much as king Paracoussy Satourioua . his child have the self same title of Satourioua . Paracoussy : the elder be name athore , a man , i dare say , perfect in beauty , wisdom , and honest sobriety , show by his modest gravity that he deserve the name which he bear , beside that he be gentle and tractable . after we have sojourn a certain space with they , the Paracoussy pray one of his son to present unto i a wedge of silver , which he do and that wedge oj with a good will : in recompense whereof i give he a silver - cutting hook and some other better present : wherewith he seem to be very well please . afterwards we take our leave of they , because the night approach , and then return to lodge in our ship . be allure with this good entertainment i fail not the next day to embark my self again with my lieutenant Ottigni and a number of soldier to return towards the Paracoussy of the river of May , which of purpose wait for we in the same place , where the day before we confer with he . we find he under the shadow of a arbour accompany with fourscore Indian at the least , and apparel at that time after the Indian fashion , to wit , with a great heart skin dress like chamois , and paint with device of strange and diverse colour , but of so lively a portraiture , and represent antiquity , with rule so just compass , that there be no painter so exquisite that can find fault therewith : the natural disposition of this strange people be so perfect and well guide that without any aid and favour of art , they be able by the help of nature only to content the eye of artisan , yea even of those which by their industry be able to aspire unto thing most absolute . than i advertise Paracoussy Satourioua , that my desire be to discover far up into the river , but that this shall be with such diligence that i will come again unto he very speedy : wherewith he be content , promise to stay for i in the place where he be : and for a earnest of his promise , he offer i his goodly skin , which i refuse then , and promise to receive it of he at my return . for my part i give he certain small trifle , to the intent to retain he in our friendship . [ Iii . 322 . ] depart from thence , i have not sail three league up the river , still be follow by the Indian , which coast i a long the river , cry still , Amy , Amy , that be to say friend , friend : but i discover a hill of mean height , near which i go on land , hard by the field that be sow with will , at one corner whereof there be a house build for their lodging , which keep and guard the mill : for there be such number of cor - gnsses . nish chough in this country , which continual devour .. 15641 and spoil the mill , that the Indian be constrain to keep and watch it , otherwise they shall be deceive of their harvest . 1 rest my self in this place for certain hour , and command Monsieur de Ottigni , and monsieur de my sergeant to enter into the wood to search out the dwelling of the Indian : where after they have go awhile , they come unto a marish of reed , where find their way to be stop , they rest under the shadow of a mighty bay tree to refresh themselves a little and to resolve which way to take . than they discover , as it be on the sudden , five Indian half hide in the wood , which seem somewhat to distrust our man , until they say unto they in the Indian language Antipola Bonassou , to the end that understand their speech they may come unto we more bold , which they do incontinent . but because they see , that the four that go last , bear up the train of the skin wherewith he that go foremost be apparel our man imagine that the foremost must needs be some man of great quality than the rest , see that withal they call he Paracoussy , Paracoussy , wherefore , some of our company go towards he , and use he courteous show he , monsieur de Ottigni , their lieutenant , for who they have make a harbour with bay and palm bough after the Indian fashion , to the end that by such sign the savage may think the Frenchman have compain with such as they at other time . the Indian Paracoussy draw near to the french , and courtesy begin to make he a long oration , which tend to no other end , but that he beseech the Frenchman very earnest to come and see his dwell and his parent , which they grant he , and straight for pledge of better amity , he give unto my lieutenant Ottigni , the very skin that he be clad with . than he take he by the hand , lead he right towards the marsh , over which the Paracoussy , monsieur Ottigni , and certain other of our man be bear upon the Indian shoulder : and the rest which can not pass because of the mire and reed , go through the wood , and follow a narrow path which lead they forth until they come unto the paracoussyes dwelling ; out of which there come about fifty Indian to receive our man gallant , and to feast they after their manner . after which they bring at their entrance a great vessel of earth , make after a strange fashion full of fountain water clear and very excellent . this vessel be bear by a Indian , and there be another young which bear of this water in another little vessel of wood , and present thereof to every one to drink , observe in do the same , a certain order and reverence , which he make to each of they , to who he give drink . our thirst well quench by this mean , and our man be sufficient refresh , the Paracoussy bring they to his father lodging , one of the old man that live upon the earth . our man regard his age , begin to make much of he , use this speech , Amy , Amy , that be to say , friend , friend , whereat the old sire show himself very glad . afterwards they question with he concern the course of his age : whereunto he make answer , show that he be the first living originali , from whence five generation be descend , as he show unto they by another old man that sit direct over against he , man of ex - which far exceed he in age . and this man be his ceedmg old father ? which seem to be rather a dead carkei than a live body : for his sinew , his vein , his artier , his bone , and other part , appear so clear through his skin , that a man may easy tell they , and discern they one from another . also his age be so great , that the good man have lose his sight , and can not speak one only word but with exceed great pain . monsieur de Ottigni have see so strange a thing , turn to the young of these two old man , pray he to vouchsafe to answer he to that which he demand touch - savage in Florida of 250 . year old . eagles in Florida . Rene Laudonniere a . d . 1564 . king his age . then the old man call a company of Indian , and strike twice upon his thigh , and lay his hand upon two of they , he show he by sign , that these two be his son : again smite upon their thigh , he show he other not so old , which be the child of the two first , which he continue in the same manner until the five generation . but though this old man have his father alive more old than himself , and that both of they do wear their hair very long , and as white as be possible , yet it be tell they , [ he . 323 . ] that they may yet live thirty or forty year more by the course of nature : although the young of they both be not less than two hundred and fifty year old . after he have end his communication , he commanded two young eagles to be give to our man , which he have breed up for his pleasure in his house . he cause also little panier make of palm leave full of gourd red and blow to be deliver unto they . for recompense of which present he be satisfy with french toy . Theise two old man cause our man to be guide back again to the place from whence they come , by the young Paracoussy which have bring they thither . and have take leave of the Paracoussy , they come and seek i out in the place where i stay , and rehearse unto i all that they have see , pray i also that i will reward their guide , which so frank and hearty have receive they into his house , which i will not fail to do by any mean . now be i determine to search out the quality of the hill . therefore i go right to the top thereof , where we find nothing else but cedar , palm , and baytree of so sovereign odour , that balm smell nothing like in comparison . the tree be environ round about with vine bear grape in such quantity , that the number will suffice to make the place habitable . beside this fertility of the soil for vine , a man may see Esquine wreathe about the shrub in 11 cedar , palm , bay exceed sweet . abundance of grape . Esquine a drug excellent against the pocket . silver certain day journey up within the river of May . thimogoamor - tall enemy to Satourioua . the english voyage great quantity . touch the pleasure of the place , the sea may be see plain and open from it , and more than six great league off , near the river Belle , a man may behold the meadow divide asunder into isle and islet interlace one another : brief the place be so pleasant , that those which be melancholic will be enforce to change their humour . after i have stay there a while , i embark again my people to sail towards the mouth of the river , where we find the Paracoussy , which accord to his promise wait for we . wherefore to content he , we go on shore , and do he that reverence that on our part be requisite . than he give i the skin so rich paint , and i recompense he with somewhat of our merchandise . i forget not to demand of he the place whence the wedge of silver come which he have give i before : whereunto he make i a very sudden answer , which notwithstanding i understand not , which he well perceive . and then he show i