the four voyage of the Frenchman into Florida , under the conduct of captain Gourgues , in the year , 1567 . aptaine Gourgues a gentleman bear in the country near unto Bourdeaux incite with a desire of revenge , to repair the honour of his nation , borrowed of his friend and sell part of his own good to set forth and furnish three ship of indifferent burden with all thing necessary , have in they a hundred and fifty soldier , and fourscore choose mariner under captain Cazenove his lieutenant , and Francis Bourdelois master over the mariner . he set forth the 22 of August 1567 . and have endure contrary wind and storm for a season , at length he arrive and go 100 on shore in the isle of Cuba . from thence he pass to the cape of saint Antony at the end of they he of Cuba , about two hundred league distant from Florida , where the captain disclose unto they his intention which hitherto he have conceal from they , pray and exhort they not to leave he be so near the enemy , so well furnish , and in such a cause : which they all swear unto he , and that with such courage that they will not stay the full moon to pass the channel of Bahama , but speedy discover Florida , channel of where the Spaniard salute they with two canon Bahama be - shot from their fort , suppose that they have be of n ^ the hie * their nation , and Gourgues salute they again to enter - ofLucayos . take they in this error , that he may surprise they at more advantage , yet sail by they , and make as though he go to some other place until he have sail out of sight of the place , so that about evening , he land 15 league from the fort , at the mouth of the the TrenchRiver Tacatacouru , which the Frenchman call Seine , because they think it to be like Seine in France . afterwards perceive the shore to be cover with savage with their bow and arrow , ( beside the sign [ three . 357 . ] of peace and amity which he make they from his ship ) he send his trumpeter , to assure they , that they be come thither for none other end but to renew the amity and ancient league of the french with they . the trumpeter do his message so well ( by reason he have be there before under Laudonniere ) that he bring back from king Satourioua , the great of all the other king , a kid and other meat to refresh we , beside the offer of his friendship and amity . afterwards they retire dance in sign of joy , to advertise all the king satouriouaes kinsman to repair thither the next day to make a league of amity with the Frenchman . whereupon in the mean space our general go about to sound the chanel of the river to bring in his ship , and the better to traffic and deal with the savage , of who the chief the next day in the morning IOI complaint of the savage against the Spaniard . two chain of silver give to Gourgues . the english voyage present themselves , namely the great king Satourioua , tacatacourou , halmacanir , athore , harpaha , Helmacape , Helicopil6 , Molloua , and other his kinsman and ally , with their accustom weapon . then send they to entreat the french general to come on shore , which he cause his man to do with their sword and harquebus , which he make they leave behind they , in token of mutual assurance , leave his man but their sword only , after that the savage complain thereof have leave and likewise send away their weapon at the request of Gourgues . this do satourioua go to meet he , cause he to sit on his right hand in a seat of wood of lentisque cover with moss make of purpose like unto his own . than two of the elder of the company pull up the bramble and other weed which be before they , and after they have make the place very clean , they all sit round about they on the ground . afterwards Gourgues be about to speak , Satourioua prevent he , declare at large unto he the incredible wrong , and continual outrage that all the savage , their wife and child have receive of the Spaniard since their come into the country and massacre of the Frenchman , with their continual desire if we will assist they thorough to revenge so shameful a treason , aswell as their own particular grief , for the firm good will they always have bear unto the Frenchman . whereupon Gourgues give they his faith , and make a league between they and he with a oath give they certain present of dagger , knife , look glass , hatchet , ring , bell , and such other thing , trifle unto we , but precious unto these king : which moreover , see his great liberality , demand each one a shirt of he to wear only on their festival day , and to be bury in at their death . which thing after that they have receive , and Satourioua have give in recompense to captain Gourgues two chain of silver grain which hang about his neck , and each of the king certain dear skin dress after their manner , they retire 102 themselves dance and very jocund , with promise to keep all thing secret , and to bring unto the say place good company of their subject all well arm to be avenge thorough on the Spaniard . in the mean space Gourgues very narrow examine Peter de Br ^ Peter de Bri bear in Newhaven , which be but a young stripling escape out ot the tort into the wood while the span - yeera yard murder the rest of the french , and be afterward Satourioua . bring up with Satourioua , which at that time bestow he on our general , who advice stand he in great stead : whereupon he send to discover the fort and the estate of the enemy by certain of his man , be guide by Olotacara satouriouaes nephew which he have give he for this purpose and for assurance of estampe a gentleman of Cominges , and other which he send to descry the state of the enemy . Moreover he give he three fledge a son of his stark naked as all of they be , and his wife which he love best of all the rest , of eighteen satoi ^ ioua . year old , apparel with the moss of tree , which for 3 day space be in the ship , until our man return from descry the state of the enemy , and the king have furnish their preparation at their rendezvous . their march be conclude , and the savage rendezvous be appoint they beyond the river Salinacani , of our man call Somme , they all drink the river of with great solemnity their drink call Cassine , make of the juice of certain herb ( as they be wont to do , fa French when they go to any place of danger , ) which have such force , that it take from they hunger and thirst for 24 hour , and Gourgues be fain to make as though he drink thereof for company . afterwards they lift up their hand and swear all that they will never forsake he . Olotocara follow he with pike in hand . be all meet at the river of Sarauahi , not without great the river of trouble , by reason of the rain and place full of water Sarauahi . which they must needs pass , which hinder their passage , they be distress with famine find nothing by the way to eat , their bark of provision be not arrive , 103 the estate of the Spaniard in Florida . [ he . 358 . ] the river of saracary , or Sarauahi . the english voyage which be to come unto he from the ship , the oversight and charge whereof he have leave unto Burdelois with the rest of the mariner . now he have learn that the Spaniard be four hundred strong , divide into three fort build and flank , and well fortify upon the river of May , the great fort especial begin by the french , and afterward repair by they : upon the most dangerous and principali land place whereof , two league low and near toward the river mouth , they have make two small fort , which be defend , the river pass between they , with six score soldier , good store of artillery and other munition , which they have in the same . from saracary unto these small fort be two league space , which he find very painful , because of the bad way and continual rain . after - ward he depart from the river Catacouru with 10 , shot , to view the first fort , and to assault it the next day in the morning by the break of day , which he can not do , because of the foul weather , and darkness of the night . king helicopile see he out of quiet in that he have fail of his purpose there , assure he to guide he a more easy way , though it be far about . insomuch as lead he through the wood , he bring he within sight of the fort , where he discern one quarter which be but begin to be entrench . thus after he have sound the small river that fall down thereby , he stay until ten of the clock in the morning for a ebb water , that his man may pass over there , unto a place where he have see a little grove between the river and the fort ( that he may not be see to pass and set his soldier in array ) cause they to fasten their flask to their morion , and to hold up their sword and caliver in their hand , for fear least the water , which reach up to their girdle , shall not wet they : where they find such abundance of great oyster , and shell which be so sharp , that many have their leg cut with they , and many other lose their shoe . notwithstanding assoon as 104 they be pass over , with a french courage they prepare themselves to the assault on the Sunday eve next after easter day , in April 1568 . insomuch that Gourgues to employ the ardent heat of this good affection , give twenty shot to his lieutenant Cazenove , and ten mariner lade with pot and ball of wild fire to burn the gate : and then he assault the fort assault on another side , after he have make a short speech unto ^ " f ^ his man of the strange treason which the Spaniard ' have play their companion . but be descry as they come hold down their head within two hundred pace from the fort , the gunner be upon the terrace of the fort , after he have cry , be i , arm , these be French man , discharge twice upon they a culverin , whereon the arm of France be grave , which have be take from Laudonniere . but as he go about to charge it the three time , Olotocara , which have not va ^ ure of learned to keep his rank , or rather move with rage , ot < , cara - lept on the platform , and thrust he through the body with his pike and slay he . whereupon Gourgues advance forward , and after he have hear Cazenove cry , that the Spaniard which issue out arm at the cry of the alarm , be flee , he draw to that part , and so hem they in between he and his lieutenant , that of threescore there escape not a man , save only fifteen reserve unto the same death which they have put the french unto . the Spaniard of the other fort in the meanwhile cease not to play with their ordinance , which much annoy the assailant : although to answer they they have by this place and oftentimes point the four piece find in the first fort where - the assault upon Gourgues be accompany with fourscore shot go aboard the bark which meet he there to good ' purpose to pass into the wood near unto the fort , out of which he suppose the Spaniard will issue to save themselves through the benefit of the wood in the great fort , which be not pass one league distant from you same . afterwards the Savages not stay for the return of Io5 the Spaniards of the second fort allslaine . note . a notable spanish subtlety . [ he . 359 - j the english voyage the bark , leap all into the water hold up their bow and arrow in one hand , and swim with the other , so that the Spaniard sing both the shore cover with so great a number of man , think to flee towards the wood : but be charge by the french , and afterward repulse by the savage , towards who they will have retire , they be soon than they will bereave of their life . to conclude they all there end their day save 15 of those which be reserve to be execute for the example of other . whereupon captain Gourgues have cause all that he find in the second fort to be transport unto the first , where he mean to strengthen himself to take resolution against the great fort , the state whereof he do not understand : in fine