the content of those letter be these . captain Laudonniere , because some of they which letter of they be return from Florida speak indifferent of lordadmtrall the country , the king desire your presence , to the end , that accord to your trial , he may resolve to ’ bestow great cost thereon , or whole to leave it : and therefore i send captain John Ribault to be governor there , to who you shall deliver whatsoever you have 85 ' in charge , and inform he of all thing you have discover . and in a postscript of the letter be thus write . think not , that whereas i send for you , it be for any evil opinion or mistrust that i have of you , but that it be for your good and for your credit , and assure your self that during my life you shall find i your good master . Chastillon . now after i have long discourse with captain Ribault , captain la Grange accost i , and tell i of a accusation infinite number of false report which have be make of against he . i to my great hindrance : and among other thing ’ he inform i , that my lord admiral take it very 2 . evil that i have carry a woman with i : likewise that some body have tell he that i go about to counter ’ feit the king , and to play the tyrant : that i be too +• cruel unto the man that go with i : that i seek to be advance by other mean then by my lord 5 - admiral : and that i have write to many lord of they . i - court , which i ought not to have do . whereunto Laudonnieres j answerej that the woman be a poor chambermaid , answer there - .. , t , , , . t / . ' unto . which encage have take up in a inn , to oversee my household business , to look to a infinite sort of diverse beast , as sheep and poultry which i carry over with i to store the country withal : that it be not meet to put a man to attend this business : likewise , consider the length of the time that i be to abide there , i think it shall not offend any body to take a woman with i , aswell to help my soldier in their sickness , as in my own , whereinto i fall afterward . and how necessary her service be for we , each one at that time may easy perceive : that all my man think so well of she , that at one instant there be six or seven which do demand she of i in manage ; as in very 2 . deed one of they have she after our return . touch that which be say that i play the king , these report be make , because i will not bear with any thing which be against the duty of my charge , and the king service . Moreover , that in such enterprise it be necessary for a governor to make himself know and obey , for fear lest every body will become a master , perceive themselves far from great force . and that 3 . if the tale - teller call this rigour , it rather proceed of their disobedience , then of my nature less subject to cruelty than they be to rebellion . for the two 4 - last point , that i have not write to any of the lord of the court but by the advice and commandment of my lord admiral , which will i at my departure to send part of such thing as i shall find in the country unto the lord of the counsel : to the end that be move by this mean , they may deal with the queen mother for the continuance of this enterprise : that have be so small time in the country , continual hinder with building of fortress , and unlade of my ship , i be not able to come by any new or rare thing to send they , whereupon i think it best to content they in the mean while with letter , until such time as i may have long space to search out the country , and may recover something to send they : the distribution of which letter i mean not otherwise but to refer to my lord admiral good pleasure : that if the bearer have forget himself so far , as that he have break the cover of the letter , and present they himself for hope of gain , it be not my commandment . and 5 . that i never honour noble man so much , nor do to any man more willing and faithful service then to my lord admiral , nor ever seek advancement but by his mean . you see how thing pass for this day . the next day the Indian come in from all part , to know what people these be : to who i signify that this be he which in the year 1562 . arrive in this country , and erect the pillar which stand at the entry of the river . some of they know he : for in truth he be easy to be know by reason of the great beard which he wear . he receive many present of they which be of the village near adjoin , 87 the mountain of apalatcy wherein be mine of perfect gold . Sieroa Pira red mettle . perfect gold . good mean to avoid the danger of fire . September 4 . among who there be some that he have not yet forget . the king homoloa , Serauahi , Alimacani , Malica , and Casti come to visit he and welcome he with diverse gift accord to their manner . i advertise they that he be send thither by the king of France , to remain there in my room , and that i be send for . than they demand and pray he , if it may stand with his good pleasure , to cause the merchandise that he have bring with he to be deliver they , and that in few day they will bring he to the mountain of apalatcy , whither they have promise to conduct i , and that in case they perform not their promise , that they be content to be cut in piece . in those mountain , as they say , be find red copper , which they call in their language Sieroa Pira , which be as much to say as red mettle , whereof i have a piece , which at the very instant i show to captain Ribault , which cause his gold - fine to make a assay thereof , which report unto he that it be perfect gold . about the time of these conference , come and go of the king of the country , be weaken with my former travail , and fall into a melancholy upon the false report that have be make of i , i fall into a great continual fever , which hold i eight or nine day : during which time captain Ribault cause his victual to be bring on shore , and bestow the most part thereof in the house which my lieutenant have build about two hundred pase without the fort : which he do to the end they may be the better defend from the weather , and likewise to the intent that the meal may be near to the bakehouse , which i have build of purpose in that place , the better to avoid the danger of the fire , as i say before . but lo how oftentimes misfortune do search and pursue we , even then when we think to be at rest baptize lo see what happen after that captain Ribault have bring up three of his small ship into the river , which be the four of September ! six great spanish ship arrive in the road , where four of our great ship remain , which cast anchor , assure our man of good amity . they ask how the chief T & Spaniards captain of the enterprise do , and call they all by their name and surname . i report i to you if it y prench . can be otherwise but these man before they go out of Spain must needs be inform of the enterprise and of those that be to execute the same . about the break of day they begin to make towards our man : but our man which trust they never a deal , have hoist their sail by night , be ready to cut the string that tie they . wherefore perceive that this make towards our man of the Spaniard be not to do they any pleasure , and know well that their furniture be too small to make head against they , because that the most part of their man be on shore , they cut their cable , leave their anchor , and set sail . the Spaniard see themselves discover , lend they certain vollei of their great ordinance , make sail after they , and chase they all day long : but our man get way of they still towards the sea . and the Spaniard see they can not reach they , by reason that the french ship be better of sail than they , and also because they will not leave the coast , turn back and go on shore in the river Seloy , which we call the the river river of dolphin 8 or 10 league distant from the orj ^ t place where we be . our man therefore find they - g ' or self better of sail than they , follow they to descry io league what they do , which after they have do , they return over land from unto the river of May , where captain Ribault have but descry they , embark himself in a great boat to know what news they have . be at the entry of the cape sea . river he meet with the boat of captain couset ship , wherein there be a good number of man which make relation unto he of all the Spaniard do : and how the great ship name the Trini tie have keep the sea , and that she be not return with they . they tell he moreover that they have see three spanish ship enter into the river of dolphin , and the other dangerous flaw of wind on the coast of Florida in September . king Emola . [ he - 353 - ] a village and river both of that name . the english voyage three remain in the road ; far that they have put their soldier , their victual and munition on land . after he understand these news he return to the fortress , and come to my chamber where i be sick , and there in the presence of the captain , la grange , S . marie , Ottigny , visty , Yonville , and other gentleman , he propound , that it be necessary for the king service , to embark himself with all his force , and with the three ship that be in the road to seek the spanish fleet , whereupon he ask our advice . i first reply , and show unto he the consequence of such a enterprise , advertise he among other thing of the perilous flaw of wind that rise on this coast , and that if it chance that he be drive from the shore , it will be very hard for he to recover it again , that in the mean while they which shall stay in the fort shall be in fear and danger . the captain , saint marie , and la grange declare unto he far , that they think it not good to put any such enterprise in execution , that it be far better to keep the land , Sc do their best endeavour to fortify themselves : and that after that the Trinity ( which be the principali ship ) be return , there will be much more likelihood to enterprise this voyage . this notwithstanding he resolve to undertake it , and that which moor be , after he understand by king Emola , one of our neighbour which arrive upon the handle of these matter , that the Spaniard in great number be go on shore , which have take possession of the house of Seloy , in the most part whereof they have place their negro , which they have bring to labour , and also lodge themselves and have cast diverse trench about they . thus for the consideration which he have , and doubt ( as he may well do ) that the Spaniard will encamp themselves there to molest we , and in the end to chase we out of the country , he resolve and continue in his embarkment , cause a proclamation to be make , that all soldier that be under his charge shall present with their weapon embark they , and that his two ensign shall march : which be put in execution . he come into my chamber , and pray i to lend he my lieutenant , my ensign , and my sergeant , and to let all my good soldier , which i have , go with he , which i deny he , because my self be sick , there be no man to stay in the fort . thereupon he answer i that i need not to doubt at all , and that he will return the morrow after , that in the mean space monsieur de Lys shall stay behind to look to all thing . than i show unto he that he be chief in this country , and that i for my part have no further authority : that therefore he will take good advisement what he do , for fear lest some inconvenience may ensue . than he tell i that he can do no less , than to continue this enterprise , and that in the letter which he have receive from my lord admiral , there be a postscript , which he show i write in these word : captain John Ribault , as i be enclose up this letter , i receive a certain advice , that don Pedro Melendes depart from Spain to go to the coast of new France : see you that you suffer he not to encroach upon you , no more than he will that you shall encroach upon he . you see ( quoth he ) the charge that i have , and i leave it unto your self to judge , if you can do any less in this case , consider the certain advertisement that we have , that they be already on land , and will invade we . This stop my mouth . thus therefore confirm or rather obstinate in this enterprise , and have regard rather unto his particular opinion then unto the advertisement which i have give he , and the inconvenience of the time whereof i have forewarn he , he embark himself the eight of September , and take my ensign and eight and thirty of my man away with he . i report i to those that know what war mean , if when a ensign march , any soldier that have any courage in he will stay behind , to forsake his ensign : thus no man 9i A . D . 1565 . a advertisement of my lord admiral to captain Ribault . captain ri - baidts em - barkment Sept . 8 . of commandment stay behind with i , for each one follow he as chief , in who name straight after his arrival , all cry and proclamation be make . captain Grange , which like not very well of this enterprise , the ten of be unto the ten of the month with i , and will September . not have go aboard , if it have not be for the instant request that captain Ribault make unto he , which stay two day in the road attend until la Grange be come unto he : who be come aboard , they set sail altogether , and from that time forward i never see a mighty they moor . the very day that he depart , which be l ^ uhof ^ eit th ® ten September , there rise so great a tempest ’ accompany with such storm , that the Indian themselves assure i that it be the worst weather that ever be see on the coast : whereupon two or three day after , fear lest our ship may be in some distress , i send for monsieur du Lewis unto i , to take order to assemble the rest of our people to declare unto they what need we have to fortify our self : which be do accord : and then i give they to understand the necessity and inconvenience whereinto we be like to fall , aswell by the absence of our ship , as by the nearness of the Spaniard , at who hand we can look for no less than a open and sufficient proclaim war , see they have take land and fortify themselves so near unto we . and if any misfortune be fall unto our man which be at sea , we ought to make a full account with our self that we be to endure many great misery , be in so small number , and so many way afflict as we be . thus every one promise i to take pain : and therefore consider that their proportion of victual be small , and that so continue , they will not be able to do any Laudtmmere great work , i augment their allowance : although that after the arrival of captain Ribault my portion of victual be allot unto i as unto a common soldier , neither be i able to give so much as part of a bottle of wine to any man which deserve it : for i be so far from 92 [ in . 354 - ] a muster of the man leave in the fort by Ribault . Rene Laudonniere a . d . ... 15651 have mean to do so , that the captain himself take two of my boat , wherein the rest of the meal be , which be leave i of the biscuit which i cause to be make to return into France : so that if i shall say that i receive more favour at the hand of the Englishman be stranger unto i , i shall say but a truth . we begin therefore to fortify our Laudonniere self and to repair that which be break down , continue ™ 0 principal towards the water side