have need of his sister tnne ' man , he will furnish i with three hundred and above . while i thus travail to purchase friend , and to practise one while with one here , a other while with another there , certain soldier of my company be suborn under hand by one name la Roquette of the country la coquette of Perigort , which put in their head that he be a cmspirade . great magician , and that by the secret of art - magicke he have discover a i of gold and silver far up within the river , whereby ( upon the loss of his life , ) every soldier shall receive in ready bullion the value of ten thousand crown , beside and above fifteen hundred thousand which shall be reserve for the king majesty : wherefore they ally themselves with la Roquette and another of his confederate , who name be le Genre , in who notwithstanding i have great affiance . This Genre exceed desirous to enrich monsieur de himself in those part , and seek to be revenge , Genre . because i will not give he the carriage of the Paquet into France , secret inform the soldier that be already suborn by la Roquette , that i will deprive they of this great gain , in that i do set they daily on work , not send they on every side to discover the country : therefore that it be a good deed , after they have make i understand so much , to seek mean to dispatch i out of the way , and to choose another captain in my place , if i will not give they victual accord to their disordinate appetite . he also bring genre mes - mee word hereof himself , make a large discourse unto i of the good affection of the soldier , which all be - soldier seek i that i will conduct they to the country name . where the mine be : i make he answer that all can his answer . not go thither , and that it be necessary before their departure to settle our fortress in such estate , that those which be to stay at home behind shall remain in security against the Indian which may surprise they . Furthermore , that their manner of proceed seem strange unto i , for that they imagine , that the king majesty be at the charge of our voyage for none other end , but only to enrich they at their first arrival , in as much as they show themselves much more give unto covetousness , then unto the service of their prince : but see my answer tend unto none other end but to make our fortress strong and defensible , they determine to travail in the work , and make a ensign of old linen , which ordinary they bear upon the rampart when they go to work , always wear their weapon , which i think they have do to encourage themselves to work the better . but as i perceive afterward , and that by the confession of Genre send i in letter which he write to i of that matter , these gentle soldier do they same for hislieutenant . none other end , but to have kill i , and my lieutenant also , if by chance i have give they any hard speech . about the twenty of September , as i come home from the wood and coppicde to finish the build of my fort , ( and that accord to my usuali manner , i march first to give encouragement unto my soldier ) i chafe my self in such sort , that i fall into a sore and grievous sickness , whereof i think i shall have laudonnier die : during which sickness , i call le Genre often sickness . unto i , as one that i trust above all other , and of who conspiracy i doubt not any whit at all . in this mean while assemble his complice , sometime in his chamber and sometime in the wood to consult with they , he speak unto they to choose another captain beside i , to the intent to put i to death : but be not able by open force to execute his mis -^ “ ot ^ carie c ^^ eYous intention , he gate he unto my apothecary [ ih . 333 ^ ] pray he instant to mingle in my medicine , which ‘ ’ i be to receive one or two day after , some drug that shall make i pitch over the perch , or at the least that he will give he a little Arsenike or quick silver , which he himself will put into my drink . but the apothecary deny he , as do in like manner master saint which be master of the firework . thus the master of whole disappoint of both his mean , he with certain the firework . other resolve to hide a little barrel of gunpowder underneath my bed , and by a train to set it on fire . upon these practise a gentleman which i have dispatch to return into France , be about to take his leave of i , advertise i , that Genre have give he a book full of all kind of lewd invective and slander against i , against monsieur de Ottigny , and against the principal of my company : upon which occasion i assemble all my soldier together , and captain captain Bourdet with all he , which on the four of September Bourdet ar - arrived in the road , and be come into our river . in their presence encage cause the content of the book to ofsepteml £ ' bee read aloud , that they may bear record of the untruth that be write against i . Genre , which have get he into the wood for fear of be take , ( where he live for a while after with the savage by my permission , ) write unto i often , and in many of his letter confess unto i , that he have deserve death , condemn himself so farrefoorth , that he refer all to my mercy and pity . the seven or eight day of November , after i have the 4 . voyage cause sufficient provision of such victual as be need - 7 - ofno - full to be make , i send two of my man , to wit , la vember - Roche Ferriere , and a other toward king utina , to discover every day more and more of the country : where he be the space of five or six month , during which he discover many small village , and among other one name Hostaqua , the king whereof be Hostaqua a desirous of my friendship , send unto i a quiver make village . of a lusern skin ne full of arrow , a couple of bow , four or five skin paint after their manner , and a chain of silver weigh about a pound weight . in recompense of which present i send he two whole suit of apparel , with certain cut hook or hatchet . after these thing therefore in this sort pass , about the ten of this month , captain Bourdet determine to leave i and to return into France . than i request he , yea rather be exceed importunate with he , to carry home with he some six or seven soldier , who i can not trust by any mean : which he do for my sake , and will not charge himself with Genre , which offer he a great sum of money , if it will please he to carry he into France : he transport he only to the other side of the river . one of his three day after his departure thirteen mariner which bark steal j bad bring out of France , suborn by certain other “ Mariners * mariner which captain Bourdet have leave i , steal away my bark in manner follow . Theise mariner of captain Bourdet put i in the head , that if they have such bark as i be , they may gain very much in the isle of the Antilles , and make a exceed profitable voyage . hereupon they begin to devise how they may steal away my bark , and consult that when i shall command they to go unto they the village of village of Sarauahi distant about a league and a half Sarauahi . from our fort , and situate upon a arm of the river , ( whither accord to my manner i send they daily to seek clay , to make brick and mortar for our house ) they will return no more , but will furnish themselves with victual as well as they may possible : and then will embark themselves all in one vessel , another of he and will go their way : as indeed they do . and bark steal jbat which be worse , two flemish carpenter , which “ carpenter ? sa ^ e B ° urdet have leave i , steal away the other ’ bark , and before their departure cut the cable of the bark , and of the shipboate , that it may go away with the tide , that i may not pursue they : so that i remain without either bark or boat , which fall out as unlucky for i as be possible . for 1 be ready to embark my self with all speed , to discover as far up our river , as i may by any mean . now my mariner , ( as i understand afterward ) take a bark that be a passenger of the Spaniard near the isle of Cuba , wherein they find a certain quantity of gold and silver , which they seize upon . and of these have this booty they lie a while at sea , until . their victual begin to fail they : which be the betray cause , that oppress with famine they come unto his own counHavana the principali town of the isle of Cuba : trey man to the whereupon proceed that mischief which hereafter i Spaniards , and will declare more at large . when i see my bark return not at their wont hour , and suspect that which fall out in deed , i command my carpenter with all diligence to make a little boat with a flat bottom , to search those river for some news of these mariner . the boat dispatch within a day and a night , by reason that my carpenter find plank and timber ready saw to their hand , as common i cause my Sawyers to provide it , i send man to seek some news of my thief : but all be in vain . therefore i determine to cause two great at Saw - mill bark to be build , each of which may be thirty five , necessary here . or thirty six foot long in the keel . and now the work be very well forward which [ three . 334 . ] i set my workman about , when ambition and avarice , the mother of all mischief , take root in the heart of four or five soldier which can not away with the work and pain take : and which from hence forward ( namely one Fourneaux , and one la Croix , and thethirde another call Steven le Geneuois , the three principali sedition . author of the sedition ) begin to practise with the best of my troop , show they that it be a vile thing for man of honest parentage , as they be , to moil themselves thus with abject and base work , see they have the best occasion of the world offer they to make themselves all rich : which be to arm the two bark which be in building , and by Peru the french mean the coast of Carthagena and number de Dios . the captain charge at his set forth . the english voyage to furnish they with good man : and then to sail unto Peru , and the other isle of the Antilles , where every soldier may easy enrich himself with ten thousand crown . and if their enterprise shall be mislike withal in France , they shall be always able , by reason of the great wealth that they shall gain , to retire themselves into Italy , until the heat be overpass , and that in the mean season some war will fall out , which will cause all this to be quite forget . this word of riches sound so well in the ear of my soldier , that in fine , after they have oftentimes consult of their affair , they grow to the number of threescore and six : which to colour their great desire which they have to go on steal , they cause a request to be present unto i by Francis de la caille sergeant of my company , contain in sum a declaration of the small store of victual that be leave to maintain we , until the time that ship may return from France : for remedy whereof they think it necessary to send to new Spain , Peru , and all the isle adjoin , which they beseech i to be content to grant . but i make they answer , that when the bark be finish , i will take such good order in general , that by mean of the king merchandise , without spare my own apparel , we will