towards the north , which i cause to be raise somewhat too high : for within a short while after the wind beat it down : and experience teach i , that high building may not build with high stage in this country , be mtlipod fi > r by reason of the wind whereunto it be subject . one ountrey . fl - ia 1 be / ' locxarl my cmirf trrliir ’ k t morlA of the side that enclose my court , which i make very fair and large , reach unto the grange of my muni tion : and on the other side towards the river be i own lodging , round about which be gallery all cover . the principali door of my lodging be in the midst of the great place , and the other be toward the river . a good distance from the fort i build a oven to avoid the danger against fire , because the house be of palm leave , which will soon be burn after the fire catch hold of they , so that with much ado a man shall have leisure to quench they . Loe here in brief the description of our four tress , which i name Caroline in the honour of our prince king Charles . after we be furnish with that which be most necessary , i will not lose a minute of a hour , without employ of the same in some virtuous exercise : therefore i charge monsieur de Ottigni my lieutenant , a man in truth worthy of all honour for his honesty and virtue , to search up within the river , what this Thimogoa may be , whereof the Paracoussy Satourioua have speak to we so often at our come on shore . for execution hereof the Paracoussy give he two Indian for his guide , which take upon they to lead he in this voyage , seem to go unto a wedding , so desirous they be to fight with their enemy . be embark they hoist sail , and have sail about twenty league , the Indian which still look on this side and that side to espy some of their enemy , discover three canoas . and immediate they begin to 18 cry Thimogoa , Thimogoa , and speak nothing else but to hasten forward to go fight with they : which the captain seem to be willing to do , to content they . when they come to board they , one of the Indian get hold of a halberd , another of a cutlass in such a rage , that he will have leap into the water to have fight with they alone . nevertheless Ottigni will not let they do it , for while he defer to board they , he give the other respite to turn the prowess of their canoas towards the shore , and so to escape into the wood . again , the meaning of Ottigni be not to make war upon they of Thimogoa , but rather to make they friend , and to make they thenceforth to live in peace one with another if it be possible , hope by this mean to discover daily some new thing , and especial the certain course of the river . for this purpose he cause the bark to retire , wherein be the two Indian his guide , and go with his man toward the canoas which be on the river side . be come unto they , he put certain trifle into they , and then retire a good way from they , which thing cause the Indian which be flee away to return to their boat , and to understand by this sign , that those of our bark be none of their enemy , but rather come only to traffic with they . wherefore be thus assure of we , they call to our man to come near unto they : which they do incontinent and set foot on land , and speak free unto they , with diverse ceremony over long to recount . in the end Ottigni demand of they by sign if they have any gold or silver among they . but they tell he they have none as then : and that if he will send one of his man with they , they will bring he without danger into a place where they may have some . Ottigni see they so willing , deliver they one of his man which seem very resolute , to undertake this voyage : this fellow stay with they until ten of the clock the next morning , so that captain Ottigny somewhat ten ieague offend with his long stay , sail ten great league further . mayrraak rich in gold and silver . the second voyage . KingMolloua . Olata ouae utina a great king . the english voyage further up the river : although he know not which way he shall go , yet he go so far up that he espy the boat wherein his soldier be : which report unto he , that the Indian will have carry he three great day journey further , and tell he that a king name Mayrra rich in gold and silver , dwell in those quarter , and that for small quantity of merchandise enough may be have of he : yet that he will not hazard himself without his leave , and that he bring but a very little gold . This be do , our man return towards our fort Caroline , after they have leave the soldier with the Indian to inform himself more and more of such thing as he may discover more at leisure . fifteen day after this voyage to Thimogoa , i dispatch captain Vasseur and my sergeant also to return again into this country , and to seek out the soldier which remain there in the former voyage . be therefore embark , they sail two whole day : and before they come to the dwell of the Indian , they find two of they on the river side , which be express send unto that place to descry whether any of their enemy be come to that part , with intention to surprise they , as they do usual . when they perceive captain Vasseur , they know incontinent that he be none of their enemy , and therefore make no difficulty to come near unto the bark , and show he by sign that the soldier which they seek be not in that place , but be at that present in the house of king Molloua which be vassal unto another great king name by they Olata ouae utina : and that if the captain will sail thitherward , he shall come thither very quick : wherewith he be content , and cause his man to row to that part which the Indian show he : whereat they be so glad , that they run quick before by land to declare his arrival , which be at the lodging of king Molloua , after he have row not past half a league . while king Molloua have end entertain captain Vasseur and his man , the soldier come in with five or six pound weight of silver which he have truck five or stxe and traffic with Indian . ofluver ^ this king cause bread to be make , and fish to be ’ dress after the Indian fashion to feast our man : to who , while they be at meat , he make a discourse of diverse other king his friend and ally , reckon up to the number of nine of they by name , to wit , Cadecha , Chilili , Eclauou , Enacappe , Calany , Anacharaqua , omit - taqua , Aequara , moquoso : all which with he to the number of more than forty , he assure we to be the vassal of the most renown Olata ouae utina . ^ uthia t0 this do , he go about likewise to discover the [ m . 327 . ] enemy of ouae utina , in which number he place as the first the Paracoussy Satourioua monarch of the confine of the river of May , which have under his obeisance thirty other paracoussy , whereof there be ten which be all his brethren , and that therefore he be great esteem in those part : than he name three other not less puissant than Satourioua , whereof the first dwell two day journey from his lord Olata ouae utina , and ordinary make war upon he , who name be Potanou , a man cruel in war , but pitiful in the king Potanou . execution of his fury . for he take the prisoner to mercy , be content to mark they on the left arm with a great mark like unto a seal , and so imprint as if it have be touch with a hot iron , than he let they go without any more hurt . the two other be name Onatheaqua , and Houstaqua , be great lord , and abound in riches , and principal Onatheaqua , which dwell near unto the high mountains , wherein there be abundance of many rare thing , exceed and infinite quantity of a kind of slate stone , wherewith they make wedge to cleave their wood . the occasion which ( as he say ) move Potanou to wage war against Olata ouae utina , be the fear that he have , lest he and his companion shall get of that hard some paint their face with black , and some with red . the english voyage stone in his country , wherewith they head their arrow , and can not get it in any near place . beside all this , Molloua recite to captain Vasseur , that the king ally the vassal of the great Olata , arm their breast , arm , thigh , leg and forehead with large plate of gold and silver : and that by this mean the arrow that be discharge upon they can do they no manner of hurt at all , but rather be break against they . hereupon captain Vasseur inquire whether the king Onetheaqua and Houstaqua be like unto we . for by the description that they make of they , he begin to doubt whether they be Spaniards or no : but Molloua tell he that they be not , but that they be Indian like the rest , save that they paint their face with black , and that the rest as Molloua , paint they with red . than my lieutenant Vasseur , and my sergeant promise he , that one day i shall march with my force into those country , and that join my self with his lord Olata , i will subdue the inhabitant of the high of those mountain . he be very glad of this speech , and answer that the least of these king which he have name , shall present unto the general of these succour the height of two foot of gold and silver , which by force of arm they have already get of those two king , Onatheaqua , and Houstaqua . the good cheer be do , and the discourse end , my man embark themselves again , with intention to bring i those good news unto the fort Caroline . but after they have sail a very long while down the river , and be come within three league of we , the tide be so strong against they , that they be constrain to go on land , and to retire themselves because of the night , unto the dwell of a certain Paracoussy name Molona , which show himself very glad of their arrival : for he desire to know some news of Thimogoa , and think that the french man go thither for none other occasion but for to invade ... i564 ' they . which captain Vasseur perceive , dissemble so well , that he make he believe that he go to Thimogoa with none other intention , but to subdue they , and to destroy they with the edge of the sword without mercy , but that their purpose have not such success as they desire , because that the people of Thimogoa be advertise of this enterprise , retire into the wood , and save themselves by flight : that nevertheless they have take some as they be flee away , which carry no news thereof unto their fellow . the Paracoussy be so glad of this relation , that he interrupt he , and ask Vasseur of the beginning and manner of his execution , and pray he that he will show he by sign how all thing pass . immediate Francis la caille the sergeant of my band take his sword in his hand , say , that with the point thereof he have thrust through two Indian which run into the wood , and that his companion have do no less for their part . and that if fortune have so favour they , that they have not be discover by the man of Thimogoa , they have have a victory most glorious and worthy of eternal memory . hereupon the Paracoussy show himself so well satisfy , that he can not devise how to gratify our man , which he cause to come into his house to feast they more honourable : and have make captain Vasseur to sit next he , and in his own chair ( which the Indian esteem for the chief honour ) and then underneath he two of his son , goodly and mighty fellow , he command all the rest to place themselves as they think good . this