, where 1 cause three - fortify they . score foot of tree to be plant , to repair the palissado with the plank which i cause to be take of the ship which i have build . nevertheless notwithstanding all our diligence and travail , we be never able full to repair it by reason of the storm , which common do we so great annoy , that we can not finish our enclosure . perceive my self in such extremity i take a muster of the man , which captain Ribault have leave i , to see if there be any that want weapon : i find nine or ten of they whereof not past two or three have ever draw sword out of a scabbard , as i think . let they which have be bold to say , that i have man enough leave i , so that i have mean to defend my self , give ear a little now unto i , and if they have eye in their head , let they see what man i have . of the nine there be four but young stripling , which serve captain Ribault and keep his dog , the five be a cook : among those that be without the fort , and which be of the foresay company of captain Ribault , there be a carpenter of threescore year old , one a beer - brewer , one old crossbow maker , two shoemaker , and four or five man that have their wife , a player on the virginal , two servant of monsieur du Lewis , one of monsieur de Beauhaire , one of monsieur de la grange , and about fourscore and five or six in all , count aswell lackey as woman and child . behold the goodly troop so sufficient to defend themselves , and so courageous as they have esteem they to be : and for my part i leave it to 93 fourscore and five leave in the fort with Laudonniere . other consideration to imagine whether captain Ribault will have leave they with i to have borrow my man , if they have be such . those that be leave i of my own company be about sixteen or seventeen that can bear arm , and all of they poor and lean : the rest be sick and maim in the conflict which my lieutenant have against utina . this view be thus take , we set our watch , whereof we make two centinel , that the soldier may have one night free . than we bethink our self of those which may be most sufficient , among who we choose two , one of who be name Monsieur saint Cler , and the other monsieur de la Vigne , to who we deliver candle and lantern to go round about the fort to view the watch , because of the foul and foggy weather . i deliver they also a sandglasse or clock , that the centinel may not be trouble more one then another . in the mean while i cease not , for all the foul weather nor my sickness which i have , to oversee the corpse de garde . the night between the nineteenth and twenty of September la Vigne keep watch with his company , wherein he use all endeavour , although it rain without cease . when the day be therefore come , and that he see that it rain still worse than it do before , he pity the centinel so too moil and wet : and think the Spaniard will not have come in such a strange time , he let they depart , and to say the truth , he go himself unto his lodging . in the mean while one which have something to do without the fort , and my trumpet which go up unto the thespanyard rampart perceive a troop of Spaniard which come down from a little knap . where incontinent they i p ' begin to cry alarm , and the trumpeter also : which assoon as ever i understand , forthwith i issue out , with my target and sword in my hand , and get i into the midst of the court , where i begin to cry upon my soldier . some of they which be of the forward sort go towards the breach , which be on the southside , and where the munition of the artillery lie , where they be repulse and slay . by the self same place two ensign enter , which immediate be the Spaniard plant on the wall . two other ensign also enter enter firton the other side towards the west , where there be another breach : and those which be lodge in this quarter , and which show themselves , be likewise defeat . as i go to succour they which be defend the breach on the southwest side , i encountered by chance a great company of Spaniards , which have already repulse our man and be now enter , which drive i back unto the court of the fort : be there i espy with they one call Francis Jean , which Francis Jean be one of the mariner which steal away my bark , atraitourto and have guide and conduct the Spaniard thither . t na tm ' assoon as he see i , he begin to say , this be the captain . this troop be lead by a captain who name , as i think , be don Pedro Melendes : these don Pedro make certain push at i with their pike which light on my tarket . but perceive that 1 be not able Spaniards . to withstand so great a company , and that the court be already win , and their ensign plant on the rampart , and that i have never a man about i , save one only who name be Bartholomew , i enter into the yard of my lodging , into which they follow i , and have it not be for a tent that be set up , i have be take : but the Spaniard which follow i be occupy in cut of the cord of the tent , and in the mean while i save my self by the breach which be on the west side near unto my lieutenant lodging , and gate away into the wood : where i find certain laudonnier of my man which be escape , of which number there esc0pe - were three or four which be sore hurt . then speak i thus unto they : sir , since it have please God that this mischance be happen unto we , we must needs take the pain to get over the marsh unto the ship which be at the mouth of the river . some will needs go to a little village which be in the wood , the rest fol - John du che - min a faithful servant . the diligence of the mariner to save they that escape out of the fort . among these be Jaques Morgues painter sometime live in the Blackfriar in London . the english voyage low i through the reed in the water , where be able to go no far by reason of my sickness which i have , i send two of my man which be with i , which can swim well , unto the ship , to advertise they of that which have happen , and to send they word to come and help i . they be not able that day to get unto the ship to certify they thereof : so i be constrain to stand in the water up to the shoulder all that night long , with one of my man which will never forsake i . the next day morning , be scarce able to draw my breath any more , i betake i to my prayer with the soldier which be with i , who name be John du chemin : for i feel my self so feeble , that i be afraid i shall die sudden : and in truth if he have not embrace i in both his arm , and so hold i up , it have not be possible to save i . after we have make a end of our prayer , i hear a voice , which in my judgement be one of they which i have send , which be over against the ship and call for the ship boat , which be so in deed : and because those of the ship have understanding of the take of the fort by one call John de Hais , master Carpenter , which flee unto they in a shallop ; they have set sail to run along the coast to see if they may save any : wherein doubtless they do very well their endeavour . they go straight to the place where the two man be which i have send , and which call they . assoon as they have receive they in and understand where i be , they come and find i in a pitiful case . five or six of they take i and carry i into the shallop : for i be not able by any mean to go one foot . after i be bring into the shallop some of the mariner take their clothes from their back to lend they i , and will have carry i present to their ship to give i a little aqua vitae . howbeit i will not go thither , until i have first go with the boat along the reed , to seek out the poor soul which be scatter abroad , where we gather up 18 or 20 of they . the last that i take 96 inn be the nephew of the treasurer le Beau . after we be all come to the ship , i comfort they as well as i can , and send back the boat again with speed to see if they can find yet any more . upon her return , the mariner tell i how that captain James Ribault which be in his ship about two musket shoot distant from the fort , have part with the Spaniard , and that Francis Jean come unto his ship , where he stay a long space , whereat they great marveil , consider he be the cause of this enterprise , how he will let he escape . after i be come into the ship call the greyhound , captain James Ribault and captain Valvot come to see i : and there we conclude to return into France . now forasmuch as i find the ship unfurnish of captain , pilot , master , and masters - mate , i give advice to choose out one of the most able man among all the mariner , and that by their own voice . i take also six man out of another small ship , which we have sink because it want ballast and can not be save . thus i increase the furniture of the ship wherein i be my self embark , and make one , which have be masters - mate in the foresay small ship , master of i . and because i lack a pilot , i pray James Ribault that he will grant i one of the four man that he have in his ship , which i shall name unto he , to serve i for a pilot : he promise to give i they , which nevertheless he do not at the instant when we be ready to depart , notwithstanding all the speech i use to he , in declare that it be for the king service . i be constrain to leave the ship behind i which i have buy of the english captain , because i want man to bring she away . for captain James Ribault have take away her furniture : i take away her ordinance only , which be all dismount , whereof i give nine piece to James Ribault to carry into France , the other five i put into my ship . the 25 of September we set sail to return into France , and captain James Ribault and i keep company all that ix 97 g A . D . 1565 . Francis Jean cause of this enterprise . the bad deal of James Ribault . our return into France the 25 . of September 1565 . day and the next until three or four a clock in the afternoon : but because his ship be better at bowline than we , he keep he to the wind and leave we then same day . thus we continue our voyage , wherein we have marvelous flaw of wind . and about the October 28 . eight and twenty of October in the morning at the break of the day we descry the isle of Flores , one of the azore , where immediate upon our approach to the land we have a mighty gust of wind which come from the north - east , which cause we to bear against it four day : afterward the wind come south and southeast , and be always variable . in all the time of our passage we have none other food save November 10 . biscuit and water . about the ten or eleven of November , after we have sail a long time , and suppose we be not far from land , i cause my man to sound , where they find threescore and afteene fathom water , whereat we all rejoice , and praise God because we have sail so prosperous . immediate after i cause they to set sail again and so we continue our way : but forasmuch as we have bear the chanel of too much towards the north - east we enter into saint saint George . George channel , a place much fear of all sailor , and whereas many ship be cast away : but it be a fair gift of God that we enter in it when the weather be clear . we sail all the night , suppose we have be shoot into the narrow sea between England and France , and by the next day to reach diepe , but we be deceive of our longing : for about two or three of the clock after midnight as i walk upon the hatch , i descry land round about i , whereat we be astonish . immediate i cause they to strike sail and sound : we find we have not under we past [ three . 356 . ] 8 fathom of water , whereupon i command they to stay till break of day : which be come , and see my mariner tell i that they know not this land , i command they to approach unto it . be near thereunto i make they cast anchor , and send the boat on 1565 - shore to understand in what country we be . word be bring i that we be in wale a province of England . i go incontinent on land , where after i have take the air , a sickness take i whereof i think i shall have dye . in the mean while i cause the ship to be bring into the bay of a small town call Swansey , where i find merchant of saint Laudonnieres malo , which lend i money , wherewith i make certain apparel for my self and part of my company that be in Qiamorgan . with i : and because there be no victual in the ship , fare in south i buy two ox , and salt they , and a ton of wale . beer , which i deliver into his hand which have charge of the ship , pray he to carry it into France , which he promise i to do : for my own part i purpose with my man to pass by land , and after i have take leave of my mariner , i depart from Swansey , and come that night with my company to a place call Morgan , where the lord of the place , understand what i be , stay i with he for the space of 6 or 7 day , and at my departure move with pity to see i go on foot , especial be so weak as i be , give i a little hackney . thus i pass on my journey first to Bristol , and then to London , where i go to do my duty to monsieur de Foix , which for the present be the king ambassador , and help i with money in my necessity . from thence i pass to Caleis , afterward to Paris , where i be inform that the king be go to molin to sojourn there : incontinent , and with all the haste i can possible make , i gate i thither with part of my come pany . thus brief you see the discourse of all that the conclusion . happen in new France since the time it please the king majesty to send his subject thither to discover those part . the indifferent and unpassionate reader may easy weigh the truth of my do , and be upright judge of the endeavour which i there use . for my own part i will not accuse nor excuse any : it suffice i to have follow the truth of the history , whereof many be able to bear witness , which 99 the courtesy of one master Morgan . Bristol . London . monsieur de Foix ambassador for the french king in England . Thecauseswhy the french lose Florida . the french fleet cast away on the coast of Florida . the english voyage be there present . i will plain say one thing , that the long delay that captain John Ribault use in his embark , and the 15 . day that he spend in rove along the coast of Florida , before he come to our fort Caroline , be the cause of the loss that we sustain . for he discover the coast the 14 of August , and spend the time in go from river to river , which have be sufficient for he to have discharge his ship in , and for i to have embark my self to return into France . i wot well that all that he do be upon a good intent : yet in my opinion he shall have have more regard unto his charge , then to the devise of his own brain , which sometime he print in his head so deep , that it be very hard to put they out : which also turn to his utter undo : for he be no soon depart from we , but a tempest take he , which in fine wrack he upon the coast , where all his ship be cast away , and he with much ado escape drown , to fall into their hand which cruel massacre he and all his company .