, consider the necessity wherein we be , and the small account that they make of we . shall it not be lawful for we to punish they for the wrong which they do unto we , beside that we know apparent how little they respect we ? be not this sufficient although there be no necessity at all , since they thus delude we , and have break promise with we ? after i have therefore resolve with they to seize on the person of utina , which beside that he have give we occasion hereof , be also most able to help we to recover victual , i depart with fifty of my best soldier all embark in two bark and we arrive in the dominion of utina , distant from our fort about 40 or 50 league : then go on shore we draw towards his village situate 6 great utina take league from the river , where we take he prisoner , prisoner in his howbeit not without great cry and alarm , and lead r ^ mniere away our bark , have first signify unto and 50 of he be father in law and his chief subject , that in that soldier . i have take he , it be not for any desire that i have to do he any harm , but only to relieve my necessity and want of victual which oppress i , and that in case they will help i to some , i will find mean to set he again at liberty : that in the mean space i will retire my self into my bark ( for i fear lest they will there assemble themselves together , and that some mischief may thereof ensue ) where i will stay for he two day to receive his answer : notwithstanding that my meaning be not to have any thing without exchange of merchandise . this they promise they will do . and in very deed the very same evening , his wife accompany with all the woman of the village come unto the river brink , and cry unto i to enter into the bark , to see her husband and her son , which i hold both prisoner . i discover the next five os - six day five or six hundred Indian archer , which draw hundred in - near unto the river side , and come to i to dian - signify unto i how that during the absence of their king , their enemy Potanou , be thereof advertise , 64 1565 . be enter into their village , and have set all on fire . they pray i that i will succour they : never - the deep dis - thelesse in the mean while they have one part of their troop in ambush , with intent to set upon i if i ln , ans ‘ have come on land , which be easy for i to discern . for see that i refuse so to do , they great doubt that they be discover , and seek by all mean to remove out of my mind that evil opinion which i have conceive of they . they bring i therefore fish in their little boat and of their meal of mast , they make also of their drink which they call cassine , which they send to utina and i . now albeit i have get this point of they that i hold their king prisoner , yet nevertheless i can not get any great quantity of victual for the present : the reason be , because they think that after i have draw victual from they , i will put their king to death . for they measure my will accord to their custom , the Indian whereby they put to death all the man prisoner that hillalltheman they take in war . and thus be out of all hope of his liberty , they assemble themselves in the great house , war . and have call all the people together they propose the election of a new king , at which time the father the election in law of utina set one of the king young son ofa king . upon the royal throne : and take such pain that every man do he homage by the major part of the voice . this election have like to have be the cause of great trouble among they . for there be a kinsman of the king near adjoin , which pretend a title to the kingdom , and in deed he have get one part of the subject : notwithstanding this enterprise can not take effect , forasmuch as by a common consent of the chief , it be consult and conclude , that the son be more meet to succeed the father then any other . now all this while i keep utina with i , to who i have give some of my apparel to clothe he , as i have likewise do unto his son . but his subject which before have a opinion that i will have kill he , ix 65 e the hatred among the savage king of Florida . note . [ HL 344 ] note . Rootes . Esquine . the english voyage be advertise of the good entertainment which i use towards he , send two man which walk along the river , and come to visit he , and bring we some victual . Theise two man at their come be receive by i with all courtesy , and entertain accord to the victual which i have . while these thing thus pass , there arrive from all quarter many savage of the country adjoin , which come to see utina , and seek by all mean to persuade i to put he to death , offer that if i will do so , they will take order that 1 shall want no victual . there be also a king my neighbour who name be Saturioua , a subtle and crafty man , and one that show by proof that he be great practise in affair . the king send ordinary messenger unto i , to pray i to deliver utina unto he : and to win i the more easy , he send twice seven or eight basket of Maiz or of mast , think by this way to allure i , and to make i come to composition with he : in the end notwithstanding when he see he lose his time , he cease to visit i with ambassage and victual : 8c in the mean while i be not able with you same store of victual which i have , so well to proportion out the travail upon the ship which we build to return into France , but that in the end we be constrain to endure extreme famine , which continue among we all the month of May : for in this latter season , neither Maiz nor bean , nor mast be to be find in the village , because they have employ all for to sow their field , insomuch that we be constrain to eat root , which the most part of our man pun in the mortar which i have bring with i to beat gunnepowder in , and the grain which come to we from other place : some take the wood of Esquine , beat it , and make meal thereof , which they boil with water , and eat it : other go with their harquebus to seek to kill some foul . yea this misery be so great , that one be find that gather up among the filth of my house , all the fish bone that he can find , which he dry and beat into powder to make bread thereof . the effect of this hideous famine appear incontinent among we , for our bone eftsoon begin to cleave so near unto the skin , that the most part of the soldier have their skin peirce through with they in many part of their body : in such sort that my great fear be , lest the Indian will rise up against we , consider that it will have be very hard for we to have defend our self in such extreme decay of all our force , beside the scarcity of all victual , which fail we all at once . for the very river have not such plenty of fish as it be wont , and it seem that the land and water do fight against we . now as we be thus upon term of despair , about the end of the month of May , and the begin of June , i be new corn by advertise by certain Indian that be my neigh - en ^ ° f hour , that in the high country up above the river , there be new Maiz , and that that country be most ' forward of all . This cause i to take upon i to go thither with a certain number of my man , and i go up the river to a place call Enecaque : where i meet the village of the sister of utina in a village where she make we very Enecaque . good cheer and send we fish . we find that which be tell we to be true : for the maiz be now ripe : but by this good luck one shrewd turn happen unto i . for the most part of my soldier fall sick with eat moor of it then their weaken stomach can digest . we have also be the space of four day since we depart from our fort , without eat any thing , save little pinocke , and a little fish , which we a little green get of the fisher which we meet sometime along the fruit that river . and yet this be so little that certain soldier eat privy little whelp which be new whelp , cherry the next day i purpose to go into you lie of Edelano than he of to take the king which have cause one of my man to Edelano . be slay , as i have mention before : but be advertise of my depart out of my fort , and of the way which i take up the river , he fear that i go forth two carpen - ten killedfor gather the Indian maiz . the village athore . Nia Cubacani a queen . the english voyage with a purpose to be revenge of the evil turn which he play : so that when i come thither , i find the house empty , for he be retire a little before with all his people : and i can not by any mean keep my soldier , be angry because they have lose one of their companion , from set the village on fire . at my departure from thence i pass back again by Enecaque , where i gather as much maiz as i can possible : which with great diligence i convey to our fort to succour my poor man , which i have leave in great necessity . they therefore see i a far off come , run to that side of the river where they think i will come on land : for hunger so pinch they to the heart , that they can not stay until the victual be bring they to the fort and that they well show assoon as i be come , and that i have distribute that little maiz among they , which i have give to each man , before i come out of the bark : for they eat it before they have take it out of the husk . but see my self in this extreme need , i take pain day by day to seek some village where there be some food . and as i travail this way and that way , it happen that two of my carpenter be kill by the two son of king Emola , and by one who name be Casti , as they go on walk to the village call athore . the cause of this murder be , because they can not refrain themselves as they walk through the field from gather a little maiz , which as they be do , they be take in the manner : whereof i be present advertise by a Indian which a little before have bring i a present from Nia Cubacani queen of a village , and neighbour to our fort upon receipt of this advertisement , i send my sergeant with a number of soldier which find nothing else but the 2 dead corpse , which they bury and return without do any other exploit , because the inhabitant be flee away , fear they shall be punish for such a foul fact . as these thing thus pass , and that by this time we have almost drive out the month of May , two subject of king utina come unto i with a hermaphrodite , which show i that by this time the maiz be ripe in the great part of their quarter . whereupon utina signify unto i that in case i will carry he home to his house , he will take such good order that i shall have plenty of maiz and bean : and withal , that the field which he have cause to be sow for i , shall be reserve to my use . i consult with my man concern this matter , and find by the advice of all my company , that it be best to grant he his request , say , that he have mean to succour we with food sufficient to serve our turn for [ three . 34 . 5 . ] our embarkement , and that therefore i may do well to carry he home . wherefore i cause the two bark forthwith to be make ready , wherein i sail to Patica , a patica a place distant from his village 8 or 9 league , where i village . find no body , for they be get into the wood , and will not show themselves , albeit utina show himself unto they , for as much as they imagine that i shall be constrain to let he go . but see no body to show themselves , i be constrain to hazard one of my man which have be acquaint with the state of the country , to who i deliver the young son of utina , and command he to go with diligence to the village of utina , unto his father in law and his wife , to advertise they that if they will have their king again , they shall bring i victual unto the side of the little river whither i be go . at my man come every one make much of the little child , neither be there a man that think not himself well appaide to touch he . his father in law and his wife hear of these news come present towards our bark , and bring bread which they give unto my soldier , they hold i there three