Laudonnieres a JY friend , you know the cause why our king send ' muthtw oul we unto country ; you know that he be our jurs ’ natural prince , who we be bind to obey accord to the commandment of God , in such sort , that we ought neither to spare our good nor life to do those thing that concern his service : you know , or at least you can be ignorant , that beside this general and natural obligation , you have this also join thereunto , that in receive of he reasonable pay and wage , you be bind to follow those who he have establish over you to be your governor , and to command you in his name , have for this purpose give he a oath of fidelity , which you can by any mean revoke for any fair appearance which you have to do the contrary : for this be reason , that see you live upon his charge on this condition , ( this be reason i say ) that you shall be faithful unto he . notwithstanding you have have more regard unto your unbridle affection then unto virtue , which invite you to the observance of your oath , in such sort that be become contemners of all honesty , you have pass your bond , and think that all thing be lawful for you . whereupon it be fall out , that while you think to escape the justice of man , you can not avoid the judgement of God , which as a thing by no mean to be avoid have lead you , and in spite of you have make you to arrive in this place , to make you confess 46 how true his judgement be , and that he never suffer so foul a fault to escape unpunished . after that i have use unto they these or the like speech , follow that which we have agree upon in council , in respect of the crime which they have commit , aswell against the king majesty as against i which be their captain , i command that they shall be hang . see therefore that there be no start hole , nor mean at all to save themselves from this arrest , they take themselves unto their prayer : yet one of the four , think to raise a mutiny among my soldier , say thus unto they : what , brethren and companion , will you suffer we to die so shameful ? And take the word out of his mouth , i say unto he , that they be not companion of author of sedition and rebel unto the king service . hereupon the soldier beseech i not to hang they , but rather let they be shoot through , and then afterward , if i think good , their body may be hang upon certain gibbet along the haven mouth : which i cause present to be put in execution . Loe here what be the end of my mutinous soldier , without which i have always live peaceable , and enjoy the good desire which i have to make a happy and quiet voyage . but because 1 have speak of nothing but their accident and adventure which happen unto they after their departure , without make any mention of our fort , i will return to the matter from which i digress , to declare that which fall out after their departure . first i begin to consider to the end i may confirm and make my self more constant in my affliction , that these murmurer can not ground their sedition upon want of victual : for from the time of our arrival , every soldier daily unto this day , and beside until the eight and twenty of February , have a loaf of bread weigh two and twenty ounce . again i recount with my self that all new conquest by sea or by land be ordinary trouble with rebellion , which be A . D . 1565 . the sentence of death . execution . [ Iii . 337 - ] the continuation of the history . new conquest subject to re - . , . r „ . r , - - bellionsand easy to be raise , aswell ! in respect or the distance of mutiny . place , as in respect of the hope that the soldier have to make their profit , as we may be well inform both by ancient history and also by the trouble which late happen unto Christopher Columbus , after his first discovery , to Francis Pizarro , and Diego de Almagro in Peru , and to Fernando Cortes . a hundred thousand other thing come unto my mind , to encourage and confirm i . my lieutenant Ottigny , and my sergeant of my band come to seek i in the ship , where i be prisoner , and carry i from thence in a bark assoon Laudonniere as our rebel be depart . after i be come unto set thing the fort , i cause all my company that remain , to be ismurne ^ ut assemble in the midst of the place before the corpse de of prison to the guard , and declare unto they the fault which they fort . that have forsake we have commit , pray they to bear they in memory , to bear witness thereof when need shall require . forthwith i ordain new captain to command the troop ; and prescribe they a order , accord whereunto they be to govern themselves from thence forward , and to enter into their watch : for the great part of the soldier , of who i have the best opinion , be go away with they . my declaration end , they promise i all with one accord to obey i most humble , and to do whatsoever i shall command they , though it be to die at my foot for the king service ; wherein assure they never after fail : so that i dare say , after the departure of my mutinous companion i be as well obey as ever be captain in place where he command . the next day after my return unto the fort , i assemble my man together again , to declare unto they that our fort be not yet finish , and that it be needful that all of we shall put thereto our help hand , to assure our self against the Indian : wherein have willing agree unto i , they raise 0 it all with turf from the gate unto the river which be the Westside on the west side - this do , i set my carpenter on of the fort . work to make another bark of the same bigness that Fcuiddus mtadcus num Laudzonerus aide s ' Florida , repnorunt conprendzc ^ dmerica quar nunc ( jduid minimum cvius Francis dirt eat ydbadtumy . ' ferfida quern si non sociorum turpiter ho ' s ' ti cedcdio prodp ^ ec ( cvius tamen , omnibus vltis , Flapsus maxibus ) quas , qualia . , quantapatraflem t Rene Laudonniere the other be of : i command the Sawyers that they shall prepare plank , the smith to prepare iron and nail , and certain other to make coal : so that the bark be finish in eighteen day . afterwards i make another lesser than the first , the better to discover up the river . in this mean space the Indian visit i , and bring i daily certain present , as fish , deer , turki - cock , leopard , little bear , and other thing accord to the place of their habitation . i recompense they with certain hatchet , knife , bead of glass , comb , and looking - glass . two Indian come unto i one day to salute i on the behalf of their king , who name be Marracou , kingmarra - dwelling from the place of our fort some forty league cou . towards the south , and tell i that there be one in the house of king Onathaqua which be call Barbu king onatha - or the beard man , and in the house of king 9 ^ Mathiaca another man who name they know not , which be not of their nation : whereupon i conceive ' that these may be some Christians . wherefore i send to all the king my neighbour to pray they , that if there be any Christian dwell in their country , they will find mean that he may be bring unto i , and that i will make they double recompense . they which love reward , take so much pain , that twa span - the two man , whereof we have speak , be bring yard bring unto the fort unto i . they be naked , their hair long unto their ham as the use to do , and be Spaniard bear , yet accustom to the fashion of the country the first sight they find our manner of strange . after that i have question of matter with they , i cause they to be apparel , and to cut their hair ; which they will not loose , but lap it up in a linen cloth , say that they will carry it into their country to be a testimony of the misery that they have endure in the Indies . in the hair of one of they be find a little gold hide , to ix 49 d unto Laudonniere by the savage . wear Savages so well that at apparel certain Calos a place upon you flat call the martyr near the cape of Florida . the king of Calos . great quantity ofgolde and silver . [ HL 338 . ] plate of g > ld as broad as a savicer . the english voyage the value of five and twenty crown , which he give unto i . And examine they of the place where they have be , and how they come thither , they answer i that fifteen year past , three ship , in one of which they be , be cast away over against a place name Calos upon the flat which be call the martyr , and that the king of Calos recover the great part of the riches which be in the say ship , travel in such sort that the great part of the people be save , and many woman ; among which number there be three or four woman marry , remain there yet , and their child also , with this king of Calos . i desire to learn what this king be . they answer i , that he be the goodly and the tall Indian of the country , a mighty man , a warrior , and have many subject under his obedience . they tell i moreover , that he have great store of gold and silver , so far forth that in a certain village he have a pit full thereof , which be at the least as high as a man , and as large as a ton : all which wealth the Spaniard full persuade themselves that they can cause i to recover , if i be able to march thither with a hundred shot , beside that which i may get of the common people of the country , which have also great store thereof . they further also advertise i , that the woman go to dance , do wear about their girdle plate of gold as broad as a saucer , and in such number ; that the weight do hinder they to dance at their ease ; and that the man wear the like also . the great part of these riches be have , as they say , out of the spanish ship , which common be cast away in this straight ; and the rest by the traffic which this king of Calos have with the other king of the country : final , that he be have in great reverence of his subject ; and that he make they believe that his sorcery and charm be the cause that make the earth bring forth her fruit : and that he may the easy persuade they that it be so , he retire himself once or twice a year to a certain house , accompany with two or three of his most familiar friend , where he use certain enchantment ; and if any man intrude himself to go to see what they do in this place , the king immediate cause he to be put to death . Moreover , they tell i , that one of these every year in the time of harvest ^ this savage king Spaniard sacrifice one man , which be keep express for this n ^^ at purpose , and take out of the number of the Spaniard qomes - which by tempest be cast away upon that coast . one of these two declare unto i , that he have serve he a long time for a messenger ; and that often time by his commandment he have visit a king name Oathcaqua , distant from Calos four or king oath - five day journey , which always remain his faithful friend : but that in the midway there be a island houat ca - situate in a great lake of fresh water , name sarrope , sampe an about five league in bigness , abound with many island . sort of fruit , special in date , which grow on the abundance of palm tree , whereof they make a wonder traffic ; date . yet not so great as of a kind of root , whereof they a root of great make a kind of meal , so good to make bread of , t0 that it be unpossible to eat better , and that for fifteen brea league about , all the country be feed therewith : which be the cause that the inhabitant of the isle gain of their neighbour great wealth and profit : for they will not depart with this root without they be well pay for it . beside that , they be take for the most warlike man of all that country , as they make good proof when the king of Calos , have make alliance with Oathcaqua , be deprive of oathcaquaes daughter , which he have promise to he in manage . he tell i the whole matter in this sort : as Oathcaqua well accompany with his people carry one of his daughter , exceed beautiful , accord to the colour of the country , unto king Calos , to give she unto he for his wife , the inhabitant of this isle advertise of the matter , lay a ambush for he in a place where he shall pass , and so behave themselves , that Oathcaqua the g - eat victory among the floridians . the situation of Calos . cannaveral in 28 degree . the floridians great traitor and dissembler . the english voyage be discomfit , the betroth young spouse take , and all the