shall put himself in arm to withstand he valiant , ask counsel of his Jawa , which be as to say in their language as his magician , whether it be best to go any further . than his magician . magician make certain sign , hideous and fearful to behold , and use certain word ; which be end , he say unto his king , that it be not best to pass Potanou accom - any further , and that Potanou accompany with two pany with thousand Indian at the least stay in such and such Tndians ^ a p ^ ace or to bid he battle : and beside this , ' that all the say Indian be furnish with cord to bind the prisoner which they make full account to take . this relation cause utina to be unwilling to pass any further : whereupon my lieutenant be as angry as ever he may be , because he have take so great pain without do of any thing of account , say unto he , that he will never think well of he nor of his people , if he will not hazard himself : and that if he will not do it , at the least , that he will give he a guide to conduct he and his small company to the the prediction place where the enemy be encamp . hereupon of the ma - utina be ashamed , and see the good affection of monsieur de Ottigny determine to go forward : and ' he fail not to find his enemy in the very place [ three . 341 . ] which the magician have name : where the skirmish begin , which last three long hour : wherein without doubt utina have be defeat , unless our harquebusiers have not bear the burden and brunt of all the battle , and slay a great number of the soldier of Potanou , upon which occasion they be put to flight . wherewithal ! utina be content for the present , cause his people to retire and return homeward to the great discontentment of monsieur de Ottigny , which desire utina have 18 nothing more , than to pursue his victory . after he or 20 ktngt to be come home to his house he send messenger to his vassal . eighteen or twenty village of other king his vassal , and summon they to be present at the feast and dance which he purpose to celebrate because of his victory . in the mean while monsieur de Ottigny refresh himself for two day : and then take his leave of the Paracoussi , and leave he twelve of his man to see that Potanou , bethink himself of his late loss 58 shall not come to burn the house of utina , he set forward on his way to come unto i unto our fort , where he up and tell i how every thing have pass : and withal that he have promise the twelve soldier , that he will come back again to fetch they . then the king my neighbour all enemy to utina , be advertise of the return of my lieutenant , come to visit i with present and to inquire how thing have pass , pray i all to receive they into my favour , and to become enemy to utina , which notwithstanding i will not grant they for many reason that move i . the Indian be wont to leave their house and to retire themselves into the wood the space of three month , to wit January , February , and march : during which time by no mean a man can see one Indian . for when they go on hunt , they make little cottage in the wood , whereunto they retire themselves , live upon that which they take in hunt . this be the cause that during this time , we can get no victual by their mean : and have it not be that i have make good provision thereof , while my man have store , until the end of April ( which be the time when at the uttermost , we hope to have have succour out of France ) i shall have be great amaze . this hope be the cause that the soldier take no great care to look well unto their victual , although i divide equal among they that which i can get abroad in the country , without reserve unto my self any more than the least soldier of all the company . the month of May approach and no manner of succour come out of France , we fall into extreme want of victual , constrain to eat the root of the earth and certain sorrel which we find in the field . for although the savage be return by this time unto their village , yet they succour we with nothing but certain fish , without which assure we have perish with famine . beside they have give we before the great part of their maiz and of their bean for our merchandise . this famine hold we from the beginning 59 at custom of the Indian to leave their house for 3 or 4 month and to live in the wood . they look for succour out of France by the end of April at the uttermost . extreme famine for six week space . promise break . the english voyage of May until the midst of June . during which time the poor soldier and handicrafts - man become as feeble as may be , and be not able to work do nothing but go one after another in centinel unto the clift of a hill , situate very near unto the fort , to see if they may discover any french ship . in fine be frustrate of their hope , they assemble altogether , and come to beseech i to take some order that they may return into France , consider that if we let pass the season to embark our self , we be never like to see our country , where it can not be choose but that some trouble be fall out , see they have break their promise make unto we , and that no succour be come from thence . thereupon it be consult and resolve by all the company , that the bark Breton shall be trim up , whereof captain Vasseur have charge . but because the ship be not big enough to receive we all , some think good to build the brigandine two deck high , which our mutinous soldier have bring back , and that 25 man shall hazard themselves to pass therein into France . the rest be better advise say that it shall be far better to build a fair ship upon the keel of the galiote which i have cause to be make , promise to labour courageous thereupon . than i inquire of my shipwright to know in what space they can make this ship ready . they assure the whole company that be furnish with all thing necessary , they will make it ready by the 8 . of August . immediate i dispose of the time to work upon it , i give charge to monsieur de Ottigny my lieutenant to cause timber necessary for the finish of both the vessel to be bring , and to monsieur de Arlac my standart - bearer to go with a bark a league ofif from the fort to cut down tree fit to make plank , and to cause the sawier which he carry with he to saw they : and to my sergeant of the company to cause fifteen or sixteen man to labour in make coal : and to master hance keeper of the artillery , and to the gunner to gather 1565 . store of rosin to bray the vessel : wherein he use such diligence , that in less than 3 week he gather 2 hog - two hogshead head of the same together . there remain now but ° frosen - the principal , which be to recover victual to sustain we while our work endure : which i undertake to do with you rest of my company and the mariner of the ship . to this end i embark my self make up the thirty [ hl 34 . 2 . ] in my great bark , to make a voyage of forty or fifty league , have with we no provision at all of victual : whereby it may easy be gather how simple those of our fort be provide . true it be that certain soldier be better husband than the rest , and have make some provision of mast , sell a little measure thereof for fifteen and twenty sou unto their companion . during our voyage we live of nothing else but raspice , of a certain round grain little and black , and of the root of palmito which we get by the river side : wherein after we have sail a long time in vain , i be constrain to return to the fort : where the soldier beginning to be weary of work , because of the extreme famine which do consume they , assemble themselves and declare unto i , that see we can get no victual of the Indian , it be expedient for the save of their life , to seize upon the person of one of the king of the country : assure themselves that one be take , the subject will not suffer our man to want victual . i make they answer that this enterprise be not rash to be attempt : but that we ought to have good regard unto the consequence that may ensue thereof . hereupon they reply unto i , that see the time be pass of our succour from France , and that we be resolve to abandon the country , that there be no danger to constrain the savage to furnish we with victual : which for the present t will not grant unto they , but promise they assure that i will send to advertise the Indian that they shall bring i victual for exchange of merchandise and apparel : which they also do for the space of certain day , during which pinocke a certain kind of fruit as big as cherry . the english voyage they bring of their mast and of their fish : which these Indian be traitorous , and mischievous of nature , and know our exceed strange famine , sell we at so dear a price , that for less than nothing they have get from we all the rest of our merchandise which remain ; . and which be worse , fear to be force by we and see that they have get all from we , they come no near to our fort then the shot of a harquebus . thither they bring their fish in their little boat , to which our poor soldier be constrain to go , and oftentimes ( as i have see ) to give away the very shirt from their back to get one fish . if at any time they show unto the savage the excessive price which they take , these villain will answer they rough and churlish : if thou make so great account of thy merchandise , eat it , and we will eat our fish : then fall they out a laugh and mock they with open throat . whereupon our soldier utter impatient , be oftentimes ready to cut they in piece , and to make they pay the price of their foolish arrogancy . notwithstanding consider the importance hereof , i take pain to appease the impatient soldier : for i will not by any mean enter into question with the savage , and it suffice i to delay the time . wherefore i devise to send unto utina to pray he to deal so far forth with his subject , as to succour i with mast and maiz : which he do very spare , send i 12 or 15 basket of mast , and two of pinock , which be a kind of little green fruit which grow among the weed in the river , and be as big as cherry : yea , and this be not but by give of they in exchange twice as much merchandise and apparel as they be worth . for the subject of utina perceive evident the necessity wherein we be , and begin to use the like speech unto we , as the other do : as it be common see that need alter man affection . while these thing be in do , a certain breathe space present it self for utina give i to understand that there be a king his 1565 . subject who name be Astina , which he determine Astina a king . to take prisoner , and to chastise he for his disobedience : that for this cause , if i will give he aid with a certain number of my soldier , he will bring they to the village of Astina , where there be mean to recover mast and maiz . in the mean season he excuse himself unto i because he have send i no more maiz , and send i word that the little store that he have leave , be scarce sufficient for his seed - corn . now be somewhat relieve , as i think , by the hope which i have of this offer , i will not fade to send he the man which he desire of i , which nevertheless be very evil entreat : for he deceive they , and in stead of lead they against Astina , he cause they to march against his other enemy . my lieutenant which have the charge of this enterprise with captain Vasseur and my sergeant be determine to be revenge of utina and to cut he in piece 8c his people : and have it not be that they fear to do any thing against my will , without all doubt they will have put their enterprise in execution . therefore they will not pass any further without advertise i thereof . wherefore be come back again unto the fort , angry 8c prick deep to the quick for be so mock , they make their complaint unto i , declare unto i that they be almost dead for hunger . they tell the whole matter to the rest of the soldier , which be very glad that they have not enter into that action , 8c resolve , assemble themselves again together , to let i understand that they do persist in their first deliberation , which be , to punish the boldness and maliciousness of the savage , which they can no long endure , 8c be determine to take one of their king prisoner : which thing i be enforce to grant unto they , to you end to avoid a great mischief , and the sedition which i foresee [ in . 343 . ] will ensue , if i have make refusal thereof . for , say they , what occasion have you to deny we