send i two of his prisoner : which he deny i , say that he be nothing behold unto i , and that i have break my promise , against the oath which i have swear unto he at my arrival . which when i understand by my soldier , which be come back with speed , i devise how i may be revenge of this savage , and to make he know how dear this bold bravado of he shall cost he : therefore i command my sergeant to provide i twenty soldier to go with i to the house of Satourioua : where after i be come and enter into the hall without any manner of salutation , i go and sit i down by he , and stay a long while without speak any word unto he , or show he any sign of friendship , which thing put he deep in his dump : beside that certain soldier remain at the gate , to who i have give express commandment to suffer no Indian to go forth : have stand still about half a hour with this countenance , at length i demanded where the prisoner be which he have take at Thimogoa , and command they present to be bring unto i . whereunto the Paracoussy angry at the heart , and astonish wonderful , stand a long while without make any answer , notwithstanding at last he answer i very stout , that be afraid to see we come the english voyage thither in such warlike manner they flee into the wood , and that not know which way they be go , they be not able by any mean to bring they again ; then i seem to make as though i understand not what he say , and ask for his prisoner again , and for some of he principali ally . then Satourioua command his son athore to seek out the prisoner , and to cause they to be bring into that place , which thing he do within a hour after . after they be come to the lodging of the Paracoussy , they humble salute i , and lift up their hand before i , they will have fall down prostrate as it be at my foot : but i will not suffer they , and soon after lead they away with i unto my own fort the Paracoussy be wonderful offend with this bravado , bethink himself by all mean how he may be revenge of we . but to give we no suspicion thereof , and the better to cover his intention , he send his messenger oftentimes unto we bring always with they some kind of present . among other one day he send three Indian , which bring we two basket full of great pumpion , much more excellent than those which we have in France , and promise i in their king behalf , that during my abode in that country , i shall never want victual : i thank they for their king good will , and signify unto they the great desire which i have , aswell for the benefit of Satourioua , as for the quiet of his subject , to make a peace between he and those of Thimogoa : which thing can not choose but turn to their great benefit , see that be ally with the king of those part , he have a open passage against onatheaqua his ancient enemy , which otherwise he can not set upon . Moreover that Olata ouae utina be so mighty a Paracoussy , that Satourioua be not able to withstand his force : but be agree together they may easy overthrow all their enemy , and may pass the confine of the far river that be towards the south . the messenger pray i to have patience until the morrow , 30 at what time they will come again unto i to certify i of their lord inclination : which they fail not to do , advertise i that Paracoussy Satourioua be the glad man in the world to treat of this accord ( although indeed he be quite contrary ) and that he beseech i to be diligent therein , promise to observe and perform whatsoever i shall agree upon with those of Thimogoa : which thing the messenger also rehearse unto the prisoner which i have lead away . after they be depart , i resolve within two day to send back again the prisoner to Olata ouae utina , who subject they be : but before i embark they , i give they certain small trifle , which be little knife or tablet of glass , wherein the image of king Charles the nine be draw very lively , for which they give i very great thanks , as also for the honest entertainment which be give they at the fort Caroline . after this they embark themselves , with captain Vasseur , and with monsieur de Arlac my ensign , which i have send of purpose to remain a certain time with ouae utina , hope that the favour of this great Paracoussy will serve my turn great to make my discovery in time to come . i send with he also one of my sergeant , and six gallant soldier . thus thing pass on this manner , and the hatred of Paracoussy Satourioua against i do still continue , until that on the nine and twenty of August a lightning [ he . 331 . i from heaven fall within half a league of our fort , - awanderfm more worthy i believe to be wonder at , and to be ofjugut put in writing , than all the strange sign which have be see in time past , and whereof the history have never write . for although the meadow be at that season all green , and half cover over with water , nevertheless the lightning in one instant consume above five hundred acre therewith , and burn with the ardent heat thereof all the fowl which take their pastime in the meadow , which thing continue for three day space , which cause we not a little to muse , not be able to judge whereof this fire proceed : for one while we think that the Indian have burn their house , and abandon their place for fear of we : another while we think that they have discover some ship in the sea , and that accord to their custom they have kindle many fire here and there , to signify that their country be inhabit : nevertheless be not assure , KingSar - i determine to send to Paracoussy Serrany to know ranay . the truth thereof . but even as i be upon the point to send one by boat to discover the matter , six Indian king Allima - come unto i from Paracoussy Allimacany , which at can3 ' their first entry make unto i a long discourse , and a very large and ample oration ( after they have present i with certain basket full of Maiz , of pompion and of grape ) of the love amity which Allimacany desire to continue with i , and that he look from day to day when it will please i to employ he in my service . therefore consider the serviceable affection that he bear unto i , he find it very strange , that i the savage thus discharge my ordinance against his dwell , ‘ lightning to be and burn up a infinite sight of green meadow , discharge of and consume even down unto the bottom of the the christian water , and come so near unto his mansion , that he ordinance . think he see the fire in his house : wherefore he beseech i most humble to command my man that they will not shoot any more towards his lodging , otherwise that hereafter he shall be constrain to abandon his country , and to retire himself into some place further off from we . have understand the foolish opinion of this man , which notwithstanding can not choose but be very profitable for we , i dissemble what i think thereof for that time , and answer the Indian with a cheerful countenance , that the relation which they make unto i of the obedience of their Paracoussy do please i right well , because that before he have not behave himself in such sort towards i , especial when i summon he to send i the prisoner of great Olata ouae utina which he detain , whereof notwithstanding he make no great account , which be the principali cause wherefore i have discharge my ordinance against he : not that i mean to reach unto his house ( as i may have do easy , if it have please i ) but that i be content to shoot the half way to make he know my force : assure he furthermore , that on condition that Laudonniere he will continue in his good affection , no more ordinance shall be discharge against he hereafter : and ^ “ profit beside that i will become his faithful protector against his great enemy . the Indian content with my answer return to assure their Paracoussy , which notwithstanding the assurance withdraw himself from his dwelling twenty or five and twenty league off and that for the space of more than two month . after that three day be expire , the fire be quite extinguish . but for two day after there follow such a excessive heat in the air , that a wonderfuu the river near unto which we plant our habitation , heate - became so hot , that i think it be almost ready to see . for there die so great abundance of fish , and that of so many diverse sort , that in the mouth of the river only there be find dead enough to have load fifty fifty cart load cart , whereof there issue a putrefaction in the air , deadph which breed many dangerous disease among we , insomuch that most of my man fall sick , and almost ready to end their day . yet notwithstanding it please our merciful God so to provide by his providence , that all our man recover their health without the loss of any one of they . monsieur de Arlac , captain Vasseur , and one of my then third sergeant be embark with their ten soldier voyage they about the ten of September , to carry back the prisoner unto utina , sail so far up the river , that they do - e ^ um er ' cover a place call Mayarqua distant from our fort Mayarqua a about fourscore league , where the Indian give they fa * 8o - good entertainment , and in many other village which ^ “ ersgfmay they find . from this place they row to the dwell - ix 33 c ling of Paracoussy utina , which after he have feast they accord to his ability and power , pray monsieur de Arlac and all his soldier to stay a while with he , to aid and assist he in battle against one of his KingPatanou . enemy call Potanou , whereunto Monsieur de Arlac consent willing . and because he know not how long he may have occasion to stay in these part , he send i captain Vasseur and the bark back again , which bring home only five soldier with he . the Indian now because the custom of the Indian be always to manner of war . wage war by surprise , utina resolve to take his enemy [ he . 332 . ] Potanou in the morning by the break of the day : to bring this to pass , he make his man to travail all the two hundred night , which may be in number two hundred person , Indian . so wep advise , that they pray our french - shot to be in the forefront , to the end ( as they say ) that the noise of their piece may astonish their enemy : notwithstanding they can not march so secret , but that those of the village of Potanou , distant from the dwell of utina about five and twenty league , be ware of they : which sudden employ and bestow a village in - all their endeavour to defend their village enclose all dose with with tree , and issue out in great company : but ' find themselves charge with shot , ( a thing where - with they never have be acquaint ) also behold the captain of their band fall down dead in the begin of their skirmish , with a shot of a harquebus which strike he in the forehead , discharge by the hand of monsieur de Arlac , they leave the place : and the Indian of utina gate into the village , take utina get man , woman , and child prisoner . thus Paracoussy the victory of utina obtain the victory by the aid of our man , ^ imofth ^ which slay many of his enemy , and lose in this conflict trench . one their companion , wherewith utina be very much grieve . eight or ten day after , i send captain Vasseur back again with a bark to fetch home Monsieur de Arlac and his soldier , which at their return bring i certain present from utina , as .... i564 ' some silver , a small quantity of gold , paint skin , silver , and and other thing , with a thousand thanks , which the geld , and Paracoussy give i , which promise that if in any enterprise of importance i shall