the second voyage unto Florida , make and write by captain Laudonniere , which fortify and inhabit there two summer and one whole winter . Fter our arrival at diepe , at our come home , from our first voyage ( which be the twenty of July 1562 ) we find the civil war begin , which be in part the cause why our man be not succour , as captain John Ribault have promise they : whereof it follow that the civil war the cause why the Frenchman be not sup - captain Albert be kill by his soldier , and the phed , which country abandon , as heretofore we have sufficient ^ re , ty * discourse , and as it may more at large be understand j ^ rst voyase by those man which be there in person . after the peace be make in France , my lord admiral de chastillon show unto the king , that he hear no news at all of the man which captain John Ribault have leave in Florida , and that it be pity to suffer they to perish . in which respect , the king be content he shall cause 3 ship to be furnish , the one of six score ton , the other of 100 , and the three of 60 , to seek they out , and to succour they . my lord admiral therefore be well inform of the faithful service which i have do , aswell unto his majesty as to his predecessor king of France , advertise the king how able i be to do he service in this voyage , which be the cause that he make i chief captain over these 3 ship , and charge i to ix laudonnier second voyage to Florida , with three ship the 22 of April 1564 . the isle of Teneriffa , or the pike . the english voyage depart with diligence to perform his commandment , which for my own part i will not gainsay , but rather think my self happy to have be choose out among such a infinite number of other , which in my judgement be very well able to have quit themselves in this charge , i embark my self at new haven the 22 of April 1564 , and sail so , that we fall near unto the coast of England : and then i turn towards the south , to sail direct to the fortunate island , at this present call the canary , one of which call the isle savage ( because as i think it be altogether without inhabitant ) be the first that our ship pass . sail therefore on forward , we land the next day in the isle of Teneriffa , otherwise call the pike , because that in the midst thereof there be a exceed high mountain , near as high as that of Aetna , which rise up like a pike , into the top whereof no man can go up but from the midst of may until the midst of August , by reason of the over great cold which be there all the year : which be a wonderful strange thing , consider that it be not past 27 degree and a half distant from the equator . we see it all cover over with snow , although it be then but the five of May . the inhabitant in this isle be heretofore pursue by the Spaniard , retire themselves into this mountain , where for a space they make war with they , and will not submit themselves to their obedience , neither by foul nor fair mean , they disdain so much the loss of their island . for those which go thither on the Spaniard behalf , leave their carcase there , so that not so much as one of they return home to bring news . notwithstanding in the end , the inhabitant not able to live in that place accord to their nature , or for want of such thing as be necessary for the commodity of their livelihood , do all die there . after i have furnish my self with some fresh water , very good and excellent , which .. 15640 spring out of a rock at the foot of this mountain , i continue my course towards the west , wherein the wind favour i so well , that 15 day after our ship arrive safe and sound at the Antilles : and go on land at the isle of Martinino , one of they the e 0 ° f first of they , the next day we arrive at Dominica , mat - ttnino . twelve league distant from the former . island . Dominica be one of the fair island of the west , full of hill , and of very good smell . who singularity desire to know as we pass , and seek also to refresh our self with fresh water , i make the mariner cast anchor , after we have sail about half along the coast thereof . as soon as we have cast anchor , two Indian ( inhabitant of that place ) sail towards we in two canoas full of a fruit of great excellency which they call Ananas . as they Ananas a approach unto our bark , there be one of they fruit of great which be in some misdoubt of we , go back eme enae ' again on land , and flee his way with as much speed as he can possible . which our man perceive and [ three . 320 . ] enter with diligence into the other Canoa , wherein they catch the poor Indian , and bring he unto i . but the poor fellow become so astonish in behold we , that he know not which way to behave himself , because that ( as afterward i understand ) he fear that he be fall into the Spaniard hand , of who he have be take once before , and which , as he show we , have cut of his stone . at length this poor Indian be secure of we , and discourse unto we of many thing , whereof we receive very small pleasure , because we understand not his mind but by his sign . than he desire i to give he leave to depart , and promise i that he will bring i a thousand present , whereunto i agree on condition that he will have patience until the next day , when i purpose to go on land , where i suffer he to depart after i have give he a shirt , and certain small trifle , wherewith he depart very well content from we . the place where we go on shore be hard by a very high rock , out of which there run a little river of sweet and excellent good water : by which river we stay certain day to discover the thing which be worthy to be see , and traffic daily with the Indian : which above all thing beseech we that none of our man shall come near their lodging nor their garden , otherwise that we shall give they great cause of jealousy , and that in so do , we shall not want of their fruit which they call Ananas , whereof they offer we very liberal , receive in recompense certain thing of small value . this notwithstanding , it happen on a day that certain of our man desirous to see some new thing in these strange country , walk through the wood : and follow still the little river side , they spy two serpent of exceed bigness , which go side by side overthwart the way . my soldier go before they think to let they from go into the wood : but the serpent nothing at all astonish at these gesture glance into the bush with fearful hyssing : yet for all that , my man draw their sword and kill they , and find they afterward 9 great foot long , and as big as a man leg . during this combat , certain other more undiscreet go and gather their ananas in the Indian garden , trample through they without any discretion : and not therewithal ! content they go towards their dwelling ; whereat the Indian be so much offend , that without regard any thing they rush upon they and discharge their shot , so that they hit one of my man name Martine chaveau , which remain behind . we can not know whether he be kill on the place , or whether he be take prisoner : for those of his company have enough to do to save themselves without think of their companion . whereof Monsieur de Ottigni my lieutenant be advertise , send unto i to know whether i think good that he shall lay a ambush for the Indian which have either take or kill our man , or whether he shall go direct to their dwelling to know the truth . i send unto he after good deliberation hereupon , that he shall not attempt any thing , and that for diverse occasion : but contrariwise that he shall embark himself with all diligence , and consequent all they that be on land : which he do with speed . but as he sail towards our ship he perceive along the shore a great number of Indian which begin to charge they with their arrow : he for his part discharge store of shot against they , yet be not able to hurt they , or by any mean to surprise they : for which cause he quite forsake they , and come unto our ship . where stay until the next day morning we set sail follow our wont course , and keep the same , we discover diverse isle conquer by the Spaniard , as the isle of S . Christopher , and of the saint , of Monserrate , and la Redonda : afterwards we pass between Anguilla and Anegada , sail towards new France . where we arrive 15 day after , to wit , on Thursday the 22 of June about 3 of the clock in the afternoon , and land near a little river which be 30 degree distant from the equator , and 10 lague above cape Francois draw towards the south , and about thirty league above the river of May . after we have strike sail and cast anchor athwart the river , i determine to go on shore to discover the same . therefore be accompany with monsieur Ottigni , with monsieur de Arlac my ensign , and a certain number of gentleman and soldier , i embark my self about 3 or 4 of the clock in the evening . And be arrive at the mouth of the river , i cause the channel to be sound , which be find to be very shallow , although that far within the same the water be there find reasonable deep , which separate it self into two great arm , whereof one run towards the south , and the other his arrival in Florida the zz of June 1564 . cape Francois be between the river of dolphin and the river of May , make that the distance 30 league about , which be but 10 league over land . towards the north . have thus search the river , i go on land to speak with the Indian which wait for we upon the shore , which at our come on land , come before we , cry with a loud voice in their Indian language , Antipola Bonassou , which be as much to say , as brother , friend , or some such like [ three . 321 . ] thing . after they have make very much of we , they show we their Paracoussy , that be to say , their king and governor , to who i present certain toy , wherewith he be well please . and for my own the great love part , i praise God continual , for the great love andc ^ eof which i have find in these savage , which be sorry t e on tans . nothing , but that the night approach , and make we retire unto our ship . for though they endeavour by all mean to make we tarry with they , and show by sign the desire that they have to present we with some rare thing , yet nevertheless for many just and reasonable occasion i will not stay on shore all night : but excuse my self for all their offer , i embark my self again and return towards my ship . howbeit , before my then river of departure , i name this river , the river of dolphin , dolphin , because that at my arrival , i see there a great the savage , number or dolphin , which be play in the mouth thereof . the next day the 23 of this month ( because that towards the south i have not find any commodious place for we to inhabit , and to build a fort ) i give commandment to weigh anchor , and to hoist our sail to sail towards the river of May , their arrival where we arrive two day after , and cast anchor . at the river of afterwards go on land , with some number of ay ' Gentlemen and soldier to know for a certainty the singularity of this place , we espy the Paracoussy of the country , which come towards we ( this be the very same that we see in the voyage of captain John Ribault ) which have espy