by evident sign that all of it come from a place more within the river by certain day journey from this place , and declare unto we that all that which they have thereof , they get it by force of arm of the inhabitant of this place , name by they Thimogoa , their most ancient and natural enemy , as he large declare . whereupon when i see with what affection he speak when he pronounce Thimogoa , i understand what he will say . and to bring my self more into his favour , i promise he to accompany he with all my force , if he will fight against they : which thing please he in such sort , that from thenceforth he promise himself the victory of they , and assure i that he will make a voyage thither within a short space , will cause store of mill to be prepare , and will command his man to make ready their bow , and furnish themselves with such store of arrow , that nothing shall be want to give battle to Thimogoa . in fine he pray i very earnest not to fail of my promise , and in so do , he hope to procure i gold and silver in such good quantity , that my affair shall take effect accord to my own and his desire . the matter thus full resolve upon , i take my leave of he to return unto my ship , where after we have rest our self all the night follow , we hoist sail the next day very early in the morning , and sail toward the river of Seine , distant from they the river of river of May about four league : and there continue - seine - ing our course toward the north , we arrive at the mouth of Somme , which be not past six league the river of distant from the river of Seine : where we cast anchor , somme - and go on shore to discover that place as we have do the rest . there we be gracious and cour - the courtesy teous receive of the Paracoussy of the country , °^ the which be one or the tall man and best proportion river of that may be find . his wife sit by he , which Somme . beside her Indian beauty , wherewith she be great endue , have so virtuous a countenance and modest gravity , that there be not one among we but do great commend she ; she have in her train five of her daughter of so good grace and so well bring up , that i easy persuade my self that their mother be their mistress , and have teach they well and straight to preserve their honesty . after that the Paracoussy have receive we as i have say , he command his wife to present i with a certain number of bullet of silver , [ three . 324 . ] for his own part he present i with his bow and his arrow , as he have do unto captain John Ribault in our first voyage , which be a sign of a perpetuali amity and alliance with those which they honour with such a kind of present . in our discourse with one another , we enter into speech as touch the exercise of arm . then the Paracoussy cause a corselet to be set on end , and pray i to make a proof of our harquebus and their bow : but this proof please he very little ; for assoon as he know that our harquebus do easy 13 pierce that which all the force of their bow can not hurt , he seem to be sorry , muse with himself how this thing may be do . nevertheless go about to dissemble in his mind that which his countenance can not do by any mean , he begin to fall into another matter , and pray we very earnest to stay with he that night in his house or lodging , affirm that no great happiness can come unto he then our long abode , which he desire to recompense with a thousand present . nevertheless we can not grant he this point , but take our leave of he to return to our ship : laudonnleres where soon after i cause all my company to be consultation assemble , with the master and pilot of my ship , anywlureit to consult together of the place whereof we shall might be best make choice to plant our habitation . first i let they fir they to understand , how none of they be ignorant , that the part which be toward the cape of Florida , be altogether a marish country , and therefore unprofitable for our inhabitation : a thing which can yield neither profit to the king , nor any contentment or pleasure to we , if peradventure we will inhabit there . on the other side if we pass further towards the north to seek out port royal , it will be neither very profitable nor convenient : at the least if we shall give credit to the report of they which remain there a long time , although the haven be one of the fair of the west Indies : but that in this case the question be not so much of the beauty of the place , as of thing necessary to sustain life . and that for our inhabit it be much more needful for we to plant in place plentiful of victuali , then in goodly haven , fair , deep and pleasant to the view . in consideration whereof that i be of opinion , if it seem good unto they , to gold and sil - seat our self about the river of May : see also that in our first v ° yase we f ° und the same only among rtver of ajj the rest tQ abqun ( je jn mafz anj cornc ) besije the ' gold and silver that be find there : a thing that 14 put i in hope of some happy discovery in time to come . after i have propose these thing , every one give his opinion thereof : and in fine all resolve , namely those which have be with i in the first voyage , that it be expedient to seat themselves rather on the river of may then on any other , until they may hear news out of France . this point be thus agree upon , we sail towards the river , and use such diligence , that with the favour of the wind we arrive there the morrow after about the break of day , which be on Thursday the 29 . of the month of June . have - June the 29 . king cast anchor , i embark all my stuff and the soldier of my company , to sail right towards the open of the river : wherein we enter a good way up , and find a creek of a reasonable bigness , which invite we to refresh our self a little , while we repose our self there . afterwards we go on shore to seek out a place plain without tree , which we perceive from the creek . but because we find it not very commodious for we to inhabit there : we determine to return unto the place which we have discover before , when we have ace be join to a be more fit and come - modious to build a fortress , then that where we be last . therefore we take our way towards the forest be guide therein by the young Paracoussy which have lead we before to his father lodging . afterwards we find a large plain cover with high pinetree distant a little from the other : under which we perceive a infinite number of stag which bray amid the plain , athwart the which we pass : than we discover a little hill adjoin unto a great vale very green and in form flat : wherein be the fair meadow of the world , and grass to feed cattle . Moreover it be environ with a great number of brook of fresh water , and high wood , which make the vale J5 sail up the river . This pl mountain , and it seem unto 1 more delectable to the eye . after i have take the view thereof at my ease , i name it at the request of our then vale of soldier , the vale of Laudonniere . thus we go Laudonniere . forwar ( £ anon have go a little forward , we meet a Indian woman of tall stature , which also be a an Herma - hermaphrodite , who come before we with a great ves - phrodite . sep of c | ere fountain water , wherewith she great refresh we . for we be exceed faint by reason of the ardent heat which molest we as we pass through those high wood . and i believe that without the succour of that Indian hermaphrodite , or rather , if it have not be for the great desire which we have to [ he . 325 . ] make we resolute of our self , we have take up our lodging all night in the wood . be therefore refresh by this mean , we gather our spirit together , and march with a cheerful courage , we come to the place which we have choose to make our habitation in : whereupon at that instant near the river brink we strew a number of bough and leaf , to take our rest on they the night follow , which we find exceed sweet , because of the pain which before we have take in our travel . on the morrow about the break of day , i commanded a trumpet to be sound , that be assemble they begin we may give God thanks for our favourable and their plant happy arrival . there we sing a psalm of thankes - mth ^ prayer to givjng unto God , beseech he that it will please ' he of his grace to continue his accustom goodness towards we his poor servant , and aid we in all our enterprise , that all may turn to his glory and the advancement of our king . the prayer end , every man begin to take courage . afterwards have measure out a piece of ground in form of a triangle , we endeavour our self of all side , some to bring earth , some to cut faggot , and other to raise and make the rampire , for there be not a man that have not either a shovel , or cut hook , or hatchet , as well to make the ground plain by cut down the 16 1564 - tree , as for the build of the fort , which we do hasten w ‘ such cheerfulness , that within few day the effect of our diligence be apparent : in which mean space the Paracoussy Satourioua our near neighbour , and on who ground we build our fort , come usual accompanied with his two son and a great number of Indian to offer to do we all courtesy . and i likewise for my part bestow diverse of our trifle frank on he , to the end he may know the good will we bear he , and thereby make he more desirous of our friendship , in such sort , that as the day increase , so our amity and friendship increase also . after that our fort be bring into form , i begin to build a grange to retire my munition and thing necessary for the defence of our fort : pray the Paracoussy to command his subject to make we a cover of palm leave , and this to the end that when that ln Florida be do , i may unfreight my ship , and put under coverture those thing that be in they . sudden the palm Paracoussy command in my presence all the Indian leaf . of his company to dress the next day morning so good a number of palm leave , that the grange be cover in less than two day : so that business be finish . for in the space of those two day , the Indian never cease from work , some in fetch palm leave , other in interlace of they : in such sort that their king commandment be execute as he desire . our fort be build in form of a triangle . the side the form of towards the west , which be towards the land , be in - fortcaro - closed with a little trench and raise with trave make in the west side . form of a battlement of nine foot high : the other side which be towards the river , be enclose with a palisado of plank of timber after the manner that gabions be make . on the south side there be a kind of bastion TheSouthside . within which i cause a house for the munition to be build : it be all build with faggot and sand , save about two or three foot high with turf , whereof the battlement be make . in the midst i cause a great ix 17 b Caroline . [ he . 326 . ] the first voyage twenty league . court to be make of eighteen pace long and broad , in the midst whereof on the one side draw towards the south i build a corpse de guard , and a house on the other side