of rose like those of Castille . sign of here be many mountain that bear show of metal , metal . but they go not to see they , because the Indian dwell upon they be many in number , and very warlike . our man remain in this place three day , upon one of the which the inhabitant make before they a very solemn dance , come forth in the same with gallant apparel , use very witty sport , wherewith our man be exceed delight . twenty four league from hence towards the west , they come to a certain province call by the inhabitant zunyorsunne . themselves zuny , and by the Spaniard Cibola , contain great number of Indian ; in which province Francisco Vazquez de Coronado have be , and have erect many 198 cross and other token of Christianity , which remain as yet stand . here also they find three Indian Christians which have remain there ever since the say journey , who name be Andrew the culiacan , Gaspar de Mexico , and Antonio de Guadalajara , who have almost forget their own language , but can speak that country speech very well ; howbeit after some small conference with our man , they easy understand one another . by these three Indian they be inform , that threescore day journey from this place there be a very mighty lake , upon the bank whereof stand many great and good town , and that the inhabitant of the same have plenty of gold , a evident argument whereof be their wear of golden bracelet and earring : and also that after the say Francis Vasquez de Coronado have perfect intelligence thereof , he depart out of this province of Cibola to go thither , and that have proceed twelve day journey , he begin to want water ; and thereupon determine to return , as he do indeed , with intention to make a second voyage thither at his better opportunity ; which afterward he perform not , be prevent of his determine journey by death . upon the news of these riches the say captain Antony de Espeio be desirous to go thither ; and though some of his companion be of his opinion , yet the great part and the friar be of the contrary , say that it be now high time to return home unto new Biscay from whence they come , to give account of that which they have see : which the say great part within few day put in execution , leave the captain with 1581 - 83 . Vasquez de Coronado be here 1540 wonderful 1541 . a mighty lake 60 dale journey from Cibola . plenty ofgolde . nine companion only that willing follow he : who after he have full certify himself of the riches abovesaid , and of the great quantity of excellent metal that be about that lake , depart out of this province of mightiepro - another Cibola with his companion ; and travel direct towards Vince w " five - - — - - - - - - . 0 . zuardof Cibola the west , after he have pass 28 league , he find another very great province , which by estimation con - ^ iied ^ mo - tein above 50000 soul : the inhabitant whereof 199 hotze . a witty politic to be use by the english in like case . the english voyage assoon as they understand of their approach , send they word , upon pain of death to come no near to their town : whereto the captain answer , that their come be in no wise to hurt they , as they shall well perceive , and therefore request they not to molest he in his intend voyage , and withal give to the messenger a reward of such thing as they bring with they : who thereupon make so good report of our people , and so appease the trouble mind of the Indian , that they grant they free access unto their town , and so they go thither with 15 . Indian their friend of the province of Cibola aforesaid , and the three Mexican Indian before mention . when they be come within a league of the first town , there come forth to meet they above 2000 Indian lade with victual , who the captain reward with some thing of small value , which they make great account of , and esteem more precious than gold . as they approach near unto the town which be name Zaguato , a great multitude of Indian come forth to meet they , and among the rest their cacique , with so great demonstration of joy and gladness , that they cast much meal of Maiz upon the ground for the horse to tread upon : with this triumph they enter the town , where they be very well lodge and much make of , which the captain do in part requite , give to the chief among they hat , and bead of glass , with many such trifle , which he carry with he for the like purpose . the say cacique present give notice to the whole province of the arrival of these new guest , who they report to be a courteous people , and such as offer they no harm : which be occasion sufficient to make they all come lade with present unto our people , and to entreat they to go and make merry with they in their town ; which they yield unto , though always with great foresight what may follow . whereupon the captain use a certain policy , make the cacique believe , that forasmuch as his horse be very fierce ( for they 200 have tell the Indian that they will kill they ) therefore it be necessary to make a fort of lime and stone to enclose they , for the avoid of such inconvenience as otherwise may happen unto the Indian by they . this tale be so steadfast believe by the cacique , that in five hour they assemble such store of people together , that with incredible celerity they build the say fort which our man require . Moreover , when the captain say that he will depart , they bring unto he a present of 40000 . mantle of cotton , both white and of other colour , and great store of hand - towel , with tassel at the corner , with diverse other thing , and among the rest rich metal , which seem to hold much silver . rich metal . among these Indian they learn very much concern the great lake aforesaid , who report agree whole with the relation of the former , as touch the riches and great abundance of gold about that lake . great abun - the captain repose great confidence in this people 8c in their good disposition towards he determine after certain day , to leave there five of his companion with the rest of his Indian friend , that they may return with his carriage to the province of Zuni , while himself with the four other which remain shall ride in post to discover certain very rich mine , whereof he have perfect information . And put this his purpose in execution he depart with his guide , and have travel due - west 45 . league he come unto the say mine , and take out of the same with his Exceedingrich own hand exceed rich metal hold great quantity mine of of silver : arid the mine which be of a very broad ' vein be in a mountain whereon they may easy ascend , by reason of a open way that lead up to the same . near unto these mine be certain town of Indian dwell upon the mountain , who show they friendship and come forth to receive they with cross on their head , and other token of peace . hereabout they find two river of a reasonable bigness , 201 upon the bank whereof grow many vine bear excellent grape , and great grove of walnuttree , and much a mighty flax like that of Castille : and they show our man by river ° f eight sjgne ) that behind those mountain there be a river run - about 8 . league broad , but they can not learn how ward the near it be : howbeit the Indian make demonstration ' north sea . that it run towards the north sea , and that upon both ^ river snowfall s ^ es thereof stand many town of so great bigness , that into ^ theChese - c ° mparison thereof those wherein they dwell be but piouk bay , or small hamlet . into the great after he have receive all this information , the say itaeoftadoac . captain return towards the province of Zuni , whither ' he have send his say companion : and be arrive there in safety , have travail upon a very good way , he find in the same place his 5 . companion , and the say father Frier Bernardin Beltran , with the soldier which be determine to return , as be aforesaid , but upon certain occasion be not as yet depart : who the inhabitant have most friendly entreat , and furnish with all thing necessary in abundance , as afterward likewise they use the captain , and those that come with he , come forth to meet they with show of great joy , and give they great store of victual to serve they in their journey homeward , and request they to return again with speed , and to bring many castilian with they ( for so they call the Spaniard ) to who they promise food sufficient . for the better performance whereof they sow that year more grain and other fruit , than they have do at any time before . [ Iii . 396 . ] at this present the friar and soldier aforesaid resolve themselves in their former determination , and agree to return unto the province from whence they come with intention before mention , to seek the two friar that be slay , to who also Gregorio Hernandez who have be standard - bearer in the journey , join himself . who be depart , the captain accompany only with 8 . soldier , determine to prosecute his former attempt , and to pass up high than say river 202 call Rio deal norte , which he do accord . and have travel about 60 . league towards the province 60 . league . of the quire aforesaid , 12 league from thence towards the orient or east they find a province of Indian call Hubates , who receive they peaceable , and give Hubates . they great store of victual , inform they also of very rich mine which they find , whereout they get very rich glister and good metal , and therewith return to the mine . town from whence they come . this province contain by their estimation 25000 . person all very well apparel in colour mantle of cotton , and chamois - skin very well dress . they have many mountain full of pine and cedar , and the house of their town be house of 4 . of 4 . and 5 . story high . here they have notice of five story another province distant about one day journey from it thence inhabit by certain Indian call Tamos , and Tamos . contain above 40000 . soul : whither be come the inhabitant will neither give they any victual , nor admit they into their town : for which cause , and in regard of the danger wherein they be , and because some of the soldier be not well at ease , and for that they be so few ( as we have say ) they determine theirretume . to depart thence , and to return towards the land of the christian , which they put in execution in the begin of July 1583 , be guide by a Indian that go with they , who lead they another way than they go forth by , down a river , which they call Rio de las vacas ; that the las be to say , the river of ox , in respect of the great multitude of ox or cow that feed upon the bank thereof , by the which they travel for the space of 120 . league , still meet with store of the say cattle . 120 . league . from hence they go forward to the river of Conchos by which they enter , and thence to the valley of saint Bartholomew , from whence they first enter into their discovery . upon their come thither they find that the say friar Bernardin Beltran and his company be safe arrive at the say town many day before , and be go from thence to the town of Guadiana . in Guadiana . 203 this town the foresay captain Antony de Espejo make most certain relation of all that be aforesaid , which relation present he send unto the conde of Corunna Vizroy of Nueva Espanna , who send the same to his majesty , and to the lord of his royal counsel of the Indies , to the end they may take such order as they think best , which they have already perform with great care and circumspection . Almighty God vouchsafe his assistance in this business , that such number of soul redeem by his blood may not utter perish , of who good capacity , wherein they exceed those of Mexico and Peru ( as we be give to understand by those that have deal with they ) we may bold presume that they will easy embrace the gospel , and abandon such idolatry as now the most of they do live in : which almighty God grant for his honour and glory , and for the increase of the holy catholique faith .