: howbeit they deal with they by sign ; and have show very great unto they certain stone of rich metal , and inquire quantity of whither there be any such in their country : they stver ' answer by the same sign , that five day journey westward from thence there be great quantity thereof , and that they will conduct they thither , and show it unto they ; as afterward they perform their 192 1581 - 83 . promise , and bear they company 22 league , which be all inhabit by people of the same nation . next unto the foresay province they come unto another pro - another further up the great river aforesaid , be mnce ' much more populous than the former , of who they be well receive , and welcome with many present , especial of fish , whereof they have exceed great store , by reason of certain great lake not far from great lake . thence , wherein they be breed in the foresay plenty . they stay among these people three day ; all which time both day and night they make before they many dance , accord to their fashion , with signification of speciali joy . they can not learn the name of this nation for want of a interpreter , yet they understand that it extend very far , and be very great . among these people they find a Indian of the foresay nation of the Conchos , who tell they , and show they by sign , that fifteen day journey from thence towards the west there be a very broad lake , and near unto a mighty lake . it very great town , and in they house of three or four story high , and that the people be well apparel , and the country full of victual and provision . This Concho offer himself to conduct our man thither , whereat our company rejoice , but leave off the enterprise , only to accomplish their intent for which they undertake the voyage , which be to go northward to give aid unto the two friar aforesaid . the chief and principali thing that they note in this province be , that it be of very good temperature , and a very rich soil , and have great store of wild beast , and wildfowl , and abundance of rich metal , and other excellent thing , and very pro - rich metal . fitable . from this province they follow their journey for the space of fifteen day without meet any people all that while , pass through great wood and grove of pine toe of pine tree bear such fruit as those of Castille : at the end tree ' whereof , have travel , to their judgement , fourscore league , they come unto a small hamlet or village of few ix 193 n people , in who poor cottage cover with straw they find many deeres - skinne as well dress as those of Flanders , with great store of excellent white salt . they give our man good entertainment for the space of two day while they remain there , after which they bear they company about twelve league , unto certain great town , always travel by the river call Rio deal norte abovesaid , till such time as they come unto the new Mexico , country call by they new Mexico . here all along o °° lar ° and t ^ le sh ° re say river grow mighty wood of poplar walnut tree be in some place four league broad , and great vine . store of walnut tree , and vine like those of Castillia . have travel two day through the say wood of poplar and Walnut tree , they come to ten town situate on both side of the say river , beside other which they may see further out of the way , wherein there seem to be great store of people , and those which they see be above ten thousand person . in this province they receive they very courteous , and bring they to their town , whereas they give they great plenty of victual and hen of the country , with many other thing , and that with great good will . house of 4 here they find house of four story high , very stone high . weq with gallant lodging , and in most of they be Stooves for the winter season . their garment be of cotton and of dear - skin , and the attire both of the man and woman be after the manner of the Indian of the kingdom of Mexico . but the strange thing of all be to see both man and woman wear shoe and boot with good sole of neat leather , a thing which they never see in any other part of the Indies . the woman keep their hair well comb and dress , wear nothing else upon their head . in all these [ three . 393 . ] town they have cacique which govern their people like the cacique of Mexico , with sergeant to execute their commandment , who go through the town proclaim with a loud voice the pleasure of the cacique , command the same to be put in execution . in this 194 province our man find many idol which they worship , and particular they have in every house a oratory for the devil , whereinto they ordinary carry he meat : and another thing they find , that as it be a use among the Christians to erect cross upon the high way , so have this people certain high chapel , in which they say the devil use to take his ease , and to recreate himself as he travel from one town to another ; which chapel be marvellous well trim and paint . in all their arable ground , whereof they have great plenty , they erect on the one side a little cottage or shed stand upon four stud , under which the labourer do eat , and pass away the heat of the day , for they be a people much give to labour , and do continual occupy themselves therein . this country be full of these high mountain and forest of pine tree . the weapon m ° untainesa ™ that they use be strong bow and arrow head with c ! ) two , nes offa flint , which will pierce through a coat of male , and country . macana which be club of half a yard long , so beset with sharp flint , that they be sufficient to cleave a man asunder in the midst : they use also a kind of target make of raw hide . Having remain four day in this province , not the province far off they come to another call the province of ° ftisuas - tiguas contain sixteen town , in one whereof , call Poala , they understand that the inhabitant have slay the Poala . two father aforesaid , to wit , friar Francis Lopez , and friar Augustus Ruyz , who they go to seek , together with the three Indian boy , and the mestizo . so soon as the people of this town and their neighbour see our man there , their own conscience accuse they , and fear that our man come to punish they , and to be avenge of the death of the foresay father , they dare not abide their come , but leave their house desolate they flee to the mountain next adjoin , from whence they can never cause they to descend , although our man attempt the same by diverse devise and enticements . they find in the town and house good store j9 the english voyage of victual , with infinite number of hen in the country , and many sort of metal , whereof some seem to be very good . they can not perfect understand what number of people this province may contain , by reason they be flee into the mountain , as i have say before . have find those to be slay which they go to seek , they enter into consultation , whether they shall return to Nueva Biscaya , from whence they come , or shall proceed further in their journey ; whereabout there be diverse opinion : howbeit , understand there , that towards the orient or east part of that province , and very far distant from thence , there be great and rich town : and find themselves so far on the way , the say captain Antonio de Espeio with the consent of the foresay friar call Frier Bernardine Beltran , and the great part of his soldier and companion determine to proceed on the discovery , till such time as they do see to what end it will come ; to the end they may give certain and perfect knowledge thereof to his majesty , as eye - witness of the same . and so with one accord they determine , that while the army lie still there , the captain and two more of his company shall prosecute their desire , which they do accord . and within two day journey they come unto another province , where they find eleven town , and much people in they , which in their judgement be above forty thousand person . the country be very fertile and plentiful , who confine border upon the territory of Cibola , where there be great store of cow , with who hide and with cotton they apparel themselves , imitate in the form of their government their next neighbour . in this place be sign of very rich mine , some quantity of the metal whereof they find in the house of the Indian ; which Indian have and do worship idol . they receive our man peaceable , and give they victual . have see thus much , and the disposition of the country , they return to the camp , from whence they 196 1581 - 83 . depart , to inform their companion of the thing above mention . be return to the camp they have intelligence of quiresb ° rder it another province call los quire , which stand six uPm l0 league high up the river call Rio deal norte . and e ° rte ' in their journey thitherward , be arrive within a league of the place , there come forth very many Indian to receive they in peace , request they to bear they company to their town : which they do , and be marvellous well entertain and cherish . in this province they find five town only , wherein be great store of people , and those which they see be above 14000 soul , who worship idol as their neighbour do . in one of these town they find a pie in a cage after the manner of Castille , and certain shadow or canopy like unto those which be bring from China , wherein be paint the sun , the moon , and many star . where have take the height of the polestar , they find themselves to be in 37 degree and of northerly latitude . they depart out of this province , and keep still the same northerly course , fourteen league from thence they find another province call the cuname , where they see other five town , the great whereof be call Cia , be so large , that it contain eight marketplace , the house whereof be plaster and paint with diverse colour , be better than any which they have see in the province before mention : the people which they here see , they esteem to be above twenty thousand person . they present to our man many curious mantle , and victual excellent well dress ; so that our man deem this nation to be more curious , and of great civility , and better government , than any other that hitherto they have see . they show they rich metal , and the mountain also not far off whereout they dig they . here our people hear of another province stand towards the northwest , whereunto they purpose to go . 197 seven and thirty degree and a half . [ he . 394 - ] cuname , or puname . Cia a great city . rich metal . have travel about six league , they come to the amey , or say province , the people whereof be call amey , emex . wherein be seven very great town , contain , to their judgement , above thirty thousand soul . they report that one of the seven town be very great and fair , which our man will not go to see , both because it stand behind a mountain , and also for fear of some mishap , if in case they shall be separate one from another . this people be like unto their neighbour of the former province , be as well provide of all necessary as they , and of as good government . about fifteen league from this province , travel always towards the west , they find a great town call AcomaorAco - Acoma , contain above six thousand person , and man a town situa ^ e upon a high rock which be above fifty pace above 6000 have no other entrance but by a ladder or pair person . of stair hew into the same rock , whereat our people marvel not a little : all the water of this town be keep in cistern . the chief man of this town come peaceable to visit the Spaniard , bring they many mantle , and chamois - skinne excellent dress , and great plenty of victual . their cornfield be two league from thence , and they fetch water out of a small river never thereunto , to water the same , on the brink whereof they see many great bank