fifteen dale city of Cevola be 15 great day journey more ; also that they will provide victual for i and other the end of they . i r . r t .... , , desert to necessary for that voyage . likewise they tell i , Cevola or that with Stephan the negro be go above 300 Clvola . man to bear he company , and to carry victual after he , and that in like sort many of they will go with i to serve i , because they hope to return home rich . i thank they , and will they to set thing in order with speed , and so i rest there three day , wherein i always inform my self of Cevola , and of as many other thing as i can learn , and call many Indian unto i , and examine they several , and all of they agree in one tale , and tell i of the great multitude of people , and of the order of the street , of the greatness of the house , and of the strength of the gate , agree altogether with that which the rest before have tell i . after three day many assemble themselves to go with i , 30 of the principal of who i take , be very well apparel , and with chain of turquese , which some of they wear five or six time double , and other people to carry thing necessary for they and i , and so set forward on my voyage . 138 thus i enter into the second desert on the 9 of may , the second de - and travel the first day by a very broad and beat way , and we come to dinner unto a water , where the Indian have make provision for i : and at night we come to another water , where i find a house which they have full make up for i , and another house stand mad where Stephan lodge when he pass that way , and many old cottage and many sign of fire which the people have make that travel to Cevola by this way . in this sort i travel 12 day journey be always well provide of twelve day victual , of wild beast , hare , and partridge of the doarney - same colour and taste with those of Spain although they be not so big , for they be somewhat less . here meet we a Indian the son of one of the chief man that accompany i , which have go before with Stephan , who come in a great fright , have his face and body all cover with sweat , and show exceed sadness in his countenance ; and he tell i that a day journey before Stephan come to Cevola he send his great mace make of a gourd by his messenger , as he be always wont to send they before he , that he may know in what sort he come unto they , which gourd have a string of bell upon it , and two feather one white and another red , in token that he demand safe conduct , and that he come peaceable . and when they come to Cevola before the magistrate , which the lord of the ci tie have place there for his lieutenant , they deliver he the say great gourd , who take the same in his hand , and after he have spy the bell , in a great rage and fury he cast it to the ground , and will the messenger to get they pack with speed , for he know well enough what people they be , and that they shall will they in no case to enter into the city , for if they do he will put they all to death . the messenger return and tell Stephan how thing have pass , who answer they , that it make no great matter , and will needs proceed on his voyage till he come to 139 the city of Cevola : where he find man that will not let he enter into the town , but shut he into a great house which stand without the city , and straightway take all thing from he which he carry to truck and barter with they , and certain turquese , and other thing which he have receive of the Indian by the way , and they keep he there all that night without give he meat or drink , and the next day in the morning this Indian be a thirst , and go out of the house to drink at a river that be near at hand , and within a little while after he see Stephan run away , and the people follow he , and slay certain of the Indian which go in his company . and when this Indian see these thing , he hide himself on the bank of the river , and afterward cross the high way of the desert . the Indian that go with i hear these news begin incontinent to lament , and i think these heavy and bad news will cost i my life , neither do i fear so much the loss of my own life , as that i shall not be able to return [ three . 372 . ] to give information of the greatness of that country , where our lord God may be glorify : and straightway i cut the cord of my budget which i carry with i full of merchandise for traffic , which i will not do till then , nor give any thing to any man , and begin to divide all that i carry with i among the principali man , will they not to be afraid , but to go forward with i , and so they do . And go on our way , within a day journey of Cevola we meet two other Indian of those which go with Stephan , which be bloody and wound in many place : and assoon as they come to we , they which be with i begin to make great lamentation . Theise wound Indian i ask for Stephan , and they agree in all point with the first Indian say , that after they have put he into the foresay great house without give he meat or drink all that day and all that night , they take from Stephan all the thing which he carry with he . the next day when 140 the sun be a lance high , Stephan go out of the house , and some of the chief man with he , and sudden come store of people from the city , who assoon as he see he begin to run away and we likewise , and forthwith they shoot at we and wound we , and certain dead man fall upon we , and so we lay till night and dare not stir , and we hear great rumour in the city , and see many man and woman keep watch and ward upon the wall thereof , and after this we can not see Stephan any more , and we think they have shoot he to death , as they have do all the rest which go with he , so that none be escape but we only . Chap . 5 . the situation and greatness of the city of Cevola , and how friar Marcus take possession thereof and of other province , call the same . the new kingdom of saint Francis , and how after his departure from thence be preserve by God in so dangerous a voyage , he arrive at Compostella in Nueva Galicia . have consider the former report of the Indian , and the evil mean which i have to prosecute my voyage as i desire , i think it not good wilful to loose my life as Stephan do : and so i tell they , that God will punish those of Cevola , and that the viceroy when he shall understand what have happen , will send many Christians to chastise they : but they will not believe i , for they say that no man be able to withstand the power of Cevola . and herewithal i leave they , and go aside two or three stone cast , and when i return i find a Indian of i which i have bring from Mexico call Marcus , who weep and say unto i : father , these man have consult to kill we , for they say , that through your and Stephans mean their father be slay , and that neither man nor woman of they shall remain unslain . 141 A . D . 1539 - then again i divide among they certain other thing which i have , to appease they , whereupon they be somewhat pacify , albeit they still show great grief for the people which be slay . i request some of they to go to Cevola , to see if any other Indian be escape , with intent that they may learn some news of Stephan ; which i can not obtain at their hand . when i see this , i say unto they , that i purpose to see the city of Cevola , whatsoever come of it . they say that none of they will go with i . at the last when they see i resolute , two of the chief of they say they will go with i ; with who and with my Indian and interpreter i follow my way , till i come within sight of Cevola , which be situate on a plain at the foot of a round hill , and make show to be a fair city , and be better seat than any that i have see in these part . the house be build in order , accord as the Indian tell i , all make of stone with diverse story , and flat roof , as far as i can discern from a mountain , whither i ascend to view the city . the people be somewhat white , they wear apparel , and lie in bed , their weapon be bow , they have emrald and other jewel , although they esteem none so much as turquese , wherewith they adorn the wall of the porch of their house , and their apparel and vessel , and they use they in stead of money through all the country . their apparel be of cotton and of ox hide , and this be their most commendable and honourable apparel . they use vessel of gold and silver , for they have no other mettle , whereof there be great use and more abundance than in Peru , and they buy the most rich same for turquese in the province of the pintado , where ” and der ^ n t ^ iere be say to mine ° f great abundance . of other the province of kingdom i can not obtain so particular instruction . the pintado . diverse time i be tempt to go thither , because i know i can but hazard my life , and that i have offer unto God the first day that i begin my journey : in the end i begin to be afraid , consider in what danger i 142 shall put my self , and that if i shall dye , the knowledge of this country shall be lose , which in my judgement be the great and the best that hitherto have be discover : and when i tell the chief man , what a goodly city Cevola seem unto i , they answer i [ three . 373 . ] that it be the least of the seven city , and that Toton - Totonteac the teac be the great and best of they all , because it have so many house and people , that there be no end of they . pnv - tnce . have see the disposition and situation of the place , i think good to name that country el Nuevo reyno de san Francisco : in which place i make a great heap of stone by the help of the Indian , and on the top thereof i set up a small slender cross because i want mean to make a great , and say that i set up that cross and heap in the name of the most honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa viceroy and captain general of Nueva Espanna , for the emperor our lord , in token of possession , accord to my instruction . which possession i say that i take in that place of all the seven city , 8c of the kingdom of Totonteac , of Acus , and of Marata . thus i return with much more fear than victual , he retume . and go until i find the people which i have leave behind i , with all the speed that i can make , who i overtake in two day travel , and go in their company till i have pass the desert , where i be a desert . not make so much of as before : for both man and woman make great lamentation for the people which be slay at Cevola , and with fear i hasten from the people of this valley , and travel ten league a valley . the first day , and so i go daily eight or ten league , without stay until i have pass the second desert . a second and though i be in fear , yet i determine to go to desert . the great plain , whereof i say before , that i have information , be situate at the foot of the mountain , and in that place i understand , that this plain be inhabit for many day journey towards the east , but i dare not enter into it , consider , that if hereafter ! 43 we shall inhabit this other country of the seven city , and the kingdom before mention , that then i may better discover the same , without put my self in hazard , and leave it for this time , that i may give relation of the thing which i have now see . at the entrance of this plain 1 see but seven town only of a reasonable bigness , which be a far off in a low valley be very green and a most fruitful soil , out of which run many river . i be inform that there be much gold in this valley , and that the inhabitant work it into vessel and thin plate , wherewith they strike and take off their sweat , and that they be people that will not suffer those of the other side of the plain to traffic with they , and they can not tell i the cause thereof . here i set up two cross , and take possession of the plain and valley in like sort and order , as i do at other place before mention . and from thence i return on my voyage with as much haste as 1 can make , until i come to the city of saint Michael in the province of culiacan , think there to have find Francis Vazquez de Coronado governor of Nueva Galicia , and find he not there , i proceed on my journey Compostella in till i come to the city of Compostella , where i find 21 . degree of i wr | te not here many other particularity , because latitude . , .. , . r t i i they be impertinent to this matter : 1 only report that which i have see , and which be tell i concern the country through which i travel , and of those which i have information of .