Maiz , to give i they in my boat . Chap . 2 . of the habit , armour and stature of the Indian . a relation of many other with who he have by sign traffic , victual and many courtesy . in this sort we go up two league , and i arrive near a clifle of a hill , whereupon be a arbour make new , where they make sign unto i , cry 284 that i shall go thither , show i the same with their hand , and tell i that there be meat to eat . but i will not go thither , see the place be good forecast . apt for some ambush , but follow on my voyage , within a while after issue out from thence above a thousand arm man with their bow and arrow , and after that many woman and child show themselves , towards who i will not go , but because the sun be almost set , i ride in the midst of the river . Theise Indian come deck after sundry fashion , some come with a paint that cover their face all over , some have their face half cover , but all besmouch with Indian be - cole , and every one as it like he best . other carry visard before they of the same colour which have the ' shape of face . they wear on their head a piece of a dear skin two span broad set after the manner of a helmet , and upon it certain small stick with some sort of feather . their weapon be bow and arrow of hard wood , and two or three sort of mace of wood harden in the fire . this be a mighty people , well feitured , and without any grossness . they have hole bore in their nostril whereat certain pendent hang : and other wear shell , and their ear be full of hole , whereon they hang bone and shell . all of they both great and small wear a girdle about their waste make of diverse colour , and in the middle be fasten a round bunch of feather , which hang down behind like a tail . likewise on the brawn of their arm they wear a strait string , which they wind so often about that it become as broad as one hand . they wear certain piece of dear bone fasten to their arm , wherewith they strike off the sweat , and at the other certain small pipe of cane . they carry pipe and also certain little long bag about a hand broad tie to their left arm , which serve they also in stead of dam continue ' braser for their bow , full of the powder of a certain herb , whereof they make a certain beverage . they have their body trace with coal , their hair cut before , 285 and behind it hang down to their waste . the woman go naked , and wear a great wreath of feather behind they , and before paint and glue together , and their hair like the man . there be among these Indian three or four man in woman apparel . now the next day be Saturday very early i go forward on my way up the river , set on shore two man for each boat to draw they with the rope , and about break forth of the sun , we hear a mighty cry of Indian on both side of the river with their weapon , but without any banner . i think good to attend their coming , aswell to see what they will have , as also to try whether our interpreter can understand they . when they come over against we they leap into the river on both side with their bow and arrow , and when they speak , our interpreter understand they not : whereupon i begin to make a sign unto they that they shall lay away their weapon , as the other have do . some do as i will they , and some do not , and those which do , i will to come near i and give they some thing which we have to truck withal , which when the other perceive , that they may likewise have their part , they lay away their weapon likewise . i judge my self to be in security leap on shore with they , and stand in the midst of they , who understand that i come not to fight with they , Skels and begin to give some of those shell and bead , and some bead . bring i certain skin well dress , and other maiz and a roll of the same naughty grind , so that none of they come unto i that bring i not some - [ three . 428 . ] thing , and before they give it i go a little way from i they begin to cry out amain , and make a sign with their body and arm , and afterward they approach to give i that which they bring . and now that the sun begin to set i put off from the shore , and ride in the midst of the river . the next morning before break of day on both side of the river we hear great cry and of more Indian , which 286 leap into the river to swim , and they come to bring i certain gourd full of Maiz , and of those wreathe which i speak of before . i show unto they wheat and bean , and other seed , to see whether they have any of those kind : but they show i that they have no knowledge of they , and wonder at all of they , and by sign 1 come to understand that the thing which they most esteem and reverence be the sun : and i signify unto they that i come from a notable the sun . whereat they marveil , and then they begin to behold i from the top to the toe , and show i more favour than they do before ; and when i ask they for food , they bring i such abundance that i be enforce twice to call for the boat to put it into they , and from that time forward of all the thing which they bring i they fling up into the air one part unto the sun , and afterward turn towards i to give i the other part : and so i be always better serve and esteem of they as well in draw of the boat up the river , as also in give i food to eat : and they show i so great love , that when i stay they will have carry we in their arm unto their house : and in no kind of thing they will break my commandment : and for my surety , i will they not to carry any weapon in my sight : and they be so careful to do so , that if any man come new thither with they , sudden they will go and meet he to cause he to lay they down far from i : and i show they that i take great pleasure in their so do : and to some of the chief of they i give certain little napkin and other trifle ; for if i shall have give somewhat to every one of they in particular , all the small ware in swarm of new Spain will not have suffice . sometime it fall m / ' k out ( such be the great love and good will which they show i ) that if any Indian come thither by chance with their weapon , and if any one be warn to leave they behind he , if by negligence , or because he understand they not at the first warning , he have not lay they 287 a exceed great current of the river . the english voyage away , they will run unto he , and take they from he by force , and will break they in piece in my presence . afterwards they take the rope so love , and with strive one with another for it , that we have no need to pray they to do it . wherefore if we have not have this help , the current of the river be exceed great , and our man that draw the rope be not well acquaint with that occupation , it will have be impossible for we to have get up the river so against the stream . when i perceive that they understand i in all thing , and that i likewise understand they , i think good to try by some way or other to make a good entrance to find some good issue to obtain my desire : and i cause certain cross to be make of certain small stick and paper , and among other when i give any thing i give they these as thing of most price and kiss they , make sign unto they that they shall honour they and make great account of they , and that they shall wear they at their neck : give they to understand that this sign be from heaven , and they take they and kiss they , and lift they up aloft , and seem great to rejoice thereat when they do so , and sometime i take they into my boat , show they great good will , and sometime i give they of those trifle which i carry with i . and at length the matter grow to such issue , that i have not paper and stick enough to make cross . in this manner that day i be very well accompany , until that when night approach i seek to launch out into the river , and go to ride in the midst of the stream , and they come to ask leave of i to depart , say that they will return the next day with victual to visit i , and so by little and little they depart , so that there stay not above fifty which make fire over against we , and stay there all night call we , and before the day be perfect break , they leap into the water and swim unto we ask for the rope , and we give it they with a good will , thank God for the good provision which 288 1540 - hee give we to go up the river : for the Indian be so many , that if they have go about to let our passage , although we have be many more than we be , they may have do it . Chap . 3 . one of the Indian understanding the language of the interpreter , ask many question of the originali of the Spaniard , he tell he that their captain be the child of the sun , and that he be send of the sun unto they , and they will have receive he for their king . they take this Indian into their boat , and of he they have many information of that country . in this manner we sail until Tuesday at night , go as we be wont , cause my interpreter to speak unto the people to see if peradventure any of they can understand he , i perceive that one [ three . 429 . ] answer he , whereupon i cause the boat to be stay , and call he , which he understand , charge my interpreter that he shall not speak nor answer he any thing else , but only that which i say unto a wise devise . he : and i see as i stand still that that Indian begin to speak to the people with great fury : whereupon all of they begin to draw together , and my interpreter understand , that he which come to the boat say unto they , that he desire to know what nation we be , and whence we come , and whither we come out of the water , or out of the earth , or from heaven : and at this speech a infinite number of people come together , which marvele to see i speak : and this Indian turn on this side and on that side to speak unto they in . another language which my interpreter understand not . whereas he ask i what we be , i answer that we be Christians , and that we come from far to see they : and answer to the question , who have send i , i say , i be send by the sun , point unto he by sign as at the first , because they shall ix 289 t not take i in a lie . he begin again to ask i , how the sun have send i , see he go aloft in the sky and never stand still , and see these many year neither he nor their old man have ever see such as we be , of who they ever have any kind of knowledge , and that the sun till that hour have never send any other . i answer he that it be true that the sun make his course aloft in the sky , and do never stand still , yet nevertheless that they may well perceive that at his go down and rise in the morning he come near unto the earth , where his dwelling be , and that they ever see he come out of one place , and that he have make i in that land and country from whence he come , like as he have make many other which he send into other part , and that now he have send i to visit and view the same river , and the people that dwell near the same , that i shall speak unto they , and shall join with they in friendship , and shall