the relation of Francis Vazquez de Coronado , captain generail of the people which be send in the name of the emperor majesty to the country of Cibola new discover , which he send to don Antonio de Mendo9a viceroy of Mexico , of such thing as happen in his voyage from the 22 . of April in the year 1540 which depart from culiacan forward , and of such thing as he find in the country which he pass . Chap . 1 . Francis Vazquez depart with his army from culiacan , and after diverse trouble in his voyage , arrive at the valley of the people call los Caracones , which he find barren of Maiz : for obtain whereof he send to the valley call the valley of the lord : he be inform of the greatness of the valley of the people call Caracones , and of the nature of those people , and of certain island lie along that coast . he 22 . of the month of April last pass i depart from the province of culiacan with part of the army , and in such order as 1 mention unto your lordship , and accord to the success i assure my self , by all likelihood that i shall not bring all my army together in this enterprise : because the trouble have be so great and the want of victual , that i think all this year will not be sufficient to perform this enterprise , and if it shall be perform in so short a time , it will be to the great loss of our people . for as i write unto your lordship , i be fourscore day in travail to culiacan , in all which time i and those gentleman my companion which be horseman , carry on our back , ix 145 king [ he . 374 - ] this be but 200 . league from Mexico . and on our horse , a little victuali , so that from henceforward we carry none other needful apparel with we , that be above a pound weight : and all this notwithstanding , and though we put our self to such a small proportion of victual which we carry , for all the order that possible we can take , we be drive to our shift . and no marvel , because the way be rough and long : and with the carriage of our harquebus down the mountain and hill , and in the passage of river , the great part of our corn be spoil . and because i send your lordship our voyage draw ' in a map , i will speak no more thereof in this my letter . thirty league before we arrive at the place which the father provinciali tell we so well of in his relation , i send Melchior Diaz before with fifteen horse , give he order to make but one day journey of two , because he may examine all thing , against my arrival : who travail four day journey through exceed rough mountain where he find neither victual , nor people , nor information of any thing , save that he find two or three poor little village , contain 20 . or 30 . cottage a piece , and by the inhabitant thereof he understand that from thence forward there be nothing but exceed rough mountain which run very far , utter disinhabit and void of people . and because it be labour lose , i will not write unto your lordship thereof . it grieve the whole company , that a thing so high commend , and whereof the father have make so great brag , shall be find so contrary , and it make they suspect that all the rest will fall out in like sort . which when i perceive i seek to encourage they the best i can , tell they that your lordship always be of opinion , that this voyage be a thing cast away , and that we shall fix our cogitation upon those seven city , and other province , whereof we have knowledge : that there shall be the end of our enterprise : and 146 ... i540 , with this resolution and purpose we all march cheerfully through a very bid way which be not passable but one by one , or else we must force out with pioner the path which we find , wherewith the soldier be not a little offend , find all that the friar have say to be quite contrary : for among other thing which the father say and affirm , this be one , that the way be plain and good , and that there be but one small hill of half a league in length . and yet in truth there be mountain which although the way be well mend can not be pass without great danger of break the horse neck : and the way be such , that of the cattle which your lordship send we for the provision of our army we lose a great part in the voyage through the roughness of the rock . the lamb and sheep lose their hoof in the way : and of those which i bring from culiacan , i leave the great part at the river of Lachimi , because they can not the river of keep company with we , and because they may come lachimi . soft after we , four man on horseback remain with they which be now come unto we , and have bring we not past four and twenty lamb , and four sheep , for all the rest be dead with travail through that rough passage , although they travail but two league a day , and rest themselves every day . at length i arrive at the valley of the people call the valley of Caracones , the 26 . day of the month of May : and from culiacan until i come thither , i can not help my ara ~ self , save only with a great quantity of bread of Maiz : for see the Maiz in the field be not yet ripe , i be constrain to leave they all behind i . in this valley of the Caracones we find more store of people then in any other part of the country which we have pass , and great store of tillage . but i understand that there be store thereof in another valley call the talk deal lord valley , which i will not disturb with force , sennor - but send thither Melchior Diaz with ware of exchange to procure some , and to give the say Maiz to the 147 Indian our friend which we bring with we , and to some other that have lose their cattle in the way , and be not able to carry their victual so far which they bring from culiacan . it please God that we gate some small quantity of Maiz with this traffic , whereby certain Indian be relieve and some Spaniard . and by that time that we be come to this valley of the Caracones , some ten or twelve of our horse be dead through weariness : for be overcharge with great burden , and have but little meat , they can not endure the travail . likewise some of our negro and some of our Indian dye here ; which be no small want unto we for the performance of our enterprise . they the valley de tell i that this valley of the Caracones be five day isumt ^ ve5 journey fr ° m the western sea i send for the Indian davet intima of the sea coast to understand their estate , and while i from the wes - stay for they the horse rest : and i stay there team sea . four day , in which space the Indian of the sea coast [ three . 375 . ] come unto i : which tell i , that two day sail seven or eight from their coast of the sea , there be seven or eight ^ t ^ isks s ^ an ^ s tight over against they , well inhabit with of California , people , but bad furnish with victual , and be a rude people : and they tell i , that they have see a ship see a ship pass by not far from the shore : which i coast . wot not what to think whither it be one or those that go to discover the country , or else a ship of the Portugal . 148 they come to chichilticale : after they have rest themselves two day there , they enter into a country very barren of victual , and hard to travail for thirty league , beyond which they find a country very pleasant , and a river call Rio deal Lino , they fight with the Indian be assault by they , and with victory vanquish their city , they relieve themselves of their pinch hunger . 1 depart from the Caracones , and always keep by the sea coast as near as i can judge , and in very deed i still find my self the far off : in such sort that when i arrive at chichilticale i find my self ten day journey from the sea : and the father provinciali say that it be only but five league distance , and that he have see the same . we all conceive great grief and be not a little confound , when we see that we find every thing contrary to the information which he have give your lordship . the Indian of chichilticale say , that if at any time they go to the sea for fish , and other thing that they carry , they go traverse , and be ten day journey in go thither . and i be of opinion that the information which the Indian give i shall be true . the sea return towards the west right over against the Caracones the space of ten or twelve league . where i find that your lordship ship be see , which go to discover the haven of chichilticale , which father Marcus of ni ? a say to be in five and thirty degree . God know what grief of mind i have sustain : because i be in doubt that some mishap be fall unto they : and if they follow the coast , as they say they will , as long as their victual last which they carry with they , whereof i leave they store in culiacan , and if they be not fall into some misfortune , i hope well in God that by this they have make some good discovery , and in this respect their long stay out may be pardon . 149 chichilticale ten day journey from the sea . this chichil - ticaleisindeede but in 28 . deg . i rest my self two day in chichilticale , and to have do well i shall have stay long , in respect that here we find our horse so tire : but because we want victual , we have no leisure to rest any long : i enter the confine of the desert country on the 23 . of saint Johns eve , and to refresh our former travail , the June . first day we find no grass , but worse way of mountain and bid passage , than we have pass already : and the horse be tire , be great molest therewith : so that in this last desert we lose more horse than we have lose before : and some of my Indian which be our friend die , and one Spaniard who name be Spinosa ; and two negro , which die with eat certain herb for lack of victual . from this place i send before i one day journey the master don Garcia of the field don Garcia Lopez de Cardenas with fifteen nas ^^^ ' h ° rses to discover the country , and prepare our way : ' wherein he do like himself , and accord to the confidence which your lordship repose in he . and well i wot he fail not to do his part : for as i have inform your lordship , it be most wicked way , at least thirty league and more , because they be inaccessible mountain . a godly and but after we have pass these thirty league , we fruitful con - founj fresh river , and grass like that of Castille , and ’ special of that sort which we call Scaramoio , many nut tree and mulberry tree , but the nut tree differ from those of Spain in the leaf : and there be flax , but chief near the bank of a certain river which Rio deal Lino , therefore we call el Rio del Lino , that be say , the river of flax : we find no Indian at all for a day travail , but afterward four Indian come out unto we in peaceable manner , say that they be send even to that desert place to signify unto we that we be welcome , and that the next day all the people will come out to meet we on the way with victual : and the master of the field give they a cross , will they to signify to those of