, always towards the California . Southwest , see in the night three or four fire , whereby it appear that the country be inhabit , and full of people , for the greatness of the country argue no less : and we suppose that there must needs be great town inhabit within the land , although in this point we be of diverse opinion . the sea be so deep on all this coast that we can scarce find ground in 54 fathom . on the great part of the coast there be hill of very white sand , and it seem to be a dangerous coast , because of the great and swift tide which go there , for the sand show so much for the space of ten or twelve league , for so the pilot affirm . this day be Saturday the wind increase , and we have sight of the isle of Isla de perlas . pearl , which on this side of the gulf appear with a deep valley all cover over with tree , and show much fair than on the other side , and we enter into the porte of Santa Cruz . from the nine of November to the fifteen we sail not above ten league , because we have contrary wind , and great shower : and beside this we have another mischance which do not a little grieve we : for we lose company of the ship call the Trinity , and can never see she for the space of three day , whereupon we suspect that she be return home unto new Spain , or that she be sever from our company : wherefore we be grieve out of measure to see our self so leave alone , and the captain of all other be most sad , though he cease not to encourage we to proceed on our voyage , say that notwithstanding all this we ought 229 not to leave off this enterprise which we have begin , and that though we be leave alone we shall deserve the great commendation and credit : whereupon we all answer he , that we will not have he think that any of we will ever be discourage , but that we will follow he until he shall think it reasonable that we shall not proceed any further in the enterprise , and that we be in danger of perish , and that until then we will be at his commandment : but withal we persuade he that after he have see any great difficulty to proceed any further , he shall do well to return back to make relation of our success to the R . H . lord the mark de valle . hereupon he make a oration unto we wherein he tell we , that he can not believe , much less can imagine , wherefore the ship call the Trinity shall return into new Spain , nor why she shall willing depart from we , and go unto any other place , and that he think by all reason , that some current have carry she out of our sight , and that through contrary weather and tempest she can not fetch we up , and that notwithstanding all that which we have do in the voyage , he have a instruction , that if by chance we be separate one from the other , we be to take this course to meet again together , namely to return back eight or ten league to seek one another , beyond certain headland which lie out into the sea , and that therefore we shall do well to return to seek she up . this sentence please we all , and so return to seek she , we espy she two league distant from we , come towards we with a fresh gale of wind , whereat we great rejoice . thus be come together we anchor for that day , because the weather seem very contrary , and the captain chide they for their negligence in sail , because they have in such sort lose our company ; and they excuse themselves , that they can do no less , because a current have carry they away above three league , whereby they can never reach unto we . the next day 230 be the sixeteenth of November we set forward , but sail very little , for the north and northwest wind be against we . here we discover certain plain , in my judgement very great and green , and right before we we can not discern any mountain or wood , whereat we marveil to see so great a country . and we meet a Indian in a Canoa on the shore whereon the sea do break , who stay to behold we a great while , and oftentimes he lift up himself to view we the better , and then return back along the coast : we use all diligence to see whether he will come out further from the shore , to give he chase , and to try whether we can catch he , but he very cunning view we without come near unto we , and return to the shore with his Canoa . here we see in the evening but one fire , and wit not whether it be do by the cunning of the Indian , because they will not have we know that there be people there , or that it be [ in . 407 . ] so indeed . from the say 16 day of November until the 24 of the same month we can not proceed on our way above 12 or 15 league : and look into our sea - chart , we find our self distant from the xaguge of the port of Santa Cruz about 70 league . they be 70 now on the 24 be Monday very early in the morn - teagtuffrom ing we begin to take very good view of that SantaCruz country , and all along the coast we see many fair plain with certain furrow make in the midst like unto half plain , the say plain still appear up into the country , with pleasant champion , because the grass which grow there be very beautiful , short , and green , and good pasture for cattle . howbeit because we ride so far off , we can not perfect judge what kind of grass it be , but it show very short and green , and without thorn . Theise plain on the right hand make a bay into a valley which seem to be a piece of a mountain : the rest show to be all plain without any thistle or weed , but full of grass good for cattle very green and fair , as i have say . 231 one of their ship by tempest be separate from the other , and afterward meet with her consort she report that the land stretch to the west by the mouth of the great lake . the pilot be of diverse judgement touch the state of this coast inhabit by Chichimecas . they enter into a haven to take in fresh water , and be sudden assail by two squadron of Indian . they defend themselves valiant , and the captain with some of his soldier be grievous wound . the 26 of this month be Wednesday at night the north wind take we , which still increase more and more so great that it put we to much trouble , for it continue two day , in which the sea be always boisterous ; and this night again we lose the Trinity be beat with the north wind aforesaid ( and we have sight of she on Monday the 24 ) wherewith we be all of we great aggrieve , both captain , soldier and mariner , because we see we be leave alone , and our ship call Santa Agueda wherein we be , be but bad condition , and this grieve we more than the trouble which we have with the boisterousness of the sea , imagine that if we shall lose the Trinity , or if any mishap shall fall unto we , we shall not be able to follow our voyage accord to our captain and our own land run desire . This say 24 day be Monday we see a the country with high mountain towards the northwest , oit west . anj seem that the land stretch on still forward , whereat we exceed rejoice , because we judge that the land grow always broad and broad , and that we shall meet with some speciali good thing . whereupon we desire that it will please God to send we good weather for our voyage , which hitherto we note . find always contrary , so that in 26 day we sail not above 70 league , and that with much trouble , sometime ride at anchor and sometime sail , and seek 232 the remedy and benefit of the shore to avoid peril . in this country which we discover the 26 day we always see ( as i have say ) along the shore , and within the land , goodly plain without any tree , in the midst whereof be a lake or gather together of the seawater , which ( to our judgement ) be above 12 league in compass , and the sea - coast reach to the mountain before mention . and this day we see our ship call the Trinity , which ride 2 league distant from we , which so soon as she see we , set sail , and we come together and rejoice great . they bring we great quantity a wonderful of grey fish , and of another kind : for at the point fi ^ nsplace of those mountain they find a fish which be very wonderful , for they suffer themselves to be take by hand : and they be so great that every one have much ado to find room to lay his fish in . they find also on the say point a fountain of fresh water which descend from those hill , and they tell we that at the same place they have find a narrow passage , whereby the sea enter into the say lake . they comfort we much with the report of these thing , and in tell we that the land trend to the west ; for the chief pilot think , and the other pilot be of the same opinion , that we shall find a good country . this night we set sail to go to that point to take in fresh water which we want , and to see this lake , and to put some man on shore : and after midnight the wind come upon we so forcible at the north that we can not stay there : whereupon we be constrain to put further into the sea , and return the same way back again unto the shore with much ado , and come to a anchor a great way short of the place from whence we be drive : and there we ride until Thursday at noon with this bitter north wind , and on Friday about noon , when we most think it will have cease , it begin to increase again , which grieve we not a little see the weather so contrary , hope always that it will cease , and that some wind will blow from the shore , whereby 233 [ three . 408 . ] we may recover the point of land to take in fresh water , and to search whether there be any people about that lake . here we lay from the 26 of the say month till the 29 , drive up and down the sea , wind in by little and little until we have get under the shelter of those mountain : which be obtain we ride the say 29 of the month half a league from those woody mountain , which we have see in the sea we stay in this place at our ease all the Sunday , and Juan Castilio the chief pilot go that day in the boat on shore with seven in his company , and they land near the sea , and on a certain low ground they find four or five Indian Chichimecas of great stature , and go towards they , who flee away like deer that have be chase . after this the pilot go a little way along the seashore , and then return to his boat , and by that time he be enter thereinto , he see about fifteen Indian of great stature also , with their bow and arrow which call unto he with a loud and strong voice , make sign with their bow ; but the pilot make no account of their gesture , but rather return to the ship , and declare what have pass between he and the Indian . the same day the captain command that our cask shall be make ready against the next morning to take in water , for in both the ship there be about five and twenty buttes empty . the first of December , and the second day in the morning the captain go with both the bark on shore with some dozen soldier , and the great part of the mariner which labour in fill of water , leave in the ship as many as be needful , and as soon as we be come on shore at the water