and turquese for their service , and that the people of this city wear very fine and excellent turquese hang at their ear and at their nostril . they say also , that of these turquese they make fine work upon the principali gate of the house of this city . they tell i , that the apparel which the inhabitant of Cevola wear , be a gown of cotton down to the foot , with a button at the neck , and a long string hang down at the same , and that the sleeve of these gown be as broad beneath as above . they say , they gird themselves with girdle of turquese , and that over these 131 the english voyage coat some be good apparel , other hide of cow very well dress , which they take to be the best apparel of that country , whereof they have there great quantity . likewise the woman go apparel , and cover down to the foot . Theise Indian give i very good entertainment , and curious inquire the day of my departure from Vacupa , that at my return they may provide i of food and lodging . they bring certain sick folk before i , that i may heal they , and seek to touch my apparel , and give i certain cow - hydes so well trim and dress , that by they a man may conjecture that they be wrought by civil people , and all of they affirm , ithat they come from Cevola . the next day i follow my journey , and carry with i the pintado , i come to another village where i be well receive by the people of the same : who likewise seek to touch my garment , and give i as particular knowledge of the land aforesaid , as i have receive of those which meet i before : and also tell i , that from that place certain people be go with Stephan Dorantez four or five day journey . and here i find a great cross , which Stephan have leave i for a sign , that the news of the good country increase , and leave word , that with all haste they shall send i away , and that he will stay for i at the end of the first desert that he meet with . here i set up two cross , and take possession accord to my instruction , because that the country seem better unto i then that which i have pass , and that i think it meet to make a act of possession as far as that place . in this manner i travail five day , always find inhabit place with great hospitality and entertainment , and many turquese , and ox - hides , and the like report concern the country . here i understand , that after two day journey i shall find a desert where there be no food ; but that there be certain go before to 132 build i lodging , and to carry food for i : whereupon i hasten my way , hope to find Stephan at the end thereof , because in that place he have leave word that he will stay for i . before i come to the desert , i meet with a very pleasant town , by a pleasant reason of great store of water convey thither to water the same . here 1 meet with many people both man and woman clothe in cotton , and some cover with oxe - hydes , which general they take for better apparel than that of cotton . all the people of this village go in caconado , that be to say , with Turqueses hang at their nostril and ear : which turquese they call Cacona . among other , the lord of this village come unto i , and two of his brethren very well apparel in cotton , who also be in caconado , each of they have his collar of turquese about his neck : and they present unto i many wild beast , as cony , quail , Maiz , nut of pine tree , and all in great abundance , and ofier i many turquese , and dress oxe - hydes , and very fair vessel to drink in , and other thing : whereof i will receive no whit . and have my garment of grey cloth , which in Spain be call farago ^ a , the lord of this village , and the other Indian touch my gown with their hand , and tell i , that of such cloth there be great store in Totonteac , and that the store of woolpeople of that country wear the same . whereat i clot ^ and laugh , and say that it be nothing else but such fofgnteac 0 apparel of cotton as they wear . and they reply : we will have thou think that we understand , that that apparel which thou wear , and that which we wear be of diverse sort . understand thou , that in Cevola all the house be full of that apparel which we wear , but in Totonteac there be certain little beast , from who they take that thing wherewith such apparel as thou wear , be make . i pray they to inform i more plain of this matter . and they tell i that the say beast be about the bigness of the two 133 collar ofturquese two or three time double . the english voyage branch or spaniel which Stephan carry with he , and they say that there be great store of that cattle in Totonteac . Chap . 3 . he enter into a desert , and the Indian suffer he to want nothing necessary . follow his voyage , he come into a fertile valley , and have certain knowledge give he ( as he have before ) of the state of Cevola and of Totonteac ; and that the coast of the sea in 35 . degree trend much to the westward : and also of the kingdom of Marata and Acus . the next day i enter into the desert , and where i be to dine , i find bower make , and victual in abundance by a river side : and at night i find bower and victual in like sort , and after that manner i find for 4 . day travel : all which time the wilderness continue . at the end of these four day , i enter into a valley very well inhabit with people . at the first village there meet i many man and woman with victual , and all of they have turquese hang at their nostril and ear , and some have collar of turquese like those which the lord of the village before i come to the desert , and his two brethren wear : save that they wear they but single about their neck , and these people wear they three or four time double , and go in good apparel , and skin of ox : and the woman wear of the say turquese at their nostril and ear , and very good waistcoat and other garment . here there be as great knowledge of Cevola , as in Nueva Espanna of temis - titan , and in Peru of Cuzco : and they tell we particular the manner of their house , lodging , street and marketplace , as man that have be oftentimes there , and as those which be furnish from thence with thing necessary for the service of their household , as those also have do , which i already have pass . i tell they it be impossible that the house shall be 134 make in such sort as they inform i , and they for my better understanding take earth or ash , and pour water thereupon , and show i how they lay stone upon it , and how the building grow up , as they continue lay stone thereon , until it mount aloft . i ask they whether the man of that country have wing to mount up unto those loft : whereat they laugh , and show i a ladder in as good sort as i my self be able to describe it . than they take a staff and hold it over their head , and say that the loft be so high one above another . likewise here i have information of the woollen cloth [ three . 370 . ] of Totonteac , where they say be house like those of Cevola , and better and more in number , and that it be a great province , and have no governor . here i understand that the coast of the sea trended much towards the west : for unto the entrance of this first desert which i pass , the coast still stretch northward : and because the trending of the coast be a thtsgradu - thing of great importance , i be desirous to know and see it : and i see plain , that in 35 . degree the e ^ e ^ ees ' at coast stretch to the west , whereat i rejoice no the least . less , then of the good news within land , and so i return back to proceed on my journey . through the foresay valley i travail five day journey , which be inhabit with goodly people , and so abound with victual , that it suffice to feed above three thousand horseman : it be all well water and like a garden : the burroughs and town be half and a quarter of a league long , and in all these village , i find very ample report of Cevola , whereof they make such particular relation unto i , as people which go yearly thither to earn their live . here i find a man bear in Cevola , who tell i that he come thither , have escape from the governor or lieutenant of the town ; for the lord of these seven city live and abide in one of those town call Ahacus , and in the rest he appoint lieutenant Ahacus . 135 the english voyage under he . this townsman of Cevola be a white man of a good complexion , somewhat well in year , and of far great capacity than the inhabitant of this valley , or then those which i have leave behind i . he say that he will go with i , that i may beg his pardon : and of he i learn many particular : he tell i that Cevola be a great city , inhabit with great store of people , and have many street and marketplace : and that in some part of this city there be certain very great house of five story high , wherein the chief of the city assemble themselves at certain day of the year . he say that the house be of lime and stone , accord as other have tell i before , and that the gate , and small pillar of the principali house be of Turqueses , and all the vessel wherein they be serve , and the other ornament of their house be of gold : and that the other six city be build like unto this , whereof some be big : and that Ahacus be the chief of they . he say that towards the southeast there be a kingdom call Marata , and that there be wont to be many , and those great city , which be all build of house of stone , with diverse loft ; and that these have and do wage war with the lord of the seven city , through which war this kingdom of Marata be for the most part waste , although it yet continue and maintain war against the other . likewise he say , that the kingdom call Totanteac lie towards the west , which he say be a very mighty province , replenish with infinite store of people and riches : and that in the say kingdom they be woollen cloth like that which i wear , and other fine sort of woollen cloth make of the fleece of those beast which they describe before unto i : and that they be a very civil people . Moreover he tell i , that there be another great province and kingdom call Acus ; for there be Acus , and Ahacus with a aspiration , which be the principali of the seven city : and Acus without a aspiration be a kingdom and province of it self . he tell i 136 also , that the apparel which they wear in Cevola be after the same manner as they before have certify i , and that all the inhabitant of the city lie upon bed raise a good height from the ground , with quilt and canopy over they , which cover the say bed : and he tell i that he will go with i to Cevola and far also , if i will take he with i . the like relation be give unto i in this town by many other , but not so particular . i travel three day journey through this valley : the inhabitant whereof make i exceed great cheer and entertainment . in this valley i see above a thousand ox - hides most excellent trim and dress . and here also i see far great store of turquese and chain make thereof , then in all place which i have pass ; and they say , that all come from the city of Cevola , whereof they have great knowledge , as also of the kingdom of Marata , and of the kingdom of Acus and Totonteac . Chap . 4 . of a very great beast with one horn upon his forehead ; and of the courtesy which the Indian show Frier Marcus of Niga , in his voyage . also how cruel Stephan Dorantez and his companion be use upon their arrival at Cevola , by the lord thereof . here they show i a hide half as big again mlghtie as the hide of a great ox , and tell i that it be the skin of a beast which have but one horn upon ' he forehead , 8c that this horn bend towards he [ three . 371 . ] breast , and that out of the same go a point right forward , wherein he have so great strength , that it will break any thing how strong so ever it be , if he run against it , and that there be great store of these beast in that country . the colour of the hide be of the colour of a great goatskin , and the hair be a finger thick . here i have messenger from Stephan which bring i word , that by this time he be come to 137 the far part of the desert , and that he be very joyful , because the far he go , the more perfect knowledge he have of the greatness of the country , and send i word , that since his departure from i , he never have find the Indian in any lie ; for even unto that very place he have find all in such manner as they have inform he , and hope that he shall find the like at his arrival in the valley which he be go unto , as he have find in the village before pass . i set up cross , and use those act and ceremony , which be to be do according to my instruction . the inhabitant request i to stay here three or four day , because that from this place there be four day journey unto the desert , and from the first entrance into the same desert unto the