the point of the hand , which we call Isla de los cedros or the he of cedar , because that on the top of the mountain therein , there grow a wood of these cedar be very tall , as the nature of they be to be . this day the Trinity descry a village or town of the Indian , and find water : for on Sunday night we have new lose she , and have no sight of she until Tuesday , whenas we find she ride near the shore , not far from those cottage of the Indian . and as soon as we have descry she , we make towards she , and before we can reach she , we espy three canoas of Indian which come hard aboard the say ship call the Trinity , so that they touch almost the side of the ship , and give they of their fish , and our people 262 on the other side give they certain trifle in exchange , and after they have speak with they , the Indian go back to the shore , and at the same instant we come up unto the admiral and ride by they , and they all salute we , say that the Indian be near they , and tell what have pass between they , whereat the general and we receive great contentment . they tell we moreover , that they have find fresh water , whereby they increase our great joy , because we stand in much need thereof , for at the other place of the Indian we can get but a little . while we thus ride at anchor , we see a Canoa with 3 Indian put out into the sea from their cottage , and they go unto a fish place , among certain great and high weed , which grow in this sea among certain rock , the great part of which weed grow in 15 or 20 fathom depth ; and with great celerity they catch seven or eight fish , and return with they unto the Trinity , and give they unto they , and they in recompense give the Indian certain trifle . after this the Indian stay at the stern of the ship , view the same above three hour space , and take the oar of our boat they try how they can row with they , whereat they take great pleasure ; and we which be in the admiral stir not a whit all this while , to give they the more assurance , that they shall not fly away , but shall see , that we mean to do they no harm , and that we be good people . as soon as we be come to anchor , and behold all that have pass between the Indian and those of the Trinity , after the Indian be go to the shore in their canoas make of the body of tree , the general command the boat which be without to be these mighty deep and high weed be describe in the end of this treatise . [ Iii . 419 . ] bring unto he : and when it be come , he , and Francis Preciado , and two other go into it , and so we go aboard the Trinity . the Indian see people come out of the other ship into the Trinity , send two canoas unto the stern of the ship , and bring we a bottle of water , and we give unto they certain 263 bead , and continue talk with they a little while ; but evening approach the air grow somewhat cold . the Indian return on shore to their lodging , and the general and we to our ship . the next day be Wednesday in the morning , the general command certain of we to take the boat and go ashore , to see if we can find any brook or well of fresh water in the house of the Indian , because he think it unpossible for they to dwell there without any water to drink . the father friar Raimund likewise go out in our company , because the day before see the Indian come to the stern of the ship and parley with we , he think he may have speak a little with they , with the like familiarity . in like sort many mariner and soldier go out in the boat of the Trinity , and go altogether with their weapon towards the shore , somewhat above the lodging of the Indian , very early in the morning they watch the boat , and perceive that we will come on land , whereupon they send away their woman and child with certain of they , who carry their good up into certain exceed steep mountain and hill , and 5 or 6 of they come towards we , which be excellent well make , and of a good stature . two of they have bow and arrow , and other two 2 bastinade much thick than the wrist of a man hand , and other two with 2 long staff like javelin with very sharp point , and approach very near we be now come on shore . And begin by sign very fierce to brave we , they come so near we , that almost they strike with one of those staff one of our soldier call Garcia a man of good parentage , but the general command he to withdraw himself , and not to hurt any of they . in the mean season the general and friar Raimund step forth , the friar lap a garment about his arm , because they have take up stone in their hand , fear that they will do they some mischief . then begin both of they to speak unto they by sign and word , to be quiet , signify , that they mean they no 264 1540 - harme , but only be come to take water ; and the friar show they a drinking - cup ; but nothing will serve to make they leave that brag , and fling of stone : and the general continue still in a mind not to hurt they , command his man gentle to come near unto they , and that by sign they shall all show they , that they mean in no wise to hurt they , but that we be come on land only to take water . on the other side refuse utter to take knowledge of these thing they still insult more and more : whereupon Francis Preciado counsel the general to give he leave to kill one of they , because all the rest will flee away , whereby at our ease we may take water : but he reply that he will not have it so , but will they to looze the two mastiff Berecillo and Achillo : wherefore the dog be let loose , and as soon as they see they , they vanish immediate , betake they to their heal , and run up those cliff like goat . also other which come the great use from the mountain to succour they , betake they - ° fmas ^ ve ^^ self to flight . the dog overtake two or they , and indan . bit they a little , and we run after , lay hold on they , and they seem as fierce as wild and untamed beast , for 3 or 4 of we hold either of they , to cherish and pacific they , and to seek to give they some thing : but we avail not , for they bite we by the hand , and stoop down to take up stone for to strike we with they . we lead they a while in this manner , and come unto their lodging , where the general give a charge , that no man shall touch any thing of they , command Francis Preciado to see that this order be observe , in not take any thing from they , although in very deed there be little or nothing there , because the woman and Indian which be flee have carry all away . here we find a old man in a cave so extreme age as it be wonderful , which can neither see nor go , because he be so lame and crooked . the father friar Raimund say , it be good ( see he be so age ) to make he a Christian ; whereupon we christen he . the captain 265 give the Indian which we have take two pair of earring , and certain counterfeit diamond , and make much of they , suffy they to depart at their pleasure , and in this sort fair and soft they return to the rest of their fellow in the mountain . we take the matter [ three . 420 . ] of that village which be but a small quantity , and then the general command we to return to our ship , because we have eat nothing as yet , and after our repast we sail towards a bay which lie beyond that village , where we see a very great valley , and those of the Trinity say , that they have see there good store of water , and sufficient for we ; wherefore we anchor near unto that valley . and the general go on shore with both the boat , and the man that go on land in the morning with the two father friar Raimund , and friar Antony : and pass up that valley a crossebow - shot , we find a very small brook of water which nevertheless supply our necessity for we fill two butt thereof that evening , leave our vessel to take it with on shore until the next morning : and we rejoice not a little that we have find this water , for it be fresh , and the water which we have take up before be somewhat brackish , and do we great hurt both in our body and in our taste . Chap . 14 . they take possession of the isle of cedar for the emperors majesty , and depart from thence they be great toss with a tempest of the sea , and return to the island , as to a safe harbour . the next day be the two and twenty of January very early the general command we to go on shore , and that we shall have our dinner bring we , and shall take in the rest of our water , which we do , and fill 17 butt without see any Indian at all the next day go out to fill 8 or 9 vessel which be not yet fill , a great wind at northwest take we , whereupon they make sign to we from the ship , that with all haste we shall come on board again , for the wind grow 266 .... I54 °‘ still high , and high , and the master be afraid that our cable will break , thus we be in the open sea . therefore be come aboard again not without great trouble , we return back over against the village of the Indian , * where we have slay the Indian , and be - Cap . 12 . cause the wind grow more calm about midnight , the pilot do not cast anchor , but hull under the shelter of this island , which ( as i have say ) be call the isle of isladehsge - cedar , and be one of the 3 isle of S . Stephan , the great and chief of they , where the general take possession . while we hull here , about midnight , the Stephan . next Friday be the 23 of the month , without our expectation we have a fresh gale of wind from the southeast , which be very favourable for our voyage , and the long it continue , the more it increase : so that between that night and the next day be Saturday the 24 of the say month we sail 18 great league . while read cap . 11 . we be thus on our way , the wind grow so contrary a ^ out the end - and so tempestuous , that to our great grief we be constrain to coast about with our ship , and return twenty league back again , take for our succour the second time , the point of the lodging of the Indian , where the foresay Indian be slay , and here we stay Monday , Tewsday , and Wednesday , during which time the northwest and the north wind blow continual , whereupon we determine not to stir from thence until we see good weather , and well settle for our voyage : for in this climate these wind do reign so great , that we fear they will stay we long there than we will ; and we be so weary of stay , that every day seem a month unto we . under this shelter we ride Thursday , Friday , and Saturday until noon , which be the last of January in the year 1540 about noon the wind begin to blow soft at Southwest , whereupon the general tell the pilot , that we shall do well to put over to the main land , where with some wind off the shore we may by the grace of God sail somewhat far . thus we