, three other canoas , one at the head of the point among certain flatte , and the other two moor into the sea , that they may descry we without come over near we . likewise between certain hill which be near the point , there appear here three and there four of they , and afterward we see a small troop of some twenty of they together , so that all of we rejoice great to behold they . on this side the land show green with piece of plain ground which be near the sea , and likewise all those coast of hill show green , and be cover with many tree , although they grow not very thick together . here at evening we ride near the shore hard upon the say point , to see if we can speak with those Indian , and likewise to see if we can get fresh water , which now we want , and still as soon as we be come to a anchor , we see the Indian show themselves on land come likewise to in a Canoa , by six and seven at a time , whereat we marvel , because we never think that one of those canoas will hold so many man . in this wise we stay look still what will be the success , and in the place where we ride we be two small league distant from the shore , where we find these Indian in their canoas : whereupon we marvel not a little to see so great a alteration in so small a distance of country , as well because we still discover pleasant land with tree ( whereas on the other side of the isle there be none ) as also because it be so well people with Indian , which have so many canoas mad of wood , as we may discern , and not raft or Balsas , for so they Balsa be a call those float which be make all flat with cane . flat raft make the next day be Thursday the fifteen of the say cane ' month about break of day four or five Indian show ix 257 r near unto their lodging , themselves at the head of that point , who as soon as they have spy we retire behind the point , and hide themselves among the bush upon certain small hill that be there , from whence they issue forth , and cover all the green hill and mountain , which be along that coast ; whereupon we gather that they have their dwelling there , in regard of the commodity of the water and the defence against ill weather and the benefit of fish . at sunrising we see the Indian appear in great company , go up unto the hill in small troop , and from thence they stand and behold we . immediate we see five or six canoas come out into the sea a good distance from we , and those which be in they stand often on their tiptoe , to view and descry we the better . on the other side we stir not at all for all these their gesture , but stand still ride at anchor ; and the general seem not to be very willing to take any of they , but this day in the morning very early command the master mate to convey he to our other ship call the Trinity . thing pass in this sort , when about ten of the clock we see three canoas launch far into the sea to fish very near unto we , whereat we take great pleasure . at 12 of the clock the general return from the Trinity and command the boat and man to be make ready , as well soldier as mariner , and that we shall go on shore to see if we can get any wood and water , and catch one of those Indian to understand their language if it be possible : and so all the man that be ready go into the admiral boat , and go towards the Trinity which by this time with the other ship have a small gale of wind , wherewith they enter far within the point , and we discover the lodging and house of the Indian , and see near the water side those five or six canoas which at the first come out to view we , draw on shore , and over against this place the ship cast anchor in 30 and 35 fathom water , and we be very near the land ; whereat we marvel much to find so great 258 depth of water so near the shore . be go aboard our boat , we make towards the shore over against a village of the Indian , who as soon as they see we village of about to come on land , leave a hill whereon they stand the Indian - to behold what we do , and come down to the shore , where we be prepare to come on land : but before they come against we they cause their woman and child to fly into the mountain with their good , and then come direct towards we , threaten we with certain great staff which they carry in their hand some 3 yard long and thick than a man wrist : but perceive that for all this we cease not to come near the sea shore to come on land , they begin to charge we with stone and to fling cruel at we , and they hit skirmish of 4 or c man , among who they smite the general with ilians two stone . in the mean while the other boat land stone . a little beneath , whereupon when they see that they be force to divide themselves to keep the rest of our company from come on land , they begin to be discourage , and do not assail the general boat so fierce , who begin to cause his people to go on shore with no small trouble ; for albeit he be near the land , yet as soon as they leap out of the boat they sink down , because they can find no fast foot ; and thus swim or otherwise as they can , first a soldier call Spinosa get on land , and next to he the general , and then some of the rest , and begin to make head against the Indian , and they come hasty with those staff in their hand , for other kind of weapon we see none , save bow and arrow of pinetree . after a short combat they break in piece the target of the general , and of Spinosa . in the mean while those of the other boat be get on land , but not without much difficulty , by reason of the multitude of stone which continual rain down upon they , and they strike Terazzo on the head a use very shroud blow , and have it not be for our target , against arrow many of we have be wound , and in great distress , and stone . 2 . 59 although our enemy be but few in number . in this manner all our company come on shore with swim and with great difficulty , and if they have not help one another , some of they have be drown . thus we land , and within a while after those of the other boat be come on land , the Indian betake themselves to flight , take their way towards the mountain , whether they have send their woman , child and good : on the other side we pursue they , and one of those Indian which come to assail the general boat , be slay upon the strand , and two or three other be wound , and some say more . while we pursue they in this manner our mastive dog Berecillo overtake one of they not far from we ( who because we be so wet can not run very theuseofma - fast ) and pull he down , have bite he cruel , arr ” against and doubtless he have hold he till we have come , Indian . unless it have happen that another of his companion have not follow that Indian which the dog have pull down , who with a staff which he have in his hand give the dog a cruel blow on the back , and without any stay draw his fellow along like a deer , and Berecillo be fain to leave he for pain , neither have he scarce take the dog off on he , but the Indian get up , and flee so hasty toward the mountain , that within a short while he overtake his fellow which have save he from the paw of the dog , who ( as it appear ) betake he lusty to his heal , and thus they come unto their fellow which descend not down to the shore be about some twenty , and they be in all about fifty or sixty . [ Iii . 418 . ] after we have breathe our self a while , we view their house where they stand , which be certain cottage cover with shrub like broom and rosemary , with certain stake pight in the ground ; and the general will we to march all together without disperse of our self , a little way up those mountain , to see if there be any water and wood , because we 260 stand in great need of they both . and while we march forward , we see in certain little valley the good which the woman have leave there behind they in their flight : for the Indian as soon as they see we pursue they overtake the woman , and for fear charge they to fly away with their child leave their stuff in this place . we go unto this booty , and find good store of freshfish , and dry fish , and certain bag contain above 28 pound weight full of dry fish ground to powder , and many seal - skin , the most part dress with a fair white grain upon they , and other very bad dress . there be also their instrument to fish withal , as hook make of the prick of certain shrub and tree . here we take the say skin without leave any one in the place , and then we return to the sea , because it be now night , or at least very late , and find our boat wait for we . Chap . 13 . a description of the canoas of the Indian of the he of cedar , and how coast the same to find fresh water they find some , and desire to take thereof they go on shore , and be diverse molest with the weapon of the Indian . they christen a old Indian , and return unto their ship . the canoas which they have be certain thick trunk of cedar , some of they of the thickness of two man , and three fathom long , be not make hollow at all , but be lay along and fasten together , they shove they into the sea , neither be they plain to any purpose , for we find no kind of edgetool , save that there be certain sharp stone , which we find upon certain rock that be very keen , wherewith we suppose that they do cut and flay those seal . and near the shore we find certain water , wherewith we fill certain bottle make of the skin of those seal , contain each of they above a great pail of water . the next day our general command we to 261 seale - skws well dress with a white grain . Isla de id cedros , or the lie of cedar in 28 deg . and a quarter . the english voyage set sail , whereupon sail with a fresh gale about 2 league from the shore of this hand , trending about the same to see the end thereof , and also to approach near the firm land , to inform our self of the state thereof , because we have see 5 or 6 fire , we compass the same about : for by this mean we perform 2 or 3 good action , namely , we return to our right course , and search whether any river fall out of the coast of the firm land , or whether there be any tree there , or whether any store of Indian do show themselves or no . in this manner proceed on our way all the Friday be the 16 of January at evening , and seek to double the point of the hand , so fierce and contrary a northern wind encounter we , that it drive we back that night over against the lodging and habitation of the Indian , and here we stay all Saturday , what time we lose the Trinity again , but on sunday - night be the 18 we see she again , and begin to proceed on our way to compass that hand , if it please God to send we good weather . on Sunday , Monday , and Tuesday ( which be the twenty of the say month of Januarie ) we sail with scarce and contrary wind , and at length come to the cape of