and in a manner calm , and run not above five league , and all the night follow we lay becalm , and we see on the shore five or six fire . the land be high with very - high mountain without grass , have certain cave in they : the next day also , and part of the night follow we be becalm : and the morrow after we follow our course along the say coast , and pass between a great island full of exceed high mountain , and the main land , where we see a very great haven in the firm land in which we anchor to see what it be , and be come to a anchor , the captain and some of we go on land the same day to see if there be any people and fresh water , and we find certain small cottage cover with dry grass , with certain little staff lay overthwart , and we go a little way into the country which be very baren , by certain small and strait path , and find a little pond or pit , but dry and without water ; and here the captain take possession for the mark of the valley in the name of his majesty , and after this we return to our ship , and that night we see four or five fire on the land . the next day the captain determine , because he have see these fire , to go on shore , and so with our two boat we go fifteen or twenty of we unto certain crooked strand two league from the place where our ship ride , and where we have see the fire , and we find two Indian of exceed huge stature , so that they cause we great to wonder ; they carry their bow and arrow in their hand , and as soon as they see we leap on shore they run away , and we follow they unto their dwelling and lodging , which be certain cottage and bower cover with bough , and there we find great and small step of many people , but they have no kind of victual but only cuttle - fish which we find there . the country towards the sea side seem but barren , for we see neither tree nor green grass there , yet be there certain small path not well beat , and along the sea - coast we see many tract of dog , hare , and cony , and in certain small island near unto the main we see seal - fish . this haven be call Ancon Ancon de Zant de Sant Andres . Andres . Chap . 5 . they discover a mountainous island very great , and near unto it certain other island with a goodly green and pleasant country . they have sight of certain Indian in canoas of cane , who language sound like the flemish tongue , with who they can not have any traffic . the next day we proceed on our voyage , sail between the main and a island , which we suppose to be in circuit about a hundred or eighty league , sail sometime within one , and sometime within two league of the main . the soil of this island be of certain mountain not very steep with cave in they , and as far as we can descry by the coast , there appear no sign of any plain country . here from this day forward we begin to be afraid , consider that we be to return to the port of Santa Cruz ; for it be suppose , that all along this mighty gulf from the entrance in at culiacan until the return back unto the say haven , be all firm land , and also because we have the firm land always on our right hand and it go round circlewise unto the say haven ; but many thought and hope that we shall find some mouth or outlet , whereby we may pass through unto the other coast . what our success be our will declare in the relation follow . the next day be Thursday we sail with scant wind , for it be almost calm , and pass beyond that great island , have firm land always on our right hand , and coast ( as i say ) very near unto it . the next day likewise we sail with little wind , it be in a manner calm , and pass near unto the shore by certain round bay , and certain point which the land make , which be pleasant to behold be somewhat green , and there seem to be some a great island . they return from the bot - tomeofthegulf of California . 219 creek there . This Friday at night we sail altogether with a fresh gale , and at break of day we another be between the main land , and a island on our island . | eft hand , which be somewhat big , as far as we can discern . there be a great bay in the firm land , and before it be a point which stretch far into the sea . the firm land seem to be much fresh and pleasant than those land which we have pass , have many bank and hill of indifferent height , and beautiful to behold . the country ( as far as we can discern ) be so pleasant and delightful , that we all desire to go on shore , and to search up into it two or three day journey , to see whether it be inhabit or not . we see within the land of that bay two fire . the night follow be Saturday we sail continual with a prosperous and fresh gale , and the wind be so great that we draw our bonnet to our main sail , and sail so till the morning . on Sunday the twelve of October we find our self altogether enclose with land , on the right hand with the main , which compass we before and behind , and on the left hand with a island of a league and a half ; and between the main and the island in the midst of the sea there lay a small Islet , and also between the say main and the island there be two mouth , through which there appear a passage whereby afterward we pass through . this main be much more fresh and green than the other which we have pass , and have certain plain and point of mountain of pleasant view , and full of green grass . here all this night we see two or three village which be very great , and at break of day we see a Canoa or boat make of cane , which come from the land out of a creek , and we stand still until it come near unto we in the ship , and they begin to speak in their language which no man understand , who pronunciation be like to the Fleming , and be 220 call they return with great haste unto the shore , and we be very sorry because our boat have not follow they . here happen unto we a very strange thing , which be , that as this Indian return to the shore in [ he . 403 . ] certain of these creek where a number of his fellow Indian be , as we view that part , we see five canoas issue forth , which come towards we : whereupon we stay to see what they will do . in the mean while our admiral come up unto we , which be near the shore , for she also have see they , and so be come together we cast anchor , expect what those canoas will do . in the mean while our general command we to make ready our boat , and to furnish the same with oar and man , to try if we can by any mean take some of they , that we may come to some knowledge of they , and that we may give they some of our trifle , and special of our hook and bead to win their friendship . the Indian with their five canoas approach within one or two stone cast of we , and then begin to speak very loud unto we in a very strange language , always stand upon their guard to retire themselves with speed . when our captain see this , and that they will not come near we , but rather retire , he command six mariner to go into the boat from the stern of the ship , and himself also go with they with all possible haste towards the Indian . the Indian return to the shore with so great celerity , that they seem to fly in those little canoas of cane . nevertheless our man use such diligence that one of the Canaos be board and take ; but the Indian in the Canoa see himself now take leap into the water , and our man follow with their boat to take he , but see himself within their reach , he duck with his head under their boat , and so deceive they , and then rise up again , and with their oar and with staff they give 221 he certain blow , to amaze he , but nothing will serve they ; for as they be about to lay hand upon he he still dive under water , and with his hand and foot get near to the shore : and as he rise up above the water , he call to his fellow which stand on the shore to behold , cry Belen with a loud voice , and so they pursue he , and strike he sometime be very near the shore , and he always go call the rest of his fellow to come and help he , whereupon within a short while after three other canoas come forth to succour he , be full of Indian with bow and arrow in their hand , cry with a loud voice , that we shall come on shore : these Indian be of great stature and savage , fat also and well set , and of a brown colour . our captain perceive this , lest they shall wound any of our people with their arrow , return back , and command we immediate to set sail , and so forthwith we depart . this day the wind scant , and we return to anchor in the foresay place , and our admiral ride from the firm land towards the island , and we which be in the ship call the Trinity lie near unto the main , and before break of day we depart with a fresh gale . and before we disemboque out of that channel we see certain grass very high and green upon the main : whereupon a mariner , and the pilot go up into the top , and see the mouth of a river which run through that green country into the sea . but because our admiral be under all her sail far from we , we can not tell they of this river , where we will have take water , whereof we have some need , and because it be a very good haven to go on shore to take it , and therefore without water we follow our course . on Monday we depart from this haven which be like unto a lake , for on all side we be compass with land , have the continent before , behind we , and on our right side , and the island on our left side , and we pass forth 222 1539 ' at those mouth beforemention , which show a outlet into the open sea . thus we sail along still view the situation of the country , rejoice all of we at the sight thereof , for it always please we moor and more , still appear moor green and pleasant , and the grass which we find near unto the shore be fresh and delectable , but not very high , be ( to all our judgement ) not past a span long . likewise the hill which we see , which be many , and many down make a very pleasant prospect , especial because we judge , that there be many valley and dale between they . Chap . 6 . they discover a very great bay with four small island in it , whereas they take possession . as they sail along and discover diverse island they come at length to the port of Santa Cruz , where not be able to get any knowledge of those Indian , although they lie in wait for they at a place call the well of Grijalva , they depart thence . they have a perilous and long tempest , which cease , after they have see a light on their shrowd . at our come out of these opening we begin to great find a bay with a very great haven , environ with havendiver small hill have upon they green wood and pleasant to behold . in this bay and strand be two [ three . 404 . ] small island near unto the shore , one of the which be like unto a table about half a league in bigness , and the other be a round