with white , and in they we see many fowl which have their nest in certain hole of those rock , and sail io . league until night , all which night we be becalm . the next day we follow our course northwest with good weather : and from that day forward we begin to see on the western shore ( whereon the foresay haven of saint Cruz stand ) certain island or high land , whereat we rejoice not a little . and so sail a island . forward we meet with a island about two league in bigness , and on the east shore have still the main land and island in sight , we sail 15 . league until the evening , always find hard by the sea - coast exceed high mountain bare of tree , the land appear still more plain unto we on the western shore . where - some take they upon we begin to be of diverse opinion , some think lfomiaafe ' that coast of Santa Cruz be a firm land , and nothing but that join with the continent of Nueva Espanna , island . other think the contrary , and that they be nothing else but island , which be to the westward . and in this sort we proceed forward , have the land on both side of we , so far , that we all begin to wonder at it . this day we sail some 15 . league , and call this cape Capo de las plaias . Capo roxo . the coast run it northward . fishingweare like those of Virginia . of the strait which they discover on the coast of Capo de las plaias , and of the pleasant country which they find before they come to the rock call los diamantes . of the wonderful whiteness of that sea , and of the ebb and flow thereof : and of the multitude of island and land , which extend themselves northward from the haven of Santa Cruz . the day follow we sail until night with so good weather , that we run about 20 . league . all this coast along the shore be full of little hill without grass or tree : and that night our ancker in 20 . fathom water . the next day we follow our voyage beginning to sail before break of day northwestward , and we come into the midst of a strait or mouth which be straight of 12 league broad from one land to the other , which straight have two hand in the midst thereof be 4 . cede depth league distant the one from the other : and here we discern the country to be plain , and certain mountain , 8c it seem that a certain gut of water like a brook run through the plain . This straight ( as far as we can perceive ) be very deep , for we can find no bottom : and here we see the land stretch afar off from the one shore to the other , and on the western shore of the haven of saint Cruz , the land be more high with very bare mountain . the day follow we pass on our way towards the north , and sail some the strait 15 . league , and in the midst of our way we find a ^ re rume circuit or bay of 6 . league into the land with many northward . coove or creek , and the next day follow continue our course we sail some 10 . league , and the coast in this day journey be all of high mountain naked and bare without any tree . it be very deep hard by the shore , and that night we be constrain to stay by reason of the contrary wind . the next morning before break of day we sail still along the coast to the northwest until evening , and run about some 15 . league . all along this shore we see very goodly mountain within the land , and many plain and down with some few tree , and the sea shore be all sandy . in the midst of this day course we find certain small rock in the sea 4 . league distant from the main , be the say land make a great point into the sea , and here we stay the rest of the night , where we have a very great shower of rain . the day follow we proceed on our voyage , and sail until night by a compass or turn , some 8 . or 9 league , and see within land a few mountain have no tree upon they , but the sun shine always very clear , as far as we can descry , they be very great , on the western shore of the haven of Santa Cruz . here we stay all night because we find very shallow water and see the sea very white , and in a manner like to chalk , so that we all begin to marveile thereat . the day follow we go forward again along the coast northwestward , and sail eight league , and see another land which stretch northwest , and be full of high mountain . and still continue this course we search very diligent to see if there be any passage through between both the land , for right forward we see no land . and thus sail we always find more shallow water , and the sea thick , black , and very muddy , and come at length into five fathom water ; and see this , we determine to pass over to the land which we have see on the other side , and here likewise we find as little depth and less , whereupon we ride all night in five fathom water , and we perceive the sea to run with so great a rage into the land , that it be a thing much to be marveil at , and with the like fury it return back again with the ebb ; during which time we find 11 . fathom water , and the flood and ebb continue from six to six hour . the day follow the captain and pilot go up to the ship top , and see all the land full of sand in a great round compass , and join it self with the other shore , and it be so low , that whereas we be a league from the same we can not well discern it , and it seem that there be a inlet of the mouth of certain lake , whereby the sea go in and out . there be diverse opinion among we , and some thought that that current enter into those lake , and also that some great river there may be the cause thereof . and when we can perceive no passage through , nor can discern the country to be inhabit , the captain accompany with certain of we go to take possession thereof . the same day with the ebb of the sea we fall down from the other coast from the side of Nueva Espanna , though always we have in sight the firm land on the one side of we , and the other island on our left hand , on the side of the port of Santa Cruz situate on the western shore : for on that side there be so many island and land , so far as we can descry , that it be great to be wonder at : for from the say haven of Santa Cruz , and from the coast of culiacan we have always in a manner land on both side of we , and that so great a country , that i suppose if it shall so continue further inward , there be country enough for many year to conquer . this day we have the wind contrary , and cast anchor until the flood increase , which be in the afternoon , and then we set sail likewise with contrary wind until midnight , and then cast anchor . the next day we depart , shape our course along the coast Southwest , until midnight with little wind , and we see within the land high mountain with some opening , and we make way some three league , and all the next night we be becalm , and the next day we continue our course but a little while , for we sail not above five league , and all the night be becalm , and see the land full of bare and high mountain , and on our left hand we descry a plain country , and see in the night certain fire . chap 4 . they land upon a island to discover the same , and there they see many fire , which issue out of certain mountain , and many seal - fish . here they take a Indian , and can not understand his language . run along they discover another island , and take possession thereof for the emperor majesty , and a great haven in the firm land , which they call Ancon de Sant Andres , or the haven of saint Andrew . the next day follow our course we see a great haven with a hand in the sea , within a crossbow shoot of the firm land , and in this island and on the firm land be see many smoke by the judgement of all the company ; wherefore the captain think good that we shall go on land to know the certainty of these smoke and fire , himself take ten or twelve of we with a boat in his company : and go on shore in the island , we find that the smoke proceed out of burn certain mountain and breach of burn earth , where - mountaine . out ascend into the air certain cinder and ash which mount up to the middle region of the air , in such great quantity , that we can not esteem less than twenty load of wood to be burn for the cause of every of those smoke , whereat we be all not a little amaze . in this island be such abundance of seal , as it be wonderful . here we stay that day , and kill a great number of these seal , with who we have some trouble : for they be so many , and aid one another so well , that it be strange to behold ; for it fall out , that while we be occupy in kill some of they with staff , they assemble twenty or thirty together , and lift abundance of themselves up assail we with their foot in a squadron , seal . and overthrow two or three of our company on the ground : whereupon let go those which they have in their hand , they and the other escape we and go into the sea , howbeit we kill good store of they , which be so fat as it be wonderful : and when we open some of they to have their liver , we find certain small b ' lacke stone in their body , whereat we much marveil . the next day we ride at anchor here for lack of good weather to sail withal : whereupon the captain determine to go on shore with nine or ten in his company , to see whether there be any people there , or any sign of people that have be there , and they find on the main land seven or eight Indian like to Chichimecas , which be go a fish , and have a raft rafi ° f of cane ; who so soon as they espy we run away and betake themselves to flight , but be pursue by we , in the end we take one of they , who language be so strange that we can by no mean understand he ; his clothing be nothing at all , for he be stark naked . Theise people carry their water in bottle make of beast skin , they fish with hook of bone , and we find good store of their fish , whereof we take three or four dozen . the Indian which we have take see himself in our hand do nothing but weep , but the captain call he , and make much of he , give he certain bead , with a hat and certain hook of we , and then let he go . and it seem that after he be return to his companion , he declare unto they how we have do he no harm at all , show they the thing which we have give he : whereupon they also determine to come unto we to our boat , but because it be now night , and that our ship be far from we , we force not to stay for they , especial because it be a bad place and a dangerous . this country have on the sea - coast high and bare mountain with certain grass in some place like unto our broom , or like unto wood of rosemary . Bottles of beast skin and fishhook of bone Ancon de S . Andres , or the haven of saint Andrew in 32 degree . two Indian of exceed huge stature . the next day we sail near to the coast on the same side , with very scarce wind ,