the first and second discovery of the gulf of California , and of the sea - coast on the northwest or back side of America , lie to the west of new Mexico , Cibola and Quivira , together with sir Francis drake land and take possession upon Nova Albion in the behalf of the crown of England , and the notable voyage of Francis Gaul ; wherein among many other memorable matter be set down the huge breadth of the ocean sea from China and Japan to the northwest part of America , in the 38 . and 40 . degree . a relation of the discovery , which in the name of God the fleet of the right noble Fernando Cortes Marques of the valley , make with three ship ; the one call Santa Agueda of 120 . ton , the other the Trinity of 35 . ton , and the third saint Thomas of the burden of 20 . ton . of which fleet be captain the right worshipful knight Francis de Ulloa bear in the city of Merida . take out of the three volume of the voyage gather by m . John Baptista Ramusio . Chap . 1 . Francis Ulloa a captain of Cortes depart with a fleet from the port of Acapulco , and go to discover unknown land , he pass by the coast of Sacatula and Motin , and by tempest run to the river of Guajaval , from whence he cross over to the haven of Santa Cruz , along the coast whereof he discover 3 . small hand , and within two day and a half return to the main land he discover the river call Rio de san Pedro y san Pablo , and not far distant from thence two other river as big or great than that of Guadalquivir which run by Sivil , together with their head - spring . e embark our self in the haven of Acapulco in Acapulco on the 8 . of July in the year i 7 ; degree of of our lord 1539 , call upon almighty atitude - God to guide we with his holy hand unto such place where he may be serve , and his holy faith advance . and we sail from the say port by the coast of Sacatula and Motin , which be sweet and pleasant the coast of through the abundance of tree that grow thereon , and $ acatfla river which pass through those country , for the which motin - wee often thank God the creator of they . So sail along we come to the haven of saint Iago in the province s - Iago de of Colima : but before we arrive there , the main mast of our ship call Santa Agueda be break by a storm of wind that take we , so as the ship be force to sail without her mast until we arrive in the say haven . from the port of Acapulco to this haven of Colima we be sail the space of 20 . day . here we stay to mend our mast and to take in certain victual , water , and wood , the space of 27 . day . and we depart from the say haven the 23 . of August , and the isle of sail by the isle of Xalisco the 27 . or 28 . of the Xalisco . say month we be take with a extreme tempest wherein we think we shall have perish , and be toss and weather - beaten , we run as far as Guajaval . the river of Guajaval in the province of culiacan . in this storm we lose the pinnace call Sant Thomas , and because we have lose she we cross over to the Santa Cruz port of Santa Cruz in California : for while we be ' cedifornla so beat tbe f ° rmer tempest , the pilot of the bark signify unto we , that he perceive she begin to leak , and that already she have receive in much water , insomuch that she begin to founder : whereupon , to help her need , and that we may meet together in a know haven , if by chance the tempest shall separate we , as it do indeed , we will he to repair to the haven of Santa Cruz , where we mean to repair his harm and our own . wherefore be all arrive in this place of Santa Cruz , we stay there five day and take in water , wherein we hear no news of our bark which we have lose : whereupon the captain resolve to follow on our voyage ; wherefore we set sail the 12 . of September , and as we sail we three hand , see along the coast of the say haven 3 . Islands , whereof the captain make no great account , think there can be no great good find in any of they . Theise Islands seem not to be great ; wherefore he command the master and pilot to proceed on their voyage , and not to lose time without any profit . So sail over the gulf of California , in two day and a half Rio de san we come to the river of saint Peter and S . Paul , find Ppablo * ! an before we enter into the same a small island in the a ° ' mouth of the river , be 4 . or 5 . mile distant from the main . on both side of this river we behold goodly and pleasant great plain full of many green and beautiful tree , and far within the land we behold certain exceed high mountain full of wood very pleasant to behold . from this river we sail still along the coast the space of 15 . league , in which course we find two other river in our judgement two great as great or great than Guadalquivir the river of nvers - sivilia in Spain . all the coast by these river be plain as the other which we have pass , with many wood : likewise within the land appear great mountain cover with wood very beautiful to behold , and beneath in the plain appear certain lake of water . from these river we sail 18 . league , and find very pleasant plain , and certain great lake who certainegreat mouth open into the sea : here our captain thought la ^ es ' good thorough to discover what those lake be , and to search whether there be any good haven for his ship to ride in , or to harbour themselves , if any tempest shall arise ; and so he command a boat to be hoist out into the sea , with a master and five or six man to view they , and to sound the depth , and bottom of they : who go thither , and find the coast very shall , and the mouth of the lake ; whereupon they make no account of they , only because the shore be so shallow , for otherwise the land be very pleasant . here at evening we see on the shore 10 . or 12 . Indian and fire . the aforesaid two river be two league distant the one from the other little more or less , and be great , as i have say , and be in the last of they we go up to the ship - top , and see many lake , and one among the rest exceed great , and we suppose that they have their spring out of this great lake , as other river also have from other lake , for we see the course of they several each by themselves , have goodly wood grow all along their bank . the current of these river may be discern three league within the sea : and at the mouth of they be many small stake set up for mark : the shore here be plain and sandy , and the country very pleasant . Chap . 2 . sail along the coast from the two aforesaid great river , they discover three mouth of lake and a goodly country , they come unto Cabo Roxo , and take possession of those country for the emperor majesty . a discourse of the fair haven that be on those coast , and of very many island which they see , before they come to the cape call Capo de las plaias . this day we sail along the coast the space of 16 . league , and in the midst of this voyage there be a bay very fair of 4 . or 5 . league , have certain bank or fence in it , in behold whereof we take great pleasure . the night follow we ride in 20 . radome water . the next day we follow our voyage towards the north , and have sail 3 . or 4 . league we see 3 . mouth of lake which enter into the land , where they become like stand pool . we ride a league distance from these mouth in 6 . fathom water , to see what they be , and send our boat with certain man , to see if there be any entry for our ship : for half a league from shore we have not pass one or two fathom water . here our man see 7 . or 8 . Indian , and find sundry sort of green herb somewhat differ from those of Nueva Espanna . the country be plain , but far within land they see great and small hill extend themselves a great way , and be very fair and pleasant to behold . the day follow we proceed on our voyage , sail always in sight of the plain coast towards the northwest , in 10 . or 15 . fathom water . and have sail 6 . good league we find a bay on the coast within the land of about 5 . league over , from whence the coast trend northwest , and this day we sail about 16 . league . all this coast be plain , and not so pleasant as that which we have pass : here be certain small hill , but not so high as those which we have find before . thus we sail all night northwest , and until the next day at noon , at which time we fall with a headland of white sand , where by the height which we take that day we find our self to be in the latitude of 27 . degree and this cape we call Capo roxo . all the coast be plain and fair and clean sand , and we see within land some few tree not very great , with certain mountain 8c wood 3 . or 4 . league distant from the say cape : and here likewise appear a mouth of a river , which ( as far as we can discern ) make certain lake up within the land : from the mouth whereof for the space of a league into the sea it seem to be very shall , because the sea do break very much . here we see within the land 3 . or 4 . river . in this sort we sail on our voyage to the northward , 8c because we have not good weather we ride that night in a great haven lie in our way , where on the shore we see certain plain , and up within the land certain hill not very high : and continue our course towards the north about 3 . league from this haven we find a hand of about one league in circuit lie before the mouth of the say haven . And sail forward we find a haven which have two mouth into the sea , into which we enter by the northermost mouth , which have 10 . or 12 . fathom water , 8c so decrease till it come to 5 . fathom , where we ancker in a pool which the sea make , which be a strange thing to behold , for there be so many entrance 8c mouth of stream and haven , that we be all astonish at the sight thereof ; and these haven be so excellent frame by nature , as the like be not to be see in the world , wherein we find great store of fish . here we ancker , and the captain go on shore , and take possession , use all such ceremony as thereunto belong . here also we find certain wear to catch fish make by the Indian , and certain small cottage , wherein be diverse piece of earthen pot as fine make as those in Spain . here by commandment of the captain a cross be erect upon a hill , and it be set up by Francis Preciado . in this place we see the country full of fresh and green grass , howbeit differ from that of new Spain , and up within the country we see many great and very green mountain . this country seem very goodly and delightsome to all of we , in regard of the greenness and beauty thereof , and we judge it to be very populous within the land . from this haven we depart and keep our way towards the northwest with good weather , and begin to find hard by the seashore exceed high mountain spot