the relation of the navigation and discovery [ he . 425 . ] which captain Fernando Alarchon make by the order of the right honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa viceroy of new Spain , date in Colima , a haven of new Spain . Chap . 1 . Fernando Alarchon after he have suffer a storm , arrive with his fleet at the haven of saint Iago , and from thence at the haven of Aguaiaval : he be in great peril in seek to discover a bay , and get out of the same he discover a river on the coast with a great current , enter into the same , and coast along he descry a great many of Indian with their weapon : with sign he have traffic with they , and fear some great danger return to his ship . n Sunday the nine of May in the year 1540 i set sail with two ship , the one call saint Peter be admiral , and the other saint Catherine , and we set forward mean to go to the haven of saint Iago of good hope : but before we arrive there we have a terrible storm , wherewith they which be in the ship call saint Catherine , be more afraid than be need , cast over board nine piece of ordinance , two anchor and one cable , and many other thing as needful for the enterprise wherein we go , as the ship it self . assoon as we be arrive at the haven of saint Iago i repair the haven of my loss which i have receive , provide my self of stint jag > . thing necessary , and take aboard my people which look for my come , and direct my course towards the haven of Aguaiavall . And be there arrive i the haven of understand that the general Francis Vazquez de Coronado be depart with all his people : whereupon take 279 the ship call saint Gabriel which carry victual for the army i lead she with i to put in execution your lordship order . afterwards i follow my course along the coast without depart from the same , to see if i can find any token or any Indian which can give i knowledge of he : and in sail so near the shore i discover other very good haven , for the ship whereof captain Francis de ullua be general for the marquess de Valle neither see nor find they . and these shoald when we be come to the flat and shoald from whence “ ofmarbe ^ f ° resaid fleet return , it seem aswell to i as mrin nr th , to the rest , that we have the firm land before we , and bay of Cali - that those shoald be so perilous and fearful , that it fimia . be a thing to be consider whither with our skiff we can enter in among they : and the pilot and the rest of the company will have have we do as captain Ullua do , and have return back again . but because your lordship command i , that i shall bring you the secret of that gulf , i resolve , that although i have know i shall have lose the ship , i will not have cease for any thing to have see the head thereof : and therefore i command Nicolas Zamorano pilot major , and Dominico deal Castello that each of they shall take a boat , and their lead in their hand , and run in among those shoald , to see if they can find out the channel whereby the ship may enter in : to who it seem that the ship may sail up high ( although with great travel and danger ) and in this sort i and he begin to follow our way which they have take , and within a short while after we find our self fast on the sand with all our three ship , in such sort that one can not help another , neither can the boat succour we , because the current be so great that it be impossible for one of we to come unto another : whereupon we be in such great j eopardie that the deck of the admiral be oftentimes under water , and if a great surge of the sea have not come and drive our ship right up , and give her leave as it be to breathe a while , 280 1540 ’ we have there be drown : and likewise the other two ship find themselves in very great hazard , yet because they be lesser and draw less water , their danger be not so great as we . now it please God upon the return of the flood that the ship come on float , and so we go forward . and although the company will have return back , yet for all this i determine to go forward , and to pursue our attempt voyage : and we pass forward with much ado , turn our stem now this way , now that way , to seek to find the chanel . and it please God that after this sort we come to the very bottom of the bay ; where we find a very mighty river , which run with so great fury of a stream , that we can hardly sail against it . in this sort i determine as well as i can to go up this river , and with two boat , leave the three with the ship , and twenty man , my self be in one of they with Roderigo Maldonado treasurer of this fleet , and Gaspar de Castilleia comptroller , and with certain small piece of artillery i begin to sail up the river , and charge all my company , that none of they shall stir nor use any sign , but he who i appoint , although we find Indian . the same day , which be Thursday the six and twenty of August , follow our voyage with draw the boat with halser we go about some 6 league : and the next day which be Friday by the break of day thus follow our way upward , i see certain Indian which go towards cer the bottom of the bay of California . [ Iii . 426 . ] they go up the river of buena guia the 26 . of August . taine cottage near unto the water , who assoon as they see we , ten or twelve of they rise up furious , and cry with a loud voice , other of their companion come run together to the number of 50 which with all haste carry out of their cottage such thing as they have , and lay they under certain shrub and many of they come run towards that part whether we approach , make great sign unto we that we shall go back again , use great threaten against we , one while run on this side and a other 281 he carry a interpreter with he . a very good course take to appease unknown savage . the english voyage while on that side . i see they in such a rage , cause our boat to launch from the shore into the mid of the river , that the Indian may be out of fear , and i ride at anchor , and set my people in as good order as i can , charge they that no man shall speak , nor make any sign nor motion , nor stir out of his place , nor shall not be offend for any thing that the Indian do , nor shall show no token of war : and by this mean the Indian come every foot near the river side to see we : and i gate by little and little towards they where the river seem to be deep . in this mean space there be above two hundred and fifty Indian assemble together with bow and arrow , and with certain banner in warlike sort in such manner as those of new Spain do use : and perceive that i draw towards the shore , they come with great cry towards we with bow and arrow put into they , and with their banner display . and i go unto the stem of my boat with the interpreter which i carry with i , who i command to speak unto they , and when he speak , they neither understand he , nor he they , although because they see he to be after their fashion , they stay themselves : and see this i draw near the shore , and they with great cry come to keep i from the shore of the river , make sign that i shall not come any far , put stake in my way between the water and the land : and the more i linger , the more people still flock together . which when i have consider i begin to make they sign of peace , and take my sword and target , i cast they down in the boat and set my foot upon they , give they to understand with this and other token that i desire not to have war with they , and that they shall do the like . also i take a banner and cast it down , and i cause my company that be with i to sit down likewise , and take the ware of exchange which i carry with i , i call they to give they some of they : yet for 282 all this none of they stir to take any of they , but rather flock together , and begin to make a great murmur among themselves : and sudden one come out from among they with a staff wherein certain shell be set , and enter into the water to give they unto i , and i take they , and make sign unto he that he shall come near i , which when he have do , i embrace he , and give he in recompense certain bead and other thing , and he return with they unto his fellow , begin to look upon they , and to parley together , and within a while after many of they come towards i , to who i make sign to lay down their banner , and to leave their weapon : which they do incontinent , than i make sign that they shall lay they altogether , and shall go aside from they , which likewise they do : and they cause those Indian which new come thither to leave they , and to lay they together with the rest . after this i call they unto i , and to all they which come i give some small trifle , use they gentle , and by this time they be so many that come throng about i , that i think i can not stay any long in safety among they , and i make sign unto they that they shall withdraw themselves , and that they shall stand all upon the side of a hill which be there between a plain and the river , and that they shall not press to i above ten at a time . and immediate the most ancient among they call unto they with a loud voice , will they to do so : and some ten or twelve of they come where i be : whereupon see my self in some security , i determine to go on land the more to put they out of fear : and for my more security , i make sign unto they , to sit down on the ground which they do : but when they see that ten or twelve of my companion come a shore after i , they begin to be angry , and i make sign unto they that we will be friend , and that they shall not fear , and herewithal they be pacify , and sit down as they do before , and i go 283 A . D . i54 ° - unto they , and embrace they , give they certain trifle , command my interpreter to speak unto they , for i great desire to understand their manner of speech , and the cry which they make at i . and that i may know what manner of food they have , i make a sign unto they , that we will glad eat , and they bring i certain cake of Maiz , and a loaf of mizquiqui , and they make sign unto i that they desire to see a harquebus shoot oflf , which i cause [ three . 427 . ] to be discharge , and they be all wonderful afraid , except two or three old man among they which be not move at all , but rather cry out upon the rest , because they be afraid : and through the speech of one of these old man , they begin to rise up from the ground , and to lay hold on their weapon : who when i seek to appease , i will have give he a silken girdle of diverse colour , and he in a great rage bite his nether lip cruel , and give i a thump with his elbow on the breast , and turn in a great fury to speak unto his company . after that i see they advance their banner , i determine to return my self gentle to my boat , and with a small gale of wind i set sail , whereby we may break the current which be very great , although my company be not well please to go any far . in the mean space the Indian come follow we along the shore of the river , make sign that i shall come on land , and that they will give i food to eat , some of they suck their finger , and other enter into the water with certain cake of