neighbour call pas - 186 1581 - 83 . saguates ; that towards the north , travel always by land , there be certain great town not hitherto know nor discover by our Spaniard : move with a zeal of charity , and a desire to save soul , crave licence of the conde of Corunna as then viceroy of Nueva Espanna , and of his superior , to go to the say town , and to endeavour to learn their language , and have learn the same , to baptize they , and to preach the holy gospel unto they . after he have obtain licence of the party aforesaid , take with he other two companion of his own order , and eight soldier , 23 « « f who of their own good will offer to bear he company , he depart to put in execution his christian prancisc0 and zealous intent . who after certain day travel Sanchez come unto a country call the province de los tiguas Xamuzcado distant from the mine of Santa Barbara , from whence they begin their journey , 250 league towards the north : in which province the inhabitant , upon a certain occasion , slay one of the say friar two companion . the soldier that go with he see this mishap , and perceive the success , and likewise fear , that thereof may happen some great danger , determine with a common consent to return unto the mine from whence they depart : consider that their company be too small to resist the danger that may happen , be so far distant from the dwelling of the Spaniard , and from all necessary succour . but the two friar which remain alive do not only refuse their determination , but rather see fit occasion to put their good desire in execution , and so great a harvest ripe for the lord table , because they can not persuade the soldier to proceed any further in that discovery , remain behind in the say province with three Indian boy , and one mestizo , who they have carry with they ; think that although they remain alone , yet shall they be there in security , by reason of the great affability and love which the people of that place show unto they . 187 which intercept be come to our hand . the province de los tiguas distant 250 league northward from the mine of Santa Barbara . the mine of SantaBarbara 160 league distant from Mexico . the second voyage . Las quatro Cienegas in the province offue five of Biscaya 70 league from the mine of Santa Barbara . the english voyage the eight soldier be return to their wish home , immediate send news of all that have pass to the viceroy unto the city of Mexico , which be distant from the say mine of Santa Barbara 160 league . the friar of Sant Francis be very much aggrieve at the stay of their brethren behind in the country , and fear least the savage will kill they see they leave alone , they begin to move the mind of certain soldier to make another voyage to the say province in the company of another friar of the foresay order call Frier Bernardin Beltran , to deliver the aforesaid two religious man out of danger , and to prosecute their former enterprise . at the same time there be at the foresay mine upon some occasion a citizen of Mexico call Antonio de Espejo , a rich man , and of great courage and industry , and very zealous in the service of king Philip his sovereign , and be bear in Cordova . who understand the desire of the foresay friar , and the importance of the action , offer himself to go on that voyage , and also to spend part of his substance , and to adventure his life therein ; conditional that licence may be grant he to the same purpose from some person sufficient authorise by his majesty . which licence at the say friar procurement be grant unto he by the governor Juan de Ontiveros the king Alcalde may6r or chief justice in the town call las quatro Cienegas situate within the jurisdiction of Nueva Biscaya seventy league from the say mine of Santa Barbara ; authorize he both to take in hand the say voyage , and also to assemble such people and soldier as he can , which may accompany and aid he in the performance of this his christian intent . the say Antonio de Espejo be so earnest in this matter , that in very few day he have gather a company of soldier , and make provision of thing necessary for his voyage , spend therein a good part of his substance . and he depart with his whole company from the valley 188 of saint Bartholomew the ten of November 1582 ; take with he ( for whatsoever shall happen ) 115 horse and mule , with great store of weapon , munition , and victual , and some Indian to serve he in his journey . direct his course towards the north , after two day journey he meet with great store of the foresay Indian call Conchos , which dwell in village or hamlet of cottage cover with straw . who , so soon as they understand of his approach , have news thereof long before , come forth to receive he with show of great joy . the food of this people and of all the rest of that province , which be great , be cony , hare , and dear which they kill , of all which they have great abundance . also they have great store of Maiz or Indian wheat , gourd , and melon very good and plentiful : and there be many river full of excellent fish of diverse sort . they go almost naked , and the weapon that they use be bow and arrow , and live under the government and lordship of cacique like those of Mexico : they find no idol among they , neither can they understand that they worship any thing , whereupon they easy consent that the Spaniard shall set up cross , and be very well content therewith , after they be inform by our friar of the signification thereof , which be do by the interpreter that they carry with they ; by who mean they understand of other town , whither the say Conchos do conduct they , and bear they company above four and twenty league , all which way be inhabit with people of their own nation : and at all place where they come they be peaceable receive by advice that be send by the cacique from one town to another . have pass the four and twenty league aforesaid , they come unto another nation of Indian call Passaguates , who live after the manner of the foresay Conchos their borderer , and do unto they as the other have do , conduct they forward other four day journey , with advice of the cacique as before . the 189 A . D . 1581 - 83 . Antonio de Espejo his set forth from the valley of saint Bartholomew the ten of November 1582 . Indian call Conchos . many river . [ HL 391 ] passaguates . jumanos or Patarabueyes . Rio turbioso deal norte . the english voyage Spaniard find in this journey many mine of silver , which accord to the judgement of skilful man , be very plentiful and rich in metal . a day journey from thence they meet with another nation call Tobosos , who so soon as they behold the countenance of our people flee unto the mountain , leave their town and house desolate . afterwards we understand that certain year pass there come unto that place certain soldier to seek mine , who carry away captive certain of the people of the country , which cause the rest of they to be so shey and fearful . the captain send messenger to call they back again , assure they that they shall not sustain any harm , and handle the matter so discreet , that many of they return , who he make much of , and give they gift , use they kind , and declare unto they by the interpreter , that their come be not to hurt any man : whereupon they be all quiet , and be content they shall set up cross , and declare the mystery of the same , make show that they be high please therewith . for proof whereof they accompany they on their voyage , as their neighbour have do , until they have bring they to a country inhabit by another nation , which be distant from they some 12 league . they use bow and arrow and go naked . the nation unto which the say Tobosos conduct they , be call jumanos , who the Spaniard by another name call Patarabueyes : their province be very great , contain many town and great store of people : their house be flat - rooffed , and build of lime and stone , and the street of their town be place in good order . all the man and woman have their face , arm and leg raze and pounce : they be a people of great stature , and of better government , than the rest which they have see in their former journey : and be well provide of victual , and furnish with plenty of wild beast , fowl and fish , by reason of mighty river which come from the north , whereof one be as great as 190 guadalquivir , which fall into the north sea or bay of Mexico . here be also many lake of salt water , which at a certain time of the year wax hard , and becomes very good salt . they be a warlike people , and soon make show thereof : for the first night that our people encamp there , with their arrow they slay five horse , and wound five other very sore , nor will not have leave one of they alive , if they have not be defend by our guard . have do this mischief , they abandon the town , and withdraw themselves to a mountain which be hard by , whither our captain go betimes in the morning , take with he five soldier well arm , and a interpreter call Peter a Indian of their own nation , and with good persuasion appease they , cause they to descend to their town and house , and persuade they to give advice unto their neighbour , that they be man that will hurt no body , neither come they thither to take away their good : which he obtain easy by his wisdom , and by give unto the cacique certain bracelet of glass bead , with hat and other trifle , which he carry with he for the same purpose : so by this mean , and by the good entertainment which they give they , many of they accompany our Spaniard for certain day , always travel along the bank of the great river abovesaid ; along the which kit del ' norte . there be many town of the Indian of this nation , which continue for the space of twelve day travel , all which time the cacique have receive advice from one to another , come forth to entertain our people without their bow and arrow , and bring they plenty of victual , with other present and gift , especial hide and chamois - skin very well dress , so that those of Flanders do nothing exceed they . Theise people be all clothe , and seem to have some light of our holy faith : for they make sign of God , look up towards heaven , and call he in their language Apalito , a pall to . and acknowledge he for their lord , from who bountiful hand and mercy they confess that they have 191 receive their life and be , and these worldly good . many of they with their wife and child come unto the friar ( which the captain and soldier bring with they ) that he may cross and bless they . who demand of they , from who they have receive that knowledge of God , they answer , from three Christians , and one negro which pass that way , and remain certain day among they , who by the sign which [ three . 392 . ] they make , be Alvero nunnez , Cabe ? a de Vaca , and Dorantes , and Castillo Maldonado , and a negro ; all Pamphilo de which escape of the company which Pamphilo the Narvaex Narvaez land in Florida ; who after they have be Florida 1527 . many day captive and slave , escape and come to these town , by who God show many miracle , and heal only by the touch of their hand many sick person , by reason whereof they become very famous in all that country . all this province remain in great peace and security ; in token whereof , they accompany and serve our man certain day , travel along by Rio deal norte , the great river aforesaid . another within few day after they come unto another great province . province of Indian , from whence they come forth to receive they , upon the news which they have hear of their neighbour , and bring they many very curious thing make of feather of diverse colour , and many mantle of cotton strake with blue and white , like those that be bring from China , to barter and truck they for other thing . all of they both man , woman and child be clad in chamois skin very good and well dress . our people can never understand what nation they be for lack of a interpreter