give they thing which they have not , and that i shall charge they that they shall not make war one against another . whereunto he answer , that i shall tell he the cause why the sun have not send i no soon to pacific the war which have continue a long time among they , wherein many have be slay . i tell he the cause hereof be , because at that time i be but a child . than he ask the interpreter whether we take he with we perforce have take he in the war , or whether he come with we of his own accord . he answer he that he be with we of his own accord , and be very well apay of our company . he return to inquire , why we bring none save he only that understand we , and wherefore we understand not all other man , see we be the child of the sun : he answer , that the sun also have beget he , and give he a language to understand he , and i , and other : that the sun know well that they dwell there , but that because he have many other business , and because 290 i be but young he send i no soon . and he turn unto i say sudden : come thou therefore hither to be our lord , and that we shall serve thou ? i suppose that i shall not please he if i shall have say yea , answer he , not to be their lord , but rather to be their brother , and to give they such thing as i have . he ask i , whether the sun have beget i as he have beget other , and whether i be his kinsman or his son : i answer he that i be his son . he proceed to ask i whether the rest that be with i be also the child of the sun , i answer he not , but that they be bear all with i in one country , where i be bring up . than he cry out with a loud voice and say , see thou do we so much good , and will not have we to make war , and art the child of the sun , we will all receive thou for our lord , and always serve thou , therefore we pray thou that thou will not depart hence nor leave we : and sudden he turn to the people , and begin to tell they , that i be the child of the sun , and that therefore they shall all choose i for their lord . those Indian hear this , be astonish beyond measure , and come near still more and more to behold i . that Indian also ask i other question , which to avoid tediousness i do not recite : and in this wise we pass the day , and see the night approach , i begin by all mean i can devise to get this fellow into our boat with we : and he refuse to go with we , the interpreter tell he that we will put he on the other side of the river , and upon this condition he enter into our boat , and there i make very much of he , and give he the best entertainment i can , put he always in security , and when i judge he to be out of all suspicion , i think it good to ask he somewhat of that country . and among the first thing that i ask he this be one , whether he have ever see any man like we , or have hear any report of they . he answer i not , save that he 291 the sun worship as God . the english voyage have sometime hear of old man , that very far from that country there be other white man , and with beard like we , and that he know nothing else . i ask he also whether he know a place call Cevola , and a river call Totonteac , and he answer i not . whereupon perceive that he can not give i any knowledge of Francis Vazquez nor of his company , i determine to ask he other thing of that country , and of their manner of life : and begin to inquire of he , whether they hold that there be one God , creator of heaven and earth , or that they worship any other idol . and he answer i no : but that they esteem and reverence the sun above all other thing , because it warm they and make their crop to grow : and that of all thing which they do eat , they cast a little up into the air unto he . i ask he next whether they have any lord , and he say no : but that they know well that there be a great lord , but they know not well which way he dwell . and i tell he that he be in heaven , and that he be call Jesus Christ , and i go no far in divinity with he . i ask he whether they have any war , and for what occasion . he answer that they have war and that very great , and upon exceed small occasion : for when they have no cause to make war , they assemble together , and some of they say , let we go to make war in such a place , and then all of they set forward with their weapon . i ask they who command the army : he answer the elder and most valiant , and that when they say they shall proceed no far , that sudden they retire from the war . i pray he to tell i what they do with those man which they kill in battle : he answer i that they take out the heart of some of they , and eat they , and other they burn ; and he add , that if it have not be for my come , they shall have be now at war : and because i command they that they shall not war , and that they shall cease 292 from arm , therefore as long as i shall not command they to take arm , they will not begin to wage war against other , and they say among themselves , that see i be come unto they , they have give over their intention of make war , and that they have a good mind to live in peace . he complain of certain people which dwell behind in a mountain certain war - which make great war upon they , and slay many of people bethem 1 1 answer hun } that from henceforward they taint shall not need to fear any more , because i have command they to be quiet , and if they will not obey my commandment , i will chasten they and kill they . he inquire of i how i can kill they see we be so few , and they so many in number . and because it be now late and that i see by this time he be weary to stay any long with i , i let he go out of my boat , and therewith i dismiss he very well content . Chap . 4 . of naguachato and other chief man of those Indian they receive great store of victual , they cause they to set up a cross in their country , and he teach they to worship it . they have news of many people , of their diverse language , and custom in matrimony , how they punish adultery , of their opinion concern the dead , and of the sickness which they be subject unto . the next day betimes in the morning come the chief man among they call naguachato , and wish i to come on land because he have great store of victual to give i . and because i see my self in security i do so without doubt ; and incontinent a old man come with roll of that Maiz , and certain little gourd , and call i with a loud voice and use many gesture with his body and arm , come near unto i , and cause i to turn i unto that people , and he himself also turn unto they say unto 293 [ hl 431 - 1 these people be great incline to learn the christian faith . they , Sagueyca , and all the people answer with a great voice , hu , and he offer to the sun a little of every thing that he have there , and likewise a little more unto i ( although afterward he give i all the rest ) and do the like to all that be with i : and call out my interpreter , by mean of he i give they thank , tell they that because my boat be little i have not bring many thing to give they in exchange , but that i will come again another time and bring they , and that if they will go with i in my boat unto my ship which i have beneath at the river mouth , i will give they many thing . they answer that they will do so , be very glad in countenance . here by the help of my interpreter i seek to instruct they what the sign of the cross mean , and will they to bring i a piece of timber , whereof i cause a great cross to be make , and command all those that be with i that when it be make they shall worship it , and beseech the lord to grant his grace that that so great a people may come to the knowledge of his holy catholic faith : and this do i tell they by my interpreter that i leave they that sign , in token that i take they for my brethren , and that they shall keep it for i careful until i return , and that every morning at the sun rise they shall kneel before it . and they take it incontinent , and without suffer it to touch the ground they carry it to set it up in the midst of their house , where all of they may behold it ; and i will they always to worship it because it will preserve they from evil . they ask i how deep they shall set it in the ground , and i show they . great store of people follow the same , and they that stay behind inquire of i , how they shall join their hand , and how they shall kneel to worship the same ; and they seem to have great desire to learn it . this do , i take that chief man of the country , and go to our boat with he , i follow my journey up the 294 river , and all the company on both side of the shore accompany i with great good will , and serve i in draw of our boat , and in hail we off the sand , whereupon we often fall : for in many place we in find the river so shall , that we have no water for , . 1 ri fall ofshelfe . our boat . as we thus go on our way , some or the Indian which i have leave behind i , come after we to pray i that i will thorough instruct they , how they shall join their hand in the worship of the cross : other show i whither they be well set in such and such sort , so that they will not let i be quiet . near unto the other side of the river be great store of people , which call unto i very often , that i will receive the victual which they have bring i . and because i perceive that one envy the other , because i will not leave they discontent , i do so . and here come before i another old man like unto the former with the like ceremony and another old offering : and i seek to learn something of he as man ' i have do of the other . this man say likewise to the rest of the people , this be our lord . now you see how long ago our ancestor tell we , that there be beard and white people in the world , and we laugh they to scorn . i which a old and the rest which be here , have never see any such people as these . and if you will not believe i , behold these people which be in this river : let we give they therefore meat , see they give we of their victual : let we willing serve this lord , which wish we so well , and forbid we to make war , and embrace all of we : and they have mouth , hand and eye as we have , and speak as we do . 1 give these likewise another cross as i have do to the other beneath , and say unto they the self same word : which they listen unto with a better will , and use great diligence to learn that which i say . afterwards as i pass far up the river , i find another people , who my interpreter understand not a whit : wherefore i show they by sign the self - their ancestors tell they thattherewere beard and white man in the world . another nation . 295 same ceremony of worship the cross , which i have teach the rest . and that principal old man which i take with i , tell i that far up the river i shall find people which will understand my interpreter : and be now