hoist our sail , February . 267 the english voyage and sail until evening three or four league , for the wind scant , and we remain becalm . the night be come there arise a contrary wind , and we be enforce of necessity to retire the three time to the same shelter of the isle of cedar , where we stay from the first of February until Shrovesunday , in the which mean time we take in two butt of water which we have spend . during the space of these eight day we seek to make sail two or three time , but as we go out a little beyond the point of this isle , we find the wind so boisterous and contrary , and the sea so grow , that of force we be constrain to return under the succour of the island , and often time we be in great fear that we shall not be able to get in thither again . during this time that we can not proceed on our journey , we employ our self in catch a few fish for the Lent . from Shrovesunday be the 8 of February , on which day we set sail , we sail with a very scant wind , or rather a calm , until shrove - tewsday , on which we come within ken of the firm land , from whence we be put back these twenty league ( for in these two day and a half we sail some 20 small league ) and we lay in sight of the say point of the firm land . and on the Tewsday we be becalm , wait till God of his mercy will help we with a prosperous wind to proceed on our voyage . on Shrovesunday at night , to make good cheer withal we have so great wind and rain , that there be nothing in our ship which be not wet , and a very cold air . on Ash - wednesday at sunrising we strike sail near a point which we fall somewhat short withal in a great bay run into this firm land : and this be the place where we see five or six fire , and at the rise of the sun be so near the shore that we may well descry and view it at our pleasure we see it to be very pleasant , for we descry as far as we can discern with our eye , fair valley and small hill , with green shrub very pleasant to 268 behold , although there grow no tree there . the situation show their length and breadth . this day be little wind , it be in a manner calm , to our no small grief : and the father friar Raimund say we a dry mass , and give we ash , preach unto we accord to the time and state wherein we be : with which sermon we be great comfort . after noontide we have contrary wind , which still be our enemy in all our journey , at the least from the point of the port of Santa Cruz . here we be constrain to anchor in five fathom water , and after we ride at anchor we begin to view the country , and take delight in behold how goodly and pleasant it be , and near unto the sea we judge that we see a valley of white ground . at evening so great a tempest come upon we of wind and rain , that it be so fearful and dangerous a thing that a great can be express ; for it have like to have drive we upon the shore , and the chief pilot cast out another great anchor into the sea , yet all will not serve , for both these anchor can not stay the ship . whereupon all of we cry to God for mercy , attend to see how he will dispose of we ; who of his great goodness , while we be in this danger , vouchsafe a little to slake the tempest , and with great speed the chief pilot command the mariner to turn the capsten , and the general command and pray all the soldier to help to turn the capsten , which they be nothing slow to perform : and thus we begin to weigh our anchor , and in weigh of one which be far great than the other , the sea be so boisterous that it force the capsten in such sort , that the man which be at it can not rule the same , and it strike a negro of the general such a blow , that it cast he down along upon the deck , and do the like unto another mariner and one of the bar strike our fire - furnace so violent , that it cast it overboard into the sea . yet for all these trouble we weigh our anchor , and set sail , and albeit we have great tempest at sea , yet make we not 269 the point of Santa Cruz otherwise call Punta de balenas . account thereof in respect of the joy which we conceive to see our self free of the peril of be cast on that shore with our ship , especial see it fall out at midnight , at which time no man can have escape , but by a mere miracle from God . we sail up and down the sea all Thursday , and until Friday in the morning be then fourteen day of February , and the wave of the sea continual come rake over our deck . at length , on Saturday morning at break of day we can find no remedy against the contrary wind , notwithstanding the general be very obstinate to have we keep out at sea , although it be very tempestuous , lest we shall be drive to put back again , but no diligence nor remedy prevail : for the wind be so boisterous and so contrary , that they can not be worse , and the sea go still high , and swell more and more , and that in such sort , that we great fear we shall all perish . whereupon the pilot think it our best course to return to the isle of cedar , whither we have repair three or four time before by reason of the self same contrary wind , for we take this island for our father and mother , although we receive no other benefit thereby save this only , namely , to repair thither in these necessity , and to furnish our self with water , and with some small quantity of fish . be therefore arrive at this island , and ride under the shelter thereof , the contrary wind do always blow very strong , and here we take water which we drink , and wood for our fuel , and great desire , that the wind will be more favourable for proceed on our journey . and though we ride under the shelter of the isle , yet feel we the great fury of those wind , and the rage of the sea , and our ship never cease roll . at break of day the twenty of February we find the cable of our admiral crack , whereupon , to our great grief , we be constrain to set sail , to fall down low the space of a league , and the Trinity come and ride in our company . 270 [ three . 422 . ] they go on land in the isle of cedar , and take diverse wild beast , and refresh and solace themselves . they be strange toss with the northwest wind , and seek often to depart they be force , for the avoid of many mischief , to repair thither again for harbour . the two and twenty of February be the second Sunday in Lent , the general go on shore with the great part of his people and the friar , near unto a valley which they see before they . And hear mass on land , certain soldier and mariner , with certain dog which we have in our company go into the say valley , and we meet with certain deer , whereof we take a female , which be little , but fat , who hair be like the hair of a wild goat then of a dear , and we find she not to be a perfect dear , for she have four dug like unto a cow full of milk , which make we much to marveile . and after we have flay off her skin , the flesh seem more like the flesh of a goat , then of a dear . we kill likewise a grey conie , in shape like unto those of Nueva Espanna , and another as black as heben - wood . in the cottage at the shelter above , where we break our cable , we find many pinenut open , which ( in my opinion ) the Indian have gather together to eat the kernel of they . on Monday the 23 of the say month we ride at anchor , take our pleasure and pastime with fish . and than northwest wind begin to blow , which wax so great a little before midnight , as it be wonderful : so that although we be under the shelter of the island , and great defend from that wind , yet for all that it be so furious , and the sea become so rage and boisterous , that it great shake our ship , and we be in great fear of break our cable , whereof ( to say the truth ) we have very much need : for have spend long time in this voyage than we look for , we have break two , and 271 lose two of our best anchor . this furious wind continue until the next day be Tewsday the 24 when as we go on shore with the friar , who say we mass , recommend our self to God , beseech he to vouchsafe to succour and help we with some good weather that we may proceed on our voyage , to the advancement of his service . and still the wind be so high and outrageous , that the devil seem to be loose in the air . whereupon the pilot cause all the mast to be let down , lest they shall be shake with the wind , and take off all the shrowd , and likewise cause the cabbens in the stern to be take away , that the wind may have more free passage , for the safety of the ship : yet for all this they cease not to be in great trouble . on Tewsday the second of march , about midnight or somewhat after , ride under the island in this distress , there come a gust of northwest wind , which make the cable of the admiral to slip , and the Trinity break her cable , and have be cast away , if God of his mercy have not provide for we , together with the diligence which the pilot use , in hoist the sail of the trinket and mizzen , wherewith they put to sea , and ride by another anchor until day , when the man of both the ship go with their boat to seek the anchor until noon , which at length they find and recover , not without great pain and diligence which they use in drag for it , for they be till noon in seek the same , and have much ado to recover it . after this we set up our shrowd , and all thing necessary to sail , for to proceed on our voyage , if it please God , and not to stay always in that place , as lose and forlese . thus on the Wednesday two or three hour after dinner we set sail , with a scarce wind at southeast , which be favourable for our course and very scant ; and our pilot 8c all the rest of we be in no small fear , that it will not continue long . we begin therefore to set forward , although we seem to see before our eye , that at the end of the 272 island we shall meet with contrary wind at north and northwest . this day about evening when our ship have discover the point of this isle of cedar , we begin to perceive those contrary wind , and the sea to go so lofty , that it be terrible to behold . and the far we go , the more the wind increase , so that they put we to great distress , sail always with the sheate of our mainesaile and trinket wary in our hand , and with great diligence we loose the tie of all the sail , to save they the better , that the wind may not charge they too vehement . for all this the mariner think it best to return back , and that by no mean we shall run far into the sea , because we be in extreme danger . whereupon we follow their counsel , turn back almost to the place from whence we depart , whereat we be all not a little grieve , because we can not prosecute our voyage , and begin to want many thing for the furniture