do he . And be not able to stand upon his leg , he lean with his arm upon Francis Preciado ; and thus we return to our boat , where with much ado we get aboard , by reason of the great tide and roughness of the sea , so that our boat be fill with every wave . thus very weary , wet , and some wound ( as be aforesaid ) each man return unto his ship , where our bed which we find , and our refresh , and the cheer we have at supper do not great comfort we in regard of our former travel . we pass that night in this sort , and the next day be Tuesday the captain find himself great pain with his wound , and chief with that on his leg , because it be great swell with his go upon it . we lack 12 butt to fill with water , and the barrel in both the ship , and the captain will have go out to cause they to be fill , but we will not suffer he , and therefore we leave off the business for that day . but he appoint that the crossbow shall be make ready , and two speciali good 240 harquebus , and the next day be Wednesday very early , he command Juan Castilio chief pilot to go out with both the boat and with all the soldier and mariner that he can make , have the day before command the Trinity to go as near the shore as she may , and to make ready some of her ordinance , that if the Indian shall show themselves , they may affright they , and do they as much hurt as they can . wherefore on the Wednesday all we that be soldier , save the wound person , go on shore with certain mariner in the best order that we can , and take the first hill , where we have fortify our self , stand all upon our guard until the water be fill , and until we be call , during which time not one Indian show himself . thus we go aboard when we think good our self , at least without any suspicion of the Indian , although the tide of the sea go so high y ‘ it put we to great trouble , for oftentimes with great wave it beat into our boat . this be on the Wednesday the 3 of December . and to avoid loss of time the captain command Juan Castilio the chief pilot to take a boat and certain mariner as he shall think good , and to view the mouth of the lake to see whether the entrance be deep enough for to harbour the ship . he take the boat of the admiral with 8 mariner , and we of the Trinity , go and sound the mouth , and on the shallow place of the bar without they find 3 fathom a special good depth , and far in 4 , and up high 5 , always increase unto 10 or 12 fathom , when they be come into the two point of the say lake , which be a league broad from one point to the other , and all their sound be exceed good ground . than they go over to the southeast point , and there they see a great boat or raft which they endeavour to take to carry unto their ship . in you mean while they espy certain cottage , which the pilot determine to go and see , and be come near they see 3 other raft with 3 Indian on they distant from the cottage one or two cross - bowe shoot , ix 241 q and he leap on land with 4 or 5 mariner in his company : and while they behold those cottage , they see many Indian descend down a small hill in warlike manner with their bow and arrow , whereupon they determine to retire to their boat , and to return to their ship , and they be not go from the seashore scarce a stone cast , but the Indian be come upon they to shoot at they with their arrow , and because they be unarm , they will not fight with they , have go on shore for no other purpose , but to sound the mouth and entrance of that lake . on Thursday the 4 of December we set sail with a fresh gale of wind , and sail some 8 or 10 league , and come unto certain [ three . 411 . ] mouth or inlet which seem to all of we as though they have be hand , and we enter into one of they , Baya deal and come into a haven which we call Baya deal Abad Abad it100 ap inc [ ose ( l anj compass with land , be one of they the point of fair haven that have be see : and about the same , California . especial on both side the land be green and goodly to behold ; we descry certain river on that part which seem green , and therefore we return back , go out at that mouth whereby we come in , always have contrary wind : yet the pilot use their best endeavour to make way : and we see before we certain woody hill , and beyond they certain plain ; this we see from the Friday the 5 of the say month , until the Tuesday , which be the nine . as we draw near to these wood they seem very pleasant , and there be goodly and large hill and beyond they towards the sea be certain plain , and through all the country we see these wood . many great from the day before , which be the conception of our tmoke , of lady , we see many great smoke , whereat we much Francis gualle marvel , be or diverse opinion among our self , make man - whether those smoke be make by the inhabitant of cion . the country or no . over against these wood there fall every night such a dew , that every morning when we rise , the deck of the ship be so wet , that until the sun be of a good height , we always make the 242 deck dirty with go upon it . we ride over against these wood from the Tuesday morning when we set sail , until Thursday about midnight , when a cruel northwest wind take we , which , whither we will or no , enforce we to way our anchor ; and it be so great , that the ship Santa Agueda begin to return back , until her cable break , and the ship hull , and sudden with a great gust the trinket and the mizzen be rend asunder , then northwest wind still grow more and more : within a short while after the main sail be rend with a mighty flaw of wind , so that we be enforce , both soldier , captain , and all of we , to do our best endeavour to mend our sail ; and the Trinity be drive to do the like , for she go round upon her anchor , when she come ahead of it , her cable break , so that there we lose two anchor , each ship one . we go back to seek Baya deal Abad , for we be within 20 league of the same , and this day we come within four league of it , and be not able to reach it by reason of contrary wind , we ride under the lee of certain mountain and hill which be bare , and almost void of grass , near unto a strand full of sandy hill . near unto this road we find a fishingplace under a point afishingplace . of land , where have let down our lead to see what ground be there , a fish catch it in his mouth , and begin to draw it , and he which hold the sounding - lead cry and show his fellow that it be catch , that they may help he , as soon as he have get it above the water , take the fish , and loose the cord of the sounding - lead , and throw it again into the sea , to see whither there be any good depth , and it be catch again , whereupon he begin to cry for help , and all of we make a shout for joy ; thus draw the fish the rope of the sounding - lead be very great be crack , but at length we catch the fish which be very fair . here we stay from Friday when we arrive there , until the Monday , when as it seem good to our captain , that we shall repair to the water place , from whence 243 we be some six league distant , to take in 12 buttes of water , which we have drink and spend , because he know not whither we shall from thenceforth find any water , or no ; and though we shall find water , it be doubtful whither we shall be able to take it by reason great tide of the great tide that go upon that coast . we draw upon this coast . near to that place on Monday at night , when as we see certain fire of the Indian . and on Tuesday morning our general command that the Trinity shall come as near our ship and to the shore as it can , that if we have need , they may help we with their great ordinance : and have make 3 or 4 bourd to draw near the shore , there come 4 or 5 Indian to the seaside ; who stand and behold while we put out our boat and anchor , mark also how our bwoy float upon the water ; and when our boat return to the ship , two of they leap into the sea , and swim unto the bwoy , and behold it a great while ; then they take a cane of a arrow , and tie to the say bwoy a very fair and shine sea - oyster of pearl , and then return to the shore , near to the water place . Chap . 10 . they give unto the Indian many trifle which stand upon the shore to see they , and seek to parley with they by their interpreter , which be a chichimeco , who can not understand their language . they go to take fresh water . Francis Preciado spend the time with they with many sign , and truck and be afeard of their great multitude , retire himself wise with his companion , return with safety to the ship . when the captain and we behold this , we judge these Indian to be peaceable people ; whereupon the captain take the boat with 4 or 5 mariner carry [ three . 412 . ] with he certain bead to truck , and go to speak with they . in the mean while he command the Indian interpreter our chichimeco , to be call out of 244 the admiral that he shall parley with they . and the captain come unto the boy , and lay certain thing upon it for exchange , and make sign unto the savage to come and take they ; and a Indian make sign unto our man with his hand , his arm , and head , that they understand they not , but signify that they shall go aside . whereupon the captain depart a small distance from that place with his boat . and they make sign again that he shall get he further ; whereupon we depart a great way off , the say Indian leap into the water , come unto the boy , and take those bead , and return back again to land , and then come unto the other three , and all of they view our thing , they give a bow and certain arrow to a Indian , and send he away , run with all haste on the shore , and make sign unto we that they have send word unto their lord what thing we have give they , and that he will come thither . within a while after the say Indian return , run as he do before , and begin to make sign unto we , that his lord be come . and while we stay here , we see on the shore ten or twelve Indian assemble themselves , which come unto the other Indian , apd by and by we see another company of 12 or 15 more appear , who assemble themselves all together . and again they begin to make sign unto we , to come forthwith to our boat , and show we many oyster of pearl on the top of certain cane , make sign that they will give they we . when we behold this , the captain command we to make ready our boat , and go aboard it with the say mariner , and row to a certain stone in form of a rock , which lie in the sea near unto the shore . and hither come first 2 or 3 Indian and lay down one of those oyster , and