of our ship . the 8 of march be Monday about noon the general command we to set sail , for a small gale of wind blow from the west , which be the wind whereof we have most need , to follow our voyage , whereat we be all glad for the great desire which we have to depart out of that place . therefore we begin to set sail , and to pass towards the point of the island , and to shape our [ three . 423 . ] course towards the coast of the firm land , to view the situation thereof . and as we pass the island , and be betwixt it and the main , then northwest be a contrary wind begin to blow , which increase so by degree , that we be constrain to let fall the bonnet of our sail , to save they , strike they very low . and the Trinity see this bad weather return forthwith unto the place from whence we depart , and the admiral cast about all night in the sea , until the morning ; and the chief pilot consider that by no mean we can proceed far without danger , if we shall continue at sea any long , resolve that we shall retire our self again to that shelter , where we ride at ix 273 sister anchor until Thursday . and on Friday about noon we set sail again with a scarce wind , and in come forth unto the point of the island , we meet again with contrary wind at northwest : whereupon run all night with the firm land , on Saturday in the morning be saint Lazarus day and the 13 of march , we come in sight thereof , in view of the which we all rejoice , and we soldier will very willing have go on shore . this night fall great store of rain like the rain in Castilia , and we be all well wet in the morning , and we take great pleasure in behold the situation of Thefirmeland that firm land , because it be green , and because we very green and discover a pleasant valley and plain of good ^ gomy valley largenesj which seem to be environ with a garland and plain . of mountain . at length for fear of misfortune , see the sea so high , we dare not stay here or approach near the land , and because we have great want of cable and anchor , we be again constrain to put to sea ; and be in the same , and find the say contrary wind , the pilot judge that we have none other remedy , but again to retire our self to our wont shelter . and thus we return , but somewhat above the old place . on Sunday we ride here to the great grief of all the company , consider what trouble we endure , and can not get forward ; so that this be such a corrasive , as none can be more intolerable . this day be come to a anchor we have a mighty gale of wind at northwest , which be our adversary and capital enemy , and when day be shut in , it still grow great and great , so that the ship roll much . and after midnight , towards break of day , the Trinity break she two cable , which hold the two anchor which she have , and see her self thus forlese , she turn up and down in the sea until day , and come and ride near we , by one anchor which she have leave . this day all of we go to seek these lose anchor , and for all the diligence which we use , we can find but one of they . we ride at anchor all day until night , when 274 than Trinity again break a cable , which certain rock have cut asunder : whereupon the general command that she shall ride no long at anchor , but that she shall turn up and down , as she have do before in sight of we , which she do all day long , and at night she come to a anchor over against a fresh water somewhat low , and we go and ride hard by she . on Palme - sunday we go on shore with the father , which read the passion unto we and say mass , and we go in procession with branch in our hand . and so be comfort , because we have receive that holy sacrament , we return to our ship . Chap . 16 . return to the isle of cedar weather - beaten , and with their ship in evil case , they conclude , that the ship call Santa Agueda or Santa Agatha shall return unto Nueva Espanna . of the multitude of whale which they find about the point of California : with the description of a weed , which grow among the island of those sea . here we continue until the Wednesday before Easter be the four and twenty of march , on which day we consult together , that because the ship be ill condition , and want necessary furniture to proceed any further , it be best for we to return back to new Spain , as also because our clothes be consume : but the general seem not willing to return , but to proceed on his voyage : and in fine it be resolve , that see both the ship can not proceed forward , as well because they have lose their necessary furniture , as also that the Santa Agatha have need of calk , because she receive much water , and be the worst furnish of the twain , that she shall return back to advertise the mark of our success in this voyage , and what hinder our proceed , and in what case we stand , and how we be bereave of our necessary furniture . and because the Trinity be 275 A . D . J54O . the swift ship , and better appoint than the other , it be conclude , that it shall be provide in the best manner that may be , and that the general shall proceed on his journey in she with such company as he shall make choice of , and that the rest shall return at their good leisure . wherefore upon this determination we go under a point of this island , because it be a fit place to carene the ship : and in recover the same we spend Wednesday , Thursday , and Friday till noon , and yet for all that we can not well double it , until Easter day about noon . here we anchor very near the shore , and in a valley we find very excellent fresh water , whereof we make no small account , and here stay all the easter - holiday , to set our self about the furnish up of the Trinity : and [ three . 424 . ] after the work be take in hand by the two master which be very sufficient calker ( one of which be Juan castiliano chief pilot , and the other Peruccio de Bermes ) they finish the same so well in five day , as it be wonderful ; for no man can perceive how any drop of water can enter into any of the seam . afterwards they mend the other ship from Saturday till Monday , during which time all those be shrive that have not confess , and receive the communion , and it be resolve by charge of the confessor , that all those seal - skin which they have take from the Indian shall be restore again ; and the general give charge to Francis Preciado to restore they all , charge he on his conscience so to do . thus they gather they together , and deliver they into the hand of the father , to be keep until they return to the place , the Santa where they be to restore they . after this manner on Monday before noon we take our leaf of the New - spaine general Francis Ulloa , and of the people that stay the 5 . of with he , who at our departure shed no small number April . of tear , and we choose for our captain in the Santa Agueda master Juan castiliano the chief pilot , as well of the ship , as of we all , and set sail the same day 276 be the five of April , have our boat tie at our stern , till we come over against the cottage , whence we have take the seal - skin . from the country of the ° f the Christians and the port of Colima we be now distant some three hundred league , which be the first port where we determine to touch at . and have sail a league from the Trinity the captain Juan castiliano command we to salute they with three piece of great ordinance , and she answer we with other three , and afterward we answer one another with two shot apiece . we sail on Monday and * Tewsday till noon with ThesixtoJ contrary wind in sight of the island , and at noon we have a fresh gale in the poop , which bring we over against the cottage of the Indian where we take away those seal skin ; and there certain soldier and mariner with the father friar Antony de Melo leap on shore with the boat , carry the skin with they , and fling they into the say cottage out of which they be take , and so return to their ship . this day the then quoth of weather calm , whereupon we be drive to cast anchor , ^ P ^ fear that we shall forthwith be distress for want of victual , if we shall stay there any long time : but God which be the true helper provide better for we than we deserve or imagine ; for as we ride here , they sail after midnight the Wednesday follow before ten the clock we have a favourable gale of wind from they the point of southeast , which put we into the sea ; whither be santa Cruz drive , we have the wind at northwest so good and con - or California stant , that in six day it bring we to the cape of the tn stxe point of the port of Santa Cruz : for which so great blessing of God we give unto he infinite thanks . and here we begin to allow our self a great proportion of victual than we have do before , for we have eat very spare for fear lest our victual will fail we . before we come to this point of the haven of Santa Cruz by six or seven league we see on shore between certain valley diverse great smoke . and have pass 277 read more of these vieede cap . 13 . Sant Iago de buena esfer - anza in 19 degree . Cabo deal en - gtinno in 30 degree in a half . the english voyage the point of this port , our captain think it good to launch forth into the main ocean : yet although we run a swift course , above 500 whale come athwart of we in 2 or 3 skull within one hour space , which be so huge , as it be wonderful , and some of they come so near unto the ship , that they swim under the same from one side to another , whereupon we be in great fear , lest they shall do we some hurt , but they can not because the ship have a prosperous and good wind , and make much way , whereby it can receive no harm , although they touch and strike the same . among these island be such abundance of those weed , that if at any time we be enforce to sail over they they hinder the course of our ship . they grow fourteen or fifteen fathom deep under the water , their top reach four or five fathom above the water . they be of the colour of yellow wax , and their stalk grow great proportionable . this weed be much more beautiful than it be set forth , and no marvel , for the natural painter and creator thereof be most excellent . this relation be take out of that which Francis Preciado bring with he . after this ship the Santa Agueda depart from the general Ulloa , and return back the 5 of April , she arrive in the port of Sant Iago de bvena esperan ^ a the 18 of the say month , and after she have stay there four or five day , she depart for Acapulco : howbeit until this present seventeenth of May in the year 1540 , i have hear no tiding nor news of she . Moreover after the departure of the Santa Agueda for Nueva Espanna , the general Francis Ulloa in the ship call the Trinity proceed on his discovery coast the land until he come to a point call Cabo deal Enganno stand in thirty degree and a half of northerly latitude , and then return back to Newspaine , because he find the wind very contrary , and his victual fail he .