among they i find one which understand my interpreter very well : whereupon very easy i give they the like instruction of the cross which i have give to other behind . Theise people have cotton , but cotton . they be not very careful to use the same : because there be none among they that know the art of weave , and to make apparel thereof . they ask i how they shall set up their cross when they be come to their dwelling which be in the mountain , and whether a mountain . it be best to make a house about it , that it may not be wet , and whether they shall hang any thing upon the arm thereof . i say no ; and that it suffice to set it in a place where it may be see of all man , until i return : and lest peradventure any man of war shall come that way , they ofired i more man to go with 301 i , say that they be naughty man which i shall find above ; but i will have none : nevertheless 20 . of they go with i , which when i draw near unto those which be their enemy , they warn i thereof : and i find their centinel set upon their guard on their border . on Saturday morning i find a great squadron of people sit under a exceed great arbour , and another part of they without : and when i see that they rise not up , i pass along on my voyage : when they behold this , a old man rise up which say unto i , sir , why do you not receive victual to eat of we , see you have take food of other ? i answer , that i take nothing but that which be give i , and that i go to none but to such as request i . here without any stay they bring i victual , say unto i , that because i enter not into their house , and stay all day and all night in the river , and because i be the son of the sun , all man be to receive i for their lord . i make they sign to sit down , and call that old man which my interpreter understand , and ask he who that country be , and whether the lord thereof be there , he say , yea : and i call he to i ; and when he be come , i embrace he , show he great love : and when i see that all of they take great pleasure at the friendly entertainment which i give he , i put a shirt upon he , and give he other trifle , and will my interpreter to use the like speech to that lord which he have do to the rest ; and that do , i give he a cross , which he receive with a very good will , as the other do : and this lord go a great way with i , until i be call unto from the other side of the river , where the former old man stand with much people : to who i give another cross , use the like speech to they which i have unto the rest , to wit , how they shall use it . then follow my way , i meet with another great company of people , with who come that very same old man who my interpreter under - 302 stand ; and when i see their lord which he show unto i , i pray he to come with i into my boat , which he do very willing , and so i go still up the river , and the old man come and show i who be the chief lord : and i speak unto they always with great courtesy , 8c all of they show that they rejoice much thereat , 8c speak very well of my coming thither . at night i withdraw my self into the midst of the river , 8c ask he many thing concern that country : and i find he as willing 8c well dispose to show they i , as i be desirous to know they . i ask he of Cevola : and he tell i he have be there , and that it be a goodly thing , 8c that the lord thereof be very well obey : and that there be other lord thereabouts , with who he be at continual war . i ask he whether they have silver 8c gold , and he behold certain bell , say they have metal of their colour . i inquire whether they make it there , and he answer i not , but that they bring it from a certain mountain , where a old woman dwell . i demand whether he have any knowledge of a river call Totonteac , he answer i not , but of another exceed mighty river , wherein there be such huge crocodile , that of their hide they make buckler , and that they worship the sun neither more nor less than those which i have pass : and when they offer unto he the fruit of the earth , they say : receive hereof , for thou have create they , and that they love he much , because he warm they ; and that when he break not forth , they be cold . herein reason with he , he begin somewhat to complain , say unto i , i know not wherefore the sun use these term with we , because he give we not clothe , nor people to spin nor to weave they , nor other thing which he give to many other , and he complain that those of that country will not suffer they to come there , and will not give they of their corn . i tell he that i will remedy this , whereat he remain very well satisfy . 3 ° 3 A . D . 1540 [ Iii . 434 . ] Cevola a goodly thing . gold and silver in a mountain near Cevola . a mighty river . this river seem to be northward by the cold . they be advertise by the Indian , wherefore the lord of Cevola kill the negro , which go with Frier Marco , and of many other thing : and of a old woman call Guatazaca , which live in a lake and eat no food . the description of a beast , of the skin whereof they make target . the suspicion that they conceive of they , that they be of those Christians which be see at Cevola , and how they cunning save themselves . the next day which be Sunday before break of day , begin their cry as they be wont : and this be the cry of 2 . or 3 . sort of people , which have lie all night near the river side , wait for i : and they take Maiz and other corn in their mouth , and sprinkle i therewith , say that that be the fashion which they use when they sacrifice unto the sun : afterward they give i of their victual to eat , and among other thing , they give i many white peason . i give they a cross as i have do to the rest : and in the mean season that old man tell they great matter of my do , and point i out with his finger , say , this be the lord , the son of the sun : and they make i to comb my beard , and to set my apparel handsome which i wear upon my back . and so great be the confidence that they have in i , that all of they tell i what thing have pass , and Dick pass among they , and what good or bad mind they bear one towards another . i ask they wherefore they impart unto i all their secret , and that old man answer i : thou be our lord , and we ought to hide nothing from our lord . after these thing , follow on our way , i begin again to inquire of he the state of Cevola , and whether he know that those of this country have ever see people like unto we : he answer i not , save one negro which wear about his leg and arm certain thing which do ring . your lordship 3 ° 4 be to call to mind how this negro which go with friar 2 % negro Marco be wont to wear bell , and feather on his arm and leg , and that he carry plate of diverse colour , and that it be not much above a year ago since he come into those part . i demand upon what occasion he be kill ; and he answer i , that the lord of Cevola inquire of he whether he have other brethren : he answer that he have a infinite number , and that they have great store of weapon with they , and that they be not very far from thence . which when he have hear , many of the chief man consult together , and resolve to kill he , that he may not give news unto cause these his brethren , where they dwell , and - that for this w ^ refire ^ te - cause they slay he , and cut he into many piece , the negro be which be divide among all those chief lord , that slalne . they may know assure that he be dead ; and also that he have a dog like i , which he likewise kill a great while after . i ask he whether they of Cevola have any enemy , and he say they have . and he reckon they off unto i 14 . or 15 . lord which have war with they : c ^^ have and that they have mantle , and bow like those above d ^ their mention : howbeit he tell i that i shall find go enemy . up the river a people that have no war neither with their neighbour , nor with any other . he tell i that they have 3 . or 4 . sort of tree bear most excellent fruit to eat : and that in a certain lake dwell a old anoldewoman woman , which be much honour and worship of call guatu - them : and that she remain in a little house which or - e be there , and that she never do eat any thing : and ship . that there they make thing which do sound , and that [ three . 435 . ] many mantle , feather and Maiz be give unto she . Antonio d ^ es - i ask what her name be , and he tell i that she be call Guatuzaca , and that thereabouts be many 1 ^ lord which in their life and death , use the like order which they of Cevola do , which have their dwelling in the summer with paint mantle , and in the winter dwell in house of wood of 2 . or 3 . loft high : and that he have see all these thing , save the old woman . ix 305 u this may be the crook back ox of Quivira . the sea side . the english voyage and when again i begin to ask he more question , he will not answer i , say that he be weary of i : and many of those Indian come about i , they say among themselves : let we mark he well , that we may know he when he come back again . the Monday follow , the river be beset with people like to they , and i begin to request the old man to tell i what people be in that country , which tell i he think i will soon forget they : and here he reckon up unto i a great number of lord , and people at the least 200 . And discourse with he of their armour , he say that some of they have certain very large target of leather , above two finger thick . i ask he of what beast skin they make they : and he describe unto i a very great beast , like unto a ox , but long by a great handful , with broad foot , the leg as big as the thigh of a man , and the head seven handful long , the forehead of three span , and the eye big than one fist , and the home of the length of a man leg , out of which grow sharp point , a handful long , the forfeit and hinderfeete above seven handful big , with a wreathe tail , but very great ; and hold up his arm above his head , he say the beast be high than that . after this he give i information of another old woman which dwell towards the sea side . i spend this day in give cross to those people as i have do unto the former . this old man that be with i leap on shore , 8c fall in conference with another which that day have often call he ; and here both of they use many gesture in their speech , move their arm , and point at i . therefore i send my interpreter out , will he to draw near unto they , and listen what they say ; and within a while i call he , and ask he whereof they talk , and he say , that he which make those gesture say unto the other , that in Cevola there be other like unto we with beard , and that they say they be Christians , and that both of they say that we