hill almost as big as the former . Theise island serve we only to content our sight , for we pass by they without stay , have but a slack wind on Monday morning : all which day we follow our course with the foresay slack wind , and within a while after it become flat contrary , so that we be constrain to anchor at the say point of the say haven ; and on Tewesday at break of day we set sail , but make but little away all the day , because 223 the wind continue contrary , although but very weak . the night follow we be becalm a little beyond the point of this haven ; but about midnight we begin to have a fresh gale , and on Wednesday in the morning we be seven league distant from that point . this country show ( as it be indeed ) more plain than the rest , with certain small woody hill , and within the other point which be before descry , the situation seem to be more pleasant and delightsome than the rest which we have pass . and at the uttermost end of the point be two small islet . the say Wednesday about nine of the clock the wind blow a good gale , and we sail by evening between seven and eight league , and come over against a land not very high , where we see certain creek or breach not very ragged , into every of which a river seem to fall , because the soil be very green , and have certain tree grow on it far big than those which we have find before . here the captain with five or six man go on shore , and take possession pass up one of those river , and find the foot of many Indian upon the sand . on the bank of that river they see many fruitful tree , as cherry - tree and little appletree , and other white tree : they find also in the wood three or four beast call adibe , which be a kind of dog . the same night we set sail with the wind off - the land , which blow so fresh , that it make we to strike our foresail ; and on the sixeteenth of October at nine of the clock we come near unto a point of certain high mountain , on which day be Thursday we make little way , because the wind cease , but it rise again in the night , whereupon by the break of day on Friday we come before the say point be six or seven league off . the land seem to be very mountainous with certain sharp point not great clad with grass , but somewhat bare . on our left hand we see two island , the one of a league and a half , the other not so much , and it seem that we draw near 224 to the port of Santa Cruz , whereat we be sorry , because we be always in good hope to find some outlet into the main ocean in some place of that land , and that the same port be the same outlet , and also that by the say coast we may return to the foresay haven of Santa Cruz , and that we have commit a great error , because we have not certain seek out the secret , whether that be a strait or a river , which we have leave behind we unsearched at the bottom of this great sea or gulf . all Friday and the night follow we sail with a scant wind , and on Saturday at break of day we be between two point of land which make a bay , wherein - a bay with 4 we see before and behind four or five great and small or 5 inland . Islands . the land be very mountainous , part whereof be cover with grass , and part be void . within the land appear more mountain and hill , and in this place we be come near unto the haven of Santa Cruz , which be all firm land , except it be divide in the very nook by some streite or great river which part it from the main , which because we have not thorough discover , all of we that be employ in this voyage be not a little grieve . and this main land stretch so far in length , that i can well express it : for from the haven of Acapulco , which stand in seventeen degree and twenty minute of latitude , we have always the coast of the firm land on our right hand , until we come to the great current of the white and red sea : this current and here ( as i have say ) we know not the secret of this u in 32 ae - current , whether it be cause by a river or by a strait : and so suppose that the coast which we have on our and red . right hand be close up without passage , we return back again , always descend southward by our degree , until we return unto the say haven of this return santa Cruz , find still along the coast a goodly and u pleasant country , and still see fire make by the ca $ ' Indian , and canoas mad of cane . we determine to take in fresh water at the haven of Santa Cruz , to ix 225 p run along the outward western coast , and to see what it be , if it please God . here we rest our self , and eat of the plum and fruit call Pithaias : they arrive and we enter into the port of Santa Cruz on Sunday ‘ ot ^ san ^’ 1 th ® * 8 ° f October and stay there eight day to take Qruz in wood and water rest our self all that while , that our man may strengthen and refresh themselves . our captain determine to divide among we certain garment of taffeta , with cloak and say , and a piece of taffeta , and likewise ordain , that we shall go on land to catch a couple of Indian , that they may talk with our interpreter , and that we may come to the knowledge of their language . whereupon thirteen of we go out [ three . 405 . ] of our ship by night , and lie in ambush in a place which be call the well of Grijalva , where we stay until noon between certain secret way , and can never see or descry any one Indian : wherefore we return the Spaniard to our ship , with two mastive - dog which we carry with they to catc ^ th ® Indian with more ease : and in our Indian return we find two Indian hide in certain thicket , ' which be come thither to spy what we do : but because we and our dog be weary , and think not on they , these Indian issue out of the thicket , and flee away , and we run after they , and our dog see they not : wherefore by reason of the read more of thickness of the wild thistle , and of the thorn and these staff briar , and because we be weary , we can never cat - i0 - overtake they : they leave behind they certain staff so fine wrought that they be very beautiful to behold , consider how cunning they be make with a handle and a cord to fling they . the nine and twenty of October be Wednesday , we set sail out of this haven of Santa Cruz with little wind , and in sail down the channel our ship call the Trinity come on ground upon certain sholde : this be at noon at a low water , and with all the remedy that we can use we can not draw she off , whereupon we be constrain to underprop she , and to stay 226 the next tide : and when the tide begin to increase we use all diligence to draw she off , and can not by any mean , whereat all the company and the captain be not a little grieve : for we think we shall have lose she there , although we cease not with all our might to labour with both our boat , and with our cable and capsten . in the end it please God about midnight at a full sea with the great force which we use to recover she , that we draw she off the sand , for which we give God most hearty thanks , and ride at anchor all the rest of the night , wait for daylight for fear of fall into any further danger or mishap . when day be come , we set forward with a fresh gale , and proceed on our voyage , direct our prow to the main sea , to see whether it will please God to let we discover the secret of this point . but whether it please not his great goodness , or whether it be for our sin , we spend eight day from this port , before we can double the point , by reason of contrary wind , and great rain , and lightning and darkness every night : also the wind grow so rage and tempestuous , that they make we all to quake , and to pray continual unto God to aid we . and hereupon we make our cable and anchor ready , and the chief pilot command we with all speed to cast anchor , and in this sort we pass our trouble : and whereas we ride in no security , he cause we forthwith to weigh our anchor , and to go whither the wind shall drive we . and in this sort we spend those eight day , turn back by night the same way that we have go by day , and sometime make good in the night that which we have lose in the day , not without great desire of all the company to have a wind which may set we forward on our voyage , be afflict with the misery which we endure by reason of the thunder , lightning , and rain , wherewith we be wet from top to toe , by reason of the toil which we have in weigh and cast of our anchor , as need require . and on one of these night , which be very dark 227 and tempestuous with wind and rain , because we think we shall have perish , be very near the shore , we pray unto God that he will vouchsafe to aid and save we without call our sin to remembrance . and straightway we see upon the shrowd of the Trinity as it be a candle , which of it self shine , and give a light , whereat all the company great rejoice , in such sort that we cease not to give thanks unto God . whereupon we assure our self , that of his mercy he will guide and save we , and will not suffer we to perish , as indeed it fall out ; for the next day we have good weather , and all the mariner say , that it be the light of saint Elmo which appear on the shrowd , and they salute it with their song and prayer . Theise storm take we between the isle of saint Iago and saint Philip , and the isle call Isla de perlas lie over against the point of California suppose to be firm land . Chap . 7 . sail on their way they discover a pleasant country , and in their judgement great inhabit , and find the sea - coast very deep . they go to discover or view the isle of pearl . and by a current one of their ship be separate from the other , and with great joy after three day they have sight again of she , and follow their voyage they discover certain great , green , and pleasant plain . we begin to sail along the coast the seven or eight of November , the land always show very green with grass pleasant to behold , and certain plain near the shore , and up within the country many [ three . 406 . ] pleasant hill replenish with wood , and certain valley , so that we be delight above measure , and wonder at the greatness and goodly view of the country : and every night we see fire , which show that the country be great inhabit . thus we proceed on our voyage until the ten of the say month of November , have 228 1539 - alwayes the coast of the main ocean on our right hand , from hence and the far we sail , we always find the country more delightsome and pleasant , as well in behold the green thereof , as also in that it show certain plain backside of and deep valley , through which river do fall down California . into the land , within certain mountain , and hill full of great wood which be not very high , and appear within the country . here we be 54 league distant from California little more or less