at night we ride over against those mountain where we have leave our anchor , and upon knowledge of the place we receive great contentment see we have sail some five and thirty league from the place where we have take in water : neither be it any marvel that we so rejoice , because that the fear which we have of contrary wind cause we to be so well apay of the way which we have make . the day of the holy nativity of our lord , which be on the Thursday the five and twenty of the say month , God of his mercy begin to show we favour in give we a fresh wind almost in the poop , which carry we beyond those mountain , for the space of ten or twelve league , find the coast always plain : and two league within the land , which we coast along , and between these mountain , there be a great space of plain ground , which we may easy discern with our eye , although other be of another opinion . we begin from Christmas day to sail slow with certain small land - wind , and 251 great apparent of gold and silver . January 1540 forty league . [ Iii . 415 . ] the english voyage sail from morning to night about seven or eight league , which we esteem no small matter , always pray to God to continue this his favour towards we , and thank he for his holy nativity , and all the day of this feast the friar say mass in the admiral , and the father Frier Raimund preach unto we , which give we not small comfort , by encourage we in the service of God . on Saturday at night be the 27 of the say month we ankor near unto a point which seem to be plain land all along the shore , and within the country be high mountain with certain wood , which wood and mountain run overthwart the country , and continue along with certain small hill sharp on the top , and certain little valley be between those mountain . and in truth to i which with diligent eye behold the same both in length and in the breadth thereof , it can not choose but be a good country , and to have great matter in it , as well touch the inhabit thereof by the Indian , as in gold and silver ; for there be great likelihood that there be store thereof . this night we see a fire far within the land towards those mountain , which make we think that the country be thorough inhabit . the next day be Sunday and innocent day , the 28 of the say month at break of day we set sail , and by nine or ten of the clock have sail three or four league , where we meet with a point which stretch toward the west , the pleasant situation whereof delight we much . from the eight and twenty of December we run our course until Thursday be newyeares day of the year 1540 , and we run some 40 league , pass by certain inlet and bay , and certain high mountain cover with grass in colour like rosemary : but towards the seaside very bare and burn , and towards the top be certain crag somewhat of a red colour , and beyond these appear certain white mountain , and so all the country show unto a point which appear beyond 252 those burn white and red mountain which have neither any grass nor tree upon they , whereat we marvel not a little . this newyeares day we see near the main two small hand , and rejoice great to see they ; for we stand in great fear , that contrary wind will drive we as far back in one day , as we have sail in ten , which if they have take we , we can not have withstand they . we run from the first of January until Monday which be five day , and the land always stretch northwest from the mountain aforesaid . and on the Sunday we see a far off " ahead of we a high land somewhat sever from the main shore , and all of we begin to dispute whether it be the land which trend towards the northwest , for that way the pilot hope to discover a better country : and the say Monday the five of Januarie we come to this high land beforesaid , and it be two hand the one a small one and the other a great one : we coast these two hand some six league , which be green , and have on the top of they many high slender tree ; and the great hand be twenty league in compass . we coast in 6 league in length without see or discover any other thing , but we see before we high land which stretch eight or ten league northward , where we ride on Monday at night . from Thursday be newyeares day until the next Monday we sail about 35 league . and in this course we feel great cold , which grieve we much , especial be assail by two or three windy shower which pinch we much with cold . we ride over against this land two or three night , have it near unto we , always keep watch by equal hour , one while mariner , and another soldier , all the night long with great vigilancy . on Tuesday be twelve day we come within two or three league of this land , which we have descry the day before , seem to we very pleasant for it show green with green tree of a ordinary bigness , and we see 253 two small islet near the main . Isla de id cedros mention in the 13 chapter the land trend here northwest 35 league . Thistle degree of northerly latitude . the english voyage many valley , out of which certain small mist arise , which continue in they for a long time , whereupon we gather , that they rise out of certain river . the same morning , to our great comfort we see great smoke , though we be above four league distant from they , and the captain make no great reckon to approach near unto they , nor to seek nor search what the matter be , and perchance because he be not then in the Santa Agueda , but be aboard the Trinity , as his manner be to come and stay there two or three day , as well to pass the time , as to give order for thing that be needful . in this country the winter and rain seem to be like that of Castille . we ride all night two or three league distance from shore , and towards evening we see five or six fire , whereat we all rejoice , but do not marvel thereat , because the situation of that country show to be habitable , be fair , pleasant , and all green , and likewise because the hand which we have leave behind we be ( as i have say ) twenty league in circuit , make show that it be well people . on the Wednesday we be 3 or 4 league at sea from the land , and begin to see two fire more , and therefore we assure our self that the country be very well inhabit ; and the far we sail , we always find it more civil . and for the space of fifty league before we come hither we always find swim on the sea certain float of weed of a ship length , and of the breadth of two ship , be round and full of gourd , and under these weed be many fish , and on some of they be store of fowl like unto white sea - meawes . we suppose that these float weed do grow upon some rock under the water . we be now in 30 degree of northerly latitude . we sail from the 7 of January until the 9 still with contrary wind : and on fry day about noon there rise a north and northeastern wind , which force we to return under the shelter of that hand which we leave behind we , from whence we have sail above 254 twenty league . and that Friday at night somewhat twenty late we have sail back above twelve league of the same , and because it be night we stay in the sea , ofqedar . where we and our ship be not a little trouble , so that all that night none of we sleep a wink , but watch every one . the next morning betimes be Saturday we proceed on our voyage , and gate under the shelter of the say hand , ride in thirty fathom water : and on that side where we ankor , we find high and close mountain , with heap of a certain earth which be all ash and burn , and in other place scorch and as black as coal , and like the rust of iron , and in other place whitish , and here and there small black hill , whereat we marvel exceed , consider that when we pass by , it seem unto we a habitable country full of tree , and now we see not a stick grow on this side . all of we suppose that on the other side towards the firm land the tree grow which we see , although ( as i have say ) we sail four or five league distant from the same . we stay here under the shelter of these mountain [ three . 416 . ] Saturday , Sunday , and Monday , always have the northern wind so strong , that we think if it have catch we in the sea , we shall have be cast away . Chap . 12 . they environ and land upon the hand of cedar , to discover the same , and to seek water and wood . they be assail of the Indian , and many of they wound with stone : but at length get the upper hand , they go to their cottage , and range far up into the island they find diverse thing which the Indian in their flight have leave behind they . on Friday the 13 of January the captain command we to hoist out our boat , and to go on shore , which be do accord , and we do row along the shore for the space of a good half league and 255 enter into a valley : for ( as i say ) all this country be full of high and bare hill , of such quality as i mention before : and in this and other small valley we find some water which be brackish , and not far from thence certain cottage make of shrub like unto broom ; likewise we find the footing of Indian both small and great , whereat we much marvel that in so rough and wild a country ( as far as we can discern ) there shall be people . here we stay all day , make four or five pit to take in water which we want , which though it be bad , and in small quantity we refuse not ; and so the evening be come , we return to our boat , and so come unto our ship which ride a good league from the shore . the next day be Wednesday the fourteenth of the say month our general command we to set sail , and we sail about the say hand on the same side which we coast when we come from Nueva Espanna : for when we arrive on the coast we see five or six fire ; wherefore he desire to see and learn whether it be inhabit ; and at the far end of this inlet or bay where we ride there come out before we a Canoa , wherein be four Indian which come row with certain small oar , and come very near we to see what we be : whereupon we tell our general , that it be best to send some of we out with our boat to take these Indian or some one of they to give they something that they may think we to be good people : but he will not consent thereto , because he mind not to stay , have then a pretty gale of wind , whereby he may sail about this hand , hope that afterward we may find and take some other to speak with they , and give they what we will to carry on shore ; and as we sail near the land , we see a great hill full of goodly tree of the bigness of the tree and cypress of Castille . we find in this hand the foot of wild beast and cony , and see a piece of pine tree - wood , whereof we gather , that there be store 256 of they in that country . thus sail near unto the shore , we see another Canoa come towards we with other four Indian , but it come not very near we , and as we look forward , we see towards a point which be very near before we