late , some of those man call i to give i victual , and do in all point as the other have do , dance and play to show i pleasure . i desire to know what people live on the bank of this people of 23 . river : and i understand by this man that it be inlanguage habit by 23 language , and these be border upon mrs . river the river > beside other not far off , and that there be beside these 23 . language , other people also which he know not , above the river . i ask he whether every people be live in one town together : and he answer i , no : but that they have many house stand scatter in the field , and that every people have their country several and distinguish , and that in every habitation there be great store of people . JcueoasGo - he show i a town which be in a mountain , mara write a ( j to | j i that fhere be there great store of people ouiuabse ^ ° f bad condition , which make continual war upon they : which be without a governor , and dwell in that desert place , where small store of Maiz grow , come down into the plain to buy it in truck of dear skin , wherewith they be apparel with long garment , which they do cut with razor , and sew with great house needle make of dear bone : and that they have great of stone . house of stone . i ask they whether there be any there of that country ; and i find one woman which wear a garment like a little mantle , which clad she from the waste down to the ground , of a dear skin well dress . than i ask he whether the people which dwell on the river side , dwell always there , or else sometime go to dwell in some other place : he answer i , that in the summer season they abide there , and sow there ; and after they have gather in their crop they go their way , and dwell in other house which they have at the foot of the mountain far from the 296 river . and he show i by sign that the house be of wood compass with earth without , and i understand that they make a round house wherein the man Roundhouses . and woman live all together . i ask he whither their woman be common or no : he tell i not , and that he which be marry , be to have but one wife only . i desire to know what order they keep in marry : and he tell i , that if any man have a daughter to marry , he go where the people keep , and say , i have a daughter to marry : be there any man here that will have she ? and if there be any that will have she , he answer that he will have she : and so the marriage be make . and that the father of he which will have she , bring some thing to give the young woman ; and from that hour forward the marriage be take to be finish , and that they sing and dance : and that when dance and night come , the parent take they , and leave they to - nn & ngatma - gether in a place where no body may see they . and 6 i learn that brethren , and sister , and kinsfolk marry not together : and that maid before they be marry converse not with man , nor talk not with they , but keep at home at their house and in their possession , [ three . 432 . ] and wrought : and that if by chance any one have company with man before she be marry , her husband forsake she , and go away into other country : and that those woman which fall into this fault , be account naughty pack . and that if after they be marry , any man be take in adultery with another woman , they put he to death : and that no man may have more than one wife , but very secret . they tell i that they burn those which die : and such as remain they bume widow , stay half a year , or a whole year before their dead - they marry . i desire to know what they think of such as be dead . he tell i that they go to another world , but that they have neither punishment nor glory . the great sickness that this people dye of , be vomit of blood by the mouth : and they have physician which cure they with charm and blow 297 which they make . the apparel of these people be pipe to drink like the former : they carry their pipe with they to tobacco with . perfume themselves , like as the people of new Spain use tobacco . i inquire whether they have any governor , and find that they have none , but that every family have their several governor . Theise people have beside Maiz , gourd , their maiz certain gourd , and another corn like unto mill : they have grindstone and earthen pot , wherein earthenpot , they boil those gourd , and fish or the river , which goodfish . be very good . my interpreter can go no far than this place : for he say that those which we shall find far on our way , be their enemy , and therefore i send he back very well content . not long after i espy many Indian to come cry with a loud voice , and run after i . i stay to know what they will have ; and they tell i that they have set up the cross which i have give they , in the midst of their dwelling as i have appoint , but that i be to this river wit , that when the river do overflow , it be wont to ‘ banks ^ fcer * 1 reac ^ to P ^ aceJ therefore they pray i to give they take season . eave to remove it , and to set it in another place where the river can not come at it , nor carry it away : which i grant they . Chap . 5 . of a Indian of that country they have relation of the state of Cevola , and of the condition and custom of these people , and of their governor : and likewise of the country not far distant from thence , whereof one be call Quicoma , and the other coama : of the people of Quicoma , and of the other Indian not far distant they receive courtesy . thus sail i come where be many Indian , and another interpreter , which i cause to come with cold and i in my boat . and because it be cold , and my rain - people be wet , i leap on shore , and command a fire to be make , and as we stand thus warm our 298 w - selve , a Indian come and strike i on the arm , point with his finger to a wood out of which i see two company of man come w ‘ their weapon , and he tell i that they come to set upon we : and because i mean not to fall out with any of they , i retire my company into our boat , and the Indian which be with i swim into the water , and save themselves on the other side of the river . in the mean season i inquire of that Indian which i have with i , what people they be that come out of the wood : and he tell i that they be their enemy , and therefore these other at their approach without say any word leap into the water : and do so , because they mean to turn back again , be without weapon , because they bring none with they , because they understand my will and pleasure , that they shall carry none . i inquire the same thing of this interpreter which i have do of the other of the thing of that country , because i understand that among some people one man use to have many wife , and among other but one . now i understand by he , that he have be at Cevola , and that it be a month journey from his country , and that from that place by a path that go along that river a man Cevola 40 might easy travel thither in forty . day , and that the occasion that move he to go thither , be only to see tk ^ river * ? Cevola , because it be a great thing , and have very high house of stone of 3 . or 4 . loft , and window on each side ; that the house be compass about with a wall contain the height of a man and a half , and that aloft and beneath they be inhabit with people , and that they use the same weapon , that other use , which we have see , that be to say , bow and arrow , mace , staff and buckler : and that they have one governor , and that they be apparel with mantle , and with ox - hides , and that their mantle have a paint about they , and that their governor wear a long shirt very fine gird unto he , and over the same diverse mantle : and that the woman wear very long garment , and that they be 299 white , and go all cover : and that every day many Indian wait at the gate of their governor to serve turquese in he , and that they do wear many azure or blue stone , Cevola . which be dig out of a rock of stone , and that they have but one wife , with who they be marry , and that when their governor die , all the good that they have be bury with they . and likewise all the while they eat , many [ three . 433 . ] of their man wait at their table to court they , and see they eat , and they eat with napkin , and that they have bath . on Thursday morning at break of day the Indian come with the like cry to the bank of the river , and with great desire to serve we , bring i meat to eat , and make i the like good cheer , which the other have do unto i , have understand what i be : and i give they cross , with the self same order which i do unto the former . And go far up the river , i come to a country where i find better government : for the inhabitant be whole obedient unto one only . but return again to confer with my interpreter touch the dwelling of those of Cevola , he tell i , that the lord of that country have a dog like that which i carry with i . afterwards when i call for dinner , this interpreter see certain dish carry in the first and late service , whereupon he tell i that the lord of Cevola have also such as those be , but that they be green , and that none other have of they save their governor , and that they be 4 . which he have get together this be then with that dog , and other thing , of a black man wentwlth which have a beard , but that he know not from what ™ rier Marco quarter he come thither , and that the king cause he the Niza . afterward to be kill , as he hear say . i ask he whether he know of any town that be near unto that place : he tell i that above the river he know some , and that among the rest there be a lord of a Quicoma . town call Quicoma , and another of a town call Coama . Coama : and that they have great store of people under they . and after he have give i this information , he 300 i54 °- craved leave of i to return unto his companion . from hence i begin again to set sail , and within a day sail i find a town dispeople : where assoon as i be enter , by chance there arrive there 500 Indian with their bow and arrow , and with they be that principali Indian call naguachato , which i have leave behind , and bring with they certain cony cony and and yucas : and after i have friendly entertain they all , depart from they , i give they licence to return to their house . as i pass further by the desert , i come to certain cottage , out of which much people come towards i with a old man before they , cry in a language which my interpreter well understand , and he say unto those man : brethren , you see here that lord ; let we give he such as we have , see he do we pleasure , and have pass through so many discourteous people , to come to visit we . and have thus say , he ofired to the sun , and then to i in like sort as the rest have do . Theise have certain great bag and well make of the skin of fish call sea - bremes . and i understand that this be a town belong unto the lord of Quicoma , which people come thither only to gather the fruit of their harvest in summer ; and