: nevertheless i send you twelve small mantle , such as the people of the country be wont to wear , and a certain garment also , which seem unto i to be well 38 ° - ] make : i keep the same , because it seem to i to be excellent well wrought , because i believe that no man broideredwith ever see any needle work in these Indies , except it be needle work . since the Spaniard inhabit the same . i send your lordship also two clothes paint with the beast of this country , although as i have say , the picture be ix 161 l the death of Stephan the negro . the english voyage very rude do , because the painter spend but one day in draw of the same . i have see other picture on the wall of the house of this city with far better proportion , and better make . i send your honour one oxhide , certain turquese , and two earring of the same , and fifteen comb of the Indian , and certain tablet set with these turquese , and two small basket make of wicker , whereof the Indian have great store . i send your lordship also two roll which the woman in these part be wont to wear on their head when they fetch water from their well , as we use to do in Spain . and one of these Indian woman with one of these roll on her head , will carry a pitcher of water without touch the same with her hand up a lather . i send you also a muster of the weapon wherewith these people be wont to fight , a buckler , a mace , a bow , and certain arrow , among which be two with point of bone , the like whereof , as these conqueror say , have never be see . i can say nothing unto your lordship touch the apparel of their woman . for the Indian keep they so careful from we , that hitherto i have not see any of they , save only two old woman , and these have two long robe down to the foot open before , and gird to they , and they be button with certain cordon of cotton . i request the Indian to give i one of these robe , which they wear , to send your honour the same , see they will not show i their woman . and they bring i two mantle which be these , which i send you as it be paint : they have two pendent like the woman of Spain , which hang somewhat over their shoulder . the death of the negro be most certain : for here be many of the thing find which he carry with he : and the Indian tell i that they kill he here , because the Indian of Chichilticale tell they that he be a wicked villain , and not like unto the Christians : because the christian kill nowoman : and he kill woman ; and also he touch their woman , which the Indian love more than themselves ; therefore 162 they determine to kill he : but they do it not after such sort as be report , for they kill none of the rest of those that come with he : neither slay they the young lad which be with he of the province of Petatlan , but they take he and keep he in safe custody until now . and when i seek to have he , they excuse themselves two or three day to give he i , tell i that he be dead , and sometime that the Indian of Acucu have carry he away . but in conclusion , when Acucu . i tell they that i shall be very angry if they do not give he i , they give he unto i . he be a interpreter , for though he can well speak their language , yet he understand the same very well . in this place there be find some quantity of gold and and s ^- silver , which those which be skilful in minerail matter esteem to be very good . to this hour i can never ’ learn of these people from whence they have it : and i see they refuse to tell i the truth in all thing , imagine , as i have say , that in short time i will depart hence , but i hope in God they shall no long excuse themselves . i beseech your lordship to certify his majesty of the success of this voyage . for see we have no more than that which be aforesaid , and until such time as it please God that we find that which we desire , i mean not to write my self . our lord God keep and preserve your excellende . from the province of Cibola , and from this city of Granada the three of August 1540 Francis Vasques de Coronado kiss the hand of your excellende . the rest of this voyage to Acuco , Tiguex , Cicuic , and Quivira , and unto the western ocean , be thus write in the general history of the west Indies by Francis Lopez de Gomara , Chap . 214 . because they will not return to Mexico without do something , nor with empty hand , they agree to pass further into the country , which be tell they to be better and better . so they come to 163 the western sea discover . Tiguex . Axa and Quivira . [ he . 381 . ] a town burn . another town assault . mantle . Turqueses . feather . precious thing . the english voyage Acuco a town upon a exceed strong hill . and from thence don Garcias Lopez de Cardenas with his company of horseman go unto the sea : and Francis Vasques go to Tiguex , which stand on the bank of a great river . there they have news of Axa and Quivira . there they say be a king who name be Tatarrax , with a long beard , hoary head , and rich , which be gird with a bracamart , which pray upon a pair of bead , which worship a cross of gold , and the image of a woman , the queen of heaven . this news do great rejoice and cheer up the army : although some think it to be false , and the report of the friar . they determine to go thither , with intention to winter in so rich a country as that be report to be . one night the Indian run away , and in the morning they find thirty horse dead , which put the army in fear . in their journey they burn a certain town : and in another town which they assault , they kill certain Spaniards , and wound fifty horse , and the inhabitant draw into their town Francis de Ovando wound or dead , to eat and sacrifice he as they think , or peradventure to see more perfect , what manner of man the Spaniard be : for there be not find there any sign of sacrifice man . our people lay siege unto the town , but can not take it in more than five and forty day space . the townsman that be besiege , drink snow in stead of water : and see themselves forlese they make a fire , wherein they cast their mantle , feather , turquese and precious thing , that those stranger may not enjoy they . they issue out in a squadron with their woman and child in the midst , to make way by force , and to save themselves , but few escape the edge of our sword and the horse , and a certain river which be near the town . Seven Spaniards be slay in this conflict , and fourscore be wound , and many horse : whereby a man may see of what force resolution be in necessity . 164 many Indian return to the town with the woman and child , and defend themselves , until our man set fire on the town . in this country there be melon , melon . and white and red cotton , whereof they make far large mantel , then in other part of the Indies . from fmre ' tigue they go in four day journey to Cicuic , which day journey be a small town , and four league from thence they meet from Tiguex . with a new kind of ox wild and fierce , whereof the first day they kill fourscore , which suffice the army with flesh . from Cicuic they go to Quivira , which after Quivira . their account , be almost three hundred league distant , through mighty plain , and sandy heath so smooth , and wearisome , and bare of wood , that they make heap of ox - dung for want of stone and tree , that they may heap of ox not lose themselves at their return : for three horse be mg make fir lose on that plain , and one Spaniard , which go from his n ° w company on hunt . all that way and plain be as full of crookebacked ox , as the mountain Serena in Spain be of sheep : but there be no people but such as keep those cattle . they be a great succour for the hunger and want of bread which our people stand in . one day it rain in that plain a great shower of hail , as big as orange , which cause many tear , weakness , and vow . at length they come to Quivira and find Tatarrax , who they seek , a hoary head man , naked , and with a j ewell of copper hang at his neck , which be all his riches . the then Spaniards Spaniards see the false report of so famous riches , return to ti - returned to Tiguex , without see either cross or ^ x \ an ^ soto show or chnstiamtie : and from thence to Mexico . TheSpaniards in the end of march of the year 1542 . Francis vas - wouldhavein - quez fall from his horse in Tiguex , and with the fall habit the fell out of his wit , and become mad . which some countrey - tooke to be for grief , and other think it to be but counterfeit : for they be much offend with he , because he people not the country . Quivira be in forty degree : it be a temperate country , and have very good water , and much grass , i65 ship see on the sea coast of Quivira , which be 30 . day in sapling thither . Andrew de Campo travail from Quivira to Panuco . the cause why the Spaniard people not in Cibola . [ in . 382 . ] the english voyage plum , mulberry , nut , melon and grape , which ripen very well . there be no cotton : and they apparel themselves with ox - hides and dear skin . they see ship on the sea coast , which bear Alcatrarzes or pelican of gold and silver in their prow , and be lade with merchandise , and they think they to be of Cathaya , and China , because they show our man by sign that they have sail thirty day . Frier John de Padilla stay behind in tigue , with another of his companion call friar Francis , and return to Quivira , with some dozen Indian of mechuacan , and with Andrew de Campo a Portugal ! , the gardener of Francis de solis : he take with he horse and mule with provision . he take sheep and hen of Castille , and ornament to say mass withal . the people of Quivira slay the friar , and the Portugal escape with certain Indian of mechuacan . who albeit at that time he escape death , yet can he not free himself out of captivity : for by and by after they catch he again . but ten month after he be take captive , he flee away with a couple of dog . as he travail , he bless the people with a cross , whereunto they offer much , and wheresoever he come , they give he alm , lodging , and food . he come to the country of the Chichimechas , and arrive at Panuco . when he come to Mexico , he wear his hair very long , and his beard tie up in a lace , and report strange thing of the land , river and mountain that he have pass . it grieve don Antonio de Mendosa very much that the army return home : for he have spend above threescore thousand peso of gold in the enterprise , and ought a great part thereof still . many seek to have dwell there ; but Francis Vasquez de Coronado , which be rich , and late marry to a fair wife , will not consent , say , that they can not maintain nor defend themselves in so poor a country , and so far from succour . they travail above nine hundred league in this country .