be all of one company , 306 and that it be a good deed to kill we , that those other may have no knowledge of we , lest they may come to do they harm : and that the old man have answer he , this be the son of the sun , and our lord , he do we good , and will not enter into our house , although we request he thereunto : he will take away nothing of we , he will meddle with none of our woman , and that to be short , he have speak many other thing in my commendation and favour : and for all this the other steadfast affirm that we be all one , and that the old man say , let we go unto he , and ask he whether he be a christian as the other 1540 the savage treason to be take heed of . be , or else the son of the sun : and the old man come unto i , and say : in the country of Cevola whereof you speak unto i doe other man like unto you dwell . than i begin to make as though i wonder , and answer he , that it be impossible ; and they assure i that it be true , and that two man have see they which come from thence , which report that they have thing which do shoot fire , and sword as we have . i ask they whether they have see they with their own eye ? and they answer no ; but that certain of their companion have see they . than he ask i whether i be the son of the sun , i answer he yea . they say that those Christians of Cevola say so likewise . and i answer they that it may well be . than they ask i if those Christians of Cevola come to join themselves with i , whether i will join with they : and i answer they , that they need not to fear any whit at all , for if they be the son of the sun as they say , they must needs be my brethren , and will use towards all man the like love certain news of the span yard at Cevola . and courtesy which i use : whereupon hereat they seem to be somewhat satisfy . 307 [ Chap . 7 it be tell he that they be ten day journey distant from Cevola , and that there be Christians there , which make war against the lord of that country . of the sodomy which those Indian use with four young man appoint for that service , which wear woman apparel . see they can not send news of their be there to they of Cevola , they go back again down the river to their ship . Cevola ten r ■ ^ en i pray they to tell i how many day that ^ fromms ^ lace kingdom of Cevola , which they speak of , be distant a desert of fr ° m that river : and that man answer , that there be ten dayesjour - the space of ten day journey without habitation , ne3 - and that he make none account of the rest of the way , because there be people to be find . upon this advertisement i be desirous to certify captain Francis Vazquez of my be there , and impart my mind [ three . 436 . ] with my soldier , among who i find none that be willing to go thither , although i offer they many reward in your lordship name , only one negro slave though with a evil will offr ed himself unto i to go thither : but i look for the come of those two Indian which they tell i of , and herewithal we go on our way up the river against the stream in such sort as we have do before . here that old man show i as a strange thing a son of his clad in woman apparel , exercise their office : i ask he how many there be of these among they , and he tell i there be four ; and that when any of they die , there be a search make of all the woman with child which be in the country , and that the first son which be bear of they , be appoint to do that duty belong unto woman , and that the woman clad he in their apparel , say , that see he be to do that which belong to they , he shall wear their apparel : these young man may not have carnail copulation with any woman : but all the young man of the country which be to marry , 308 may company with they . Theise man receive no kind of reward for this incestuous act of the people of that country , because they have liberty to take whatsoever they find in any house for their food . i see likewise certain woman which live dishonest among man : and i ask the old man whether they be marry , who answer i noe , but they be common woman , which live apart from the marry woman . i come at length after these discourse to pray they to send for those Indian , which they say have be at Cevola , and they tell i that they be eight day journey distant from that place , but that notwithstanding there be one among they which be their companion and which have speak with they , as he meet they on the way , when they go to see the kingdom of Cevola , and that they tell he that he be not best to go any far , for he shall find there a fierce nation like we , and of the same quality and make , which have fight much with the people of Cevola , because they have kill a negro of their company , say , wherefore , have you kill he ? what do he to you ? do he take any bread from you , or do you any other wrong ? and such like speech . and they say moreover , that these people be call Christians , which dwell in a great house , and that many of they have ox like those of Cevola , and ox of other little black beast with wool and home , and that evola - some of they have beast which they ride upon , which run very swift ; and that one day before their departure , from sun rise until sun set these Christians be all day in come thither , and all of they lodge in that place where other have lodge , and that these two meet with two Christians , which ask they whence they be , and whether they have field sow with corn ; and they tell they that they dwell in a far country , and that they have corn , and that then they give each of they a little cap , and they give they another to carry to their other companion , which they promise to do , and depart quick . when i understand this , i speak 3 ° 9 again with my company , to see if any one of they will go thither , but i find they unwilling as at the first , and they lay against i great inconvenience . than i call the old man to see if he will give i any people to go with i , and victual to travel through a desert , that wilderness , but he lay before i many inconvenience and danger , which i may incur in that voyage , show i the danger that there be in pass by a Cumana , lord of Cumana , which threaten to make war upon they , because his people have enter into the other country to take a stag , and that i shall not therefore depart thence without see he punish . and when i reply that in any wise i must needs go to Cevola , he will i to surcease from that purpose , for they look that that lord without all doubt will come to annoy they , 8c that therefore they can not leave their country naked to go with i , and that it will be better , that i will make a end of that war between they , and that then i may have their company to Cevola . and upon this point we grow to such variance , that we begin to grow into choler , and in a rage he will have go out of the boat , but i stay he , and with gentle speech begin to pacific he , see that it import i much to have he my friend : but for all my courtesy which i show he , i can not alter he from his mind , wherein he still remain obstinate . in this mean while i send a man away unto my ship to give they knowledge of the journey that i have determine to make . after this i pray the old man that he will fetch he back again , because i have determine , that see i see no mean to be able to go to Cevola , 8c because i will stay no long among those people , because they shall not discover i , and likewise because i mean in person to visit my ship , with determination to return again up the river , carry with i other companion , 8c leave there some which i have sick , and tell the old man and the rest that i will return , and leave they satisfy the best i 310 can ( although they always say that i go away for fear ) i return down the river : and that way which i have go against the stream up the river in 15 . day and a half , i make in my return in 2 . day and a half , because the stream be great and very swift . in this wise go down the river , much people come to the bank , say , sir , wherefore do you leave we ? what discourtesy have be do unto you ? do you he return in 2 . day and a half to his ship . not say that you will remain continual with we , and be our lord ? and turn back again ? if any [ he . 437 . ] man above the river have do you any wrong we will go with our weapon with you and kill he ; and such like word full of love and kindness . Chap . 8 . when they come to their ship the captain name that coast la Campanna de la Cruz , and build a chapel unto our lady , and call the river el Rio de buena guia , and return up the same again : when he come to Quicona and Coama the lord of those place use he very courteous . upon my arrival at my ship i find all my people in health , although very heavy for my long stay , and because the current have fret four of their cable , and that they have lose two anchor which be recover . after we have bring our ship together , i cause they to bring they into a good harbour , and to give the carena to the ship call sanct Peter , and to mend all thing that be needful . and here assemble all my company together , i open unto they what knowledge i have receive of Francis Vasquez ; and how it may be that in those sixteen day space which i be in sail up the river he may peradventure have some knowledge of i , and that i be mind to return up the river once again to try if i can find any mean to join my self with he : and although some speak against my determination , i cause all my boat to be make ready , because the ship have no need of 311 mark what the . i cause one of they to be fill with ware thing then of exchange , with corn and other seed , with hen spamardes and cock of Castille , and depart up the river , leave in new dis - order that in that province call Campanna de la Cruz emery . they shall build a oratory or chapel , and call it the chapel of our lady de la buena guia , and that Rio de bvena they shall call this river Rio de buena guia because guia - that be your lordship devise : i carry with i Nicolas Zamorano pilot mayor , to take the height of the pole . and i depart on Tuesday the fourteenth of September , and on Wednesday i come unto the first dwelling of the first Indian , which come run to hinder my passage , suppose that we have be other people , for we carry with we a fifer , and a drummer , and i be clad in other apparel than i go in before , when they see i first of all : and when they know i they stay , though i can not grow unto perfect friendship with they , whereupon i give they some of those seed which i bring with i ; teach they how they shall sow they : and after i have sail 3 league , my first interpretor come even to my boat to seek i with great joy , of who i demand wherefore he have leave i , he tell i that certain companion of his have lead he away . i make he good countenance and better entertainment , because he shall bear i company again , consider how much it do import i to have he with i . he excuse himself because he parrot in stay