place the captain cause the buttes to be take out , to the end they may be fill with water , and while they return to fetch the barrel and hogshead of the ship , the captain walk a turn or two upon the shore for the space of one or two crossbow shoot , and afterward we go up to certain of those 234 mountain , to view the disposition of the country , and in truth we find it in that place very bad to our judgement , for it be very ragged , full of wood and cave , and so stony , that we have much ado to go . be come unto the top we find certain small hill full of wood , and cliff that be not so craggy , although very troublesome to climb up ; and while we look from these little hill , we can not discern any more mountain , but rather judge that from that place forward there be great plain . the captain will not suffer we to go any further , because in those place we have see certain Indian which seem to be spy , and warn we thereof he command we to retire unto the shore , where we be to take in water , and to dispatch our business quick , and appoint we to make certain pit , that our butt may more easy be fill with water . And set our guard or centinel , we begin to fill water . in the mean while the captain take certain soldier , and go to the top of a high hill , from whence he descry a great part of the sea , and a lake which be within the land : for the sea enter in the space of a league , and there be a good fish place round about : and the lake be a fishingplace so great , that it seem unto we to be very near 30 ° f league in compass , for we can not discern the end thereof . than we come down with no less trouble ’ than we have mount up unto the hill , by reason of the steepenesse of the place , and some tumble down with no small laughter of the rest . And be come somewhat late to our water place ( for it be then past noon ) we set our self to dinner , always appoint some of our company in sentinel , until we be call to dinner , and when some be call two other be appoint in their room . and about two of the clock after dinner , the captain and the rest suspect no danger of assault of Indian , both because the place seem not to be fit for it , as also for that we have set our centinel at the passage ; two squadron of Indian 235 a sudden assault of the Indian with stone , arrow , and staff . [ Iii . 409 . ] the english voyage come upon we very secret and covert , for one come by the great valley through which the water run which we take , and the other come by a part of that great hill which we have ascend to see the lake , and all of they come so covert , that our centinel can neither see nor hear they ; and we have not perceive they , if a soldier by chance lift up his eye have not say , arm , arm , my master , for many Indian come upon we . when we hear this the captain leap up in a great rage , because the guard be change out of their place : and with his sword and target , be follow by a soldier , who name be Haro , and afterward by the rest , he and the say soldier go towards a little gate of certain stone , whither the rest of we be to follow he : for if the Indian have get that place from we , we shall have incur great danger , and the great part of we have like to have be slay , and none can have escape but such as by chance can have leap into the boat , and the tide go so high , that none can be save but such as be most excellent swimmer . but at length the captain bestir himself very nimble , use all celerity that be possible . therefore when he and Haro have win the gate , the rest of the soldier gate up after they , and the captain and Haro turn themselves to the Indian and make head against they , and the Indian assail they with such number of stone , arrow , and javelin ( which be a very strange thing ) that they break in piece the target which the captain have on his arm , and beside that wound he with a arrow in the bend of his knee , and though the wound be not great , yet be it very painful unto he . while they thus stand to withstand their assault , they strike Haro which be on the other side so forcible with a stone , that they throw he flat upon the ground : and by and by another stone light upon he which shiver his target , and they hit the captain with another arrow , and shoot he quite through one of his ear . another arrow come and strike a 236 soldier call Graviello Marques in the leg , of which he feel great pain and go halt . in the mean space Francis Preciado , and certain other soldier come up and join himself with the rest on the left hand of the captain , say unto he , sir , withdraw your self , for you be wound , but be you not dismay , for they be but Indian and can hurt we . in this wise we begin to rush in among they upon the side of a rock always gain ground of they , which great encourage our mind , and when we begin to enforce they to retire , we win a small woody hill , where we shelter our self , whereas before they shoot upon we from aloft , for they be on the high ground under covert in safety , and then by no mean we can offend they , but by run forcible upon they with our target on our arm , and our sword in our hand . on the other side , to approach and seek to overtake they be a vain thing , see they be as swift as wild goat . by this time Haro be get up on foot , and have clap a woollen cloth upon his head , which have bleed extreme , he join himself unto we , of who we receive no small aid . in the mean space the Indian fortify themselves on the crag of a rock , from whence they do not a little molest we , and we likewise fortify our self upon a hillock , whereby we descend into their fort , and there be a small valley between they and we , which be not very deep from the upper part . there we be 6 soldier and two negro with the captain , and all of we be of opinion that it be not good to pass that place , lest you Indian be many may destroy we all , for the rest of our soldier which be beneath at the foot of the hill , make head against the other squadron of the Indian , keep they from hurt those which take in water on the strand and from break the butt of water , and be but few , we conclude to stay here , and so we stand still fortify our self as well as we can , especial consider that we have no succour on any side ; for Berecillo our mastive - dogge which shall have 237 A . D . 1539 - the Spaniard use mastiffs in their warn against the Indian . Reade more hereof cap . 12 . the english voyage aid we be grievous wound with 3 arrow , so that by no mean we can get he from we : this mastive be wound in the first assault when the Indian come upon we , who behave himself very well , and great aid we ; for he set upon they , and put 8 or 10 of they out of array , 8c make they run away , leave many arrow behind they : but at length ( as i have say ) he be so wound , that by no mean we can get he to go from we to set any more upon the Indian , 8c the other two mastiff do we more harm than good : for when they go against they , they shoot at they with their bow , and we receive hurt and trouble in defend they . the captain leg when he wax cold be so swell , that we lap it up in a woollen cloth , and he halt much of it : and while the Indian thus stand still , one part of they begin to dance , sing , and shout , and then they begin all to lade themselves with stone , and to put their arrow into their bow , and to come down towards we very resolute to assault we , and with great outcry they begin to fling stone and to shoot their arrow . then Francis Preciado turn he to the captain and say : sir , these Indian know or think , that we be afeard of they , 8c in itrueth it be a great fait to give they this encouragement , it be better for we resolute to set upon they with these dog , 8c to assault they on this hill , that they may know we to be no dastard , for they be but Indian and dare not stand we ; and if we can get their fort upon the hill , God will give we victory in all the rest . the captain answer , that he like well of the motion , and that it be best so to do , although for any further pursuit up the hill , he think we be to take another course . by and by Francis Preciado get his target on his arm , and his sword in his hand , run unto the other side of the valley , which on that part be not very steep , cry saint Iago , upon they my master , and after he leap Haro , Teresa , Spinosa , and a crossebow - man call Montanno , and after they follow the captain , 238 1539 - though very lame , with a negro and a soldier which accompany he , encourage and comfort they , will they not to fear . thus we drive they to the place where they have fortify themselves , and from whence they descend , and we take another hill over against they within a dart cast of they . and have breathe our self a little , the captain come unto we , and say , go too my master , upon they before they strengthen themselves on this hill , for now we see plain that they be afeard of we , see we chase they continual from their fort : and sudden 3 or 4 of we go towards they well cover with target , unto the foot of their fort where they be assemble , and the rest of our company follow we : the Indian begin [ three . 410 . ] to make head against we , and to fling many stone upon we , and shoot many arrow , and we with our sword in our hand rush upon they in such sort , that they see how furious we set upon they , abandon the fort , and run down the hill as swift as deer , and flee unto another hill over against we , where the other squadron of the Indian stand , of who they be rescue , and they begin to talk among themselves , but in a low voice , and join together 6 and 6 and 8 8c 8 in a company , and make a fire and warm themselves , and we stand quiet behold what they do . 239 [ Chap . 9 after the skirmish the captain be wound , and the rest of the soldier see the Indian depart , return unto their ship . the next day take in fresh water at the say place he send mariner to sound the mouth of the lake . depart thence they come to the port call Baya de Sant Abad , and endure a dangerous storm at sea . and afterward come near the shore to take fresh water in the say haven , they see certain peaceable Indian . by this time it be late and the night approach , and the Indian see this , within a short while after determine to get they pack , and each of they or the great part take firebrand in their hand , and get they away into craggy place . when the captain see this he command we to return aboard our boat , it be now dark night , thank we all for the good service we have