their city that they shall not fear , and they shall 150 rather let the people stay in their house , because i come only in the name of his majesty to defend and aid they . and this do , Fernando Alvarado return to advertise i , that certain Indian be come unto they in peaceable manner , and that two of they stay for my come with the master of the field . whereupon i go unto they and give they bead and certain short cloak , will they to return unto their city , and bid [ three . 376 . ] they to stay quiet in their house , and fear nothing . and this do i send the master of the field to search wisefore - wheth there be any bad passage which the Indian cast it may keep against we , and that he shall take and defend it until the next day that i shall come thither . so he go , and find in the way a very bad passage , where we may have sustain very great harm : wherefore there he seat himself with his company that be with he : and that very night the Indian come to take that passage to defend it , and find it take , they assault our man there , and as they tell i , treason of they assault they like valiant man ; although in the the n ^ ans - ende they retire and flee away ; for the master of the field be watchful , and be in order with his company : the Indian in token of retreat sound on a certain small trumpet , and do no hurt among the Spaniard . the very same night the master of the great forecast field certify i hereof . whereupon the next day in the best order that i can i depart in so great want master . of victuali , that i think that if we shall stay one day long without food , we shall all perish for hunger , especial the Indian , for among we all we have not two bushel of corn : wherefore it behoove i to prick forward without delay . the Indian here and their make fire , and be answer again afar off as orderly as we for our life can have do , to give their fellow understanding , how we march and where we arrive . 0 . assoon as i come within sight of this city of Granada , at city y i send don Garcias Lopez campmaster , friar Daniel , Cibola . 151 the arrogande of the people of Cibola . the english voyage and friar Lewis , and Fernando Vermizzo somewhat before with certain horseman , to seek the Indian and to advertise they that our come be not to hurt they , but to defend they in the name of the emperor our lord , accord as his majesty have give we in charge : which message be deliver to the inhabitant of that country by a interpreter . but they like arrogant people make small account thereof ; because we seem very few in their eye , and that they may destroy we without any difficulty ; and they strike friar Lewis with a arrow on the gown , which by the grace of God do he no harm . in the mean space i arrive with all the rest of the horseman , and footman , and find in the field a great sort of the Indian which begin to shoot at we with command - their arrow : and because i will obey your will and mean to use ^ g command of the mark , i will not let my and they savage people charge they , forbid my company , which entreat i that they may set upon they , in any wise to provoke they , say that that which the enemy do be nothing , and that it be not meet to set upon so few people . on the other side the Indian perceive that we stir not , take great stomach and courage unto they : insomuch that they come hard to our horse heal to shoot at we with their arrow . whereupon see that it be now time to stay no long , and that the friar also be off the same opinion , i set upon they without any danger : for sudden they flee part to the city which be near and well fortify , and other into the field , which way they can shift : and some of the Indian be slay , and more have be if i will have suffer they to have be pursue . but consider that hereof we may reap but small profit , because the Indian that be without , be few , there be and those which be retire into the city , with they t ^ towne ' which stay within at the first be many , where the ' comara ^ ist . victual be whereof we have so great need , i assemble gen . cap . wonderful > - my people , and divide they as i think best to assault ! 52 the city , and i compass it about : and because the famine which we sustain suffer no delay , my self with certain of these gentleman and soldier put our self on foot , and command that the crossbow and harquebusier shall give the assault , and shall beat the enemy from the wall , that they may not hurt we , and i assault the wall on one side , where they tell i there be a scale ladder set up , and that there be one gate : but the crossebowman sudden break the string of their bow , and the harquebusier do nothing at all : for they come thither so weak and feeble , that scarce they can stand on their foot : and by this mean the people that be aloft on the wall to defend the town be no way hinder from do we all the mischief they can : so that twice they strike i to the ground with infinite number of great stone , which they cast down : and if i have not be defend with a excellent good headpiece which i wear , i think it have go hardly with i : nevertheless my company take i up with two small wound in the face , and a arrow stick in my foot , and many blow with stone on my arm and leg , and thus i go out of the battle very weak . i think that if don Garcias Lopez they defend the wait with stone like those of Hochelaga . de Cardenas the second time that they strike i to the ground have not succour i with stride over i like a good knight , i have be in far great danger than i be . but it please God that the Indian yield themselves unto we , and that this city be take : and such store of Maiz be find therein , as our necessity [ three . 377 . ] require . the master of the field , and don Pedro de Tovar , and Fernando de Alvarado , and Paul de Melgosa captain of the footman escape with certain knock with stone : though none of they be wound with arrow , yet Agoniez Quarez be wound in one arm with the shot of a arrow , and one Torres a townsman of Panuco be shoot into the face with another , and two footman more have two small wound with arrow . and because my armour be gild and glitter , they 153 excellent house four or five loft high . all lay load on i , and therefore i be more wound than the rest , not that i do more than they , or put my self forward than the rest , for all these gentleman and soldier carry themselves as manful as be look for at their hand . i be now well recover i thank God , although somewhat bruise with stone . likewise in the skirmish which we have in the field , two or three other soldier be hurt , and three horse slay , one of don Lopez , the other of Viliega and the three of don Alonso Manrique , and seven or eight other horse be wound ; but both the man and horse be whole and sound . Chap . 3 . of the situation and state of the seven city call the kingdom of Cibola , and of the custom and quality of those people , and of the beast which be find there . it remain now to certify your honour of the seven city , and of the kingdom es and province whereof the father provinciali make report unto your lordship . and to be brief , i can assure your honour , he say the truth in nothing that he report , but all be quite contrary , save only the name of the city , and great house of stone : for although they be not wrought with turquese , nor with lime , nor brick , yet be they very excellent good house of three or four or five loft high , wherein be good lodging and fair chamber with lather in stead of stair , and certain cellar under the ground very good and pave , which be make for winter , they be in manner like stoove : and the lather which they have for their house be all in a manner moveable and portable , which be take away and set down when they please , and they be make of two piece of wood with their step , as we be . the seven city be seven small town , all make with these kind of house that i speak of : and they stand all within four league together , and they * 54 be all call the kingdom of Cibola , and every one Cibola be a of they have their particular name : and none of they be call Cibola , but altogether they be call Cibola . and this town which i call a city , i have name Granada , as well because it be somewhat like unto it , as also in remembrance of your lordship . in this town where i now remain , there may be some two hundred house , all compass with wall , and i think that with the rest of the house which be not so wall , they may be together five hundred . there five hundred be another town near this , which be one of the seven , bouse in and it be somewhat big than this , and another of the ’ same bigness that this be of , and the other four be somewhat less : and i send they all paint unto your faint ne - lordship with the voyage . and the parchment wherein [ essarl ^ zn a the picture be , be find here with other parchment . new tscovery it the people of this town seem unto i of a reasonable stature , and witty , yet they seem not to be such as they shall be , of that judgement and wit to build these house in such sort as they be . for the most part they go all naked , except their privy part which be cover : and they have paint mantle like those paint which i send unto your lordship . they have no cotton mantbes - wooll grow , because the country be cold , yet they wear mantel thereof as your honour may see by the show thereof : and true it be that there be find in their house certain yarn make of cotton wool . they wear their hair on their head like those of Mexico , and they be well nurture and condition : and they store of tur - have turquese i think good quantity , which with the lueses - rest of the good which they have , except their corn , they have convey away before i come thither : for i find no woman there , nor no youth under fifteen year old , nor no old folk above sixty , save two or three old folk , who stay behind to govern all the rest of the youth and man of war . there be find in a certain paper two point of emrald , and emrald . certain small stone break which be in colour some - 155 excellent and very great guinie cock . [ HL 378 - ] Gomara hist . gen . Cap . zi $ . say that that the cold be by reason of the high mountain . a wood of cedar . excellent grass . deer , hare , and cony . what like granate very bad , and other stone of crystal , which i give one of my servant to lay up to send they to your lordship , and he have lose they as he tell i . we find here guinie cock , but few . the Indian tell i in all these seven city , that they eat they not , but that they keep they only for their feather . i believe they not , for they be excellent good , and great than those