of Mexico . the season which be in this country , and the temperature of the air be like that of Mexico : for sometime it be hot , and sometime it rain : but hitherto i never see it rain , but once there fall a little shower with wind , as they be wont to fall in Spain . the snow and cold be wont to be great , for so say the inhabitant of the country : and it be very likely so to be , both in respect to the manner of the country , and by the fashion of their house , and their fur and other thing which this people have to defend they from cold . there be no kind of fruit nor tree of fruit . the country be all plain , and be on no side mountainous : albeit there be some hilly and bad passage . there be small store of fowl : the cause whereof be the cold , and because the mountain be not near . here be no great store of wood , because they have wood for their fuel sufficient four leaugue off from a wood of small cedar . there be most excellent grass within a quarter of a league hence , for our horse as well to feed they in pasture , as to mow and make hay , whereof we stand in great need , because our horse come hither so weak and feeble . the victual which the people of this country have , be Maiz , whereof they have great store , and also small white pease : and venison , which by all likelihood they feed upon , ( though they say no ) for we find many skin of deer , of hare , and cony . they eat the best cake that ever i see , and every body general eat of they . they have the fine order and way to grind that we ever see in any place . and one Indian woman of this country will grind as much as four woman of Mexico . they have most excellent salt in kernel , which they fetch ery good from a certain lake a day journey from hence . they s ^^ esterne have no knowledge among they of the north sea , nor sea within of the western sea , neither can i tell your lordship 150 . league to which we be near : but in reason they shall fnm seem to be near to the western sea : and at the lion lest i think i be a hundred and fifty league from porkesplck , ’ thence : and the northern sea shall be much further mlghtlesheep , off . your lordship may see how broad the land be wild gpate . here . here be many sort of beast , as bear , tiger , bose . Lions , porkespick , and certain sheep as big as a horse , with very great home and little tail , i have stag . see their home so big , that it be a wonder to be - tty travalle hold their greatness . here be also wild goat who rd ^ head likewise i have see , and the paw of bear , n ^ e sea . and the skin of wild boar . there be game of deer , qxe hide ounce , and very great stag : and all man be of dress and opinion that there be some big than that beast f ° ity ^ very which your lordship bestow upon i , which once belong to John Melaz . they travel eight day journey unto certain plain lie towards the north sea in this country there be certain skin well dress , and they dress they and paint they where they kill their ox , for so they say themselves . 157 [ Chap . 4 . Tadouac seems because it be a lake , and end in ac to have some affinity herewith . other town near a river . Chap . 4 . of the state and quality of the kingdom of Totonteac , Marata , and Acus , quite contrary to the relation of Frier Marcus . the conference which they have with the Indian of the city of Granada which they have take , which have fifty year past foresee the coming of the christian into their country . the relation which they have of other seven city , whereof Tucano be the principali , and how he send to discover they . a present of diverse thing have in these country scent unto the viceroy Mendosa by Vasques de Coronado . the kingdom of Totonteac so much extol by the father provinciali , which say that there be such wonderful thing there , and such great matter , and that they make cloth there , the Indian say be a hot lake , about which be five or six house ; and that there be certain other , but that they be ruinate by war . the kingdom of Marata be not to be find , neither have the Indian any knowledge thereof . the kingdom of Acus be one only small city , where they gather cotton which be call Acucu . and i say that this be a town . for Acus with a aspiration nor without , be no word of the country . and because i guess that they will derive acucu of Acus , i say that it be this town whereinto the kingdom of Acus be convert . beyond this town they say there be other small town which be near to a river which i have see and have have report of by the relation of the Indian . i will to God i have better news to write unto your lordship : nevertheless i must say the truth : and as i write to your lordship from culiacan , i be now to advertise your honour as well of the good as of the bad . yet this i will have you be assure , that if all the riches and the treasure of the world be here , i can have do no more in the service of his majesty and of your 158 1540 lordship , than i have do in come hither whither you have send i , my self and my companion carry our victual upon our shoulder and upon our horse three hundred league ; and many day go on foot travail over hill and rough mountain , with other trouble which i cease to mention , neither purpose i to depart unto the death , if it please his majesty and your lordship that it shall be so . three day after this city be take , certain Indian [ three . 379 . ] of these people come to offer i peace , and bring i certain turquese and bid mantle , and i re - turqueses . ceive they in his majesty name with all the good mant ^ es - speaches that i can devise , certify they of the purpose of my come into this country , which be in the name of his majesty , and by the commandment of your lordship , that they and all the rest of the people of this province shall become Christians , and shall know the true God for their lord , and receive his majesty for their king , and earthly sovereign : and herewithal they return to their house , and sudden Indian the next day they set in order all their good and sub - A * / 1 ’ stance , their woman and child , and flee to the hill , w - tves child leave their town as it be abandon , wherein re - and good . maim very few of they . when i see this , within eight or ten day after be recover of my wound , i go to the city , which i say to be great than a city great this where i be , and find there some few of they , ^ Granada . to who i say that they shall not be afraid , and that they shall call their governor unto i : howbeit , forasmuch as i can learn or gather , none of they have any governor : for i see not there any chief house , whereby any preeminence of one over another may be gather . after this a old man come , which say that he be their lord , with a piece of a mantle make of many piece , with who i reason that small while that he stay with i , and he say that within three day after , he and the rest of the chief of that town will come and visit i , and give order what course shall 159 be take with they . which they do : for they bring i certain mantle and some turquese . i advise they to come down from their hold , and to return with their wife and child to their house , and to become Christians , and that they will acknowledge the emperor majesty for their king and lord . and even to this present they keep in those strong hold their woman and child , and all the good which they have . two table i command they that they shall paint i out a paint by the of aq e beast which they know in their country : beasts0 ” 6 and such bid painter as they be , forthwith they another of paint i two clothes , one of their beast , another bird and of their bird and fish . they say that they will bring fish . their child , that our religious man may instruct they , and that they desire to know our law : and they assure ^^ thatlhcM we ’ a ^ ove year past be prophesy among part shall be they , that a certain people like we shall come , and subdue by from that part that we come from , and that they shall christian . subdue all that country . they worship that which these Indian worship as far as hitherto the water . we can } earnej be the water : for they say it cause their corn to grow , and maintain their life ; and that they know none other reason , but that their ancestor do so . i have seek by all mean possible to learn of the inhabitant of these town , whether they have any knowledge of other people , country and city : and seven city they tell i of seven city which be far distant from ^ Granada p ^ ace ’ i be bke unto these , though they have it not house like unto these , but they be of earth , and small : and that among they much cotton be gather . the chief of these town whereof they have knowledge , Tucana . they say be call Tucano : and they give i no perfect knowledge of the rest . and i think they do not tell i the truth , imagine that of necessity i must speedy depart from they , and return home . but herein they shall soon find themselves deceive . i send don Pedro de Tovar with his company of footman and with certain other horseman to see this town : and i will not 160 have dispatch this packet unto your lordship , until i have know what this town be , if i have think that within twelve or fifteen day i may have have news from he : for he will stay in this journey thirty day at least . and have examine that the knowledge hereof be of small importance , and that the cold and the water approach : i think it my duty to do according as your lordship give i charge in your instruction , which be , that immediate upon my arrival here , i shall signify so much unto your lordship , and so i do , send withal the bare relation of that which i have see . i have determine to send round about the country from hence to have knowledge of all thing , and rather to suffer all extremity , than to leave this enterprise to serve his majesty , if i may find any thing wherein i may perform it , and not to omit any diligence therein , until your lordship send i order what i shall do . we have great want of pasture : and your lordship also shall understand , that among all those which be here , there be not one pound of raisin , nor sugar , nor oil , nor any the Spaniard wine , save only one pint which be save to say mass : willing ™ for all be spend and spill by the way . now your lordship ’ may provide we what you think needful . and if your honour mean to send we cattle , your lordship must understand that they will be a summer in come unto we : for they will not be able to come unto we any soon . i will have send your lordship with this dispatch many muster of thing which be in this country : but the way be so long and rough , that it be hard for i to do so