there to bring i certain feather of parrot , these part . which he give i . i ask he what people these be , and whether they have any lord : he answer i , yea ; and name three or four unto i , of four or 25 name of people which he know and that they have house paint within , and that they have traffic with two moon those of Cevola , and that in two moon he come into to Cevola . the country . he tell i moreover many other name lord , and other people , which i have write down particular of in a b ° oke ot i , which 1 will bring my self unto that country . your lordship . but i think good to deliver this 312 ...... I54 °‘ brief relation to Augustine Guerriero in this haven of Colima , that he may send it overland to your lordship , to who i have many other thing to impart . but to return to my journey , i arrive at Quicama , Quicoma . where the Indian come forth with great joy and gladness to receive i , advertise i that their lord wait for my come ; to who when i be come i find that he have with he five or six thousand man without weapon , from who he go apart with some two hundred only , all which bring victual with they , and so he come towards i , go before the rest with great authority , and before he and on each side of he be certain which make the people stand aside , make he way to pass . he wear a garment close before and behind and open on both side , fasten with button , wrought with white and black chequer work , it be very soft and well make , be of the skin of certain delicate fish call sea bream . assoon as he be come to the water side his servant take he up in their arm , and bring he into my boat , where i embrace he and receive he with great joy , show unto he much kindness : upon which entertainment his people stand by and behold the same seem not a little to rejoice . this lord turn himself to his people will they to consider my courtesy , and that he be of his own accord come unto i with a strange people , they may see how good a man i be , and with how great love i have entertain he , and that therefore they shall take i for their lord , and that all of they shall become my servant , and do whatsoever 1 will [ three . 438 . ] command they . there i cause he to sit down , and to eat certain conserves of sugar which i have bring with i , and will the interpreter to thank he in my name for the favour which he have do i in vouchsafe to come to see i , recommend unto he the worship of the cross , and all such other thing as i have recommend to the 313 rest of the Indian ; namely that they shall live in peace , and shall leave off war , and shall continue always good friend together : he answer that of long time they have continue in war with their neighbour , but that from thence forward he will command his people that they shall give food to all stranger that pass through his kingdom , and that they shall do they no kind of wrong , and that if any nation shall come to invade he , he say he will tell they how i have command that they shall live in peace , and if they refuse the same , he will defend himself , and promise i , that he will never go to seek war , if other come not to invade he . than i give he certain trifle , as well of the seed which i bring , as of the hen of Castille , wherewith he be not a little please . and at my departure i carry certain of his people with i , to make friendship between they and those other people which dwell above the river : and here the interpreter come unto i , to crave leave to return home ; and i give he certain gift wherewith he depart great satisfy . Coama . the next day i come to Coama , and many of they know i not , see i clad in other aparrel , but the old man which be there as soon as he know i leap into the water , say unto i , sir , lo here be the man which you leave with i , which come forth very joyful and pleasant declare unto i the great courtesy which that people have show he , say that they have stroven together who shall have he to his house , and that it be incredible to think what care they have at the rise of the sun to hold up their hand and kneel before the cross . i give they of my seed , and thank they hearty for the good entertainment which they have show my man , and they beseech i that i will leave he with they , which i grant they until my return , and he stay among they very willing . thus i go forward up the river , take that old man in my company , which tell i , that two 314 Indian come from Cumana to inquire for the christian , Cumana . and that he have answer they that he know none such , but that he know one which be the son of the sun , and that they have persuade he to join with they treason of they to kill i and my companion . i wish he to lend i two Indian , and i will send word by they , that i will come unto they , and be desirous of their friendship , but if that they on the contrary will have war , i will make such a war with they , that shall displease they . and so i pass through all that people , and some come and ask i , why i have not give they cross as well as the rest , and so i give they some . Chap . 9 they go on land , and see the people worship the cross which they have give they . the captain cause a Indian to make a draught of the country : he send a cross to the lord of Cumana , and go down the river with the stream , he arrive at his ship . of the error of the pilot of Cortes as touch the situation of this coast . the next day i go on land to see certain cottage , and i find many woman and child hold up their hand and kneel before a cross which i have give they . when i come thither i do the like my self ; and confer with the old man , he begin to inform i of as many people and province as he know . and when evening be come i call the old man to come and lodge with i in my boat ; he answer that he will not go with i because i will weary he with ask he question of so many matter : i tell he that i will request he nothing else but that he will set i down in a chart as much as he know concern that river , and what manner of people those be which dwell upon the bank thereof on both side : which he do willing . and then he request i that i will describe my country unto he , as he have do his unto i . and for to 315 content he , i cause a draught of certain thing to be make for he . the next day i enter between certain very high mountain , through which this river pass with a strait chanel , and the boat go up against the stream very hardly for want of man to draw the same . here certain Indian come and tell i , that in the same place , there be certain people of Cumana , a enchanter , and among the rest a enchanter , who inquire which way we will pass ; and they tell he that we mean to pass by the river , he set certain cane on both side thereof , through which we pass , without receive any kind of damage which they intend against we . thus go forward i come unto the house of the old man which be in my company , and here i cause a very high cross to be set up , whereupon i engrave certain letter to signify that i be come thither : and this i do , that if by chance any of the people of the [ three . 439 . ] generail Vasquez de Coronado shall come thither , they may have knowledge of my be there . at length see i can not attain to the knowledge of that which i seek for , i determine to return back unto my ship . And be ready to depart there arrive two Indian , which by mean of the interpreter of the old man , tell i that they be send to i , and that they be of Cumana , and that their lord can not come himself , because he be far from that place , but desire i to signify unto he what my pleasure be . i tell they , that i wish that he will always embrace peace , and that i be come to see that country , but be enforce to return back down the river i can not now do it , but that hereafter i will return , and that in the mean season they shall give that cross unto their lord , which they promise i to do , and they go direct to carry he that cross with certain this river feather which be on the same . of these i seek to he ^ up ^ n ' understand what people dwell upward upon the bank he ^ tra ^ they and iverJ which give i knowledge of many people , veil . and tell i that the river go far moor up into the 316 land then i have yet see , but that they know not the head thereof , because it be very far into the country , and that many other river fall into the same . have learn thus much the next day morning i return down the river , and the day follow i come where i have leave my Spaniard , with who i speak , and tell he that all thing have go well with i , and that at this time and the former i have go above 30 league into the country . the Indian of that place inquire of i what the cause be of my departure , and when i will return ; to who i answer , that i will return short . thus sail down the stream , a woman leap into the water cry unto we to stay for she , and she come into our boat , and creep under a bench , from whence we can not make she to come out : i understand that she do this , because her husband have take unto he another wife , by who he have child , say that she mean not to dwell any long with he , see he have take another wife . thus she and another Indian come with i of their own accord , and so i come into my ship , and make they ready we proceed home on our voyage , coast and oftentimes go on land , and enter a great way into the country , to see if i can learn any news of captain Francis Vasquez and his company ; of who i can have no other knowledge , but such as i learn in the aforesaid river . i bring with i many act of take possession of all that coast . and by the situation of the river , and the height which i take , i find that that which the master and pilot of the marquess take be false , and that they be deceive by 2 degree , and i have sail beyond they above 4 degree . i sail up he sail it , the river 8 5 league , where i see and learn all the the particular before mention , and many other thing ; ' whereof when it shall please God to give i leave to kiss your lordship hand , i will deliver you the full and perfect relation . i think my self to have have 317 very good fortune , in that i find don Luis de Castilia , the port of and Augustine Ghenero in the port of Colima : for the Colima . Galiot of the adolantado come upon i , which be there with the rest of his fleet , and command i to strike sail , which seem a strange thing unto i , and not understand in what state thing be in Nueva Espanna , i go about to defend my self , and not to do it . in the mean while come don Luis de Castilia in a boat and confer with i , and i lay at anchor on the other side of the haven where the say fleet road , and i give unto he this relation ( and to avoid strife i determine to sail away by night ) which relation i carry about i brief write ; for i always have a purpose to send the same , as soon as i shall touch upon Nueva Espanna , to advertise your lordship of my proceed .