a relation of the reverend father friar Marco [ he . 366 . ] de Nifa , touch his discovery of the kingdom of Cevola or Cibola , situate about 30 . degree of latitude , to the north of Nueva Espanna . Chap . 1 . Frier Marco de ni ? a depart from saint Michael in the province of culiacan , stand in 24 . degree of northerly latitude : and come to the town of Petatlan , receive many courtesy of the Indian there . depart from thence , he have information of many island , and of a great country inhabit with civil people ; he come to Vacupa : where during his abode , he hear news of Cevola , and of the state of the 7 . city , and of other province , and of the rich island of pearl , which extent northward upon the coast . Frier Marco de ni ? a of the order of saint Francis , for the execution of the instruction of the right honourable lord don Antonio de Mendosa , viceroy and captain general for the emperor majesty in new Spain , depart from the town of saint Michael in the province of culiacan on Friday the 7 . of march , in the year 1539 have for my companion Frier Honoratus , and carry with i Stephan a negro , belong to Andrew Dorantez , and certain of those Indian which the say lord viceroy have make free , and buy for this purpose : who Francis Vazquez de Coronado governor of Nueva Galicia deliver i , and with many other Indian of Petatlan , and of the town call Cuchillo , which be some 50 . league from Petatlan , who come to the valley of culiacan , show themselves to bee exceed glad , because they be certify by the i2 the english voyage Indian which have be set free , who the say governor have send before to advertise they of their liberty , that none of they from thenceforth shall be make slave , and that no man shall invade they , nor use they bad ; signify unto they , that the emperor majesty have will and command that it shall be so . with the foresay company i go on my voyage until i come to the town of Petatlan , find all the way great entertainment , and provision of victual , with rose , flower , and other such thing , and bower which they make for i of chalk and bough plait together in all place where there be no house . in this town of Petatlan i rest 3 . day , because my companion Honoratus fall so sick , that i be constrain to leave he there behind . then , accord to my say instruction , i follow my journey as the holy ghost do lead i , without any merit of i , have in my company the say Stephan the negro of Dorantez , and certain of the Indian which have be set at liberty , and many of the people of the country , which give i great entertainment and welcome in all place where i come , and make i bower of tree , give i such victual as they have , although they be but small : because ( as they say ) it have not rain there in 3 year , and because the Indian of this country seek mean rather to hide themselves , than to sow corn , for fear of the Christians of the town of S . Michael , which be wont to make inroad even to that place , and to war upon they , and to carry they away captive . in all this way , which may be about 25 . or 30 . league from that part of Petatlan , i see nothing worthy the note , save that there come to seek i certain Indian from the island , where Fernando Cortes the mark of the valley have be , of who i be inform , that it be a island , and not firm land , as some suppose it to be . they come to you firm land upon certain raft of wood : and from the main to the island be but half a league by sea , little more or less . likewise cer - 126 take Indian of another island great than this come a greatisland , to visit i , which island be far off , of who i be inform that there be 30 . other small island , which be inhabit , but have small store of victual , save 2 . new island of which have Maiz or corn of the country . Theise in - California dian have about their neck many great shell which be rtchmpearle . mother of pearl . i show they pearl which i carry with i for a show , and they tell i that there be in the island great store of they , and those very great : howbeit i see none of they . i follow my voyage through a desert of 4 . day journey , have in my company both the Indian of the island , and those of the mountain which i have pass , and at the end of this desert i find other Indian which marvel to see i , because they have no knowledge of any Christians , have no traffic nor conversation with those Indian which i have pass , in regard of the great desert which be worse desert fiure between they . Theise Indian entertain i exceed daiesj ° urne ^- courteously , and give i great store of victual , and seek to touch my garment , and call i Hayota , which in their language signify a man come from heaven . Theise Indian i advertise by my interpreter , accord to my instruction , in the knowledge of our lord God in heaven , and of the emperor . in these country and in all place else by all way and mean possible , i seek in - [ he . 367 . ] formation where any country be of moor city and people of civility and understanding , than those which i have find : and i can hear no news of any such : howbeit they tell i , that four or five day journey within the country , at the foot of the mountain , there be a large and mighty plain , wherein they tell i , ™ s be the that there be many great town , and people clad in Cotton : and when i show they certain metal which i ' carry with i , to learn what rich metal be in the land , they take the minerali of gold and tell i , that thereof be vessel among the people of that plain , and that they carry certain round green stone hang at their nostril , and at their ear , 127 Vacupa a town 40 . league from the bay of California . the english voyage and that they have certain thin plate of that gold , wherewith they scrape off their sweat , and that the wall of their temple be cover therewith , and that they use it in all their household vessel . and because this valley be distant from the sea - coast , and my instruction be not to leave the coast , i determine to leave the discovery thereof until my return ; at which time i may do it more commodious . thus i travel three day journey through town inhabit by the say people , of who i be receive as i be of those which i have pass , and come unto a town of reasonable bigness , call Vacupa , where they show i great courtesy , and give i great store of good victual , because the soil be very fruitful , and may be water . this town be forty league distant from the sea and because i be so far from the sea , it be two day before passion Sunday , i determine to stay there until easter , to inform my self of the island , whereof i say before that i have information . and so i send certain Indian to the sea by three several way , who i command to bring i some Indian of the seacoast and of some of those island , that i may receive information of they : and i send Stephan Dorantez the negro another way , who i command to go direct northward fifty or threescore league , to see if by that way he may learn any news of any notable thing which we seek to discover , and i agree with he , that if he find any knowledge of any people and rich country which be of great importance , that he shall go no further , but shall return in person , or shall send i certain Indian with that token which we be agree upon , to wit , that if it be but a mean thing , he shall send i a white cross of one handful long ; and if it be any great matter , one of two handful long ; and if it be a country great and better than Nueva Espanna , he shall send i a great cross . So the 12 say Stephan depart from i on Passion - sunday after dinner : and within four day after the messenger of Stephan return unto i with a great cross as high as a man , and they bring i word from Stephan , that i shall forthwith come away after he , for he have find people which give he information of a very mighty province , and that he have certain Indian in his company , which have be in the say province , and that he have send i one of the say Indian . this Indian tell i , that it be thirty day fr ° m Vacupa journey from the town where Stephan be , unto the ayes ^ 6 first city of the say province , which be call Cevola . jOumey . he affirm also that there be seven great city in this province , all under one lord , the house whereof be make of lime and stone , and be very great , and the least of they with one loft above head , and some of two and of three loft , and the house of the lord of the province of four , and that all of they join one unto the other in good order , and that in the gate of the principali house there be many turques - stone cunning wrought , whereof he say they have there great plenty : also that the people of this city go very well apparel : and that beyond this there be other province , all which ( he say ) be much great than these seven city . i give credit to his speech , because i find he to be a man of good understanding : but i defer my departure to follow Stephan Dorantes , both because i think he will stay for i , and also to attend the return of my messenger which i have send unto the sea , who return unto i upon easter day , bring with they certain inhabitant of the sea - coast , and of two of the island . of who i understand , that the island above mention be scarce of victual , as i have learn before , and that they be inhabit by people , which be greatpearles shell of pearl upon their forehead , and they say that tmd much gold they have great pearl , and much gold . they in - isk ° f form i of four and thirty island , lie one near ichare ’^ unto another : they say that the people on the sea - coast in number . ix 129 1 have small store of victual , as also those of the island , and that they traffic one with the other upon raft . this coast stretch northward as be to be see . Theise Indian of the coast bring i certain target make of cow - hydes very well dress , which be so large , that they cover they from the head to the very foot , with a hole in the top of the same to look out before : they be so strong , that a crossbow ( as i suppose ) will not pierce they . [ Iii . 368 . ] Chap . 2 . he have new information of the seven city by certain Indian call pintado , and of three other kingdom call Marata , Acus , and Totonteac , be country very rich in turquese and hide of cattle . follow his voyage through those country , he take possession thereof for the emperor majesty , and of the Indian be much honour and serve with victual . the same day come three Indian of those which i call pintado , because i see their face , breast and arm paint . Theise dwell far up into the country towards the east , and some of they border upon the seven city , which say they come to see i , because they have hear of i : and among other thing , they give i information of the seven city , and of the other province , which the Indian that Stephan send i have tell i of , almost in the very same manner that Stephan have send i word ; and so i send back the people of the sea - coast : and two Indian of the island say they will go with i seven or eight day . so with these and with the three pintado above mention , i depart from Vacupa upon Easter Tuesday , the same way that Stephan go , from who i receive new messenger with a cross of the bigness of the first which he send i : which hasten i forward , 13 ° and assure i that the land which i seek for , be the great and best country in all those part . the say messenger tell i particular without fail in any one point , all that which the first messenger have tell i , and much more , and give i more plain information thereof . so i travel that day be easter Tuesday , and two day more , the very same way that Stephan have go : at the end of which 3 day they tell i , that from that place a man may travel in thirty day to the city of Cevola , which be the first of the seven . neither do one only tell i thus much , but very many ; who tell i very particular of the greatness of the house , and of the fashion of they , as the first messenger have inform i . also they tell i , that beside these seven city , there be 3 . other kingdom which be call Marata , Acus , and Totonteac . i inquire of they wherefore they travel so far from their house ? they say that they go for Turqueses , and hide of cow , and other thing ; and that of all these there be great abundance in this country . likewise i inquire how , and by what mean they obtain these thing ? they tell i , by their service , and by the sweat of their brow , and that they go unto the first city of the province which be call Cevola , and that they serve they in till their ground , and in other business , and that they give they hide of ox , which they have in those place ,