day do break , and so put our self in danger of cast away : the wind and sea grow so foul and strong , that within two hour after the storm begin , eight ship that be together be so disperse , that we can not see one another . one of the ship of our company be of the burden of 500 tun call the hulk of carrion , will not cast about to sea as we do , but go that night with the land , think in the morning to purchase the port of saint John de ullua , but miss the port go with the shore and be cast away . there be drown of that ship 75 . person , man , woman and child , and 64 . be save that can swim , and have mean to save themselves : among those that perish in that ship , be a gentleman who have be present the year before in saint Domingo , his wife and 4 . daughter with the rest of his servant and household . we with the other 7 . ship cast about into the sea , the storm 343 A . D . 1556 . during 10 . day with great might , boisterous wind , fog and rain : our ship be old and weak be so toss , that she open at the stern a fathom under water , and the best remedy we have be to stop it with bed and pilobier , and for fear of sink we throw and lighten into the sea all the good we have or can come by : but that will not serve . than we cut our main mast and throw all our ordinance into the sea save one piece , which early in a morning when we think we shall have sink , we shoot off , and as please God there be one of the ship of our company near unto we , which we see not by mean of the great fog , which hear the sound of the piece , and understand some of the company to be in great extremity , begin to make towards we , and when they come within hear of we , we desire they for the love of God to help to save we , for that we be all like to perish . they will we to hoist our foresail as much as we can and make towards they , for they will do their best to save we , and so we do : and we have no soon hoist our foresail , but there come a gale of wind and a piece of a sea , strike in the foresail , and carry sail and mast all overboard , so that than we think there be no hope of life . and then we begin to embrace one another , every man his friend , every wife her husband , and the child their father and mother , commit our soul to almighty God , think never to escape alive : yet it please God in the time of most need when all hope be pass , to aid we with his help hand , and cause the wind a little to cease , so that within two hour after , the other ship be able to come aboard we , and take into she with her boat man , woman and child , naked without hose or shoe upon many of our foot . i do remember that the last person that come out of the ship into the boat , be a woman black moor , who leap out of the ship into the boat with a young suck child in her arm , leap too short and fall into the sea , and be a good while under 344 the water before the boat can come to rescue she , and with the spread of her clothes rise above water again , and be catch by the coat and pull into the boat have still her child under her arm , both of they half drown , and yet her natural love towards her child will not let she let the child go . and when she come aboard the boat she hold her child so fast under her arm still , that two man be scant able to get it out . so we depart out of our ship and leave it in the sea : it be worth four hundred thousand ducat , ship and good when we leave it . and within three day after we arrive at our port of saint John de ullua in new Spain . i do remember that in the great and [ three . 450 . ] boisterous storm of this foul weather , in the night , there come upon the top of our main yard and main mast , a certain little light , much like unto the light of a little candle , which the Spaniard call the cuerpo santo , and say it be S . Elmo , who they cuerpo Santo . take to be the advocate of sailor . at the which sight the Spaniard fall down upon their knee and worship it , pray God and S . Elmo to cease the torment , and save they from the peril that they be in , with promise he that at their come on land , they will repair unto his chapel , and there cause mass to be say , and other ceremony to be do . the friar cast relic into the sea , to cause the sea to be still , and likewise say gospel , with other cross and ceremony upon the sea to make the storm to cease : which ( as they say ) do much good to weaken the fury of the storm . but i can not perceive it , nor give no credit to it , till it please God to send we the remedy and deliver we from the rage of the same , his name be praise therefore . this light continue aboard our ship about three hour , fly from mast to mast , and from top to top : and sometime it will be in two or three place at once . i inform my self of learned man afterward what that light shall be , and they say , that it be but a congelation of the wind and vapour of the sea congeal with the ex - 345 tremitie of the weather , which fly in the wind , many time do chance to hit on the mast and shrowd of the ship that be at sea in foul weather . and in truth i do take it to be so : for that i have see the like in other ship at sea , and in sundry ship at once . by this man may see how the papist be give to believe and worship such vain thing and toy , as God , to who all honour do appertain , and in their need and necessity do let to call upon the live God , who be the giver of all good thing . the 16 . of April in anno 1556 . we arrive at the port of saint John de ullua in new Spain , very naked and distress of apparel , and all other thing , by mean of the loss of our foresay ship and good , and from his arrival at thence we go to the new town call vera Cruz , five yera Cruz , league from the say port of saint John de ullua , march still by the sea side , where we find lie upon the sand great quantity of mighty great tree with root and all , some of they off four , five , and six cart load by our estimation , which , as the people tell we , be in the great stormy weather , which we endure at sea , Florida 300 . root out of the ground in Terra Florida , which be league from three hundred league over by sea , and bring thither . ^ ullua ^ $° we carne to the say town of Vera cruz , where we remain a month : and there the say John field chance to meet with a old friend of his acquaintance in Spain , call Gongalo Ruiz de Cordova , a very rich man of the say town of Vera cruz : who hear of his come thither with his wife and family , and of his misfortune by sea , come unto he and receive he and all his household into his house , and keep we there a whole month , make we very good cheer , and give we good entertainment , and also give we that be in all eight person of the say John field house , double apparel new out of the shop of very good cloth , coat , cloak , hose , shirt , smock , gown for the woman , hose , shoe , and all other necessary apparel , and for our way up to the city of Mexico , horse , moile , 346 and man , and money in our purse for the expense by the way , which by our account may amount unto the sum of 400 . crown . and after we be enter two day journey into the country , i the say Robert Tomson fall so sick of a ague , that the next day i be not able to sit on my horse , but be fain to be carry upon Indian back , from thence to Mexico . and when we come within half a day journey of the city of Mexico , the say John field also fall sick , and within three day after we arrive at the say city , he die : and present sicken one of his child , and two more of his household people , and within eight day die . so that within ten day after we arrive at the city of Mexico , of eight person that be of Mexico . we of the say company , there remain but four alive , and i the say Tomson be at the point of death of the sickness that i get upon the way , which continue with i the space of six month . at the end of which time it please almighty God to restore i my health again , although weak and great disable . And be some thing strong , i procure to seek mean to live , and to seek a way how to profit my self in the country , see it have please God to send we thither in safety . then by friendship of one Thomas Blake a Scottishman bear , who have dwell and have be marry in the say city above twenty year before i come to the say city , i be prefer to the service of a gentleman a Spaniard dwell there , a man of great wealth , and one of the first conqueror of the say ci tie , who name be Gongalo Cerezo , with who i dwell twelve month and a half . at the end of which i be malicious accuse by the holy house for matter of religion , and so apprehend and carry to prison , where i lie close prisoner seven month , without speak to any creature , but to the jailer that keep the say prison , when he bring i my meat and drink . in the mean time be bring into the say prison one Augustin Boacio a italian of Genoua also for matter 347 of religion , who be take at Sacatecas 80 . league to [ three . 451 . ] the northwest of the city of Mexico : at the end of the say seven month , we be both carry to the high church of Mexico , to do open penance upon a high scaffold , make before the high altar , upon a Sunday , in the presence of a very great number of people , who be at the least five or six thousand . for there be that come one hundred mile off , to see the say Auto ( as they call it ) for that there be never none before , that have do the like in the say country , nor can not tell what lutheran be , nor what it mean : for they never hear of any such thing before . we be bring into the church , every one with a saint Benito upon his back , which be half a yard of yellow cloth , with a hole to put in a man head in the midst , and cast over a man head : both flap hang one before , and another behind , and in the midst of every flap , a saint Andrew cross , make of red cloth , sow on upon the same , and that be call saint Benito . the common people before they see the penitent come into the church , be give to understand that we be heretic , infidel , and people that do despise God , and his work , and that we have be more like devil than man , and think we have have the favour of