the travail of Job Hortop , which sir John Hawkins set on land within the bay of Mexico , after his departure from the haven of S . John de ullua in nueva espanna , the 8 . of October 1568 . ot untrue nor without cause say Job the faithful servant of God ( who the sacred scripture tell we , to have dwell in the land of hus ) that man be bear of a woman , live a short time , be replenish with many misery : which some know by read of history , many by the view of other calamity , and i by experience in my self , as this present treatise ensue shall show . it be not unknown unto many , that i job Hortop powder - maker be bear at Bourne , a town in Lincolnshire , from my age of twelve year bring up in redriffe near London , with m . Francis Lee , who be the queen majesty powder - maker , who i serve , until i be press to go on the 3 . voyage to the west Indies , with the right worshipful sir John Hawkins , who appoint i to be one of the gunner in her majesty ship call the Jesus of Lubeck , who set sail from Plymouth in the month of October 1567 . have with he another ship of her majesty , call the minion , and four ship of his own , namely the angel , the swallow , the Judith , and the William and John . he direct his vice - admiral , that if foul weather do separate they , to meet at the hand of tenerif . after which by the space of seven day and seven night , we have such storm es at sea , that we lose our long boat and a pinnace , with some man : come to the isle of 445 a temedie against foy - soned arrow . the river of Calousa . [ Iii . 488 . ] the english voyage tenerif , there our general heard that his viceadmiral with the swallow , and the William and John be at the hand call Gomera , where find his viceadmiral , he anchor , take in fresh water , and set sail for cape blank , where in the way we take a Portugal caravel , lade with fish call mullet : from thence we sail to cape Verde . in our course thither we meet a Frenchman of rochel call captain Bland , who have take a Portugal caravel , who our vice admiral chase and take . captain Drake , now sir Francis Drake be make master and captain of the caravel , and so we keep our way till we come to cape Verde , and there we anchor , take our boat , and set soldier on shore . Oure general be the first that leap on land , and with he captain Dudley : there we take certain negro , but not without damage to our self . for our general , captain Dudley , and 8 . other of our company be hurt with poison arrow : about nine day after , the 8 . that be wound die . our general be teach by a negro , to draw the poison out of his wound with a clove of garlic , whereby he be cure . from thence we go to Sierra leona , where be monstrous fish call shark , which will devour man . i among other be send in the angel with two pinnaces into the river call Calousa , to seek two caravel thaf be there trade with the negro : we take one of they with the negro , and bring they away . in this river in you night time we have one of our pinnaces bulge by a sea - horse , so that our man swim about the river , be all take into the other pinnace , except two that take hold one of another , and be carry away by the sea - horse . this monster have the just proportion of a horse , save that his leg be short , his tooth very great , and a span in length : he use in the night to go on land into the wood , seek at unaware to devour the negro in their cabin , who they by their vigilancy prevent , and kill he in this manner . the negro keep watch , and diligent attend their come , and when they be go into the wood , 446 they forthwith lie a great tree overthwart the way , so that at their return , for that their leg be so short , they can go over it : then the negro set upon they with their bow , arrow and dart , and so destroy they . from thence we enter the river call the Casserroes , where there be other caravel trade with the negro , and they we take . in this hand betwixt the river and the main , tree grow with oyster upon they . there grow Palmito tree , which be as high as a ship main mast , and on their top grow nut , wine and oil , which they call Palmito wine and Palmito oil . the plantain tree also grow in that country ; the tree be as big as a man thigh , and as high as a fir pole , the leaf thereof be long and broad , and on the top grow the fruit which be call Plantanos : they be crooked , and a cubit long , and as big as a man wrist , they grow on cluster : when they be ripe they be very good and dainty to eat : sugar be not more delicate in taste than they be . from thence with the angel , the Judith , and the two pinn ess , we sail to Sierra leona , where our general at that time be , who with the captain and soldier go up into the river call Taggarin , to take a town of the river of the negro , where he find three king of that country Taggarin . with fifty thousand negro besiege the same town , which they can not take in many year before , when they have war with it . our general make a breach , enter and valiant take the town , wherein be find five Portugal which yield themselves to his mercy , and he save their life : we take and carry thence for traffic to the west Indies 500 negro . the three 5 °° - negro king drive 7000 negro into you sea at low water , ta ^ en ' at the point of the land , where they be all drown in the Oz , for that they can not take their canoas to save themselves . we return back again in our pinnace to the ship , and there take in fresh water , and make ready sail towards Rio grande . at our come thither Rio grande . we enter with the angel , the Judith , and the 2 pinnace , 447 Burboroata . the english voyage and find there seven Portugal caravel , which make great fight with we . in the end by god help we win the victory , and drive they to the shore , from whence with the negro they flee , and we fetch the carvel from the shore into the river . the next morning m . Francis drake with his carvel , the swallow , and the William and John come into the river , with captain Dudley and his soldier , who land be but a hundred soldier , and fight with seven thousand negro , burn the town , and return to our general with the loss of one man . in that place there be many musk - cat , which breed in hollow tree : the negro take they in a net , and put they in a cage , and nourish they very dainty , and take the musk from they with a spoon . now we direct our course from Guinea towards the west Indies . and by the way die captain Dudley . in sail towards the Indies , the first land that we escry , be the hand call Dominica , where at our come we anchor , and take in fresh water and wood for our provision : which do , we sail towards the hand call Margarita , where our general in despite of the Spaniard anchor , land , and take in fresh victual . a mile off the hand there be a rock in the sea , wherein do breed many fowl like unto barnacle : in the night we go out in our boat , and with cudgel we kill many of they , and bring they with many of their egg aboard with we : their egg be as big as Turkey egg , and speckle like they . we do eat they , and find they very good meat . from thence we sail to Burboroata , which be in the main land of the west Indies : there we come in , more our ship , and tarry two month trim and dress our ship , and in the mean time trade with certain Spaniard of that country . there our general scent we unto a town call Placencia , ( which stand on a high hill ) to have entreat a bishop that dwell there for 448 i56 & his favour and friendship in their law , who hear of our come , for fear forsake you town . in our way up the hill to Placencia , we find a Placencia in monstrous venomous worm with two head : his body the main , be as big as a man arm , and a yard long : our master Robert Barret do cut he in sunder with his sword , and it make it as black as if it be colour with ink . here be many tiger , monstrous and furious beast , which by subtlety devour and destroy many man : they use the trade way , and will show themselves twice or thrice to the traveller , and so depart secret , lurk till they be past , then sudden and at unaware they leap upon they and devour they : they have so use two of our [ three . 489 . ] company , have not one of they look behind . Oure general send three ship unto the hand call Coragao , to make provision for the rest , where they remain until his come . he send from thence the angel and the Judith to Rio de Hacha , where we anchor before the town . the Spaniard shoot three piece at we from the shore , who we requite with two of we , and shoot through the governor house : we weigh anchor , and anchor again without shot of the town , where we ride five day in despite of the Spaniard and their shot . in the mean space there come a caravel of advice from saint Domingo , who with the angel , and the Judith we chase and drive to the shore : we fetch he from thence in spite of 200 . Spaniards harquebus shoot , and anchor again before the town , and rid there with they , till our general come , who anchor , land his man , and valiant take the town , with the loss of one man , Rio de la who name be Thomas surgeon : we land and ^ acJia take , plant on the shore for our safety , our field ordinance : we drive the Spaniard up into the country above two league , whereby they be enforce to trade with our general , to who he sell most part of his negro . in this river we kill a monstrous Lagarto or crocodile in this port at sun set : seven of we go in the ix 449 2 F Cartagena . Campeche . the english voyage pinnace up into the river , carry with we a dog , unto who with ropeyarne we bind a great hook of steel , with a chain that have a swivel , which we put under the dog belly , the point of the hook come over his back fast bind , as aforesaid : we put he over board , and vex out our rope by little and little , row away with our boat : the lagarto come and present swallow up the dog , then do we row hard , till we have choke he : he plunge and make a wonderful stir in the water : we leap on shore , and hale he on land : he be 23 . foot by the rule , head like a hog , in body like a serpent , full of scale as broad as a saucer : his tail long and full of knot as big as a fawcon shot : he have four leg , his foot have long nail like unto a dragon : we open he , take out his gut , flay he , dry his skin