sodden as it will be over a fire in half a day . i have see half a sheep 384 cast in , and immediate it have be sodden , and i have eat part of it . there be many hare , and some cony . there be no partridge , but abundance of quail . they have great store of fish in the south sea , and many oyster , and very great . the people do open the oyster , and take out the meat of they , and dry it as they do any other kind of fish , and keep they all the year : and when the time serve , they send they abroad into the country to sell , as all other fish . they have no salmon , nor trowt , nor peel , nor carp , tench , nor pike in all the country . there be in the country mighty high mountain , and hill , and snow upon they : they common burn ; and twice every day they cast out much smoke and ash at certain open place , which be in the top of they . there be among the wild people much manna . i have gather of the same , and have eat it , and it be good : for the apothecary send their servant at certain time , to gather of the same for purgation , and other use . there be in the mountain many wild hog , which all man may kill , and lion and tiger ; which tiger do much harm to man that travel in the wilderness . in this country , not long since , there be two poor man that find a marvellous rich i ; and when these man go to make a register of the same ( accord to the law and custom ) before the king officer , they think this mine not meet for such man as they be : and violent take the say mine for the king ; and give no part thereof unto the two poor man . and within certain day the king officer resort thither to labour in the i , and they find two great hare and cony . sea fish . [ he . 465 . ] burn mountain . manna . wild hog , lion , and tiger . Mines discover , not find again . mighty hill be come together ; so they find no place to work in . and in the time while i be among they , which be five year , there be a poor sheep - the mthour hear , who keep his sheep , happen to find a well ^ levaEs ™ of quicksilver ; and he go in like manner to manifest panna . the same , as the custom and manner be ; the king ix 385 2 b description of the Indian person and manner . the people of Nueva espagna great coward . officer deal in like order as they do with the two poor man that find the rich i , take it quite from the shepherd : but when they go to fetch home the quicksilver , or part thereof , they can never find it again . so these thing have be declare unto the king , who have give commandment , that nothing be find in the field , as mine , and such like , shall be take away from any man . and many other thing have be do in this country , which man may count for great marvel . there be great abundance of sugar here , and they make diverse conserves , and very good , and send they into Peru , where as they sell they marvellous well , because they make none in those part . the people of the country be of a good stature , tawny colour , broad face , flat nose , and give much to drink both wine of Spain and also a certain kind of wine which they make with honey of magueiz , and root , and other thing which they use to put into the same . they call the same wine Puleo . they be soon drink , and give to much beastliness , and void of all goodness . in their drunkenness they use and commit sodomy ; and with their mother and daughter they have their pleasure and pastime . whereupon they be defend from the drink of wine , upon pain of money , aswell he that sell the wine as the Indian that drink the same . and if this commandment be not , all the wine in Spain and in France be not sufficient for the west Indies only . they be of much simplicity , and great coward , void of all valour , and be great witch . they use diverse time to talk with the devil , to who they do certain sacrifice and oblation : many time they have be take with the same , and i have see they most cruel punish for that offence . the people be give to learn all manner of occupation and science , which for the most part they learn since the come of the Spaniard : i say all manner of 386 art . they be very artificiali in make of image with feather , or the proportion or figure of any man , in all kind of manner as he be . the fineness and excellency of this be wonder , that a barbarous people as they be , shall give themselves to so fine a art as this be . they be goldsmith , blacksmith , and coppersmith , carpenter , mason , shoemaker , tailor , saddler , embroiderers , and of all other kind of science : and they will do work so good cheap , that poor young man that go out of Spain to get their live , be not set on work : which be the occasion there be many idle people in the country . for the Indian will live all the week with less than one groat ; which the Spaniard can do , nor any man else . they say , that they come of the lineage of a old man the Indian which come thither in a boat of wood , which they call a i & ioran ™ canoa . but they can tell whether it be before the ame * flood or after , neither can they give any reason of the flood , nor from whence they come . and when the Spaniard come first among they , they do certain sacrifice to a image make in stone , of their own invention . the stone be set upon a great hill , which they make of brick of earth : they call it their Cowa . and certain day in the year they do sacrifice , certain old man , and young child ; and only believe in the sun and the moon , say , that from they they the sun and have all thing that be needful for they . they have in m ° one these part great store of cotton wool , with which they ^ g0fC0ttm make a manner of linen cloth , which the Indian wear , ' both man and woman , and it serve for shirt and smock , and all other kind of garment , which they wear upon their body : and the Spaniard use it to all such purpose , especial such as can buy other . and if it be not for this kind of cloth , all manner of cloth that [ in . 466 . ] go out of Spain , i say linen cloth , will be sell out of all measure . the wild people go naked , without any thing upon the wild in - them . the woman wear the skin of a dear before dian - 387 the pomp of owner of mine . the english voyage their privity , and nothing else upon all their body . they have no care for any thing , but only from day to day for that which they have need to eat . they be big man , and likewise the woman . they shoot in bow which they make of a cherry tree , and their arrow be of cane , with a sharp flint stone in the end of the same ; they will pierce any coat of mail : and they kill dear , and crane , and wild goose , duck and other foul , and worm , and snake , and diverse other vermin , which they eat . they live very long : for i have see man that have be a hundred year of age . they have but very little hair in their face , nor on their body . the Indian have the friar in great reverence : the occasion be , that by they and by their mean they be free and out of bondage ; which be so ordain by Charles the emperor : which be the occasion that now there be not so much gold and silver come into Europe as there be while the Indian be slave . for when they be in bondage they can not choose but do their task every day , and bring their master so much metal out of their mine : but now they must be well pay , and much entreat to have they work . so it have be , and be a great hindrance to the owner of the mine , and to the king quinto or custom . there be many mine of copper in great quantity , whereof they spend in the country as much as serve their turn . there be some gold in it , but not so much as will pay the cost of the fine . the quantity of it be such , and the mine be so far from the sea , that it will not be worth the fraught to carry it into Spain . on the other side , the king officer will give no licence to make ordinance thereof ; whereupon the mine lie unlaboured , and of no valuation . there be much lead in the country ; so that with it they cover church , and other religious house : wherefore they shall not need any of our lead , as they have have need thereof in time past . the pomp and liberality of the owner of the mine 388 be marvellous to behold : the apparel both of they and of their wife be more to be compare to the apparel of noble person then otherwise . if their wife go out of their house , as unto the church , or any other place , they go out with great majesty , and with as many man and maid as though she be the wife of some noble man . i will assure you , i have see a miner wife go to the church with a hundred man , and twenty gentlewoman and maid . they keep open house : who will , may come to eat their meat . they call man with a bell to come to dinner and supper . they be prince in keep of their house , and bountiful in all manner of thing . a good owner of mine must have at the least a thing neces - hundred slave to carry and to stamp his metal ; he sap ‘° mines must have many mule , and man to keep the mine ; he must have mill to stamp his metal ; he must have 6 many wain and ox to bring home wood to fine the oar ; he must have much quicksilver , and a marvellous quantity of salt - brine for the metal ; and he must be at many other charge . and as for this charge of quicksilver , it be a new invention , which they find more profitable than to fine their oar with lead . howbeit the same be very costly : for there be never a hundred of quicksilver but cost at the least threescore pound sterling . and the mine fall daily in decay , and of less value : and the occasion be , the few Indian that man have to labour their mine . there be in new Spain a marvellous increase of cattle , the plenty of which daily do increase , and they be of a great growth catteli - then we be . you may have a great steer that have a hundred weight of tallow in his belly for sixteen shilling ; and some one man have 20000 head of cattle of his own . they sell the hide unto the merchant , who lade into Spain as many as may be well spare . they spend many in the country in shoe and boot , and in the mine : and as the country be great , so be the increase of the cattle wonder . in the island of Santo Domingo they common kill the beast for their hide 389 and tallow ; and the fowl eat the carcase : and so they do in Cuba and Porto Rico , whereas there be much sugar , and cana fistula , which daily they send into Spain . Sheene . they have great increase of sheep in like manner , and daily do intend to increase they . they have much wool . wool , and as good as the wool of Spain . they make cloth . cloth as much as serve the country , for the common people , and send much cloth into Peru . i have see cloth make in the city of Mexico , which have be sell for ten pezo a vare , which be almost four pound English , and the vare be less than our yard . they have wood . woad grow in the country , and alum , and brazil , and Prosili diverse other thing to die withal , so that they make all ‘ colour . in Peru they make no cloth : but hereafter our cloth will be little set by in these part , unless it be some fine cloth . the wool be common four shilling every rove , which be five and twenty pound : and in some place of the country that be far from the place where as they make cloth , it be worth nothing , and do serve but only to make bed for man to lie on . [ Iii . 467 . ] they make hat , as many as do serve the country , very fine and good , and sell they better cheap , than they can be bring out of Spain , and in like manner send they into Peru . many people be set on work both in the one and in the other : they spin their wool as we do , and in steed hog grease of oil , they have hog grease : they twist not their thread its stead of oil . so much as we joej neither work so fine a thread . they make no kersy , but they make much cloth , which be course , and sell it for less than 12 . penny the vare . it be call Sayall . silk of sun - they have much silk , and make all manner of sort dry sort . thereof , as taffeta , satin , velvet of all colour , and they be as good as the silk of Spain , save that the colour be not so perfect : but the black be better then the black that come out of Spain . Horses . they have many horse , and mere , and mule , which mule . the Spaniard bring thither . they have as good 390 jennet , as any be in Spain , and better cheap than jennet . they be in Spain . and with their mule they carry all their good from place to place . there be rain usual in this country , from the month of May , to the midst of October , every day , which time they call their winter , by reason of the say water . and if it be not for the water which fall in these hot season , their Maiz , which be the great part of their sustenance , will be destroy . This Maiz be the great maintenance which the Indian Maize grain have , and also all the common people of the Spaniard . man and . and their horse and mule which labour , can be eat tn without the same . this grain be substantiali , and increases much blood . if the miner shall be without it , they can not labour their mine : for all their servant eat none other bread , but only of this Maize