king of Spain and our sovereign , all our request shall be both favourable grant , and faithful perform : signify further that he hear and understand of the honest and friendly deal of our general , towards the king of Spain subject in all place where he have be , as also in the say port : so that to be brief our request be article , and set down in writing . viz baptize the first be that we may have victual for our money , and license to sell as much ware , as may suffice to furnish our want . 2 the second , that we may be suffer peaceable to repair our ship . 3 the third that the island may be in our possession during the time of our abode there , in which island our general for the better safety of he and he , have already plant and place certain ordinance which be eleven piece of brass , therefore he require that the same may so continue , and that no Spaniard shall come to land in they . say island , have or wear any kind of weapon about he . 4 the four and the last , that for the better and more sure performance and maintenance of peace , and of all the condition , there may twelve gentleman of credit be deliver of either part as hostage . Theise condition be conclude and agree upon in write by the viceroy and sign with his hand , and seal with his seal , and 10 . hostage upon either part be receive . and further it be conclude that the two general shall meet , and give faith each to other for the performance of the premise . all which be do , the same be proclaim by the sound of a trumpet , and commandment be give that none of either part shall violate or break the peace upon pain of death : thus at the end of three day all be conclude , and the fleet enter the port , the ship 404 salute one another as the manner of the sea do require : the morrow after be Friday we labour on all side in place the english ship by themselves , and the spanish ship by themselves , the captain and inferior person of either part , offer , and show great courtesy one to another , and promise great amity upon all side . howbeit as the sequel show , the Spaniard mean nothing less upon their part . for the viceroy and governor thereabouts have secret at land assemble to the number of 1000 choose man , and well appoint , mean the next Thursday be the 24 . of September at dinner time to assault we , and set upon we on all side . but before i go any further , i think it not amiss brief to describe the manner of the island as it then be , and the force and strength , that it be now of . for the Spaniard since the time of our general be there , for the better fortify of the same place , have upon the same island build a fair castle , fain cutie and bulwark very well fortify : this port be then at our being there , a little island of stone , not past three faylaiuiqf foot above water in the high place , and not past a san Juan de bowshot over any way at the most , and it stand Ullua . from the main land , two bowshoote or moor : and there be not in all this coast any other place for ship safe to arrive at : also the north wind in this coast be of great violence and force , and unless the ship be safe more in , with their anchor fasten in this island , there be no remedy , but present destruction and shipwreck . all this our general wise foresee , do provide that he will have the say island in his custody , or else the Spaniard may at their pleasure , have but cut our cable , and so with the first northwind that blow we have have our passport , for our ship have go a shore . but to return to the matter . the time approach that their treason must be put in practice , the same Thursday morning , some appearance thereof begin to show it self , as shift of weapon from ship to ship , and plant , and bend thpir 405 the value of a spanishvice - roy his faith . the villainous treachery of the Spaniard and their cruelty . [ HL 473 - ] the english voyage ordinance against our man that ward upon the land , with great repair of people : which apparent show of breach of the viceroy faith cause our general to send one to the viceroy , to inquire of he what be mean thereby , which present send and give order , that the ordinance aforesaid , and other thing of suspicion shall be remove , return answer to our general in the faith of a viceroy , that he will be our defence , and safety from all villainous treachery : this be upon Thursday in the morning . Oure general not be therewith satisfy , see they have secret convey a great number of man aboard a great hulk or ship of they of six hundred ton , which ship ride hard by the minion , he send again to the viceroy Robert Barret the master of the Jesus , a man that can speak the spanish tongue very well , and require that those man may be unshipt again , which be in that great hulk . the viceroy then perceive that their treason be thorough espy , stay our master , and sound the trumpet , and give order that his people shall upon all side charge upon our man , which ward on shore , and else where , which strike such a maze , and sudden fear among we , that many give place , and seek to recover our ship for the safety of themselves . the Spaniard which secret be hide in ambush at land be quick convey over to the island in their long boat , and so come to the island , they slay all our man that they can meet with , without mercy . the minion which have somewhat before prepare her self to avoid the danger , hale away and abide the first brunt of the 300 man that be in the great hulk : than they seek to fall aboard the Jesus , where be a cruel fight , and many of our man slay : but yet our man defend themselves , and keep they out : so the Jesus also get loose , and join with the minion , the fight wax hot upon all side : but they have win and get our ordinance on shore , do great annoy we . in this fight there be two great ship of the 406 Spaniard sink , and one burn , so that with their ship they be not able to harm we , but from the shore they beat we cruel with our own ordinance , in such sort that the Jesus be very sore spoil : and sudden the Spaniard have fire two great ship of their own , they come direct against we , which breed among our man a marvellous fear . howbeit the minion which have make her sail ready , shift for her self , without consent of the general , captain or master , so that very hardly our general can be receive into the minion : the most of our man that be in the Jesus shift for themselves , and follow the minion in the boat , and those which that small boat be not able to receive , be most cruel slay by the Spaniard . of our ship none escape save the minion and the Judith : and all such of our man as be not in they be enforce to abide the tyrannous cruelty of the Spaniard . for it be a certain truth , that whereas they have take certain of our man ashore , they take and hang they up by the arm upon high post until the blood burst out of their finger end : of which man so use , there be one Copstow , and certain other yet alive , who by the merciful providence of the almighty , be long since copstoweoneof m . Hawkins man return arrive here at home in England , carry still about with from ^ ueva they ( and shall to their grave ) the mark and token of Espanna . those inhumane and more than barbarous cruel deal . Chap . 3 . wherein be show , how that after we be escape from the Spaniard , we be like to perish with famine at the sea , and how our general , for the avoid thereof be constrain to put half of his man on land , and what misery we after that sustain among the savage people , and how again we fall into the hand of the Spaniard . after that the viceroy , don Martin Henriques , have thus contrary to his faith and promise , most cruel deal with our general master Hawkins , at saint John the 407 ullua , where most of his man be by the Spaniard slay and drown , and all his ship sink and burn , save the minion , and the Judith , which be a small bark of fifty ton , wherein be then captain master Francis Drake aforesaid : the same night the say bark lose we , we be in great necessity , and inforce to remove with the minion two bow - shoote from the spanish fleet , where we anchor all that night : and the next morning we weigh anchor , and recover a island a mile from the Spaniard , where a storm take we with a north wind , in which we be great distress , have but two cable and two anchor leave : for in the conflict before we have lose three cable and two anchor . the morrow after , the storm be cease and the weather fair , we weigh , and set sail , be many man in number , and but small store of victual to suffice we for any long time : by mean whereof we be in despair and fear that we shall perish through famine , so that some be in mind to yield themselves to the mercy of the Spaniard , other some to the savage or infidel , and wander thus certain day in these unknown sea , hunger constrain we to eat hide , cat and dog , mouse , rat , parrot and monkey : to be short , our hunger be so great , that we think it savoury and sweet whatsoever we can get to eat . and on the eight of October we come to land again , in the bottom of the bay of Mexico , where we hope to have find some inhabitant , that we may have have some relief of victual , and a place where to repair our ship , which be so great bruise , that we be scarce able with our weary arm to keep forth the water : be thus oppress with famine on the one side and danger of drown on the other , not know where to find relief , we begin to be in wonderful despair , and we be of many mind , among who there be a great many that do desire our general to set they on land , make their choice rather to submit themselves to the mercy of the savage or infidel , then long to 408 hazard themselves at sea , where they very well see , that if they shall remain together , if they perish not by drown , yet hunger will enforce they in the end to eat one another : to which request our general do very willing agree , consider with himself that it be necessary for he to lessen his number , both for the safety of himself and they rest : and thereupon be resolve to set half his people ashore that he have then leave alive , it be a world to see how sudden man mind be alter : for they which a little before desire to be set on land , be now of another mind , and request rather to stay : by mean where - [ three . 474 - . ] of our general be enforce for the more contentation of all man mind , and to take away all occasion of offence , to take this order : first he make choice of such person of service and account , as be needful to stay , and that be do , of those which be willing to go he appoint such as he think may be best spare , and present appoint that by the boat they shall be set on shore , our general promise we that the next year he will either come himself , or else send to fetch we home . here again it will have cause any stony heart to have relent to hear the pitiful moan that many do make , and how loath they be to depart : the weather be then somewhat stormy and tempestuous , and therefore we be to pass with great danger , yet notwithstanding there be no remedy , but we that be appoint to go away , must of necessity do so . howbeit those that go they be put in the first boat be safe set on shore , but of they » » 2 5 which go in the second boat , of which number i ' ' ™ rth - my self be one , the sea wrought so high , that we panucj0 t } ie 8 can not attain to the shore , and therefore we be of October constrain through the cruel deal of John Hampton 1568 . captain of the minion , and John Sanders boatswain of the Jesus , and Thomas Pollard his mate , to leap out of the boat into the main sea , have moor then a mile to shore , and so to shift for our