, and it be make in cake , as they make oaten cake , in some place of England . the Indian pay tribute , be of the age of 20 . year , 4 . shilling of money , and a hanege of Maiz , AnHanegais which be worth 4 . shilling more unto the king every a year . this be pay in all nova Hispania , of as many m a * e ‘ as be of the age of 20 . year , save the city of Tlascalla , which be make free , because the citizen thereof be the occasion that Cortes take Mexico in so little a time . and although at the first they be free from payment of tribute , yet the Spaniard now begin to usurp upon they , and make they to till a great field of Maiz , at their own cost every year for the king , which be as beneficial unto he , and as great cost unto they , as though they pay their tribute , as the other doe . the ship which go out of Spain with good for Peru , go to number de dios , and there discharge the say good : and from thence they be carry over the neck of a land , unto a port town in the south sea , call Panama , which be 17 . league distant from number de dios . and there they do ship their good 391 again , and so from thence go to Peru . they be in go thither three month , and they come back again in 20 . day . they have seidome foul weather , and few ship be lose in the south sea . four year past , to wit 1568 , there be a ship make out of Peru , Salomons to seek Salomons island , and they come somewhat to and ^ f , m ^ n t ^ ie out equinoctial , and find a island with ten south sea many black people , in such number that the Spaniard 1568 . dare not go on land among they . and because they have be long upon the voyage , their people be very weak , and so go not on land , to know what commodity be upon it . and for want of victual , they arrive in Nova Hispania , in a port call Puerto de Navidad , and thence return back again unto Peru , whereas they be evil entreat , because they have not know more of the same island . they have in this port of Navidad ordinary their china find ship , which go to the island of China , which be cer - by the west , taine island which they have find within these 7 . year . they have bring from thence gold , and much cinamom , and dish of earth , and cup of the same , so fine , that every man that may have a piece of they , will give the weight of silver for it . there be a mariner that bring a pearl as big as a dove egg from thence , 8c a stone , for which the viceroy will have give 3000 . ducat . many thing they bring from thence , most excellent . there be many of these island , and the Spaniard have * this be to be not many of they as yet : * for the Portugal disturb understand of they much , and combat with they every day , say , it this discourse l part °* tneir conquest , and to the main land they be write , can come at any hand . there be goodly people in anno 1572 . they , and they be great mariner , rich apparel in cloth of gold , and silver , and silk of all sort , and go apparel after the manner of the Turk . this report make such as come from thence . the man of the main land have certain traffic with some of these china ship ylander , and come thither in a kind of ship , which with one sail . they have wjth one saj ] ej anj bring open such marcban 0 392 dize as they have need of . and of these thing there have be bring into new Spain both cloth of gold and silver , and diverse manner of silk , and work of gold and silver , marvelous to be see . so by their say , there be not such a country in the whole world . the main land be from the island 190 . league : and the island be not far from the Malucos northwards . and the people of those island , which the Spaniard have , say , that if they will bring their wife and child , that than they shall have among they what they will have . so there go woman daily , and the [ three . 468 . ] king pay all the charge of the marry man and their wife , that go to those island . and there be no doubt but the trade will be marvelous rich in time to come . it be my fortune to be in company with one Diego Gutieres , who be the first pilot that ever go to that country of the phillippinas . he make report of many strange thing in that country , aswell riches , as other , and say , if there be any paradise upon earth , it be in that country : and add , that sit under a tree , you shall have such sweet smell , with such great content and pleasure , that you shall remember nothing , neither wife , nor child , nor have any kind of appetite to eat or drink , the odoriferous smell will be so sweet . this man have good live in Nova Hispania , notwithstanding he will return thither , with his wife and child , and as for treasure there be abundance , as he make mention . in this country of Nova Hispania there be many buck and do , but they have not so long home as they have here in England . the Spaniard kill they with handgun and with grayhound , and the Indian kill they with their bow and arrow , and with the skin they make chamoyce , such as we in Eng - chamoue . land make doublet and hose of , as good as the skin that spanish be dress in Flanders , and likewise they make marvelous leather . good spanish leather of they . there be a bird which be like unto a raven , but he have some of his feather white : voure c ’ ar 0 there be such abundance of they , that they eat all the rion . 393 wrong do to the Indian punish . justice you cause of civil tie . the english voyage corrupt and dead flesh which be in the country . otherwise the abundance of carrion be so much , that it will make a marvelous corrupt air in all the country , and be so noisome , that no man can abide it . therefore it be command there shall none of they be kill . Theise bird be always about city , and town , where there be much flesh kill . the Indian be much favour by the justice of the country , and they call they their orphan . and if any Spaniard shall happen to do any of they harm , or to wrong he in take any thing from he , as many time they do , or to strike any of they , be in any town , whereas justice be , they be aswell punish for the same , as if they have do it one Spaniard to another . when a Spaniard be far from Mexico , or any place of justice , think to do with the poor Indian what he list , consider he be so far from any place of remedy , he make the Indian do what he command he , and if he will not do it , he beat and misuse he , accord to his own appetite . the Indian hold his peace , until he find a opportunity , and then take a neighbour with he , and go to Mexico , although it be 20 . league off , and make his complaint . this his complaint be immediate hear , and although it be a knight , or a right good gentleman , he be forthwith send for , and punish both by his good , and also his person be imprison , at the pleasure of the justice . this be the occasion that the Indian be so tame and civil , as they be : and if they shall not have this favour , the Spaniard will soon dispatch all the Indian , or the Indian will kill they . but they may call they dog , and use other evil word , as much as they will , and the Indian must needs put it up , and go his way . the poor Indian will go every day two or three league to a fair or market with a child upon their neck , with as much fruit or root , or some kind of ware , as cotton wool , or cadis of all colour , as shall be not past worth a penny : and they will maintain they - 394 i572 - selve upon the same . for they live with a marvelous small matter . they be in such poverty , that if you need to ride into the country , you shall have a Indian to go with you all the day with your bed upon his back , for one royal of plate : and this you shall have from one town to another . here you be to understand , that all man that travel by the way , be always wont to carry their bed with they . they be great thief , and will steal all that they may , and you shall have no recom penny at their hand . the garment of the woman , be in this manner . The the apparel uppermost part be make almost like to a woman smock , of the Indian . save that it be as broad above as beneath , and have no sleeve , but hole on each side one to put out their arm . it be make of linen cloth make of cotton wool , and fill full of flower , of red cadis and blow , and other colour . this garment come down to the knee , and then they have another cloth make after the same manner , and that go round about their waste , and reach to their shoe , and over this a white fine sheet upon their head , which go down half the leg . their hair be make up round with a hair lace about their head . and the man have a small pair of breech of the same cotton wool , and their shirt which hang over their breech , and a broad girdle about their middle , and a sheet with flower upon their back , and with a knot upon one shoulder , and a hat upon their head , and a pair of shoe . and this be all their apparel , although it be a cacique , which they use in all the country . the wall of the house of the Indian , be but plain , the house of but the stone be lay so close , that you shall not well Indian . perceive the joint between one stone and another , they be so fine cut : and by the mean that the stone be so workmanly do , and fine join together , there be some beauty in their wall . they be marvelous small [ ill . 469 . ] and light , as pumy stone . they make their door 395 Mutezuma , and his riches . the english voyage very little , so that there can go in but one man at a time . their window , and room within their house be small , and one room they have reserve for their friend , when they come to talk one with another , and that be always fair mat , and keep marvelous clean , and hang full of image , and their chair stand there to sit in . they eat their meat upon the ground , and sleep on the ground upon a mat , without any bed , both the gentleman , and other . the Indian strike their fire with one stick in another , aswell the tame people , as the wild . for they know not how to do it with a iron , and a stone . in Nova Hispania every io . or 12 . league they have a contrary speech , save only about Mexico : so there be a number of speech in the country . Mutezuma which be the last king of this country , be one of the rich prince which have be see in our time , or long before . he have all kind of beast which be then in the country , and all manner of bird , and fish , and all manner of worm , which creep upon the earth , and all tree , and flower , and herb , all fashion in silver and gold , which be the great part of all his treasure , and in these thing have he great joy , as the old Indian report . and unto this day , they say that the treasure of Mutezuma be hide , and that the Spaniard have it not . this king will give none of his people freedom , nor forgive any of they that shall pay he tribute , though he be never so poor . for if it have be tell he that one of his tributary be poor , and that he be not able to pay his tribute accord to the custom , than he will have he bind to bring at such time as tribute shall be pay , a quill full of louse , say , he will have none free , but himself . he have as many wife or concubine , as he will have , and such as like he . always whensoever he go out of his court to pass the time , he be bear upon 4 . of his noble man shoulder set upon a table , some sav , of gold , and very rich dress with feather of diverse and 396 1572 . many colour and flower . he wash all his body every Indian day , be it never so cold . and unto this day so do all tkem the Indian , and especial the woman . se ^ ever ^ the Spaniard keep the Indian in great subjection . they may have in their house no sword nor dagger , nor knife with any point , nor may wear upon they any manner of arm , neither may they ride upon any horse nor mule , in any saddle nor bridle , neither may they drink wine , which they take for the great pain of all . they have attempt diverse time to make insurrection , but they have be overthrow immediate by their own great and beastly cowardliness . there remain some among the wild people , that unto cannibal . this day eat one another . i have see the bone of a Spaniard that have be as clean burnish , as though it have be do by man that have no other occupation . and many time people be carry away by they , but they never come again , whether they be man or woman . they have in the sea island of red salt in great abun - island of salt . dance , whereas they lade it from place to place about the sea coast : and they spend very much salt with salt their hide , and fish : and in their mine they occupy great quantity . they have much allume , and as good as allume . any that be in all the Levant , so that they need none of that commodity . they have also of their own grow , much Cana fistula , and much Salsa perilla , which cassia fistula . be marvelous good for many kind of disease . Salsa peri ^ a - there be in Florida many jarrefalcon , and many Florida . other kind of hawk , which the gentleman of Nova Hispania send for every year . the Spaniard have two fort there , chief to keep out the Frenchman from plant there .