for justice . this city stand from the coast of the south sea 14 league within the land , and be very rich , by reason of the gold that they fetch out of the coast of Veragua . from this city to the eastward 60 sonsonate . league lie the province sonsonate , where i sell the merchandise i carry out of Nova Hispania . the chief san Salvador . city of this province be call saint Salvador , which lie 7 league from the coast of the south sea , and have a port Acaxutla . lie by the sea coast , call Acaxutla , where the ship arrive with the merchandise they bring from Nova Hispania ; and from thence lade back again the cacao : there dwell here to the number of threescore Spaniard . Nicoia a port where you ship which go to thephilippinas be build . [ Iii . 458 . ] from sonsonate i travel to Nicoia , which be in the kingdom of Nicaragua , in which port the king build all the ship that travel out of the Indies to the Malucos . i go forward from thence to Costa rica , where the Indian both man and woman go all naked , and the land lie between Panama , and the kingdom of Guatimala : and for that the Indian there live as warrior , i dare not pass by land , so that here in a town call S . Salvador i bestow that which i carry in annile ( which be a kind of thing to die blow withal ) which i carry with i to the port of Cavallos , lie in Puerto the ca - the kingdom of Honduras , which port be a mighty huge a ruh gulf , and at the come in on the one side of it there * a : e it lie a town of little force without ordinance or any other strength , have in it house of straw : at which town the Spaniard use yearly in the month of August to unlade four ship which come out of Spain lade with rich merchandise , and receive in here again their lade of a kind of merchandise call annile and Cochinilia ( although it be not of such value as that of Nova Hispania ) and silver of the mine of Tomaangua , and gold of Nicaragua , and hide , and Salsa perilla , the best in all the Indies : all which merchandise they return , and depart from thence always in the month of April follow , take their course by the island of Jamaica , in which island there dwell on the west side of it certain Spaniard of no great number . from this place they go to the cape of saint Anthony , which be the uttermost part of the westward of the island of Cuba , and from thence to Havana lie hard by , which be descrip - the chief port that the king of Spain have in all the country of the Indies , and of great importance : for all the ship , both from Peru , Hunduras , porto rico , s . Domingo , Jamaica , and all other place in his Indies , arrive there in their return to Spain , for that in this port they take in victual and water , and the most part of their lade : here they meet from all the foresay place always in the begin of may by the king commandment : at the entrance of this port it be so narrow , that there can scarce come in two ship together , although it be above six fathom deep in the narrow place of it . in the north side of the come in there stand a tower , in which there watch every day a man to descry the sail of ship which he can see on the sea ; and as many as he discover , so many banner he set upon the tower , that the people of the town ( which stand within the port about a mile from the tower ) may understand thereof . under this tower there 367 lie a sandy shore , where man may easy go aland ; and by the tower there run a hill along by the water side , which easy with small store of ordinance subdu the town and port . the port within be so large that there may easy ride a thousand sail of ship without anchor or cable , for no wind be able to hurt they . there the smalforce inhabit within the town of Havana about three hundred of Havana . Spaniard , and about threescore soldier , which the king maintain there for the keep of a certain castle which he have of late erect , which have plant in it about twelve piece of small ordinance , and be compass round with a small ditch , wherethorow at their pleasure they may let in the sea . about two league from Havana there lie another town call Wanabacoa , in which there be dwell about a hundred Indian , and from this place 60 league there lie another town name Bahama , situate on the north side of the island . the chief city of this island of Cuba ( which be above 200 league in length ) be also call Sant Iago de Cuba , where dwell a bishop and about two hundred Spaniard ; which town stand on the south side of the island the commodi - about loo league from Havana . all the trade of this tie of Cuba . isiand js cattle , which they kill only for the hide that be bring thence into Spain : for which end the Spaniard maintain there many negro to kill their cattle , and foster a great number of hog , which be kill , and cut into small piece , they dry in the sun , and so make it provision for the ship which come for Spain . Having remain in this island two month , i take hombre de ship in a frigate , and go over to number de dios , dw ’ and from thence by land to Panama , which stand upon Panama . the south sea . from number de dios to Panama be 17 league distance : from which town there run a river which be call the river of Chagre , which run within 5 league of Panama , to a place call cruze , through which river they carry their good , and disembark they at the say cruze , and from thence they be convey on mule back to Panama by land ; where they again 368 embark they in certain small ship in the south sea for all the coast of Peru . in one of these ship i go to Potossi , and from thence by land to Cusco , and from Potosi . thence to Paita . here i remain the space of seven month , and then return into the kingdom of Guatimala , and arrive in the province of Nicoia , and Nicaragua . from Nicaragua i travel by land to a province call Nicamula ( which lie towards the north sea in certain high mountain ) for that i can not pass through the kingdom of Guatimala at that time for water , wherewith all the low country of the province of Soconusco , lie by the south sea , be drown with the rain that fall above in the mountain , endure always from April to September : which season for that cause they call their winter . from this province i come into another call de Vera Paz , in which the chief city be also Vera Paz . call after that name , where there dwell a bishop [ three . 459 . ] and about forty Spaniard . among the mountain of this country towards the north sea , there be a province call la Candona , where be Indian man of war which the king can not subdue , for that they have town and fort in a great lake of water above in the say mountain : the most part of they go naked , and some wear mantle of cotton wool . distant from this about 80 league , i come into another province call the province of Chiapa , wherein the chief city be call Sacatlan , chiapa 300 where there dwell a bishop and about a hundred a £ ue ^ fr < he Spaniard . in this country there be great store of ‘ Cotten wool , whereof the Indian make fine linen cloth , which the Christians buy and carry into Nova Hispania . the people of this province pay their tribute to the king all in cotton wool and feather . fourteen league from this city there be another call Chiapa , where be the fine gennet in all the Indies , which be carry hence to Mexico , 300 league from it . from this city i travel still through hill and mountain , till i come to the end of this province , to ix 369 2 A Ecatepec an a hill call Ecatepec , which in English signify the ^ ka he h w * nde : f ° r they say , it be the high hill ‘ that ever be discover : for from the top of it may be discover both the north and the south sea ; and it be in height suppose to be nine league . they which travel over it , lie always at the foot of it over night , and begin their journey about midnight , to travel to the top of it before the sun rise the next day , because the wind blow with such force afterward , that it be impossible for any man to go up : from the foot of this Tecoantepec . hill to Tecoantepec , the first town of Nova Hispania , be about fifteen league . and so from hence i journey to Mexico . his journey to by and by after i come to Mexico ( which be in the panuco . year 1572 ) in the company of another Spaniard , which be my companion in this journey , we go together towards the province of Panuco , which lie upon the coast of the north sea , and within three day journey Mestitlan . we enter a city call Mestitlan , where there dwell twelve Spaniard : the Indian inhabitant there be about thirty thousand . this city stand upon certain high mountain , which be very thick plant with town very wholesome and fruitful , have plentiful fountain of water run through they . the high way of these hill be all set with fruit , and tree of diverse kind , and most pleasant . in every town as we pass through , the Indian present we with victual . within twenty Clanchinolte - league of this place there be another city call clanchi - fec - noltepec , belong to a gentleman , where there inhabit about forty thousand Indian ; and there be among they eight or nine friar of the order of saint Augustine , who have there a monastery . within three day after we de - guaxutla . part from this place , and come to a city call Guaxutla , where there be another monastery of friar of the same order : there dwell in this town about twelve Spaniard . from this place forward begin a province call Guastecan . Guastecan , which be all plain ground without any Tancuylabo . hill . the first town we come unto be call tan - 370 cuylabo , in which there dwell many Indian , high of stature , have all their body paint with blue , and wear their hair long down to their knee , tie as woman use to do with their hair - lace . when they go out of their door , they carry with they their bow and arrow , be very great archer , go for the most part naked . in those country they take neither gold nor silver for exchange of any thing , but only salt , which they great esteem , and use it for a saltaprind - principall medicine for certain worm which breed in 7 their lip and in their gum . after nine day travel c n 1 e ' from this place , we come to a town call tampice , tampice a which be a port town upon the sea , wherein there port tmne - dwell , i think , forty Christians , of which number while we abide there , the Indian kill fourteen , as they be gather of salt , which be all the trade that they have in this place : it stand upon the entry of the river of Panuco , which be a mighty great river ; and Panuco . be it not for a sand that lie at the mouth of it , ship of five hundred ton may go up into it above three score league . from hence we go to Panuco , fourteen league from tampice , which in time pass have be a goodly city , where the king of Spain have his governor : but by reason that the Indian there destroy the christian , it lie in a manner waste , containing in it not above ten Christians with a priest . in this town i fall sick , where i lie one and forty day , have no other sustenance than fruit and water , which water i send for above six league off within the country . here i remain till my companion come to i , which have depart from i another way , retain in my company only a slave , which i bring with i from Mexico . and the last day in easter week my companion come to i , find i in a very weak state , by reason of the unholesomenesse of the place . notwithstanding my weakness , i be set on a horse , and a Indian behind i to hold i , we go forward on our voyage all that day till night . the 371 next day in the morning we pass over the river in a canoa ; and be on the other side , i go my self before alone : and by reason there meet many way trale by the wild beast , i lose my way , and so travel through a great wood about two league : and at length [ three . 460 . ] fall into the hand of certain wild Indian , which be there in certain cottage make of straw ; who see