, and stuff it with straw , mean to have bring it home , have not the ship be cast away . this monster will carry away and devour both man and horse . from hence we shape our course to Santa Martha , where we land , trade , and sell certain negro : there two of our company kill a monstrous adder , go towards his cave with a conie in his mouth : his body be as big as any man thigh , and seven foot long : upon his tail he have sixteen knot , every one as big as a great walnut , which they say , do show his age : his colour be green and yellow : they open he , and find two cony in his belly . from thence we sail to Cartagena , where we go in , more our ship , and will have trade with they , but they dare not for fear of the king : we bring up the minion against the castle , and shoot at the castle and town : than we land in a hand , where be many garden : there in a cave we find certain Botijos of wine , which we bring away with we , in recompense whereof , our general command to be set on shore woollen and linen cloth , to the value thereof . from hence by foul weather we be force to seek the port of saint John de ullua . in our way thwart of campeche 45 ° we meet with a Spaniard , a small ship , who be bind for Santo Domingo : he have in he a Spaniard call Augustin the villa nueva , who be the man that betray all the noble man in the Indies , and cause they to be behead , wherefore he with two friar flee to saint Domingo : they we take and bring with we into the port of saint John de ullua . Oure general make great account of he , and use he like a noble man : howbeit in the end he be one of they that betray we . when we have more our ship , and land , we mount the ordinance that we find there in the island , and for our safety keep watch and ward . the next day after we discover the spanish fleet , whereof lu ^ on a Spaniard be general : with he come a Spaniard call don Martin Henriquez , who the king of Hon Martin Spain send to be his viceroy of the Indies . he send Henriquez . a pinnace with a flag of truce unto our general , to know of what country those ship be that ride there in the king of Spain port ; who say , they be the queen of England ship , which come in there for victual for their money : wherefore if your general will come in here , he shall give i victual and all other necessary , and i will go out on the one side of the port , and he shall come in on the other side . the Spaniard return for answer , that he be a viceroy , and have a thousand man , and therefore he will come in . Oure general say , if he be a viceroy , i represent my queen person , and i be a viceroy as well as he : and if he have a thousand man , my powder and shot will take the better place . then the viceroy after counsel among themselves , yield to our general demand , swear by his king and his crown , by his commission and authority that he have from his king , that he will perform it , and thereupon pledge be give on both part . Oure general bear a godly and Christian mind , void of fraud and deceit , judge the Spaniard to have do the like , deliver to they six gentleman , not doubt to have receive the like from [ three . 490 . ] 451 Augustine the villa nueva a most thankless trey tour . the spanish viceadmiral fire . the english voyage they : but the faithless Spaniard , in costly apparel give of the base of their company , as afterwards it be well know . Theise thing finish , proclamation be make on both side , that on pain of death no occasion shall be give , whereby any quarrel shall grow to the breach of the league , and then they peaceable enter the port , with great triumph on both side . the Spaniard present bring a great hulk , a ship of six hundred , and more she by the side of the minion , and they cut out port in their other ship , plant their ordinance towards we , in the night they fill the hulk with man , to lay the minion aboard , as the sequel do show , which make our general doubtful of their deal : wherefore , for that he can speak the spanish tongue , he send Robert Barret aboard the viceroy , to know his meaning in those deal , who will he with his company to come in to he , who he command present to be set in the bilboe , and forthwith a cornet ( for a watchword among the false Spaniard ) be sound for the enterprise of their pretend treason against our general , who Augustine the villa nova sit at dinner with he , shall then present have kill with a poynado which he have privy in his sleeve , which be espy and prevent by one John Chamberlayne , who take the poynado out of his sleeve . our general hasty rise up , and command he to be put prisoner in the steward room , and to be keep with two man . the faithless Spaniard , think all thing to their desire have be finish , sudden sound a trumpet , and therewith three hundred Spaniard enter the minion , whereat our general with a loud and fierce voice call unto we , say , God and saint George , upon those traitorous villain , and rescue the minion , i trust in God the day shall | be we : and with that the mariner and soldier leap out of the Jesus of Lubeck into the minion , and beat out the Spaniard , and with a shot out of she fire the Spaniard vice admiral , where the most part of 300 . Spaniard be 45 2 spoil , and blow over board with powder . their admiral also be on fire half a hour : we cut our cable , wound off our ship , and present fight with they : they come upon we on every side , and continue the fight from ten of the clock until it be night : they kill all our man that be on shore in the hand , save three , which by swim get aboard the Jesus of 0 « of those Lubeck . they sink the general ship call the angel , be and take the swallow : the Spaniard admiral have reof ' above threescore shot through she : many of his man be spoil : four other of their ship be sink . four Spanish there be in that fleet , and that come from the shore sum ” ko - to rescue they , fifteen hundred : we slay of they five hundred and fourty , as we be credible inform by a note that come to Mexico . in this fight the Jesus of Lubeck have five shot through her main mast : her foremast be strike in sunder under the hound with a chain shot , and her hull be wonderful pierce with shot , therefore it be unpossible to bring she away . they set two of their own ship on fire , intend therewith to have burn the Jesus of Lubeck , which we prevent by cut our cable in the halse , and wind off by our sternefast . the minion be force to set sail and stand off from we , and come to a anchor without shot of the island . Oure general courageous cheer up his soldier and gunner , and call to Samuel his page for a cup of beer , who bring it he in a silver cup , and he drink to all man will the gunner to stand by their ordinance lusty like man . he have no soon set the cup out of his hand , but a demy culverin shoot stroke away the cup and a Cooper plane that stand by the main mast , and run out on the other side of the ship : which nothing dismay our general , for he cease not to encourage we , say , fear nothing , for God , who have preserve i from this shot , will also deliver we from these traitor and villain . then captain Bland mean to have turn out of the port , have his main 453 about a hundred . Englishmen land . the english voyage must stroke over board with a chain shoot that come from the shore , wherefore he anchor , fire his ship , take his pinnace with all his man , and come aboard the Jesus of Lubek to our general , who say unto he , that he think he will not have run away from he : he answer , that he be not mind to have run away from he , but his intent be to have turn up , and to have lay the weathermost ship of the spanish fleet aboard , and fire his ship in hope therewith to have set on fire the spanish fleet , he say if he have do so he have do well . with this , night come on . Oure general command the minion , for safeguard of her mast to be bring under the Jesus of Lubeck lee : he will m . Francis drake to come in with the Judith , and to lay the minion aboard , to take in man and other thing needful , and to go out , and so he do . at night when the wind come off the shore , we set sail , and go out in despite of the Spaniard and their shot , where we anchor , with two anchor under the island , the wind be northerly , which be wonderful dangerous , and we fear every hour to be drive with the lee shore . in the end when the wind come large , we weigh anchor , and set sail , seek the river of Panuco for water , whereof we have very little , and victual be so scarce , that we be drive to eat hide , cat , rat , parrot , monkey , and dog : wherefore our general be force to divide his company into two part , for there be a mutiny among they for want of victual : and some say that they have rather be on the shore to shift for themselves among the enemy , than to starve on shipboard . he ask they who will go on shore , and who will tarry on shipboard , those that will go on shore , he will to go on foremast , and those that will tarry , on baft mast : fourscore and sixteen of we be willing to depart . Oure general give unto every one of we six yard of Rouen cloth , and money to they that demand it . when we be land , he come unto we , where friendly embrace every one of 454 we , he be great grieve that he be force to leave we behind he , he counsel we to serve God , and to love one another , and thus courteous he give we a sorowfol farewell , and promise if God send he safe home , he will do what he can , that so many of we as live shall by some mean be bring into England , and so he do . since my return into England i have hear that many mislike that he leave we so behind he , and bring away negro : but the reason be this , for they he may have have victual , or any other thing needful , if by foul weather he have be drive upon the island , which for gold nor silver he can not have have . and thus our general depart to his ship , and we remain on land , where for our safety , fear the wild Indian that be about we , we keep watch all night , and at sun rise we march on our way , three and three in a rank , until that we come into a field under a grove , where the Indian come upon we , ask we what people we be , and how we come there . two of our company , namely Anthony Goddard and John cornish , for that they can speak the spanish tongue , go to they , and say we be Englishman , that never come in that country before , and that we have fight with the Spaniard