i , come out to the number of twenty of they , with their bow and arrow , and speak unto i in their language , which i understand not : and so i make sign unto they to help i from my horse ; which they do by commandment of their lord , which be there with they ; and light down . they carry i under one of their cottage , and lay i upon a mat on the ground : and perceive that i can not understand they , they bring unto i a little Indian wench of Mexico , of fifteen or sixteen year of age , who they command to ask i in her language from whence i come , and for what intent i be come among they : for ( say she ) do thou not know Christian , how that these people will kill and eat thou ? to who i answer , let they do with i what they will ; here now i be . Shee reply , say , thou may thank God thou be lean ; for they fear thou have the pock : otherwise they will eat thou . so i present to the king a little wine which i have with i in a bottle ; which he esteem above any treasure : for for wine they will sell their wife and child . afterwards the wench ask i what i will have , and whether i will eat any thing . i answer that i desire a little water to drink , for that the country be very hot : and she bring i a great Venice glass , gild , full of water . And marvel at the glass , i demand how they come by it . she tell Shallapa . i that the cacique bring it from Shallapa , a great town distant 30 league from this place on the hill , whereas dwell certain Christians , and certain friar of the order of saint Augustine , which this cacique with his people on a night slay ; and burn the friar monastery , 372 among other thing reserve this glass : and from thence also bring i . have now be conversant with they about three or four hour , they bid she ask i if i will go my way . i answer she , that i desire nothing else . So the cacique cause two of his Indian to lead i forward in my way ; go before i with their bow and arrow , naked , the space of three league , till they bring i into a high way : and then make a sign unto i , they signify that in short time i shall come to a town where Christians inhabit , which be call S . Iago de los valle , stand in plain field , wall about with a mud wall : the number of the Christians that dwell therein , be not above four or five and twenty , unto which the king of Spain give Indian and town , to keep the country subject unto he . here the Christians have their mighty mule , which they carry for all the part of the Indies , and into Peru , for that all their merchandise be carry by this mean by land . in this town aforesaid , i find my company , which i have lose before , who make no other account of i but that i have be slay : and the Christians there likewise marvel to hear that i come from those kind of Indian alive , which be a thing never see nor hear of before : for they take a great pride in kill a christian , and to wear any part of he where he have any hair grow , hang it about their neck , and so be account for valiant man . in this town i remain eighteen day , till i recover my health , and in the mean space there come one don Francisco de Pago , who the viceroy don Henrico Manriques have send for captain general , to open and discover a certain way from the sea side to the mine of Sacatecas , which be from this place 160 league , for to transport their merchandise by that way , leave the way by Mexico , which be seven or eight week travel . so this captain take i and my company , with the rest of his soldier , to the number of forty , which he have bring with he , and five hundred 373 Sant Iago de los valle . mighty mule . don Henrico Manriques viceroy of Mexico . the mine of Sacatecas . the valley of saint Michael . Pueblo nuevo . mechuacan . copper mine . Campeche . [ Iii . 461 . ] Merida . Rio de Tabasco . Indian , which we take out of two town in this province call Tanchipa , and Tamaclipa , all good archer , and naked man , and go thence to the river de las Palmas , which be of great bigness , part the kingdom of Nova Hispania and Florida : and go still along by this river the space of three day , seek passage to pass over ; and find none , we be at length enforce to cut timber to make a balsam or raft , which when we have make , we sit on it , the Indian swim in the water , and thrust it before they to the other side . within thirty day after , travel through wood , hill , and mountain , we come to the mine of Sacatecas , which be the rich mine in all the Indies , and from thence they fetch most silver : at which mine there dwell above three hundred Christians : and there our captain give we leave to depart . so we come to the valley of saint Michael towards Mexico ; and from thence to Pueblo novo ; and from that place to the province of mechuacan , after which name the chief city of that place be call : where there dwell a bishop , and above a hundred Spaniard in it : it abound with all kind of spanish fruit , and have wood full of nut tree , and wild vine . here be many mine of copper , and great store of cattle . it lie 60 . league from Mexico , whither we come within four day after . the Indian of this country be very mighty and big man . afterwards i return another way to the province of sonsonate by Vera cruz , and so to Rio Alvarado , and from thence to the province of campeche , which lie on the south side of the bay of Mexico : the chief town of this province be call Merida , in which be a bishop and almost 100 Spaniard . the Indian of this province pay all their tribute in mantle of cotton wool and cacao . there be no port in all this province for a ship of 100 tun to ride in , but only in the river of Tabasco , by which river this city of Merida stand . the chief merchandise which they lade there in small frigate , be a certain 374 wood call campeche , ( wherewith they use to die ) as also hide and annile . by this there lie the province of lucatan , near the Honduras by the north sea coast , where there be also another bishop , and a town likewise name lucatan , where there dwell a few Spaniard . they have no force at all in all this coast to defend themselves withal , save only that the land be low , and there be no port to receive any ship , unless they be frigate , which carry from thence to the port of saint John de ullua , wax , cacao , honey , and also mantle of cotton wool , whereof they make there great store , and of which kind of merchandise there be great trade thence to Mexico : of the same also they pay their tribute to the king . the king have tribute bring he yearly out of the Indies into Spain between nine and ten million of gold and silver : for he receive of every Indian which be subject unto he ( except those which do belong to the Incommenderos , which be the child of those Spaniard , who first conquer the land , to who the king give and grant the government of the city and town subdue for three life ) twelve real of plate , and a hannege of maiz , which be a wheat of the country , ( five of they make a quarter of english measure ) and of every widow woman he have six real , and half a hannege lucatan . the greatness of the king of Spain tribute out of the west Indies . of maiz . and so if any Indian have twenty child in his house , he pay for every one of they , be above fifteen year old , after that rate . this wheat be due bring to the governor of every province and city , be sell in Mexico by the king governor there every year ; so that the money receive for it , be put into the king treasury there , and so be yearly carry from thence into Spain . of the Spaniard which be owner of the mine of gold and silver , he receive the five part of it , which he call his quinta , which be take out the quinto . of the heap , there be his arm set on it ; for otherwise it may not be ' bring out of the land into Spain , under pain of death . the mark of silver , which be eight ounce , when it come out of the mine , not have 375 the mark of the king seal upon it , be worth three and forty real of silver be 64 plate , and so it be current : and when they will bring it for real of plate . Spain , they carry it to the king treasure house , where his seal be set upon it ; and so it be raise in value thereby to threescore and four real of plate : and so the king have for his custom of every mark of plate one and twenty real . from the year of 1570 , which be the year that the pope bull come into the Indies , as be afore mention , he have receive both of the Indian which be tributary unto he , and also of all other belong to the incommenderos , of every one be above twelve year of age , four real of every bull . also they carry other pardon with they into the Indies , for such as be dead , although a hundred year before the Spaniard come into the country : which pardon the friar in their preach persuade the poor Indian to take , tell they that with give four real of plate for a mass , they will deliver their soul out of purgatory . of the Christians likewise dwell there he have fourteen real for every bull : and there be certain bull bring thither for the christian beside the former , which serve for pardon all such fault wherein they have trespass either against the king , by keep back his custom , or one against another by any other injury ; for every hundred crown whereof a man conscience do accuse he that he have deceive the king or any other , he must give ten for a bull , and so after that rate for every hundred which he have any the revenue way steal , and so be pardon the fault . the revenue bukandpar - ul after manner yield unto his treasury don come yearly above three million of gold , as i have be yearly to three credible inform , although of late both the Spaniard million . and Indian do refuse to take the bull ; for that they perceive he do make a yearly custom of it : only each Indian take one pardon for all his household , ( whereas in former time every Indian use to take one for every person in his house ) and tear the same 376 into small piece , and give to every one of his household a little piece , say thus , they need now no more , see in that which they buy the year before they have above ten thousand year pardon . Theise piece they stick up in the wall of the house where they lie . both the Christians and Indian be weary with these infinite tax and custom , which of late he have impose upon they , more than in the year before : so as the people of both sort do rebel rebellion « twice in the time that i be among they , and will have set up another king of themselves ; for which exac - cause the king have command upon pain of death , that tion . they shall not plant either wine or oil there , but shall always stand in need of they to be bring out of Spain , although there will more grow there in four year , then there grow in Spain in twenty , it be so fertile a country . and the king to keep the country always in sub - [ he . 462 . ] iection , and to his own use , have straight provide by reason law , upon pain or death , and loss or good , that none the of these country shall traffic with any other nation , tyainetofirbid although the people themselves do much now desire to firren traffic trade with any other then with they , and will undoubted do , if they fear not the peril ensue it thereupon . about Mexico , and other place in Nova Hispania , there grow a certain plant call maguei , which maguei . yield wine , vinegar , honey , and black sugar , and of the leaf of it dry they make hemp , rope , shoe which they use , and tile for their house : and at the end of every leaf there grow a sharp point like a awl , wherewith they use to bore or pierce through any thing . thus to make a end , i have here set down the sum of all the chief thing that i have observe and note in my seventeen year travel in those part .