have sure perish : and yet all the provision that we have get that way be but slender . And continue thus straight keep in prison there for the space of two month , at the length we agree among our self to break forth of prison , come of it what will , for we be mind rather to suffer death then long to live in that miserable state . and so have escape out of prison , we know not what way to fly for the safety of our self , the night be dark , and it rain terrible , and not have any guide , we go we know not whither , and in the morning , at the appear of the day , we perceive our self to be come hard to the city of Mexico , which be 24 English mile from Tescuco . the day be come we be espy by the Spaniard , and pursue , and take , and bring before the vice Roy and head justice , who threaten to hang english we for break of the king prison . yet in the end they e ^ emen send we into a garden belong to the vice Roy , and 6 ’ come thither , we find there our english gentleman 421 which be deliver as hostage when as our general be betray at saint John de ullua , as be aforesaid , and with they we also find Robert Barret , the master of the Jesus , in which place we remain labour and do such thing as we be command , for the space of 4 month , have but two sheep a day allow to almost a suffice we all , be very near a hundred man , and for bread we have every man two loaf a day , of the quantity prhonenTn one halfpenny loaf . at the end of which four Mexico , month , they have remove our gentleman hostage , and the master of the Jesus to a prison in the vice Roy his own house , do cause it to be proclaim , that what gentleman Spaniard soever be willing , or will have any english man to serve he , and be bind to keep he forth come , to appear before the justice within one month after notice give , that they shall repair to the say garden , and there take their choice : which [ three . 479 . ] proclamation be no soon make , but the gentleman come and repair to the garden amain , so that happy be he that can soon get one of we . Chap . 5 . wherein be show in what good sort , and how wealthy we live with our master until the come of the inquisition , when as again our sorrow begin a fresh : of our imprisonment in the holy house , and of the severe judgement and sentence give against we , and with what rigour and cruelty the same be execute . the gentleman that thus take we for their servant or slave do new apparel we through out , with who we abide , do such service as they appoint we unto , which be for the most part to attend upon they at the table , and to be as their chamberlain , and to wait upon they when they go abroad , which they great account of ; for in that country not Spaniard will serve one another , but they be all of they attend and serve by Indian weekly , and by negro which 422 be their slave during their life . in this sort we remain and serve in the say city of Mexico , and thereabouts for the space of a year and somewhat long . afterwards many of we be by our master appoint to go to sundry of their mine where they have to do , and to be as overseer of the negro and Indian that labour there . in which mine many of we do profit and gain great : for first we be allow three hundred pezo a man for a year , which be threescore pound sterling , and beside that the Indian and negro which wrought under our charge , upon our well use and entreat of they , will at time as upon Saturdayes when they have leave work , labour for we , and blow as much silver as shall be worth unto we 3 mark or thereabouts , every mark be worth 6 pezo , and a half of their money , which 19 pezo and a half , be worth 4il 10 . of our money . sundry week we do gain so much by this mean beside our wage , that many of we become very rich , and be worth three thousand or four thousand pezo , for we live and gain thus in those mine some three or four year . as concern those gentleman which be deliver as hostage , and that be keep in prison , in the viceroy his house , after that we be go from out the garden to serve sundry gentleman as aforesaid , they remain prisoner in the say house for the space of 4 month after their come thither , at the end whereof the fleet be ready to depart from saint John de ullua , to go for Spain , the say gentleman be send away into Spain with the fleet , where as i have hear it credible report , many of they die with the cruel handle of the Spaniard in the inquisition house , as those which have be deliver home after they have suffer the persecution of that house can more perfect declare . Robert Barret also master of the Jesus , be send away with the fleet into Spain the next year follow , where afterward he suffer persecution in the inquisition , and at the last be con - 423 the english voyage demean to be burn , and with he one more of our man who name be John Gilbert . now after that six year be full expire since our first come into the Indies , in which time we have be imprison and serve in the say country as be before true declare , in the year of our lord one thousand five hundred seventie four , the inquisition begin to be establish in the Indies , very much against the mind of many of the Spaniard themselves : for never until this time since their first conquer and plant in the Indies , be they subject to that bloody and cruel inquisition . the chief inquisitor be name don Pedro Moya de Contreres , and John de Bovilla his companion , and John Sanches the fischall , and Pedro de los Rios , the secretary : they be come and settle , and place in a very fair house near unto the white friar , consider with themselves that they must make a entrance and beginning of that their most detestable inquisition here in Mexico , to the terror of the whole country , think it best to call we that be Englishman first in question , and so much the rather , for that they have perfect knowledge and intelligence that many of we be become very rich , as have be already declare , and therefore we be a very good booty and pray to the inquisitor : so that now again begin our sorrow a fresh , for we be send for , and seek out in all place of the country , and proclamation make upon pain of loose of good and excommunication , that no man shall hide or keep secret any Englishmen or any part of their good . by mean whereof we be all soon apprehend in all place , and all our good seize and take for the inquisitor use , and so from all part of the country we be convey and send as prisoner to the city of Mexico , and there commit to prison in sundry dark dungeon , where we can not see but by candle light , and be never past two together in one place , so 424 that we see not one another , neither can one of we tell what be become of another . thus we remain close imprison for the space of a year and a half , and other for some less time , for they come to prison ever as they be apprehend . during which time of our imprisonment , at the first beginning we be often call before the inquisitor alone , and there severe examine of our faith , and command to say the pater noster , the have maria , and the creed in latin , which God know a great number of we can not say , otherwise then in the english tongue . and have the say Robert sweat who be our friend at Tescuco always present with they for a interpreter , he make report for we , y * in our own country speech we can say they perfect , although not word for word as they be in latin . then do they proceed to demand of we upon our oath what we do believe of the sacrament , and whether there do remain any bread or wine after the word of consecration , yea or no , and whether we do not believe that the host of bread which the priest do hold up over his head , and the wine that be in the chalice , be the very true and perfect body and blood of our saviour Christ , yea or no : to which if we answer not yea , then be there no way but death . than they will demand of we what we do remember of our self , what opinion we have hold , or have be teach to hold contrary to the same while we be in England : to which we for the safety of our life be constrain to say , that we never do believe , nor have be teach otherwise then have before we have say . then will they charge we that we do not tell they the truth , that they know the contrary , and therefore we shall call our self to remembrance , and make they a better answer at the next time , or else we shall be rack , and make to confess the truth whether we will or no . and so come again before they the next time , we be still demand of our belief while we 425 A . D . 1575 - [ three . 480 . ] be in England , and how we have be teach , and also what we think or do know of such of our own company as they do name unto we , so that we can never be free from such demand , and at other time they will promise we , that if we will tell they truth , then shall we have favour and be set at liberty , although we very well know their fair speech be but mean to entrap we , to the hazard and loss of our life : howbeit God so merciful wrought for we by a secret mean that we have , that we keep we still to our first answer , and will still say that we have tell the truth unto they , and know no more by our self nor any other of our fellow then as we have declare , and that for our sin and offence in England against God and our lady , or any of his bless saint , we be hearty sorry for the same , and do cry God mercy , and beseech the inquisitor for God sake , consider that we come into those country by force of weather , and against our will , and that never in all our life we have either speak or do any thing contrary to their law , and therefore they will have mercy upon we . yet all this will not serve ; for still from time to time we be call upon to confess , and about the space of 3 month before they proceed our man be to their severe judgement , we be all rack , and some cruel rack . enforce to utter that against themselves , which afterward cost they their life . and thus have get from our own mouth matter sufficient for they to proceed in judgement against we , they cause a large scaffold to be make in the midst of the market place in Mexico right over against the head church , and 14 or 15 day before the day of their judgement , with the sound of a trumpet , and the noise of their attabaly , which be a kind of drum , they do assemble the people in all part of the city : before who it be then solemn proclaim , that whosoever will upon such a day repair to the market place , they shall hear the sentence of the holy inquisition against the 426 english heretic , lutheran , and also see the same put in execution . which be do , and the time approach of this cruel judgement , the night before they come to the prison where we be , with certain officer of that holy hellish house , bring with they certain fool coat which they have prepare for we , be call in their language s . benitos , which coat be make of yellow cotton and red cross upon they , both before and behind : they be so busy in put on their coat about we , and bring we out into a large yard , and place and point we in what order we shall go to the scaffold or place of judgement upon the morrow , that they do not once suffer we to sleep all that night long . the next morning be come , there be give to every one of we for our breakfast a cup of wine , and a slice of bread fry in honey , and so about eight of the clock in the morning , we set forth of the prison , every man alone in his yellow coat , and a rope about his neck , and a great green wax candle in his hand unlighted , have a Spaniard