anchor at four fathom about two hundred cubit from the land , and then the town of manilla be two league northward from we . Chap . 2 . the course and voyage of the aforesaid Francisco gualle out of the haven or road of manilla , to the haven of Macao in China , with all the course and situation of the place . sail out of the haven of cabite , lie in the bay of manilla , we hold our course westward for the space of eighteen league , to the point call el Cabo de sambaly : and when we be eight league in our way , we leave the two hand maribillas on the south side , and sail about a league from they : the point of sambalies aforesaid lie under fourteen degree , and f . be low land , at the end of the same coast of lu ^ on , on the west side . from the hook or point aforesaid , we run north , and north and by west , for the space of five and twenty league ( about a league from the coast of lu ^ on ) to the point call Cabo de Bullinao : all this coast and cape be high and hilly ground , which cape lie under sixteen degree and - | . from this cape de Bullinao we hold our course north , and north and by east , for 45 . league to the point call el Cabo de Bojador , which be the further land northward from the hand Lu . ? on lie under 19 degree . the cape de Bullinao be past the land make a great creek or bough , and from this creek the coast run north to the point of bojador , be a land full of cliff and rock that reach into the sea , and the land of the hook or point be high and hilly ground . from the point of bojador , we hold our course 332 westnorthwest a hundred and twenty league , until we come to the hand call at ilha Branca , or the white hand , lie in the begin of the coast and bay of the river Canton under two and twenty degree , have four and twenty fathom brown muddy ground . from the hand ilha Branca , we hold the aforesaid course of westnorthwest , for the space of sixteen league , to the hand of Macao lie in the mouth of the river of Canton , and it make the river to have two mouth or entry , and it be a small hand about three league great . Canton 22 . degree . the hand of Macao . Chap . 3 . the navigation or course of the aforesaid Francisco gualle out of the haven of Macao to new Spain , with the situation and stretching of the same , with other notable and memorable thing concern the same voyage . when we have prepare our self , and have take our leaf of our friend in Macao , we set sail upon the four and twenty of July , hold our course southeast , and southeast and by east , be in the wane of the moon : for when the moon increase , it be hard hold the course between the hand , because as then the water and stream run very strong to the northwest ; we travail through many narrow channel by night , have the depth of eight or ten fathom , with soft muddy ground , until we be about the hand ilha Branca , yet we see it not , but by the height we ilha Branca . know that we be past it . be beyond it , we run eastsoutheast a hundred and fifty league , to get above the sand call os Baixos do pescadore , and the begin of the hand Lequeos on the east side , which hand be call as s ilhasfer - ilhas fermosa , that be to say , the fair hand . this mosa ' i understand by a Chinar call santy of Chinchon , and he say that they lie under one and twenty degree and there it be thirty fathom deep : and although 333 we see they not , notwithstanding by the height and depth of the water we know we be past they . be pass as ilhas fermosa , or the fair hand , we hold our course east , and east and by north , for two hundred and sixty league , until we be past the length Lequeos . of the hand Lequeos , sail about fifty league from they : the say Chinar tell i , that those hand call lequeos be very many , and that they have many and very good haven , and that the people and inhabitant thereof have their face and body paint like the Bysayas of the hand of Lu . go or philippinas and be mine of gild . apparel like the Bysayas , and that there also be mine of gold : he say likewise that they do often come with small ship and bark lade with buck and harts - hides , and with gold in grain or very small piece , to traffic with they of the coast of China , which he assure i to be most true , say that he have be nine time in the small hand , bring of the same ware with he to China : which i believe [ three . 446 . ] to be true , for that afterward i inquire thereof in Macao , and upon the coast of China , and find that he say true . the further or uttermost of these hand stretch northward and eastward , lie under nine and twenty degree . be past these hand , than you come to the hand of japon , whereof the first lie west and south , be Firando . the hand of Firando , where the Portugal use to traffic : they be in length altogether a hundred and thirty league , and the further eastward lie under two and thirty degree : we run still east , and east and by north , until we be past the say hundred and thirty league . all this information i have of the aforesaid Chinar , as also that there i shall see some mine of brimstone or fiery hill , be seventie league beyond they , and thirty league further i shall find four hand lie together , which i likewise find , as he have tell i : and that be in japon , he say he have there 334 see certain man of a very small stature , with great roll of linen cloth about their head , that bring gold in small piece , and some white Cangas of cotton , ( which be piece of cotton - linen so call by the chinar ) as also saltfish like the spanish atun , or Tunney , which he say come out of other island east - hand ward from japon : and by the token and mark which eastward , ) f he show i , i guess whereabout those hand shall ‘ be , and find they not far from whence he say they lie . he say likewise that all the hand of japon have good haven and channel , be a country full of rice , corn , fish , and flesh , and that they be a in - difierent and reasonable people to trafiique with , and that there they have much silver . run thus east , and east and by north about three hundred league from japon , we find a very hollow water , with the stream run out of the north and northwest , with a full and very broad sea , without any hindrance or trouble in the way that we pass : and what wind soever blow , the sea continue all in one sort , with the same hollow water and stream , until we have pass seven hundred league . about JaPm 9 °°- two hundred league from the coast and land of new Spain we begin to lose the say hollow sea and America in stream : whereby i most assure think and believe , 37 degree that there you shall find a channel or straight passage , awl 1111 between the firm land of new Spain , and the country of Asia and Tartary . likewise all this way from the aforesaid seven hundred league , we find a great number of whale - fish and other fish call by the Spaniard atun or tunny , whereof many be find on the coast of Gibraltar in Spain , as also alba - coras and bonito , which be all fish , which common keep in channel , straight , and run water , there to disperse their seed when they breed : which make i more assure believe , that thereabouts be a channel or straight to pass through . be by the same course upon the coast of new 335 seven and Spain , under seven and thirty degree and J . we am &' and pass by a very high and fair land with many tree , read Francis whole without snow , and four league from the land , Ulloa chapter 16 . you find thereabouts many drift of root , leaf of tree , reed , and other leaf like fig leave , the like whereof we find in great abundance in the country of japon , which they eat : and some of those that we find , 1 cause to be sodden with flesh , and be sodden , they eat like colewort : there likewise we find great store of seal : whereby it be to be presume and certain to be believe , that there be many river , bay , and haven along by those coast to the haven of Acapulco . from thence we run southeast , southeast and by south , and southeast and by east , as we find the Cabo de San wind , to the point call el Cabo de Sant Lucas , which Lucas in 22 . js he beginning of the land of California , on the northwest side , lie under two and twenty degree , be five hundred league distant from cape Mendocino . in this way of the aforesaid five hundred league along by the coast , be many hand : and although they be but small , yet without doubt there be in they some haven late good haven , as also in the firm land , where you have find out . these haven follow , now late find out , as that of they he of Sant Augustine , lie under thirty degree and 4 . and the hand call Isla de cedros , scarce under eight and twenty deg . and j . and the hand lie beneath saint Martyn , under three and twenty degree and J . all this coast and country , as i think , be inhabit , and show to be a very good country : for there by night we see fire , and by day smoke , which be a most sure token that they be inhabit . from the point or hook of saint Lucas , to the southeast side of California , we hold our course eastsoutheast , for the space of 80 . league , to the point call el cabo de las corriente , that be , the cape of the stream lie under 19 degree and f . And run this course , northward about a league from we we see 33 < 5 1584 . three hand call las tres Maria , ( that be to say , the three Maries ) run the same course . about four league from the other hand , there be other hand , reach about two or three league : all this way from [ he . 447 . ] the mouth or gulf of California aforesaid , for the space of the say fourscore league , there be great stream that run westward . from the point or cape de las Corrientes , we run southeast , and sometime southeast and by east , for the space of a hundred and thirty league to the haven of Acapulco . in this way of a hundred and thirty league , be twenty league on the way , we have the haven of Natividad , that be , of the birth of the virgin mary : and other eight league further , the haven of saint Iago , or saint James : and six league further , the sea strand call la Playa de Colima , that be , the strand of Colima . all this coast from California to the haven of Acapulco be Acapulco . inhabit by people that have peace and traffic with the Spaniard , and be of condition and quality like the people of the other place of new Spain . the conclusion of the author of this last voyage . a li this description and navigation have i my self scene , prove , and well note in my voyage make and end in the year of our lord 1584 . from great china out of the haven and river of Canton , as i will more at large set it down unto your honour , with the longitude and latitude thereof , as God shall permit i time and leisure , who i beseech to send you long and happy day . and the same be true translate out of spanish into low dutch verbatim out of the originali copy , ( which be send unto the viceroy of the Portugal Indies ) by John huyghen van Linschoten .