a notable discourse of m . John Chilton , touch the people , manner , mine , city , riches , force , and other memorable thing of new Spain , and other province in the west Indies , see and note by himself in the time of his travel , continue in those part , the space of seventeen or eighteen year . n the year of our lord 1561 , in the month of July , i John Chilton go out of this city of London into Spain , where i remain for the space of seven year , and from thence i sail into Nova Hispania , and so travel there , and by the south sea , unto Peru , the space of seventeen or eighteen year : and after that time expire , i return into Spain , and so in the year 1586 in the month of July , i arrive at the fbresayd city of London : where peruse the note which i have 360 1568 . take in the time of my travel in those year , i have set down as follow . in the year 1568 , in the month of march , be 1568 . desirous to see the world , i embark my self in the bay of Cadiz in Andaluzia , in a ship bind for the Cadiz .. isle of the canary , where she take in her lade , and set forth from thence for the voyage , in the month of June , the same year . within a month after , we fall with the isle of S . Domingo , and from thence direct to Nova Hispania , and come into the port of saint John San Juan de de ullua , which be a little island stand in the sea , ua - about two mile from the land , where the king maintaineth about 50 soldier , and captain , that keep the fort , and about 150 negro , who all the year long be occupy in carry of stone for building , and other use , and to help to make fast the ship that come in there , with their cable . there be build two bulwark at each end of a wall , that stand likewise in the say island , where the ship use to ride , make fast to the say wall with their cable , so near , that a man may leap ashore . from this port i journey by land to a town call Vera Cruz , stand by a river side , VeraCruz . where all the factor of the spanish merchant dwell , t111 - 4 $ 6d which receive the good of such ship as come thither , and also lade the same with such treasure and merchandise as they return back into Spain . they be in number about four hundred , who only remain there , during the time that the spanish fleet discharge , and be load again , which be from the end of August to the begin of April follow . and then for the unwholesomeness of the place they depart thence sixteen league further up within the country , to a town call Xalapa , a very Jalapa six - healthfull soil . there be never any woman deliver ten lea & ues - of child in this port of Vera Cruz : for so soon as they perceive themselves conceive with child , they get they into the country , to avoid the peril of the infect air , although they use every morning to drive through the town above two thousand head of cattle , to take away 361 Pueblo de los angel eight league . the english voyage the ill vapour of the earth . from Xalapa seven league i come to another place , name Perota , wherein be certain house build of straw , call by the name of ventas , the inhabitant whereof be Spaniard , who accustom to harbour such traveller as be occasion to journey that way up into the land . it stand in a great wood of pine and cedar tree , the soil be very cold , by reason of store of snow which lie on the mountain there all the year long . there be in that place a infinite number of dear , of bigness like unto great mule , have also home of great length . from Perota nine league , i come to the Fuentes of Ozumba , which fuente be spring of water issue out of certain rock into the midst of the high way , where likewise be certain range , and house , for the use before mention . eight league ofif from this place i come to the city of the angel , so call by that name of the Spaniard , which inhabit there to the number of a thousand , beside a great number of Indian . this city stand in very plain field , have near adjoin to it many sumptuous city , as namely the city of Tlaxcalla , a city of two hundred thousand Indian , tributary to the king , although he exact no other tribute of they then a handful of wheat a piece , which amount to thirteen thousand hannege yearly , as have appear by the king book of account . and the reason why he content himself with this tribute , only for they , be , because they be the occasion that he take the city of Mexico , with who the tlaxcallians have war at the same time when the Spaniard come into the country . the governor of this city be a Spaniard , call among they the Alcalde maydr , who administer chief cause of justice both unto the Christians and Indian , refer small and light vice , as drunkenness and such like , to the judgement and discretion of such of the Indian as be choose every year to rule among they , call by the name of alcalde . Theise Indian from fourteen year old 362 upward , pay unto the king for their yearly tribute one ounce of silver , and a hannege of maiz , which be value among they common at twelve real of plate . the widow among they pay half of this . the Indian both of this city , and of the rest , lie about Mexico , go clothe with mantle of linen cloth make of cotton wool , paint throughout with work of diverse and fine colour . it be distant from the city of the angel four Tlaxcalla league to the northward , and fourteen from Mexico . league there be another city a league from it , call Chetula , consist of more than sixty thousand Indian , tributary , angel . and there dwell not above twelve Spaniard there . from it , about two league , there be another , call Acassingo , of above fifty thousand Indian , and about eight or twelve Spaniard , which stand at the foot of the Vulcan of Mexico , on the east side . there be vukan be a beside these , three other great city , the one name ml that c < > n - tepiaca , a very famous city , Waxazingo , and tichama - chalcho : all these in time past belong to the kingdom ' of Tlaxcalla : and from these city they bring most of their Cochinilia into Spain . the distance from the Cochinilia . city of the angel , to the city of Mexico be twenty Pueblo de los league . this city of Mexico be the city of great angeles20 fame in all the Indies , have goodly and costly house in it , build all of lime and stone , and seven street ’ in length , and seven in breadth , with river run through every second street , by which they bring their provision in canoas . it be situate at the foot of certain hill , which contain in compass by estimation above twenty league , compass the say city on the one side , and a lake which be fourteen league about on the other side . upon which lake there be build many notable and sumptuous city , as the city of Tescuco , where the Spaniard build six frigate , at that time when they conquer Mexico , and where also Fernando Cortes make his abode five or six month in cure of the sickness of his people , which they have take at their come into the country . there dwell 363 his voyage from Mexico to Nueva Biscaia . [ Iii . 457 . ] new Biscay . the silver mine of tamascaltepec . the valley of saint barthoh - mew . the haven where you ship of China in thephiuppinas arrive . Guaxaca . the english voyage in this city about sixty thousand Indian , which pay tribute to the king . in this city the say Fernando build the fine church that ever be build in the Indies , the name whereof be saint Peter . after i have continue two year in this city , be desirous to see further the country , i employ that which i have , and take my voyage towards the province of California , in the which be discover a certain country , by a Biscaine , who name be Diego the guiara , and call it after the name of his country , new Biscay , where i sell my merchandise for exchange of silver , for there be there certain rich mine discover by the aforesaid biskaine . go from Mexico i direct my voyage somewhat towards the southwest , to certain mine , call Tamascaltepec , and so travel forward the space of twenty day through desert place unhabit , till i come to the valley of saint Bartholomew , which join to the province of new Biscay . in all these place the Indian for the most part go naked , and be wild people . their common armour be bow and arrow : they use to eat up such Christians as they come by . from hence depart , i come to another province name Xalisco , and from thence to the port of Navidad , which be 120 league from Mexico , in which port arrive always in the month of April , all the ship that come out of the south sea from China , and then philippinas , and there they lie their merchandise ashore . the most part whereof be mantle mad of cotton wool , wax , and fine platter gild , make of earth , and much gold . the next summer follow , be in the year 1570 ( which be the first year that the pope Buis be bring into the Indies ) i undertake another voyage towards the province of sonsonate , which be in the kingdom of Guatimala , whither i carry diverse merchandise of Spain , all by land on mule back . the way thitherward from Mexico be to the city of the angel , and from thence to another city of Christians 80 league off , call Guaxaca , in which there dwell about counterfeit 3 ^ 4 Spaniard , and many Indian . all the Indian of this province pay their tribute in mantle of cotton wool , and Cochinilia , whereof there grow abundance throughout this country . near to this place there lie a port in the south sea , call Aguatulco , in the which there agwtuko . dwell not above three or four Spaniard , with certain negro , which the king maintain there : in which place sir Francis Drake arrive in the year 1579 , in the month of April , where i lose with his be there above a thousand ducat , which he take away , with much other good of other merchant of Mexico from one Francisco Gomes Rangifa , factor there for all the spanish merchant that then trade in the south sea : for from this port they use to embark all their good that go for Peru , and to the kingdom of Honduras . from Guaxaca i come to a town name Nixapa , which stand Nixapa . upon certain very high hill in the province of sapot - Sapotecas . ecas , wherein inhabit about the number of twenty Spaniard , by the king of Spain commandment , to keep that country in peace : for the Indian be very rebellious : and for this purpose he bestow on they the town and city that be within that province . from hence i go to a city call Tecoantepec , which be the far Tecoantepec . town to the eastward in all nova Hispania , which some time do belong to the mark de Valle , and because it be a very fit port , stand in the south sea , the king of Spain , upon a rebellion make by the say mark against he , take it from he , and do now possess it as his own . here in the year 1572 i see a piece of ordinance of brass , call a demy culverin , which come out of a ship call the Jesus of Lubec , which captain Hawkins leave in saint John de ullua , be in fight with the Spaniard in the year 1568 ; which piece they afterward carry 100 league by land over mighty mountain to the say city , to be embark there for the philippinas . leave Tecoantepec , i go still along by the south sea about 150 league in the desolate province of Soconusco , Soconusco . in which province there grow cacao , which the chris - 365 1570 . tian carry from thence into Nova Hispania , for that it will not grow in any cold country . the Indian of this country pay the king their tribute in cacao , give he four hundred cargas , and every carga be 24000 almond , which carga be worth in Mexico thirty piece of real of plate . they be man of great riches , and withal very proud : and in all this province throughout , there dwell not twenty Christians . i travel through Suchetepec . Guasacapan . another province call Suchetepec ; and thence to the province of Guasacapan : in both which province be very few people , the big town therein have not above two hundred Indian . the chief merchandise Guatimala . there , be cacao . hence i go to the city of Guatimala , which be the chief city of all this kingdom : in this city do inhabit about 80 Spaniard : and here the king have his governor , and council , to who all the people of the kingdom repair