a relation of the commodity of Nova Hispania , and the manner of the inhabitant , write by Henry Hawks merchant , which live five year in the say country , and draw the same at the request of m . Richard Hakluyt esquire of Eiton in the county of Hereford , 1572 . aint John de ullua be a island not high above the water , where as now the Spaniard upon m . John Hawkins be there , be in make a strong fort . in this place all the ship that come out of Spain with good for these part , do unlade : for they have none other port so good as this be . the come into this place have three channel , and the best of all be the northermost , which go by the main land : and on every side of the channel there be many small rock as big as a small barrel : they will make man stand in doubt of they , but there be no fear of they . there be another island there by , call the island of sacrifice , whereas the Spaniard do in time past unlade their good : and for that , they say , there be upon it spirit or devil , it be not frequent as it have be . in these place the north wind have so great dominion , that oftentimes it destroy many ship and bark . this place be give to great sickness . Theise island stand in 18 degree and a half , and about the same be great plenty of fish . five league from saint John de ullua be a fair river ; it lie northwest from the port , and go to a little town of the Spaniard call Vera Cruz , and with small vessel or bark , which they call frigate , they carry all their merchandise which come out of Spain , to the say town : and in like manner bring all the gold , silver , cochinilla , hide , and all other thing that the ship carry into Spain unto they . and the good being in 378 Vera Cruz , they carry they to Mexico , and to Pueblo de los angel , Sacatecas , and saint Martin , and diverse other place so far within the country , that some of they be 700 mile off , and some more , and some less , all upon horse , mule , and in wain draw with ox , and in car draw with mule . in this town of Vera Cruz within these twenty year , when woman be bring to bed , the child new bear incontinent die ; which be not so now in these day , God be thank . this town be incline to many kind of disease , by reason of the great heat , and a certain gnat or fly which they call a musquito , which bite both man and woman musquito . in their sleep ; and assoon as they be bite , incontinent the flesh swell as though they have be bite with some venomous worm . and this musquito or gnat do most follow such as be new come into the country . many there be that die of this annoyance . this town be situate upon the river aforesaid , and compass with wood of diverse manner and sort , and many fruit , as orange and limon , guiave , and diverse other , and bird in they , popinjay both small popinjay . and great , and some of they as big as a raven , and their tail as long as the tail of a fezant . there be also many other kind of bird of purple colour , and small monkey , marvellous proper . monkey . this hot or sick country continue five and forty mile towards the city of Mexico ; and the five and forty mile be pass , than there be a temperate country , and full of tillage : but they water all their corn with river which they turn in upon it . and they gather their wheat twice a year . and if they shall not wheat twice water the ground where as their corn be sow , the in a yeere - country be so hot it will burn all . before you come to Mexico , there be a great town call Tlaxcalla , which have in it above 16000 house - Tlaxcalla a hold . all the inhabitant thereof be free by the king free aty - 379 of Spain : for these be the occasion that Mexico be win in so short time , and with so little loss of [ three . 463 . ] man . wherefore they be all gentleman , and pay no tribute to the king . in this town be all the cochinilia grow . Mexico . Mexico be a great city ; it have more than fifty thousand household , whereof there be not pass five or six thousand house of Spaniard : all the other be the people of the country , which live under the Spaniard law . there be in this city stately building , and many monastery of friar and nun , which the Spaniard have make . and the build of the Indian be somewhat beautiful outward , and within full of small chamber , with very small window , which be not so comely as the build of the Spaniard . this city stand in the midst of a great lake , and the water go through all or the most part of the street , and there come small boat , which they call canoas , and in they they bring all thing necessary , as wood , and coal , and grass for their horse , stone and lime to build , and corn . this city be subject to many earthquake , which oftentimes cast down house , and kill people . this city be very well provide of water to drink , and with all manner of victual , as fruit , flesh and fish , bread , hen and capon , guiny cock and hen , and all other fowl . there be in this city every week three fair or market , which be frequent with many people , aswell Spaniard as the people of the country . there be in these fair or market all manner of thing that may be invent , to sell , and in especial , thing of the country . the one of these fair be upon the Monday , which be call saint hypolitos fair , and saint James his fair be upon the Thursday , and upon Saturday be saint Johns fair . in this city be always the king governor or viceroy , and there be keep the term and parliament . and although there be other place of justice , yet this be above all : so that all man may appeal unto this 380 ! 572 , place , and may not appeal from this city , but only into Spain before the king : and it must be for a certain sum : and if it be under that sum , than there be no appellation from they . many river fall into this lake which the city stand in : but there be never any place find whither it go out . the Indian know a way to drown the city , and way10 within these three year they will have practise the same : but they which shall have be the doer of ' it be hang : and ever since the city have be well watch both day and night , for fear lest at some time they may be deceive : for the Indian love not the Spaniard . round about the town there be very many garden and orchard of the fruit of the country , marvellous fair , where the people have great recreation . the man of this city be marvellous vicious ; and in like manner the woman be dishonest of their body , more than they be in other city or town in this country . there be near about this city of Mexico many river crocodile . and stand water which have in they a monstrous kind of fish , which be marvellous raven , and a great devourer of man and cattle . he be wont to sleep upon the dry land many time , and if there come in the mean time any man or beast and wake or disquiet he , he speed well if he get from he . he be like unto a serpent , save that he do not fly , neither have he wing . there be west out of Mexico a port town which navigation be on the south sea , call Puerto de Acapulco , where as there be ship which they have ordinary for the navigation of China , which they have new find . this port be threescore league from Mexico . there be another port town which be call culiacan , on the south sea , which lie west and by north out of Mexico , and be 200 league from the same : and there the Spaniard make two ship to go seek the strait the northor gulf , which , as they say , be between the newfound - west - strei & ht . land and Greenland ; and they call it the Englishman 381 1572 . straight : which as yet be never full find . they say , that straight lie not far from the main land of China , which the Spaniard account to be marvellous rich . towards the north from Mexico there be great store the more northward , the rich silver mine . of silver mine . there be great quantity of silver find in these mine towards the north , than there be any other part : and as the most man of experience say always , they find the rich mine the more northerly . Theise mine be common upon great hill and stony ground , marvellous hard to be labour and wrought . out of some of the mine the Indian find a certain paint earth . kind of earth of diverse colour , wherewith they paint themselves in time of their dance , and other pastime which they use . in this country of Nova Hispania there be also gold mine . mine of gold , although the gold be common find in river , or very near unto river . and now in these day there be not so much gold find as there have be heretofore . there be many great river , and great store of fish in they , not like unto our kind of fish . and there be marvellous great wood , and as fair tree as may be see , of diverse sort , and especial fir tree , that [ three . 464 . ] NLesquiquez . may mast any ship that go upon the sea , oak and pineapple , and another tree which they call Mesquiquez : it bear a fruit like unto a peascod , marvellous sweet , which the wild people gather , and keep it all the year , and eat it in stead of bread . seven city by witchcraft not find of the seeker . the Spaniard have notice of seven city which old man of the Indian show they shall lie towards the northwest from Mexico . they have use and use daily much diligence in seek of they , but they can find any one of they . they say that the witchcraft of the Indian be such , that when they come by these town they cast a mist upon they , so that they can see they . 382 they have understanding of another city which they call Copalla : and in like manner , at my be in the country , they have use much labour and diligence in the seek of it : they have find the lake on which it shall stand , and a canoa , the head whereof be wrought with copper curious , and can not find nor see any man nor the town which to their understanding shall stand on the same water , or very near the same . there be a great number of beast or cow in the country of Cibola , which be never bring thither by the Spaniard , but breed natural in the country . they be like unto our ox , save that they have long hair like a lion , and short home , and they have upon their shoulder a bunch like a camel , which be high than the rest of their body . they be marvellous wild and swift in run . they call they the beast or cow of Cibola . This Cibola be a city which the Spaniard find now of late , without any people in the same , goodly bnilding , fair chimney , window make of stone and timber excellent wrought , fair well with wheel to draw their water , and a place where they have bury their dead people , with many fair stone upon the grave . and the captain will not suffer his soldier to break up any part of these grave , say , he will come another time to do it . they ask certain people which they meet , whither the people of this city be go : and they make answer , they be go down a river , which be there by , very great , and there have build a city which be more for their commodity . this captain lack thing necessary for himself and his man , be fain to return back again , without find any treasure accord to his expectation : neither find they but few people , although they find beat way , which have be much haunt and frequent . the captain at his come back again , have a great 383 A . D . 1572 . PedroMorales Eif Nicolas Burgignon write the like of Copalla . the strange ox of Cibola . Cibola abandon . a great river near Cibola . water congeal to salt . dog of India describe . Cacao a fruit currant as money . fruit . hot spring . the english voyage check of the governor , because he have not go forward , and see the end of that river . they have in the country , far from the sea side , stand water , which be salt : and in the month of April and may the water of they congeal into salt , which salt be all take for the king use and profit . their dog be all crooked back , as many as be of the country breed , and can run fast : their face be like the face of a pig or a hog , with sharp nose . in certain province which be call Guatimala , and Soconusco , there be grow great store of cacao , which be a berry like unto a almond : it be the best merchandise that be in all the Indies . the Indian make drink of it , and in like manner meat to eat . it go current for money in any market or fair , and may buy any flesh , fish , bread or cheese , or other thing . there be many kind of fruit of the country , which be very good , as plantan , sapotes , guiave , pina , aluacatas , tunas , mamios , limon , orange , walnut very small and hard , with little meat in they , grape which the Spaniard bring into the country , and also wild grape , which be of the country , and be very small , quinse , peach , fig , and but few apple , and very small , and no pear : but there be melon and Calabasas or gourd . there be much honey , both of bee and also of a kind of tree which they call magueiz . this honey of magueiz be not so sweet as the other honey be , but it be better to be eat only with bread , than the other be ; and the tree serve for many thing , as the leaf make thread to sow any kind of bag , and be good to cover and thatch house , and for diverse other thing . they have in diverse place of the country many hot spring of water : as above all other , i have see one in the province of mechuacan . in a plain field without any mountain , there be a spring which have much water , and it be so hot , that if a whole quarter of beef be cast into it , within on half hour it will be as well