some monster , or heathen people . and when they see we come into the church in our player coat , the woman and child begin to cry out , and make such a noise , that it be strange to see and hear , say , that they never see goodly man in all their life , and that it be not possible that there can be in we so much evil as be report of we , and that we be more like angel among man , than such person of such evil religion as by the priest and friar we be report to be , and that it be great pity that we shall be so use for so small a offence . so that be bring into the say high church , and set upon the scaffold which be make before the high altar , in the presence of all the people , until high mass be do , and the sermon 348 make by a friar , concern our matter , they do put we in all the disgrace they can , to cause the people not to take so much compassion upon we , for that we be heretic , and people that be seduce of the devil , and have forsake the faith of the catholique church of Rome , with diverse other reproachful word , which be too long to recite in this place . high mass and sermon be do , our offence , as they call they , be recite , every man what he have say and do , and present be the sentence pronounce against we . that be , that the say Augustine Boacio be condemn to wear his saint Benito all the day of his life , and put into perpetuali prison , where he shall fulfil the same , and all his good confiscate and lose . and i the say Tomson to wear the saint Benito for three year , and then to be set at liberty . and for the accomplish of this sentence or condemnation , we must be present send down from Mexico , to vera Cruz , and from thence to saint John de ullua , and there to be ship for Spain , which be 65 . league by land , with strait commandment , that upon pain of 1000 ducat , the master every one shall look strait unto we , and carry we to Spain , and deliver we unto the inquisitor of the holy house of Seville , that they shall put we in the place , where we shall fulfil our penance that the archbishop of Mexico have enjoin unto we , by his sentence there give . for performance of the which , we be send down from Mexico , to the sea side , which be 65 . league , with fetter upon our foot , and there deliver to the master of the ship , to be carry for Spain , as before be say . and it be so , that the italian , fear that if he have present himself in Spain before the inquisitor , that they will have burn he , to prevent that danger , when we be come homeward , and be arrive at the island of Ter ? era , one of the ysle of the azore , the first night that we come into the say port to a anchor , about midnight he find the mean to get he naked out of the ship into the sea , and swim 349 the english voyage naked a shore , and so present get he to the further side of the island , where he find a little Carvel ready to depart for Portugal , in the which he come to Lisbon , and pass into France , and so into England , where he end his life in the city of London . and i for my part keep still aboard the ship , and come into Spain , and be deliver to the inquisitor of the holy house of Seville , where they keep i in close prison , till i have fulfil the three year of my penance . which time be expire , i be free put out of prison , and set at liberty : and be in the city of Sivil a casher of one Hugh Typton , a english merchant of great do , by the space of one year , it fortune that there come out of the city of Mexico , a Spaniard , call John de la Barrera , that have be long time in the Indies , and have get great sum of gold and silver , and with one only daughter ship himself for to come for Spain , and by the way chance to die , and give all that he have unto his only daughter , who name be marie de la Barrera , and be arrive at the city of Sivil , it be my chance to marry with she . the marriage be worth to i 2500 . pound in bar of gold and silver , beside jewel of great price . this i think good to speak of , to show the goodness of God to all they that put their trust in he , that i be bring out of the Indies , in such great misery and infamy to the world , shall be provide at God hand in one moment , of more than in all my life before i can attain unto by my own labour . [ Iii . 452 . ] after we depart from Mexico , our saint benitoe be set up in the high church of the say city , with our name write in the same , accord to their use and custom , which be and will be a monument and a remembrance of we , as long as the romish church do reign in that country . the same have be see since by one John Chilton , and diverse other of our nation , which be leave in that country long since , by sir John Hawkins . and because it shall | be know wherefore it be 35 ° that i be so punish by the clergy hand , as before be mention , i will in brief word declare the same . it be so , that be in Mexico at the table , among many principali people at dinner , they begin to inquire of i be a Englishman , whether it be true , that in England they have overthrow all their church and house of religion , and that all the image of the saint of heaven that be in they be throw down , break , and burn , and in some place high way stone with they , and whether the english nation deny their obedience to the pope of Rome , as they have be certify out of Spain by their friend . to who i make answer , that it be so , that in deed they have in England put down all the religious house of friar and monk that be in England , and the image that be in their church and other place be take away , and use there no more : for that ( as they say ) the make of they , and put of they where they be adore , be clean contrary to the express commandment of almighty God , thou shall not make to thy self any grave image , etc and that for that cause they think it not lawful that they shall stand in the church , which be the house of adoration . one that be at the declare of these word , who be my master Gonsalo cereso , answer and say , if it be against the commandment of God , to have image in the church , that than he have spend a great deal of money in vain , for that two year past he have make in the monastery of Santo Domingo , in the say city of Mexico , a image of our lady of pure silver and gold , with pearl and precious stone , which cost he 7000 and odd peso , and every peso be 4 . S . 8 . d . of our money : which indeed be true , for that i have see it many time my self where it stand . at the table be another gentleman , who presume to defend the cause more than any other that be there , say , that they know well enough that they be make but of stock and stone , and that to they be no worship give , but that there be a certain veneration due unto they 351 after they be set up in the church , and that they be set there to a good intent : the one , for that they be book for the simple people , to make they understand the glory of the saint that be in heaven , and a shape of they to put we in remembrance to call upon they , to be our intercessor unto God for we , for that we be such miserable sinner , that we be not worthy to appear before God , and that use devotion to saint in heaven , they may obtain at God hand the soon , the thing that we demand of he . as for example , say he , imagine that a subject have offend his king upon the earth in any kind of respect , be it for the party to go bold to the king in person , and to demand pardon for his offence ? no , say he , the presumption be too great , and possible he may be repulse , and have a great rebuke for his labour . better it be for such a person to seek some private man near the king in his court , and make he acquaint with his matter , and let he be a mediator to his majesty for he , and for the matter he have to do with he , and so may he the better come to his purpose , and obtain the thing which he do demand : even so say he , it be with God and his saint in heaven : for we be wretched sinner : and not worthy to appear nor present our self before the majesty of God , to demand of he the thing that we have need of : therefore thou have need to be devout , and have devotion to the mother of God , and the saint of heaven , to be intercessor to God for thou , and so may thou the better obtain of God the thing that thou do demand . to this i answer , and say , sir , as touch the comparison you make of the intercessor to the king , how necessary they be , i will but ask you this question . set the case that this king you speak of , if he be so merciful , as , when he know that one , or any of his subject have offend he , he send for he to his own town , or to his own house , or palace , and say unto he , come hither , i know that thou have offend 352 many law , if thou do know thereof , and do repent thou of the same , with full intent to offend no more , i will forgive thy trespass , and remember it no more : say i , if this be do by the king own person , what then have this man need to go seek friendship at any of the king private servant hand , but go to the principal , see that he be ready to forgive thou , than thou be to demand forgiveness at his hand ? Even so be it with our gracious God , who call and cry out unto we throughout all the world , by the mouth of his prophet , apostle , and by his own mouth , say , come unto i all you that labour and be over lade , and i will refresh you : beside 1000 other offer and proffer which he do make unto we in his holy scripture . what then have we need of the saint help that be in heaven , whereas the lord himself do so free offer himself unto we ? at which say , many of the hearer be astonish , and say , that by that reason , i will give to understand , that the inn - [ three . 453 . ] vocation of saint be to be disannul , and by the law of God not command . i answer , that they be not my word but the word of God himself : look into the scripture your self , and you shall so find it . the talk be perceive to be prejudicial ! to the romish doctrine , and therefore it be command to be no more entreat of , and all remain unthink upon , have it not be for a villainous Portugal that be in the company , who say , basta ser ingle para saber todo esto y mass : who the next day , without