the true and perfect description of a voyage perform and do by Francisco the gualle a spanish captain and pilot , for the viceroy of new Spain , from the haven of Acapulco in new Spain , to the island of the lu ^ ones or philippinas , unto the haven of manilla , and from thence to the haven of Macao in China , and from Macao back again to Acapulco , accomplish in the year of our lord , 1584 . Chap . 1 . he ten of march in the year of our lord 1582 we set sail out of the haven of Acapulco , lie in the country of new Spain , direct our course towards the island of the Lugones , or philippinas west Southwest , run in that manner for the space of twenty five league , till we come under sixteen degree , that so we may shun the calm by sail close by the shore . from thence forward we hold our course west for the space of 30 league , and be there , we run west , and west and by south , for the space of 1800 [ three . 443 . ] league , to the hand call Isla deal Enganno , which be the further hand lie in the south part of you hand call des los ladrone , that be , the hand of rover , or Islas de las Velas , under 13 . degree and in latitude septentrionali , and 164 . degree in longitude orientali , upon the fix meridionali line , which lie 326 right with the hand of Ter ^ era . from thence we hold our course westward for the space of 280 . league , till we come to the point call el capo de Espirito Santo , that be , the point of the holy ghost , lie in the hand Tandaya , the first hand of those that be call philippinas , lu ^ ones , or Manillas , which be a country with few hill , with some mine of brimstone in the middle thereof . from the point aforesaid , we sail west for the space of eighteen league to the point or entry of the channel , which run in between that hand and the hand of Lu ^ on . this point or entry lie scarce under 12 . degree . all the coast that stretch from the entry of the chanel to the point of el capo del Spirito santo , be not very fair . eight league from the say point lie a haven of indifferent greatness , call Baya de Lobos , that be , the bay of wolf , have a small hand in the mouth thereof : and within the channel about half a league from the end of the say hand lie a hand or cliff , and when you pass by the point in the middle of the channel , than you have five and twenty fathom deep , with brown sand : there we find so great a stream run westward , that it make the water to cast a skum as if it have be a sand , whereby it put we in fear , but cast out our lead , we find five and twenty fathom deep . from the aforesaid entry of the channel north , and north and by east about ten league , lie the island of catanduane , about a league distant from the land of lu ^ on , on the further point eastward , and from the same entry of the channel towards the west and Southwest lie the hand Capuli about six league from thence , stretch westsouth west , and eastnortheast , be five league long , and four league broad : and as we pass by it , it lie northward from we under twelve degree and | . and somewhat high land . four league from the aforesaid hand of Capuli northwestward lie the three hand of the haven of Bollon in the 327 hand of lufone , stretch north and south about four league , distant from the firm land half a league , whereof the further southward lie under thirteen degree : in this channel it be twenty fathom deep , with white sand , and a great stream , run southeast : we pass through the middle of the channel . from this channel we hold our course Southwest , and Southwest and by west , for the space of twenty league , until we come to the west end of the hand of Tycao , which reach east and west thirteen league . this point or hook lie under 12 . degree and in the middle between this hand and the hand Capuli there lie three hand call the faranias , and we run in the same course on the northside of all the hand , at the depth of 22 . fathom with white sand . from the aforesaid west point of the hand Tycao to the point of Buryas it be east and west to sail about the length of a league or a league and a half : we put into that channel , hold our course south , and south and by west about three league , until we be out of the channel at sixteen fathom deep , with half white and reddish sand in the channel , and at the mouth thereof , whereof the middle lie under 12 . degree and f . and there the stream run northward . the hand of Buryas stretch northwest and southeast , and be low land , whereof the northwest point be about three league from the coast of Lugon , but you can pass between they with any ship , but with small foist and bark of the country . this shallow channel lie under twelve degree : and run through the aforesaid channel between the hand Tycao and Buryas , as i say before , we sail southward about the isle of two league from the hand of masbate , which stretch masbate . past anj west 8 . league long , be in breadth 4 . league , and lie under 12 . degree and in the middle thereof , and be somewhat high land . from the say channel between Tycao and Buryas , we hold our course westnorthwest for thirteen 328 league , leave the hand masbate on the southside , and the hand Buryas on the north side : at the end of thirteen league we come by a hand call Banton , which be in form like a hat , under twelve degree and f . when we have sail the aforesaid thirteen league and eight league more , on the south side we leave the hand call rebuiam , which stretch northwest and northwest and by north , and southeast , and southeast and by south , for the space of eight league , be high and crooked land , whereof the north point lie under twelve degree and and there you iinde 35 . fathom deep , with white sand . from the aforesaid hand of Banton southward nine league , there begin and follow three island , one of they be call Bantonsilla , which be a small hand in form of a sugar loaf : the second Crymara , be somewhat great in length , reach east and west about two league : the three Itaa , or the he of goat , have certain hovel . by all these hand aforesaid you may pass [ three . 444 . ] with all sort of ship , whereof the foremost lie southward under twelve degree and j . from the hand of Bantonsilla , or small Banton , we hold our course northwest for the space of four league , to the channel between the hand call the verey , and the hand Marinduque , the verey lie on the south side under twelve degree and ( which be two small hand like two frigate ) and the hand Marinduque on the north side under twelve degree , and which be a great hand , stretch westnorthwest , and eastsoutheast , have in length 12 . and in breadth 7 . league . on the north side with the hand lu ^ on it make a long and small channel , run somewhat crooked , which be altogether full of shallows and sand , whereby no ship can pass through it . the further point westward of the same hand lie under thirteen degree and J . it be high land , on the east side have the form of a mine of brimstone or fiery hill , and on the west side the land run downward at the point thereof be round like 329 a loaf of bread : in the channel between it and the verey , there be 18 . fathom deep with small black sand . from the aforesaid channel of verey and marinduque , we hold our course westnorthwest twelve league to the land of Mindora , to the point or hook call Dumaryn , lie full under thirteen degree : five league forward from the say channel on the south side we leave a hand call Isla deal maestro del Campo , that be , the hand of the colonel , lie under twelve degree and which be a small and flat hand : in this course we have 45 fathom deep , with white sand . by this point or end of the hand Marinduque begins the hand of Myndoro , which have in length east and west five and twenty league , and in breadth twelve league , whereof the further point southward lie under thirteen degree , and the further point northward under thirteen degree and f . and the further point westward under thirteen degree . this hand with the hand of Lu . ? on make a channel of five league broad , and ten or twelve fathom deep with muddy ground of diverse colour , with white sand . five league forward from Marinduque lie the river of the town of Anagacu , which be so shallow , that no ship may enter into it . from thence two league further lie the hand call Bacco , which be three hand lie in a triangle , two of they be distant from the land about three hundred cubit , and between they and the land you may pass with small ship : and from the land to the other hand , be about two hundred cubit , where it be altogether shallows and sand , so that where the ship may pass outward about 150 . cubit from the land , you leave both the hand on the south side , run between the three hand and the river call Rio deal Bacco , somewhat more from the middle of the chanel towards the hand , which be about a league distant from the other : the channel be ten fathom deep , with mud and shell upon the ground : the river of 33 ° Bacco be so shallow , that no ship may enter into it . from this hand with the same course two league forward , you pass by the point el Capo de Rescaseo , where we cast out our lead , and find that a man may pass close by the land , and there you shall find great strong stream : and half a league forward with the same course , lie the town of Mindoro , which have a good haven for ship of three hundred ton . three league northward from the same haven lie the hand call Cafaa , stretch from east and west , be hilly ground . from the say town of Myndoro , we hold our course westnorthwest eight league , till we come to the point or hook of the sand call Tulen , lie upon the hand of Lu ^ on , which sand or bank reach into the sea half a league from the coast : you must keep about a hundred cubit from it , where you find eight fathom water , muddy and shel ground : you run along by those sand north , and north and by west for the space of two league , till you come to the river call Rio de anasebo : all the rest of the coast call de los limbone to the mouth or entry of the bay call manilla , ( which be four league ) be sail with the same course . the limbone ( which be hand so call ) be high in form like a pair of organ , with good haven for small ship , run along by the limbone : and two league beyond they on the south side , we leave the hand of fortan , and four hand more , but the three hand of Lubao , which be very low , lie under 13 . degree and J . and the limbone lie in the mouth or entry of the bay of manilla under 14 . degree and J . from thence we run northwest for the space of six league to the haven of cabite , keep along by the land lie on the west side , where it be shallow , and be call los Baixos deal Rio de Cannas , the shallows of the river of reed : all along this bay in the same course , there be from ten to four fathom deep . 331 A . D . i584 . the bay of manilla in 14 degree and one quarter . be by the point or hook of cabite , than we keep but a hundred pace from it , run Southwest , southsouthwest , and south , until we discover the whole mouth or entry of the bay , where we may