. the general of that fleet be call Diego flores de Valdes . after his come , when he have water his ship , both the fleet join in one , and don Juan de Velasco de Varre be the first fifteen day general of both the fleet , who turn through the channel of Bahama , his pilot have like to have cast away all the fleet upon the cape call cannaveral , which be prevent by i John Hortop , and our master Robert Barret : for i 460 being in the second watch escry land , and call to Robert Barret , bid he look over board , for i see land under the lee - bow of the ship : he call to the boatswain , and bid he let fly the fore sail sheet , and lie the helm upon the lee , and cast the ship about . when we be cast about , we be but in seven fathom water : we shoot off a piece , give advice to the fleet to cast about , and so they do . for this we be belove o the general , and all the fleet . the general be in a great rage , and swear by the king , that he will hang his pilot : for he say , that twice before he have almost cast away the admiral . when it be day , he command a piece to be shoot off , to call to council : the other admiral in his ship come up to he , and ask what the matter be , he say , that his pilot have cast away his ship and all the fleet , have it not be for two of the Englishman , and therefore he will hang he . the other admiral with many fair word persuade he to the contrary . when we come in the height of Bermuda , we this - a sea - monster cover a monster in the sea , who show himself three ™ ttesliafe time unto we from the middle upward , in which part °^ a man ' he be proportion like a man , of the complexion of a Mulato , or tawny Indian . the general do command one of his clerk to put it in writing , and he certify the king and his noble thereof . present after this , for the space of sixteen day we have wonderful foul weather , and then God send we a fair wind , until such time as we discover the hand call faial . on saint James day we make racket , wheel , and other firework , to make pastime that night , as it be the order of the Spaniard . when we come near the land , our master R . Barret confer with we , to take the pinnace one night , when we come on the hand call Ter ? era , to free our self from the danger and bondage that we be go into , whereunto we agree : none have any pinnace astern then but our ship , which give great courage to our enterprise : we prepare a bag of bread , and a Botijo of water , which will have serve we nine day , and 461 provide our self to go : our master borrow a small compass of the master gunner of the ship , who lend it he , but suspect his intent , and close make the general privy to it , who for a time dissemble the matter . in the end see our pretense , he call R . Barret , command his head to be put in the stock , and a great pair of iron bolt on his leg , and the rest of we to be set in the stock by the leg . than he will a piece to be shoot off , and he send the pinnace for the other admiral , and all the captain , master and pilot of both fleet to come aboard of he . he command the mainyard to be strike down , and to put 2 . pilley , on every yard - arme one ; the hangman be call , and we be will to confess our self , for he swear by the king that he will hang we . when the other admiral , and the rest be come aboard , he call they into his counsel - chamber , and tell they that he will hang the master of the Englishman , and all his company . the admiral , who name be Diego Flores de Valdes , ask he wherefore : he say , that we have determine to rise in the night with the pinnace , and with a ball of firework to set the ship on fire , and go our way : therefore , say he , i will have you the captain , master , and pilot , to set your hand unto that , for i swear by the king that i will hang they , [ three . 494 . ] Diego flores de Valdes answer , i nor the captain , master , and pilot will not set our hand to that , for he say , if he have be prisoner as we be , he will have do the like himself . he counsel he to keep we fast in prison , till he come into Spain , and then send we to the contratation house in Sivil , where , if we have deserve death the law will pass on we , for he will not have it say that in such a fleet as that be , six man and a boy shall take the pinnace , and go away , and so he return to his ship again . when he be go , the general come to the main mast to we , and swear by the king , that we shall not come out of the stock till we come into Spain : within 462 16 day after we come over the bar of saint Lucar , and come up to the hurcado , than he put we into a pinnace in the stock , and send we prisoner to the contratation house in Seville . from thence after one year we break prison , on saint Stevens day at night , 7 . of our company escape , Robert Barret , i job Hortop , John Emerie , Humphrey Roberts , and John Gilbert be take , and bring back to the contratation house , where we remain in the stock till twelve tide be pass . than our keeper put up a petition to the judge of the contratation house , that we may be send to the great prison house in Seville , for that we break prison , whereupon we be present lead thither , where we remain one month , and then from thence , to the castle of the inquisition house in Triana , where we continue one year : which expire , they bring we out in procession , every one of we have a candle in his hand , and the coat with saint Andrew cross on our back : they bring we up on a high scaffold , that be set up in the place of saint Francis , which be in the chief street of Seville : there they set we down upon bench , every one in his degree , and against we on another scaffold sit all the judge , and the clergy on their bench : the people wonder , and gaze on we , some pity our case , other say , burn those heretic . when we have sit there two hour , we have a sermon make to we : after which one call Bresinia , secretary to the inquisition , go up into the pulpit with the process , and call Robert Barret and John Gilbert , who two familiar of Robert Barret the inquisition bring from the scaffold before the judge , where the secretary read the sentence , which it be that they shall be burn , and so they return to the scaffold , and be burn . than i job Hortop , and John bone be call , and Job Hortop bring to the place , as before , where we hear our hls cmdm - sentence , which be , that we shall go to the game , and there row at the oar end ten year , and then to be bring back to the inquisition house , to have the coat with saint Andrew cross put on our back , and 463 from thence to go to the everlasting prison remediless , and so we be return from the scaffold from whence we come . Thomas mark , and Thomas Ellis be call , and have sentence to serve in the galley eight year , and Humphrey Roberts , and John Emery to serve five year , and so be return to the bench on the scaffold , where we sit till four of clock in the afternoon . than we be lead again to the inquisition house , from whence we be bring . the next day in the morning Bresinia the treasurer come thither to we , and deliver to every one of we his sentence in write . i with the rest be send to the galley , where we be chain four and four together : every man daily allowance be 26 . ounce of course black biscuit and water , our clothing for the whole year two shirt , two pair of breech of course canvas , a red coat of course cloth , soon on , and soon off , and a gown of hair with a friar hood : our lodging be on the bare board , and bank of the galley , our head and beard be shave every month , hunger , thirst , cold , and stripe we lack none , till our several time expire . and after the time of 12 . year , for i serve two year above my sentence , i be send back to the inquisition house in Seville , and there have put on the coat with saint Andrew cross , i be send to the everlasting prison remediless , where i wear the coat 4 . year , and then upon great suit , i have it take off for 50 ducat , which Hernando the Soria treasurer of the king mint lend i , who i serve for it as a drudge 7 . year , and until the month 1590 . of October last , 1590 , and then i come from Seville to saint Lucar , where i make mean to come away in a flyboat , that be lade with wine and salt , which be Fleming good , the king of Spain subject , dwell in Sivil , marry to spanish woman , and swear to their king . in this month of October last , depart from saint Lucar , at sea , off the southermost cape , we meet a english ship , call the Galeon Dudley , who take the Fleming , and i out of he , and bring i to ports - 464 1590 . mouth , where they set i on land , the 2 . day of December last pass , 1590 . from thence i be send by 1590 . m . muns the lieutenant of Portsmouth , with letter to the R . honourable the earl of Sussex , who command his secretary to take my name and examination , how long i have be out of England , and with who i go , which he do . and on Christmas even i take my leave of his honour , and come to redriffe . the computation of my imprisonment . i suffer imprisonment in Mexico two year . in the contratation house in Seville one year . in the inquisition house in Triana one year . [ he . 495 . ] i be in the galley twelve year . in the everlasting prison remediless , with the coat with saint Andrews cross on my back 4 . year . and at liberty i serve as a drudge Hernando de Soria 3 . year , which be the full compliment of 23 . year . since my departure from England , until this time of my return , i be five time in great danger of death , beside the many peril i be in , in the galley . first in the port of saint John de ullua , where be on shore , with many other of our company , which be all slay save i , and two other that by swim get aboard the Jesus of Lubek . second , when we be rob by the wild Indian . third , after we come to Mexico , the viceroy will have hang we . four , because he can not have his mind to hang we , he will have burn we . five , the general that bring we into Spain , will have hang we at sea . thus have true set down unto you my travel , misery and danger , endure the space of 23 . year , i end .