appoint to go upon either side of every one of we : and so march in this order and manner towards the scaffold in the market place , which be a bow shoot distant or thereabouts , we find a great assembly of people all the way , and such a throng , that certain of the inquisitor officer on horseback be constrain to make way , and so come to the scaffold , we go up by a pair of stair , and find seat ready make and prepare for we to sit down on , every man in order as he shall be call to receive his judgement . we be thus set down as we be appoint , present the inquisitor come up another pair of stair , and the viceroy and all the chief justice with they . when they be set down and place under the cloth of [ three . 481 ] estate agree to their degree and call , then come up also a great number of friar , white , black and grey , about the number of 300 person , they be set in the place for they appoint . then be there a 427 solemn oyes make , and silence command , and then present begin their severe and cruel judgement . the cruel the first man that be call be one Roger the chief e ^ mtish ^ armourer of the Jesus , and he have judgement to have inquisitor three hundred stripe on horseback , and after condemn upon our poor to the galley as a slave for io year . countryman . after he be call John grey , John brown , John rider , John moon , James collier , and one Thomas Browne : these be adjudge to have 200 stripe on horseback , and after to be commit to the galley for the space of 8 year . then be call John key , and be adjudge to have 100 stripe on horseback , and condemn to serve in the galley for the space of 6 year . then be several call the number of 53 one after another , and every man have his several judgement , some to have 200 stripe on horseback , and some 100 , and condemn for slave to the galley , some for 6 year , some for 8 and some for 10 . and then be i mile Philips call , and be adjudge to serve in a monastery for 5 year , without any stripe , and to wear a fool coat , or saint Benito , during all that time . then be call John story , Richard Williams , David Alexander , Robert cook , Paul Horsewell and Thomas Hull : the six be condemn to serve in monastery without stripe , some for 3 year and some for four , and to wear the saint Benito during all the say time . which be do , and it now draw towards night , George rively , Peter momfrie , and Cornelius the Irishman , be call and have their judgement to be burn to ash , and so be present send away to the place of execution in the market place but a little from the scaffold , where they be quick burn and consume . and as for we that have receive our judgement , be 68 in number , we be carry back that night to prison again . and the next day in the morning be good Friday , the year of our lord 1575 , we 42 be all bring into a court of the inquisitor palace , where we find a horse in a readiness for every one of our man which be condemn to have stripe , and to be commit to the galley , which be in number 60 and so they be enforce to mount up on horseback naked from the middle upward , be carry to be show as a spectacle for all the people to behold throughout the chief and principali street of the city , and have the number of stripe to every one of they appoint , most cruel lay upon their naked body with long whip by sundry man appoint to be the executioner thereof : and before our man there go a couple of crier which cry as they go : behold these english dog , lutheran , enemy to God , and all the way as they go there be some of the inquisitor themselves , and of the familiar of that rakehel order , that cry to the executioner , strike , lay on those english heretic , lutheran , God enemy : and so this horrible spectacle be show round about the city , they return to the inquisitor house , with their back all gore blood , and swell with great bump , and be then take from their horse , and carry again to prison , where they remain until they be send into Spain to the galley , there to receive the rest of their martyrdom : and i and the 6 other with i which have judgement , and be condemn among the rest to serve a apprenticeship in the monastery , be take present and send to certain religious house appoint for the purpose . 429 [ Chap . 6 wherein be show how we be use in the religious house , and that when the time be expire , that we be adjudge to serve in they , there come news to Mexico of m . Francis drake be in the south sea , and what preparation be make to take he , and how i seek to escape , be again take and put in prison at Vera Cruz , and how again i make my escape from thence . i Miles Philips and William low be appoint to the black friar , where i be appoint to be a overseer of Indian workman , who wrought there in building of a new church : among which Indian i learn their language or Mexican tongue very perfect , and have great familiarity with many of they , who i find to be a courteous and love kind of people , ingenious , and of great understanding , and they hate and abhor the Spaniard with all their heart , they have use such horrible cruelty against they , and do still keep they in such subjection and servitude , that they and the negro also do daily lie in wait to practise their deliverance out of that thraldom and bondage , that the Spaniard do keep they in . William [ three . 482 . ] low he be appoint to serve the cook in the kitchen , Richard Williams and David Alexander be appoint to the grey friar , John story and Robert cook to the white friar : Paul horsewel the secretary take to be his servant : Thomas Hull be send to a monastery of priest , where afterward he die . thus we serve out the year that we be condemn for , with the use of our fool coat , and we must needs confess that the friar do use we very courteous : for every one of we have his chamber with bed and diet , and all thing clean and neat : yea many of the Spaniard and friar themselves do utter abhor and mislike of that cruel inquisition , and will as they dare bewail our misery , and comfort we the best they can , 43 ° although they stand in such fear of that devilish inquisition , that they dare not let the left hand know what the right do . now after that the time be expire for which we be condemn to serve in those religious house , we be then bring again before the chief inquisitor , and have all our fool coat pull off and hang up in the head church , call Ecclesia major , and every man name and judgement write thereupon with this addition , a heretic Lutheran reconcile . and there be also all their coat hang up , which be condemn to the galley , with their name and judgement , and underneath his coat , heretic Lutheran reconcile . and also the coat and name of the three that be burn , whereupon be write , a obstinate heretic Lutheran burn . then be we suffer to go up and down the country , and to place our self as we can , and yet not so free , but that we very well know that there be good espial always attend we and all our action , so that we dare not once speak or look awry . David Alexander and Robert Cooke return to serve the inquisitor , who short after marry they both to two of his negro woman : Richard Williams marry a rich widow of Biskay with 4000 pezo : Paul Horsewell be marry to a Mestisa , as they name those who father be Spaniard , and their mother Indian , and this woman which Paul Horsewell have marry , be say to be the daughter of one that come in with Hernando Cortes the conqueror , who have with she in marriage four thousand pezo , and a fair house : John story be marry to a negro woman : William low have leave and licence to go into Spain where he be now marry : for my own part i can never thorough settle my self to marry in that country , although many fair offer be make unto i of such as be of great ability and wealth , but i can have no like to live in that place , where i must every where see and know such horrible idolatry commit , and dare not once for my life speak against it : and therefore 431 A . D . 1575 - 80 . i have always a longing and desire to this my native country : and , to return and serve again in the mine where i may have gather great riches and wealth , i very well see that at one time or another i shall fall again into the danger of that devilish inquisition , and so be strip of all , with loss of life also , and therefore i make my choice rather to learn to weave Grogranes and taffeta , and so compound with a silk - weaver , i bind my self for three year to serve he , and give he a hundred and fifty pezo to teach i the science , otherwise he will not have teach i under seven year prenticeship , and by this mean i live the more quiet , and free from suspicion . howbeit i shall many time be charge by familiar of that devilish house , that i have a meaning to run away into England , and to be a heretic Lutherane again : to who i will answer that they have no need to suspect any such thing in i , for that they know all very well that it be impossible for i to escape by any manner of mean : yet notwithstanding i be call before the inquisitor , and demand why i do not marry : i answer that i have bind my self at a occupation . Well say the inquisitor , i know thou mean to run away , and therefore i charge thou here upon pain of burn as a heretic relapse , that thou depart not out of this city , nor come near to the port of saint John de ullua , nor to any other port : to the which i answer , that i will willing obey . yea say he , see thou do so and thy fellow also , they shall have the like charge . so i remain at my science the full time , and learn the art , at the end whereof there come news to Mexico that there be certain Englishman land with a great power at the port of Acapulco , upon the south sea , and that they be come to Mexico to take the spoil thereof , which wrought a marvellous great fear among they , and many of those that be rich , begin to shift for themselves , their wife and child : upon which hurly burly the viceroy cause a general muster to be make of 432 all the Spaniard in Mexico , and there be find to be the number of 7000 and odd householder of Spaniards in the city and suburb , and of single man unmarried , the number of 3000 and of Mestizoes , which be count to be the son of Spaniards bear of Indian woman , twenty thousand person , and then be Paul horsewel and i mile Philips send for before the viceroy , and be examine if we do know a english man name Francis Drake , which be brother to captain Hawkins : to which we answer , that captain Hawkins have not any brother [ three . 483 . ] but one , which be a man of the age of threescore year or thereabouts , and be now governor of Plymouth in England . and then he demand of we if we know one Francis Drake , and we answer , no . while these thing be in do , there come news that all the Englishman be go , yet be there eight hundred man make out under the lead of several captain , whereof two hundred be send to the port of saint John de ullua , upon the north sea under the conduct of don Lewis Suares , two hundred be send to Guatimala in the south sea , who have for their captain John Cortes , two hundred more be send to Guatulco , a port of the south sea , over who go for captain don Pedro de Robles , and two hundred more be send to Acapulco , the port where it be say that captain Drake have be . and they have for captain doctor Robles Alcalde de corte , with who i mile Philips go as interpreter , have licence give by the inquisitor . when we be come to Acapulco , we find that captain Drake be depart from thence , more than a month before we come thither . but yet our captain Alcalde de corte there present embark himself in a small ship of threescore ton or thereabouts , have also