a discourse write by one mile fillip Englishman , one of the company put on shore northward of Panuco , in the west Indies by m . John Hawkins 1568 . contain many special thing of that country and of the spanish government , but special of ' ’ cruelty use to our Englishman , among the rest to he self for the of 15 . or 16 . year together , until by and happy mean he be deliver 1 . the Jesus . [ in . 47 ° - ] 2 . the minion . ^ . TheWilliam and John . 4 . TheJudith . 5 . the angel . 6 . the swallow . their and space good from this fleet consist of 6 . ship . their bloody hand , and return into his own country . An . 1582 . Chap . 1 . wherein be show the day and time of our departure from the coast of England , with the number and name of the ship , their captain and master , and of our traffic and deal upon the coast of Africa . Pon Monday the second of October 1567 . the weather be reasonable fair , our general m . John Hawkins , have command all his captain and master to be in a readiness to make sail with he , he himself be embark in the Jesus , whereof be appoint for master Robert Barret , hoist sail , and depart from plymouth upon his intend voyage for the part of Africa , and America , be accompany with five other sail of ship , as namely the minion , wherein go for captain m . John Hampton , and John Garret master . the William and John , wherein be captain Thomas Bolton , and James Raunce master . the Judith , in who be captain m . Francis Drake afterward knight , and the angel , who master , as also the captain and master of the swallow i now remember not . and so 398 sail in company together upon our voyage until the ten of the same month , a extreme storm then take we near unto cape Finister , which dure for the space of four day , and so separate our ship , that we have lose one another , and our general find the Jesus to be but in ill case , be in mind to give over the voyage , and to return home . howbeit the eleven of the same month the sea wax calm , and the wind come fair he alter his purpose , and hold on the former intend voyage : and so come to the island of Gomera be one of the island of the canary , where accord to a order before appoint , we meet with all our ship which be before disperse , we then take in fresh water and depart from thence the four of November , and hold on our course , upon the eighteenth day of the same month we come to a anchor upon the coast of Africa , at cape Verde in twelve fathom water ; and here our general land certain of our man , to the number of 160 . or thereabouts , seek to take some ros . and they go up into the country for the space of six mile , be encounter with a great number of the negro : who with their envenome arrow do hurt a great number of our man , so that they be enforce to retire to the ship , in which conflict they recover but a few negro , and of these our man which be hurt with their envenom arrow , there die to the number of seven or eight in very strange manner , with their mouth shut , so that we be force to put stick and other thing into their mouth to keep they open , and so afterward pass the time upon the coast of Guinea , until the twelve of January , we obtain by that time the number of 150 . Negros . And be ready to depart from the sea coast , there be a negro send as a ambassador to our general , from a king of the negro , which be oppress with other king his border neighbour , desire our general to grant he succour and 399 the William and John separate and never after meet with the fleet . the english voyage aid against those his enemy , which our general grant unto , and go himself in person a land , with the number of two hundred of our man or thereabouts , and the say king which have request our aid , do join his force with we , so that thereby our general assault , and set fire upon a town of the say king his enemy , in which there be at the least the number of eight or ten thousand negro , and they perceive that they be not able to make any resistance seek by flight to save themselves , in which their flight there be take prisoner to the number of eight or nine hundred , which our general ought to have have for his share : howbeit the negro king which request our aid , falsify his word and promise , secret in the night convey himself away with as many prisoner as he have in his custody : but our general notwithstanding find himself to have now very near the number of 500 Negros think it best without long abode to depart with they , and such merchandise as he have from the coast of Africa , towards the west Indies , and therefore command with all diligence to take in fresh water and fuel , and so with speed to prepare to depart . howbeit before we depart from thence , in a storm that we have , we lose one of our ship , namely the William and John , of which ship and of her people , we hear no tiding during the time of our voyage . Chap . 2 . wherein be show the day and time of our departure from the coast of Africa , with the day and time of our arrival in the west Indies , also of our trade , and traffic there , and also of the great cruelty that the Spaniard use towards we , by the viceroy his direction , and appointment , falsify his faith and promise give , and seek to have entrap we . a li thing be make in a readiness , at our general he appointment , upon the third day of February 1568 . we depart from the coast of Africa , have the 400 weather somewhat tempestuous , which make our passage the more hard ; and sail so for the space of 52 . day , upon the 27 . of march 1568 . we come in sight of a island call Dominica , upon the coast of America in the west Indies , situate in 14 . degree of latitude , and 322 . of longitude : from thence our general coast from place to place , ever make traffic with the Spaniard and Indian as he may , which be somewhat hardly obtain , for that the king have straight charge all his governor in those part not to trade with any : yet notwithstanding , during the month of April and may , our general have reasonable trade and traffic , and courteous entertainment in sundry place , as at Margarita , Coragao , and else where , till we come to cape de la vela , and Rio de Hacha , ( a place from whence all the pearl do come : ) the governor there will not by any mean permit we to have any trade or [ three . 471 . ] traffic , nor yet suffer we to take in fresh water : by mean whereof our general for the avoid of famine and thirst about the begin of June , be enforce to land two hundred of our man , and so by main force and strength to obtain that which by no fair mean he can procure : and so recover the town with the loss of two of our man , there be a secret and peaceable trade admit , and the Spaniard come in by night , and buy of our negro to the number of 200 . and upward , and of our other merchandise also . from thence we depart for Carthagena , where the governor be so straight , that we can not obtain any traffic there , and so for that our trade be near finish , our general thought it best to depart from thence the rather for the avoid of certain dangerous storm call the huri - canos , which accustom to begin there about that time of the year , and so the 24 . of July 1568 . we depart from thence direct our course north : and leave the island of Cuba upon our right hand , to the eastward of we , and so sail towards Florida upon the 12 . of August a extreme tempest arise , which dure for the space of ix 401 2c Mexico 60 . league from 8 . Juan de ullua . the english voyage 8 day , in which our ship be most dangerous toss and beat hither , and thither , so that we be in continual fear to be drown by reason of the shallowness of the coast , and in the end we be constrain to flee for succour to the port of saint John de ullua , or Vera Cruz , situate in 19 degree of latitude , and in 279 . degree of longitude , which be the port that serve for the city of Mexico : in our seek to recover this port our general meet by the way three small ship that carry passenger , which he take with he , and so the sixteenth of September 1568 . we enter the say port of saint John de ullua . the Spaniard there suppose we to have be the king of Spain fleet , the chief officer of the country thereabouts come present aboard our general , where perceive themselves to have make a unwise adventure , they be in great fear to have be take and stay : howbeit our general do use they all very courteous . in the say port there be twelve ship which by report have in they in treasure to the value of two hundred thousand pound all which be in our general he power and at his devotion , he do free set at liberty , as also the passenger which he have before stay , not take from any of they all the value of one groat : only he stay two man of credit and account , the one name don Laurenzo de Alva , and the other don Pedro de Rivera , and present our general scent to the viceroy to Mexico which be threescore league off , certify he of our arrival there by force of weather , desire that forasmuch as our queen his sovereign , be the king of Spain his love sister and friend , that therefore he will , consider our necessity and want , furnish we with victual for our navy , and quiet suffer we to repair and amend our ship . and furthermore that at the arrival of the spanish fleet which be there daily expect and look for , to the end that there may not quarrel arise between they , and our general and his company for the breach of amity , he humble request of his excellency , that there 402 might in this behalf some special order be take . this message be send away the 16 . of September 1568 . it be the very day of our arrival there . the next morning be the sevententh of the same month , we descry 13 . sail of great ship : and after that our general understand , that it be the king of Spain fleet then look for , he present send to advertise the general hereof , of our be in the say port , and give he further to understand , that before he shall enter there into that harbour , it be requisite that there shall pass between the two general some order and condition to be observe on either part , for the better contrive of peace between they and they , accord to our general request make unto the viceroy . and at this instant our general be in a great perplexity of mind , consider with himself that if he shall keep out that fleet from enter into the port , a thing which he be very well able to do with the help of God , then shall that fleet be in danger of present shipwreck and loss of all their substance , which amount unto the value of one million and eight itisputdowne hundred thousand pound . again he see that if he suffer they to enter , he be assure that they ns ^ t it will practise by all manner of mean to betray he relation . and his , and on the other side the haven be so little , that the other fleet enter , the ship be to ride one hard aboard of another . also he see that if their fleet shall perish by his keep of they out , as of necessity they must if he shall have do so , then stand he in great fear of the queen our sovereign displeasure in so weighty a cause : therefore do he choose the least evil , which be to suffer they to enter under assurance , and so to stand upon his guard , and to defend himself and he from their treason which we be well assure they will practise , and so the messenger be return from don Martin de Henriques , the new viceroy , who come in the same fleet , and have sufficient authority to command in all case both 403 4 . article conclude upon , betwixt the english y the Spaniard ; although the treacherous Spaniards keep none of they . the english voyage by sea and by land in this province of Mexico or new Spain , do certify our general , that for the better maintenance of amity between the