diverse voyage make by Englishman to the famous city of Mexico , and to all or most part of the other principali province , city , town and place throughout the great and large kingdom of new Spain , even as far as Nicaragua and Panama , and thence to Peru : together with a description of the Spaniard form of government there : and sundry pleasant relation of the manner and custom of the natural inhabitant , and of the manifold rich commodity and strange rarity find in those part of the continent : and other matter most worthy the observation . the voyage of Robert Tomson merchant , into nova Hispania in the year 1555 . with diverse observation concern the state of the country : and certain accident touch himself . Obert Tomson bear in the town of Andover in Hampshire begin his travail out of England in An . 1553 . in the month of march : who depart out of the city of Bristol in a good ship call the bark young , in company of other merchant of the say city , within 8 . day after arrive at Lisbon in Portugal , where the say Robert Tomson remain 15 . day , at the end of which he ship himself for Spain in the say ship , and within 4 . day arrive in the bay of Cadiz in Andalusia , which be under the kingdom of Spain , and from thence go up to the city of Sivil by land , which be 20 . league , and there he repair to one John field house a english merchant , who have dwell in the say city of Sivil 18 . or 20 . year marry with wife and 338 child : in who house the say Tomson remain by the space of one whole year or thereabouts , for two cause : the one to learn the castillian tongue , the other to see the order of the country , and the custom of the people . at the end of which time have see the fleet of ship come out of the Indies to that city , with such great quantity of gold and silver , pearl , precious stone , sugar , hide , ginger , and diverse other rich commodity , he do determine with himself to seek mean and opportunity to pass over to see that rich country from whence such great quantity of rich commodity come . and it fall out that within short time after , the say John field ( where the say Tomson be lodge ) do determine to pass over into the west Indies , himself , with his wife , child , and family , and at the request of the say Tomson , he purchase a licence of the king to pass into the Indies , for himself , his wife and child , and among they also for the say Tomson to pass with they : so that present they make preparation of victuali and other necessary provision for the voyage . but the ship which be prepare to perform the voyage be all ready to depart , upon certain consideration by the king commandment be stay and arrest till further shall be know of the king pleasure . whereupon the say John field , with Robert Tomson depart out of Sivil and come down to saint Lucar 15 . league off , and [ three . 448 . ] see the stay make upon the ship of the say fleet , and be not assure when they will depart , determine to ship themselves for the isle of the canary , which be 250 . league from saint Lucar , and there to stay till the say fleet shall come thither : for that be continual their port to make stay at 6 . or 8 . day , to take in fresh water , bread , flesh , and other necessary . so that in the month of February in An . 1555 . then say Robert Tomson with the say John field and his company , ship themselves out of the town of saint Lucar in a carvel of the ci tie of Cadiz , and within 6 . 339 day they arrive at the port of the grand Canaria , where at our come the ship that ride in the say port begin to cry out of all measure with loud voice , in so much that the castle which stand fast by begin to shoot at we , and shoot 6 . or 7 . shot at we , and strike down our main mast , before we can hoist out our boat to go on land , to know what the cause of the shoot be , see that we be spanish ship , and be come into his country . so that be on land , and complain of the wrong and damage do unto we ; they answer , that they have think we have be French rover , that have come into the say port to do some harm to the ship that be there . for that 8 . day pass there go out of the say port a carveil much like unto we , laden with sugar and other merchandise for Spain and on the other side of the point of the say hand , meet with a Frenchman of war , who take the say carvell , and unlade out of she into the say french ship both man and good . And be demand of the say Spaniards what other ship remain in the port whence they come , they answer that there remain diverse other ship , and one lade with sugar ( as they be ) and ready to depart for Spain : upon the which news the Frenchman put 30 . tall man of their ship well appoint into the say carvel which they have take , and send she back again to the say port from whence she have depart the day before . and somewhat late towards the evening come into the port , not show past 3 . or 4 . man , and so come to a anchor hard by the other ship that be in the say port , and be see by the castle and by the say ship , they make no reckon of she , because they know she , and think that she have find contrary wind at the sea , or have forget something behind they , they have return back again for the same , and so make no account of she , but let she alone ride quiet among the other ship in the say port : so that about midnight the say carvel with the Frenchman in she go aboard the other ship that lie 340 hard by lade with sugar , and drive the Spaniard that be in she under hatch , and present let slip her cable and anchor , and set sail and carry she clean away , and after this sort deceive they : and they think or fear that we be the like , do shoot at we as they do . This be pass , the next day after our arrival in the say port , we do unbark our self and go on land up to the city or head town of the great Canaria , where we remain 18 . or 20 . day : and there find certain Englishman merchant servant of one Anthony ^ ngushfactors Hickman and Edward Castelin , merchant of the city the grand or . London that lie there in traffic , or who we receive great courtesy and much good cheer . after the which 20 . day be pass , in the which we have see the country , the people , and the disposition thereof , we depart from thence , and pass to the next he of the canary 18 . league off , call TenerifFe , and be come on land , go up to the city call la Laguna , where we remain 7 . month , attend the come of the whole fleet , which in the end come , and there have take that which they have need of , we ship our self in a ship of Cadiz , be one of the say fleet , which be belong to a Englishman John sweat marry in the city of Cadiz in Spain , who name be John sweat , and there come in the say ship for Cadiz , send captain also a Englishman marry in Cadiz , and son a ship of he in law to the say John sweat , who name be own int0 Leonard Chilton : there come also in the say ship another Englishman which have be a merchant of dust of his the city of Exeter , one of 50 . year or thereabouts , who son in law name be Ralph Sarre . so that we depart from Leonard chil - the say hand in the month of October the fore - rre ^^ say year , 8 . ship in our company , and so direct ’ our course towards the bay of Mexico , and by the way towards the hand of S . Domingo , otherwise call Hispaniola . so that within 32 . day after we depart from the isle of canary we arrive with our ship at the port of saint Domingo , and go in over the 341 many of our man die of these noorme at the take of Puerto rico . the english voyage bar where our ship knock her keel at her entry : and there our ship rid before the town , where we go on land , 8c refresh our self 16 . day , where we find no bread make of wheat , but biscuit bring out of Spain , and out of the bay of Mexico : for the country it self do yield no kind of bread to make grain withal . but the bread they make there , be certain cake make of root call Cassavi , which be something substantiali , but it have but a unsavoury taste in the eat thereof . flesh of beef and mutton they have great store : for there be man that have 10000 head of cattle , of ox , bull and cow , which they do keep only for the hide : for the quantity of flesh be so great , that they be not able to spend the hundred part . hog flesh be there good store , very sweet and savoury , and so wholesome , that they give it to sick folk to eat in stead of hen and capon , although they have good store of poultry of that sort , as also of guinycock 8c Guinyhens . at the time of our be there , the city of saint Domingo be not off above 500 household of Spaniards , but of the Indian dwelling in the suburb there be more . the country be most part of the year very hot , 8c very full of a kind of fly or gnat with long bill , which do prick 8c molest the people very much in the night when they be asleep , in prick their face and hand , and other part of their body that lie uncover , 8c make they to swell wonderful . also there be another kind of small worm which creep into the sole of man foot 8c especial of the black moor and child which use to go barefoot , 8c make their foot to grow as big as a man head , 8c do so ache that it will make one run mad . they have no remedy for the same , but to open the flesh sometime 3 . or 4 . inch 8c so dig they out . the country yield great store of sugar , hide of ox , bull and cow , ginger , Cana fistula 8c Salsa perillia : mine of silver 8c gold there be none , but in some river there be 342 sound some small quantity of gold . the principal coin that they do traffic withal in that place , be black money make of copper and brass : and this they say they do use not for that they lack money of gold and silver to trade withal out of the other part of India , but because if they shall have good money , the merchant that deal with they in trade , will carry away their gold and silver , and let the country commodity lie still . and thus much for saint Domingo . so we be come from the isle of canary to saint Domingo , and there stay until the month of December , which be 3 . month . about the begin of January we depart thence towards the bay of Mexico and new Spain , towards which we set our course , and so sail 24 . day till we come within 15 . league of saint John de ullua , which be the port of Mexico of our right discharge : and be so near our say port , there rise a storm of northerly wind , which come off from terra Florida , which cause we to cast about into the sea again , for fear lest that night we shall be cast upon the shore before