, and for that we lack victual , our general set we on shore : they ask we whither we intend to go , we say to Panuco . the captain of the Indian will we to give unto they some of our clothes and shirt , which we do : then he bid we give they all , but we will not so do , whereupon John cornish be then slay with a arrow , which a Indian boy that stand by the captain shoot at he , wherefore he strike the boy on the neck with his bow , that he lie for dead , and will we to follow he , who bring we into a great field , where we find fresh water : he bid we sit down about the pond and drink , and he with his company will go in the mean space to kill five or six deer , and bring they 455 John cornish slay . James collier . 8 . Englishmen slay . Anotherriver . Seven day travel to Panuco . the english voyage we . we tarry there till three of the clock , but they come not : there one of our company who name be John Cooke , with four other depart from we into a grove to seek relief , where present they be take by the Indian , and strip as naked as ever they be bear , and so return to we . than we divide our self into two part , half to Anthony Goddard , and the rest to James collier , and thus several we seek for Panuco . Anthony Goddard with his company , bid we farewell , they pass a river , where the Indian rob many of they of their clothes , and so pass on their way , come to a stony hill , where they stay . James collier with his company that day pass the same river , and be also rob , and one of they slay by chance : we come that night unto the hill , where Anthony Goddard and his company rest , there we remain till morning , and then we march altogether from thence , enter between two grove , where the Indian rob we of all our clothes , and leave we naked , they hurt many , and kill eight of we . three day after we come to another river , there the Indian show we the way to Panuco , and so leave we : we pass the river into the wilderness , where we make wreath of green grass , which we wound about our body , to keep we from the sun , and gnat of that country . we travel there seven day , and seven night , before we come to Panuco , feed on nothing but root , and guiavo , a fruit like figs . at our come to the river of Panuco two spanish horseman come over unto we in a canowe : they ask we how long we have be in the wilderness , and where our general be , for they know we to be of the company that have fight with their countryman : we tell they seven day and seven night , and for lack of victual our general set we on shore , and he be go away with his ship . they return to their governor , who send they with five canow to bring we all over , which do , they set we in array , where a hundred horseman with their lance , 456 come forcible upon we , but do not hurt we , they carry we prisoner to Panuco , where we remain one night . in the river of Panuco there be a fish like a calf , the Spaniard call it a Mallatin , he have a stone in his head , which the Indian use for the disease of the colic , in the night he come on land , and eat grass . i have eat of it , and it eat not much unlike to bacon . from thence we be send to Mexico , which be 90 league from Panuco . in our way thither , 20 league from the sea side , i do see white crab run up and down the sand , i have eat of they , and they be very good [ three . 492 . ] meat . there grow a fruit which the Spaniard call avocotte , it be proportion like a egg , and as black as a coal , have a stone in it , and it be a excellent good fruit . there also grow a strange tree which they call maguei , it serve they to many use , below by a manifold use the root they make a hole , whereat they do take out of tfMagueis . it twice every day a certain kind of liquour , which they see in a great kettle , till the three part be consume , and that it wax thick , it be as sweet as any honey , and they do eat it . within 20 . day after that they have take all the liquour from it , it wither , and they cut it down , and use it as we use our hemp here in England , which do , they convert it to many use : of some part they make mantle , rope , and thread : of the end they make needle to sow their saddle , pannei , and other furniture for their horse : of the rest they make tile to cover their house , and they put it to many other purpose . and thus we come to Mexico , which be seven or eight mile about , seat in a great fen , environ with 4 hill , it have but two way of entrance , and it be full of creek , in the which in their canow they pass from place to place , and to the island there within . in the Indies ordinary three time a year be wonderful earthquake , which put the people in great fear and danger : during the time of two year that i be in Mexico , i see they six time : when they come they throw down tree , 457 house , and church . there be a city 25 . league from Mexico , call Tlaxcalla , which be inhabit with a hundred thousand Indian , they go in white shirt , linen breech , and long mantle , and the woman wear about they a garment much like unto a flannel petticoat . the king palace be the first place we be bring unto in Mexico , where without we be will to sit down . much people , man , woman , and child come wonder about we , many lament our misery , and some of their clergy ask we if we be Christians , we say , we praise God , we be as good Christians as they : they ask how they may know that , we say , by our confession . from thence we be carry in a Canow to a tanner house , which stand a little from the city : the next morning two friar and two priest come thither to we , and will we to bless our self , and say our prayer in the latin tongue , that they may understand we , many of our company do so , whereupon they return to the viceroy , and tell he that we be good Christians , and that they like we well , and then they bring we much relief , with clothes , our sick man be send to their hospital , where many be cure , and many die . from the tanner house we be lead to a gentleman place , where upon pain of death we be charge to abide , and not to come into the city , thither we have all thing necessary bring we : on Sunday and holy day much people come , and bring we great relief . the viceroy practise to hang we , and cause a pair of new gallows to be set up , to have execute we , whereunto the nobleman of that country will not consent , but pray he to stay until the ship of advice bring news from the king of Spain , what shall be do with we , for they say they can not find any thing by we , whereby they may lawful put we to death . the viceroy then command we to be send to a island there by , and he send for the bishop of Mexico , 4S8 who send four priest to the island , to examine and confess we , who say , that the viceroy will burn we , when we be examine and confess accord to the law of the country . they return to the bishop , and tell he that we be very good Christians . the bishop certify the viceroy of our examination and confession , and say that we be good Christians , therefore he will not meddle with we . then the viceroy send for our master , R . Barret , who he keep prisoner in his palace , until the fleet be depart for Spain . the rest of we he send to a town seven league from Mexico call Tescuco , to card wool among the Indian slave , which drudgery we disdain , and conclude to beat our master , and so we do : wherefore they send to the viceroy , desire he for god sake and our lady , to send for we , for they will not keep we any long , they say that we be devil and no man . the viceroy send for we , and imprison we in a house in Mexico , from thence he send Anthony Goddard , and some other of our company with he into Spain , with Lu . ? on , the general that take we : the rest of we stay in Mexico two year after , and then be send prisoner into Spain , with don Juan de Velasco de Varre , admiral and general of the spanish fleet , who carry with he in his ship , to be present to the king of Spain , the anatomy of a giant , which be send from China to Mexico , to the viceroy don Martin Henriquez , to be send to the king of Spain for a great wonder . it do appear by the anatomy , that he be of a monstrous size , the skull of his head be near as big as half a bushel , his neck - bone , shoulder - plate , arme - bone , and all other lineament of his other part , be huge and monstrous to behold , the shank of his leg from the ankle to the knee be as long as from any man ankle up to his waste , and of bigness accord . at this time , and in this ship , be also send to be present to the king of Spain , two chest full of earth 459 1570 . Havana . the english voyage with ginger grow in they , which be also send from China , to be send to the king of Spain . the ginger run in the ground like to liccoras , the blade grow out of it in length and proportion like unto the blade of wild garlic , which they cut every fifteen day , they use to water they twice a day , as we do our herb here in England , they put the blade in their pottage , and use they in their other meat , who excellent savour and taste be very delightful , and procure a good appetite . when we be ship in the port of saint John de ullua , the general call our master Robert Barret and we with he into his cabin , and ask we if we will fight against Englishmen if we meet they at the sea , we say that we will not fight against our crown , but if we meet with any other , we will do what we be able . he say if we have say otherwise he will not have believe we , and for that we shall be the better use , and have allowance as other man have : and he give a charge to every one of we , accord unto our knowledge , Robert Barret be place with the pilot , i be put in the gunner room , William cause with the boatswain , John bear with the quartermaster , Edward rider , and Geffrey Giles , with the ordinary mariner , Richard the master boy attend on he and the pilot : short after we depart from the port of saint John de ullua with all the fleet of Spain , for the port call Havana : we be 26 . day sail thither . there we come in , anchor , take in fresh water , and stay 16 . day for the fleet of number de dios , which be the fleet that bring the treasure from Peru