their sustenance : to who i speak in the Mexican tongue , and tell they how that i have of a long time be keep in prison by the cruel Spaniard , and do desire they to help i to file off my iron collar , which they willing do : rejoice great with i , that i be thus escape out of the Spaniard hand . than i desire that i may have one of they to guide i out of those desert mountain towards the south , which they also most willing do : and so they bring i to a Indian town 8 . league distant from thence , name Shalapa , where i stay three day , for that i be somewhat sickly . at which town ( with the gold that i have quilt in my doublet ) i buy i a horse 439 of one of the Indian , which cost i 6 . pezo , and so travail south , within the space of 2 . league i happen to overtake a grey friar , one that i have be familiar withal in Mexico , who than i know to be a zealous good man , and one that do much lament the cruelty use against we by the inquisitor , and true he use i very courteous : and i have confidence in he do indeed tell he , that i be mind to adventure to see if i can get out of the say country if i can find ship , and do therefore pray he of his aid , direction , and advise herein , which he faithful do , not only in direct i which be my safe way to travail , but he also of himself keep i company for the space of three day , and ever as we come to the Indian house ( who use and entertain we well ) he gather among they in money to the value of 20 . pezo , which at my departure from he he free give unto i . So come i to the city of Guatimala upon the south sea , which be distant from Mexico about 250 . league , where i stay 6 . day , for that my horse be weak . and from thence i travail still south and by east seven day journey , pass by certain Indian town , until i come to a Indian town distant from Mexico , direct south 309 . league . and here at this town inquire to go to the port de Cavallos in the north - east sea , it be answer that in travail thither i shall not come to any town in 10 . or 12 . day journey : so here i hire two Indian to be my guide , and i buy hen , and bread to serve we so long time , and take with we thing to kindle fire every night , because of wild beast , and to dress our meat : and every night when we rest , my Indian guide will make two great fire , between the which we place our self , and my horse . and in the night time we shall hear the lion roar , with tiger , ounce , and other beast , and some of they we shall see in the night , which have eye shine like fire . And travail thus for the space of twelve day , 440 we come at last to the port of Cavallos upon the east Puerto de sea , distant from Guatimala south and by east , two cavau ° s - hundreth league , and from Mexico 450 . or thereabouts . this be a good harbour for ship , and be without either castle or bulwark . i have dispatch away my guide , go down to the haven , where i see certain ship load chief with canary wine , where i speak with one of the master , who ask i what country man i be , and i tell he that i be bear in Granado , and he say , that then i be his countryman . i require he that i may pass home with he in his ship , pay for my passage : and he say yea , so that i have a safe conduct , or letter testimonial to show , that he may incur no danger : for say he , it may be that you have kill some man , or be indebt , and will therefore run away . to that i answer , that there be not any such cause . way , in the end we grow to a price , that for [ he . 486 . ] 60 . pezo he will carry i into Spain : a glad man be i at this good hap , and i quick sell my horse , and make my provision of hen and bread to serve i in my passage ; and thus within 2 . day after we set sail , and never stay until we come to Havana , which be distant from puerto de Cavallos by sea 500 league : where we find the whole fleet of Spain , which be bind home from the Indies . and here i be hire for a soldier to serve in the admiral ship of the same fleet , wherein the general himself go . there land while i be here 4 . ship out of Spain , be all full of soldier and ordinance , of which number there be 200 . man land here , and 4 . great brass piece of ordinance , although the castle be before sufficient provide : 200 . man more be send to campeche , and certain ordinance : 200 . to Florida with ordinance : and 100 last to saint John ullua . as for ordinance there they have sufficient , and of the very same which be we , which we have in the Jesus , and those other which we have plant in the place , where the viceroy betray m . Hawkins our general , as have be declare . the 441 send of those soldier to every of those port , and the strengthen of they , be do by commandment from the king of Spain , who write also by they to the general of his fleet , give he in charge so to do , as also direct he what course he shall keep in his come home into Spain , charge he in any hand not to come nigh to the isle of azore , but to keep his course more to the northward , advertise he withal , what number and power of french ship of war , and other , don Antonio have at that time at ten ; era , and the isle aforesaid : which the general of the fleet well consider , and what great store of riches he have to bring home with he into Spain , do in all very dutifully observe and obey : for in truth he have in his say fleet 37 . sail of ship , and in every of they there be as good as 30 . pipe of silver one with another , beside great store of gold , Cochinilla , sugar , hide , and Cana fistula , with other apothecary drug . this our general , who be call don Pedro de Guzman , do provident take order for , for their most strength and defence , if need shall be , to the uttermost of his power , and command upon pain of death , that neither passenger nor soldier shall come aboard without his sword and harquebus , with shot and powder , to the end that they may be the better able to encounter the fleet of don Antonio , if they shall hap to meet with they , or any of they : and ever as the weather be fair , the say general will himself go aboard from one ship to another , to see that every man have his full provision accord to the commandment give . yet to speak true what i think , two good tall ship of war will have make a foul spoil among they . for in all this fleet there be not any that be strong and warlike appoint , save only the admiral , and vice - admiral : and again over and beside the weakness and the ill furnish of the rest , they be all so deep lade , that they have not be able ( if they have be charge ) to have hold out any long fight . well , thus we set sail , and have 442 a very ill passage home , the weather be so contrary . we keep our course in manner Northeast , and bring our self to the height of 42 . degree of latitude , to be sure not to meet with don Antonio his fleet , and be upon our voyage from the 4 . of June , until the 10 . of September , and never see land till we fall with the Arenas gordas hard by saint Lucar . and there be a order take that none shall go on shore until he have licence : as for i , i be know by one in the ship , who tell the master that i be a Englishman , which ( as God will ) it be my good hap to hear : for if i have not hear it , it have cost i my life . notwithstanding , i will not take any knowledge of it , and seem to be merry and pleasant , that we be all come so well in safety . present after , licence come that we shall go on shore , and i press to be go with the first : howbeit , the master come unto i , and say , sirrah , you must go with i to Sivil by water : i know his meaning well enough , and that he mean there to ofler i up as a sacrifice to the holy house . for the ignorant zeal of a number of these superstitious Spaniards be such , that they think that they have do God good service , when they have bring a lutheran heretic to the fire to be burn : for so do they account of we . well , i perceive all this , take upon i not to suspect any thing , but be still jocund 8c merry : howbeit , i know it stand i upon to shift for my self . and so wait my time when the master be in his cabin asleep , i convey my self secret down by the shrowd into the ship boat , and make no stay but cut the rope wherewithal she be moar , and so by the cable hale on shore , where i leap on land , and let the boat go whither it will . thus by the help of God i escape that day , 8c then never stay at saint Lucar , but go all night by the way which i have see other take towards Sivil : so that the next morning i come to Sivil , and seek i out a workmaster , that i may fall to my science , which be weave of taffeta ; and be entertain i set my self close to my work , 443 and dare not for my life once to stir abroad for fear of be know : and be thus at my work , within 4 . day after i hear one of my fellow say , that he hear there be great inquiry make for a Englishman that come home in the fleet : what a heretic Lutheran ( quoth i ) [ three . 487 . ] be it , i will to God i may know he , sure i will present he to the holy house . and thus i keep still within door at my work , and feign my self not well at ease , and that i will labour as i may to get i new clothes . And continue thus for the space of 3 . month i call for my wage , and buy i all thing new , different from the apparel that i do wear at sea , and yet dare not be overbold to walk abroad : and after understand that there be certain english ship at saint Lucar bind for England , i take a boat and go aboard one of they , and desire the master that i may have passage with he to go into England , and tell he secret that i be one of those which captain Hawkins do set on shore in the Indies : he very courteous pray i to have he excuse , for he dare not meddle with i , and pray i therefore to return from whence i come . which when i perceive , with a sorrowful heart , God know , i take my leave of he , not without watty cheek . and then i go to saint mary port , which be 3 . league from saint Lucar , where i put my self to be a soldier to go in the king of Spain galley , which be bind for Majorca , and come thither in he come the end of the Christmas holiday , i find there two ten english ship , the one of London , and the other of they from Majorca . west country , which be ready freight and stay but for a fair wind . to the master of the one , which be of the west country go i , and tell he that i have be 2 . year in Spain to learn the language , and that i be now desirous to go home and see my friend , for that i lack maintenance : and so have agree with he for my passage , i take ship . and thus through the providence of almighty God , after 16 . year absence , have sustain many and sundry great trouble and 444 misery , as by this discourse appear , i come home to this my native country of England in the year 1582 . in the month of February , in the ship call the landret , and arrive at pool .