it to their own country people , in double the price . also much of the salt make in this place , be transport from thence by sea to sundry other place , as to Cuba , saint John de ullua , and the other port of Tamiago , and Tamachos , which be two bar haven west and by south above threescore league from saint John de ullua . when we be all come to the town , the governor there show himself very severe unto we , and threaten to hang we all : and then he demand what money we have , which in truth be very little , for the Indian which 415 we first meet withal , have in a manner take all from we , and of that which they leave , the Spaniard which bring we over , take away a good part also : howbeit , from Anthony Godard the governor here have a chain of gold , which be give unto he at Carthagena , by the governor there , and from other he have some small store of money : so that we account that among we all he have the number of five hundred pezo , beside the chain of gold . and have thus satisfy himself , when he have take all that we have , he cause we to be put into a little house much like a hogsty , where we be almost smother : and before we be thus shut up into that little coat , they give we some of the country wheat , call Mayz , sodden , which they feed their hog withal . but many of our man which have be hurt by the Indian at our first come on land , who wound be very sore and grievous , desire to have the help of their surgeon to cure their wound . the governor , and most of they all answer , that we shall have none other surgeon but the hangman , which shall sufficient heal we of all our grief : and thus revile we , and call we English dog , and Lutheran heretic , we remain the space of three day in this miserable state , not know what shall become of we , wait every hour to be bereave of our life . Chap . 4 . wherein be show how we be use in Panuco , and in what fear of death we be there , and how we be carry to Mexico to the viceroy , and of our imprisonment there and at Tescuco , with the courtesy and cruelty we receive during that time , and how in the end we be by proclamation give to serve as slave to sundry gentleman Spaniards . upon the four day after our come thither , and there remain in a perplexity , look every hour when we shall suffer death , there come a great number 416 of Indian and Spaniards weapon to fetch we out of the house , and among they we espy one that bring a great many of new halter , at the sight whereof we be great amaze , and make no other account but that we shall present have suffer death , and so cry and call to God for mercy and forgiveness of our sin , we prepare our self , make we ready to die : yet in the end , as the sequel show , their meaning be not so : for when we be come out of the house , with those halter they bind our arm behind we , and so couple we two and two together , they command we to march on through the town , and so along the country from place to place towards the city of Mexico , which be distant from Panuco west and by south the space of ninety league , have only but two Spaniard to conduct we , they be accompany with a great number of Indian ward on either side with bow and arrow , lest we shall escape from they . And travel in this order , upon the second day at night we come unto a town which the Indian call Nohele , and the Spaniard call it Santa maria : in which town there be a house of white friar , which do very courteous use we , and give we hot meat , as mutton and broth , and garment also to cover our self withal , make of white bay : we feed very greedy of the meat , and of the Indian fruit , call noc - hole , which fruit be long and small , much like in fashion to a little cucumber . our greedy feed cause we to fall sick of hot burn ague . and here at this place one Thomas Baker one of our man die of a hurt : for he have be before shoot with a arrow into the throat at the first encounter . the next morrow about ten of the clock , we depart from thence , bind two 8c two together , and guard as before , and so travail on our way towards Mexico , till we come to a town within forty league of Mexico , name Mestitlan , where be a house of black friar : and in this town there be about the number of three hundred Spaniard , both man , woman , and child . ix 417 2d [ he . 477 - 1 the friar send we meat from the house ready dress , and the friar , and the man and woman use we very courteous , and give we some shirt and other such thing as we lack . here our man be very sick of their ague , and with eat of another fruit call in the Indian tongue , guiaccos , which fruit do bind we so sore , that for the space of ten or twelve day we can not ease our self . the next morning we depart from thence with our two Spaniard and Indian guard , as aforesaid . of these two Spaniards the one be a age man , who all the way do very courteous entreat we , and will careful go before to provide for we both meat and thing necessary to the uttermost of his power : the other be a young man who all the way travel with we , and never depart from we , who be a very cruel caitiff , and he carry a javelin in his hand , and sometime when as our man with very feebleness and faintness be not able to go so fast as he require they , he will take his javelin in both his hand , and strike they with the same between the neck and the shoulder so violent , that he will strike they down ; then will he cry , and say , Marchad , marchad ingleses perro , Luterianos , enemigos de dios : which be as much to say in english , as march , march on you english dog , lutheran , enemy to God . and the next day we come to a town call Pachuca , and there be two place of that name : as this town of Pachuca , and the mine of Pachuca , which be mine of silver , and be about six league distant from this town of Pachuca towards the northwest . here at this town the good old man our governor suffer we to stay two day and two night , have compassion of our sick and weak man , full sore against the mind of the young man his companion . from thence we take our journey , and travel four or five day by little village , and Stantias , which be farm or dairy house of the Spaniard , and ever as we have need , the good old man will still provide we sufficient of meat , fruit , and water to sustain we . at the end of which 418 five day we come to a town within five league of Mexico , which be call Quoghliclan , where we also stay one whole day and two night , where be a fair house of grey friar , howbeit we see none of they . here we be tell by the Spaniard in the town , that we have not pass fifteen english mile from thence to Mexico , whereof we be all very joyful and glad , hope that when we come thither , we shall either be relieve , and set free out of bond , or else be quick dispatch out of our life : for see our self thus carry bind from place to place , although some use we courteous , yet can we never joy , nor be merry till we may perceive our self set free from that bondage , either by death or otherwise . the next morning we depart from thence on our journey towards Mexico , and so travel till we come within two league of it , where there be build by the Spaniard a very fair church , call our lady church , in which there be a image of our lady of silver and gilt , be as high , and as large as a tall woman , in which church , and before this image , there be as many lamp of silver as there be day in the year , which upon high day be all light . whensoever any Spaniards pass by this church , although they be on horse back , they will alight , and come into the church , and kneel before the image , and pray to our lady to defend they from all evil ; so that whether he be horseman or footman he will not pass by , but first go into the church , and pray as aforesaid , which if they do not , they think and believe that they shall never prosper : which image they call in [ he . 478 ] the spanish tongue , Nuestra sennora de Guadalupe . at nuestr a this place there be certain cold bath , which arise , spring - sennora - ing up as though the water do see : the water whereof be somewhat brackish in taste , but very good for any that have any sore or wound , to wash themselves therewith , for as they say , it heal many : and every year once upon our lady day the people use to repair thither to offer , and to pray in that church before the image , and 419 certain Englishman take prisoner at the fight at Sant Juan de ullua . the english voyage they say that our lady of Guadalupe do work a number of miracle . about this church there be not any town of Spaniards that be inhabit , but certain Indian do dwell there in house of their own country building . here we be meet with a great number of Spaniards on horseback , which come from Mexico to see we , both gentleman , and man of occupation , and they come as people to see a wonder : we be still call upon to march on ; and so about four of the clock in the afternoon of the say day we enter into the city of Mexico , by the way or street call la call Santa Catherina : and we stay not in any place till we come to the house or palace of the vice Roy , don Martin Henriques , which stand in the midst of the city , hard by the market place , call la plaga deal Marquese . we have not stay any long time at this place , but there be bring we by the Spaniard from the market place great store of meat , sufficient to have satisfy five time so many as we be : some also give we hat , and some give we money : in which place we stay for the space of two hour , and from thence we be convey by water in two large canoas to a hospital where as certain of our man be lodge , which be take before the fight at saint John de ullua : we shall have go to our lady hospitali , but that there be also so many of our man take before at that fight that there be no room for we . after our come thither , many of the company that come with i from Panuco die within the space of fourteen day : soon after which time we be take forth from that place , and put altogether into our lady hospitali , in which place we be courteous use , and visit oftentimes by virtuous gentleman and gentlewoman of the city , who bring we diverse thing to comfort we withal , as succat and marmilad , and such other thing , and will also many time give we many thing , and that very liberal . in which hospitali we remain for the 420 space of six month , until we be all whole and sound of body , and then we be appoint by the vice Roy to be carry unto the town of Tescuco , which be from Mexico Southwest distant eight league : in which town there be certain house of correction and punishment for ill people call obrache , like to Bridewell here in London : into which place diverse Indian be sell for slave , some for ten year , and some for twelve . it be no small grief unto we when we understand that we shall be carry thither , and to be use as slave , we have rather be put to death : howbeit there be no remedy , but we be carry to the prison of Tescuco , where we be not put to any labour , but be very strait keep , and almost famish , yet by the good providence of our merciful God , we happen there to meet with one Robert sweet - Robert ing , who be the son of a Englishman bear of a fete a spanish woman : this man can speak very good Eng - * lish , and by his mean we be help very much with victual from the Indian , as mutton , hen , and bread . and if we have not be so relieve , we