a relation of the haven of Tecuanapa , a most convenient place for building of ship , situate upon the south sea not far from Nicaragua , which be send unto the viceroy of Mexico or to the king of Spain : wherein be describe the river of Ometepec , tlacamama , and Tlacolula fall into the say haven , with the town , people , and mountain adjoin to the say river , and other thing fit for the building and victual of ship . he port and small harbour of Tecuanapa have in the dry time of summer in the channel little less than one fathom at low water , and at full sea one fathom and a half : in the time of rain , with the increase of the land - water it have three fathom and more . it lie towards the west , and there the bishopric of guaxacan and Tlarcali be separate . from hence towards the point call Punta de Intla and Dordaci there be a bay 2 . league distant , which though it be no special harbour , yet upon a extremity ship may come and ride there , as in time past they have do . this bay on the right hand towards the north make a lake somewhat large towards the midst of the channel , and in some part deep , but special on the side of Cuahintla , but on either side it be but shallow . as you pass between the sea and certain great and large wood of orange tree , and tree of other nature which grow along the sea coast , which be of no great breadth , all the country appear very open : howbeit on the side of Cuahintla the mountain have many creek and a small lake call Tulaningo , and the country can be travel , except you take the way between the sea and the end of this lake , which may be about two league of sandy way . 466 and on the north side there be another small creek . And go by the sand side one quarter of a league , you come to the way that lead unto Quacapotla a Quacapotla . mansion of Intla . the river of Ometepec be the principal river river of which come to this haven have his head in the moun - ® metetec - taines of Xicayan the touer about 24 . league from this haven , from diverse brook which come out of the mountain of Cacatepec , and beneath a town call Suchistlahuaca little more than 3 . league all the brook join together : and from that place you may pass down to the sea with canoas and lighter : and you may come far but for the fall of a furious stream or current which run between two great rock , pass from Cocahulapa a mansion of Ometepec unto yanguitle a mansion of the say Ometepec . Theise inconvenience be pass ( which in my judgement may be about one league ) the river be more navigable , so that you may sail in the same about 12 . league . during the space of which 12 . league , about a league and a half distance from the water side , and in many other part of the same river it have great quantity of wood which use to grow in hot soil , fit for shiptimber , as huber - tree , and suchicuhitil , whereof they of Nicaragua make great profit . also there be white Nicaragua . oak and tehegurte in great quantity , and many other kind of timber : and in the mountain there be firtree , oak , and cork - tree , which easy may be carry down the river , because they may be cut some 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 . league from the river , and may be bring down to the water side with the service and help of those that dwell in the town thereabouts . at the head of these brook where the river begin be the town which be call Xicaian , belong to the Xicalan . heir of Francis the touer y de Guillen , contain about 350 . Indian of rude speech and of little policy , be 24 . league from the sea , little more or less . 467 the place it self be hot , although the mountain round about be cold . [ Iii . 496 . ] a little from this be the town of Aioanapa possess aioanapa . by heir of perez Gomez , have in it about 300 . Indian of the self same speech and quality . the country be more subject to heat then cold ; yet have it near it cool country and mountain . it be distant from Xicaian de touer 4 . league , and from the sea 20 . league . six league downward towards the south be the town Zuchistlahuaca . of Suchistlahuaca on the say river , and the inhabitant be of the same speech and quality . the country be more subject to heat then cold . it be in the charge of Gonzalvo Fernandez a citizen of Mexico , and have about 150 . Indian , and be 15 . league distant from the sea . Ometepec . from this town unto the town of Ometepec be 6 . league . the place be very hot , and in the same government , and be situate between certain hill one league from the river : he and his follower have under they about 700 . Indian , which speak the Ayacastecan , Amusgan , and Niciecan tongue , and this place be from the sea nine league . Ihualapa . from this town unto Ihualapa be two great league : it be in the government of the heir of Laurence de Castro , of the foresay temperature , and the people use the say language , and be of the like stature : and it stand three league from the river , and from the sea ten league . these be the best town , and of the best traffic that be upon all this coast . the Indian be rich in Cacao and victual , and in these town do the Indian Niciecan . of Niciecan principal trade . and in the town of Ihualapa the chief Alguazil of the province be resident for the most part of the year . Pio a frontier more low beneath the river of Tlacolula , about a town against league or a league and a half from the town of the Mexicans . Ometepec be the town call Pio , which be wont to be 468 a town of Tlacolula , and be a frontier town against the Mexicans . there be in it about 50 . Indian of the ancient inhabitant : one Graviel de chiavez a citizen of Mexico have the government thereof : it be 4 . league from Ihualapa , and 6 . from the sea . a little below this be the town of Huehuatlan in the Huehuatlan . self same government stand one league from the river on certain high hill : it have 10 . Indian , and be from the sea 5 . league . and one league from this town stand the town of Cuahucapotla a mansion of Anda or Intla : it have to the Cuahucapotla . number of 15 . Indian ; it stand one league and a half from the river , and 4 . league from the mouth thereof . at the fountain or head of the rest of the brook be the town of Cacatepec be in the government of Cacatepec . Raphael de Treyo : he and his tenant have under they some 700 . Indian of Niciecan : it be from the sea some 22 . league . the river which be call tlacamama come from tf the mountain of Atoyaque and Amusgos , which be tlacamama - some 17 . league from the sea . there it make a form river , so big , that it be navigable to the sea with canoas and lighter : i say from a little below tolistla - huaca a mansion of Xicaian . it be navigable 8 . month in the year , and the other 4 . not , because that the sand of the plain do soak and drink up the water in such wise , that there remain so little , that there be no passage : howbeit in small lighter timber may be bring down this river one league from the place where it be cut , unto the place that i have speak of ; whereas big vessel may be make ; for nigh unto that place other brook and run water do join and meet , which make it a main river . it have nigh unto it in the mountain of Atoyaque , Cacatepec , and Amusgos many wood of pinetree , cork - tree , and oak of great bigness : and beneath those mountain in the warm country , near unto the river there be much 469 timber of those sort which i mention before to be about the river of Ometepec , which may easy be cut and carry down unto Tecuanapa in the time before specify . this river have likewise town adjoin to it ; the first at the foot of the mountain be the town of Atoiaque . Atoiaque belong to the king , and to the heir of Pronetto : their language be Niciecan , the country hot , the people politic , and it be from the sea 15 . league . it have about 200 . Indian . one league from this town , and 14 . from the sea Xicaian . be the town of Xicaian belong likewise to the king , and to the heir of Pronetto . they be Niciecan people and very comely , and in a hot country . it have by account 300 . Indian . there be resident in it the vicar and justice ; it be from the river a league and a half . a league from this town , and 14 . from the sea be pinotespan . situate the mansion of pinotespan subject to Tututepec , which have with the manor subject unto it 500 Indian . two league from the town , and one from Xicayan , and 13 . from Tecuanapa , and 3 . from the river be then the town of town of tlacamama : the people be very comely and tlacamama . poiit ; que . it contain some 100 Indian , and belongeth to the king . moor towards the south 5 . league from the river , and two from this town , and 14 . from the sea be the town call Pinotespan deal Rey : they be handsome people , [ three . 497 . ] but of slow speech : this town contain about 100 Indian like unto the former . they be wealthy , because a lake have they make great quantity of salt ; for they have a hard salt saite grow under the water , ( a thing the water . repugnant to nature , that two contrary do grow and be conserve together ) whereout they take it in break it with stone upon the ground under the water . it have also the town of Amusgos , which be in the 47 ° government of Fernando de Avila , which may be from tecuanapa 18 . league . they speak the Amusgan tongue . the country be hot : it stand on the high way from Nicieca : it have 400 . Indian , few more or less . these be all the town of account situate near this river . near upon this river be two farm , the one belong to Pedro Bravo , and the other to he that make this relation unto your excellency , which may be from the sea some 8 . or 9 league all plain ground . and in this territory there be but one town call Quesala situate upon the river , and 6 . league from the sea ; which in time pass have be a great town , and now have but three Indian only , and it be from the farm 3 . league . the mansion house of don Mattheo be more towards the south , stand in a large mountainous and waste country , which abound with cattle be 3 . league from the river ; and as far from Tecuanapa , as from the place where all the cattle be ; and the sea that way be from it but one league . a little below this mansion about 4 . league , and 7 . league from the sea , be a garden of Alonso Pedraza which bear Cacao . and 2 . league from this garden and 6 . league from the sea stand the town of Cuahintlan belong to the king , a town of 19 household , but very rich , for they gather much Cacao and the best in that country . they speak the Tlapanecan tongue . this town have the sea that way within half a league . and this coast from Cuahintlan to Tecuanapa , and the coast which run to Huatulco be a coast of much pearl , for in old time the Indian gather much pearl there . and 2 . league from Cuahintlan and 4 . from Tecuanapa be a garden of Cacao in the land of Francisco Maldonado , which be call cacahu - atoyaque . 471 Quesala . Cuahintlan deal Rey . Huatulco or Guatulco in 15 . deg . and 50 . minute . the province of Tututepec and Tlapa . these be the thing worthy of relation from the head - spring of this river of tlacamama unto the sea : and this foresay river enter into the river of Ometepec 5 . league from Tecuanapa . the river of Tlacolula spring within the bound of Chilsiztlahuaca subject to Comastlahuaca a town of Suchistlahuaca , near which be many mountain . this river be navigable little moor than 2 . league before it enter into the river of Ometepec , where it be 5 . league from the sea . hard by it be the town of Tlacolula abovenamed ; and 3 . league from it be the town of Azoyoque a old manor of Tlapa . the town of Chilsiztlahuaca have but 3 . Indian ; and the town of Azoyoque have more than 300 . Indian . but because in this haven must be the build of ship , the province of Tlapa and Tututepec may stand they in great stead ; the province of Tututepec be neighbour to the river of tlacamama , and the province of Tlapa to the river of Tlacolula . for they may , as i have say , carry the timber in lighter or raft down the river , and may use the Indian in the town thereabouts to fall , and draw the same out of the cold mountain ; for in the warm country the most be plain ground , whereas with very few man and ox it may be bring unto the place where it shall be embark . there may come flat bottom , and canoas unto the town thereabouts , and lade themselves with victual : for they have already come by that river to the road of Ometepec , and make there provision at the mansion of don Mattheo , and at the farm , at that time when his majesty do people the plain which be between these river , contain a large and void country sufficient for the erect of 20 . manor , be a country well furnish with water and pasture without any danger or peril , accord to the description hereunto annex . this small harbour of Tecuanapa be see and view , seem very commodious for to build ship 472 in , by reason of the great abundance of mountain full tecuanapa a of good timber for that purpose , with the commodity of most fit har - river , and with the service and victual from the town p ^ idMpsfior thereabouts , which be very good for coast town . south sea . the desire of he that make this relation , have be with zeal to serve your excellency ; who therewithal ! desire the lord God to give the success .