impart any thing to any body , go to the bishop of Mexico , and his provisor , and say , that in a place where he have be the day before , be a Englishman , who have say , that there be no need of saint in the church , nor of any invocation of saint , upon who denomination i be apprehend for the same word here rehearse , and none other thing , and thereupon be use , as before be write . now to speak somewhat of the description of the country , you shall understand , that the port of saint John de Sant Juan de ullua be a very little island low by the water side , the ullua - ix 353 z broad or long part thereof not above a bow shoot over , and stand within two furlong of the firm land . in my time there be but one house , and a little chapel to say mass in , in all the island : the side to the land ward be make by man hand , with freestone and gravel , and be 4 . fathom deep down right , wherefore the great ship that come in there do ride so near the shore of the island , that you may come and go aland upon their beak nose . they use to put great chain of iron in at their halser , and a anchor to the landward , and all little enough to more well their ship for fear of the northerly wind , which come off the coast of Florida , that sometime have carry ship , and house , and all away to the shore . the king be wont to have 20 . great mighty negro , who do serve for nothing else , but only to repair the say island , where the foul weather do hurt it . the country all thereabouts be very plain ground , and a mile from the sea side a great wilderness , with great quantity of red deer in the same , so that when the mariner of the ship be dispose , they go up into the wilderness , and do kill of the same , and bring they aboard to eat , for their recreation . the way and from this port to the next town , which be call distance from yera quoth be c . league almost by the sea side , till San Juan de ’ ... i 7 r . i , j Ullua to vera you come within one league or the place , and than you Cruz , be five turn up towards the land , into a wood , till you come league . to a iide river hard by the say town side , which sometime of the year be dry without water . the town of Vera Cruz in my time , have not pass 300 . household , and serve but for the folk of the ship , to buy and bring their good aland , and deliver it to their owner , as also the owner and their factor to receive their good of the master of the ship . this town stand also in a very plain on the one side the river , and the other side be environ with much sand blow from the sea side with the tempest of weather , many time come upon that coast . this town also 354 • • .. 15581 be subject to great sickness , and in my time many of the mariner and officer of the ship do die with those disease , there accustom , and especial those that be not use to the country , nor know the danger thereof , but will common go in the sun in the heat of the day , and do eat fruit of the country with much disorder , and especial give themselves to woman company at their first come : whereupon they be cast into a burn ague , of the which few escape . half a day journey from Vera Cruz , towards Penta de Rin - Mexico , be a lodging of five or six house , call the cona ^°- rinconado , which be a place , where be a great pinnacle make of lime and stone , fast by a river side , where the Indian be wont to do their sacrifice unto their god , and it be plain and low ground betwixt that and vera Cruz , and also subject to sickness : but afterward half a day journey that you do begin to enter into the high land , you shall find as fair , good , and sweet country , as any in the world , and the far you go , the goodly and sweet than country be , till you come to Pueblo de los angel , which may be some 43 league Ruebh de las from vera Cruz , which be in my time a town of 600 . Angeles . household , or thereabouts , stand in a goodly soil . between Vera Cruz and that you shall come through many town of the Indian , and village , and many goodly field of meadow ground , river of fresh water , forest , and great wood , very pleasant to behold . from Pueblo de los angel , to Mexico , be 20 . league of very fair way and country , as before be declare . Mexico Mexico . be a city in my time , of not above 1500 . household of Spaniards inhabit there , but of Indian people in the suburb of the say city , dwell above 300000 . as it be think , and many more . this city of Mexico be 65 . league from the north sea , and 75 . league from the south sea , so that it stand in the midst of the main land , betwixt the one sea and the other . it be situate in the midst of a lake of stand water , and environ round about with the same , save in many place , go 355 this be to be understand of his second come into Spain . the english voyage out of the city , be many broad way through the say lake or water . this lake and city be environ also with great mountain round about , which be in compass above thirty league , and the say city , and lake of stand water , do stand in a great plain in the midst of it . this lake of stand water do proceed from the shed of the rain , that fall upon the say mountain , and so gather themselves together in this place . all the whole proportion of this city do stand in a very plain ground , and in the midst of the say city be a square place of a good bow shoot over from side to side : and in the midst of the say place be the high church , very fair and well build all through , at that time not half finish , and round about the say place , be many fair house build : on the one side , be the house where Mutezuma the great king of Mexico that be , dwell , and now there lie always the viceroy that the king of Spain send thither every three year . and in my time there be for viceroy a gentleman of Castil , call don Luis de Velasco . and on the other side of the say place , over against the same , be the bishop house , very fair build , and many other house of goodly build . and hard by the same , be also other very fair house , build by the mark de Valle , otherwise call Hernando Cortes , who be he that first conquer the say city and country , who after the say conquest which he make with great labour and travail of his person , and danger of his life , and be grow great in the country , the king of Spain send for he , say that he have some particular matter to impart unto he . and when he come home , he can not be suffer to return back again , as the king before have promise he . with the which , for sorrow that he take , he die ; and this he have for the reward of his good service . the say city of Mexico have the street make very broad , and right , that a man be in the high place , 356 at the one end of the street , may see at the least a good mile forward , and in all the one part of the street of the north part of their city , there run a pretty lake of very clear water , that every man may put into his house as much as he will , without the cost of any thing , but of the let in . also there be a great cave or ditch of water , that come through the city , even unto the high place , where come every morning at the break of the day twenty or thirty canoas , or trough of the Indian , which bring in they all manner of provision for the city , which be make , and grow in the country , which be a very good commodity for the inhabitant of that place . and as for victual in the say city , of beef , mutton , and hen , capon , quail , guiny - cock , and such like , all be very good cheap : to say , the whole quarter of a ox , as much as a slave can carry away from the butcher , for five Tomynes , that be , five royal of plate , which be just two shilling and six penny , and a fat sheep at the butcher for three royal , which be 18 . penny and no more . bread be as good cheap as in Spain , and all other kind of fruit , as apple , pear , pomegranate , and quince , at a reasonable rate . the city go wonderful forward in build of friary and nunnery , and chapel , and be like in time to come , to be the most populous ci tie in the world , as it may be suppose . the weather be there always very temperate , the day differ but one hour of length all the year long . the field and the wood be always green . the wood full of popinjay , and many other kind of bird , that make such a harmonic of sing , and cry , that any man will rejoice to hear it . in the field be such odoriferous smell of flower and herb , that it give great content to the sense . about the city of Mexico two , three , or four league off , be diverse town of Indian , some of 4000 or 6000 . household , which do stand in such a goodly soil , that if Christians have the inhabitation thereof , it will be put to a further benefit . in my time be 357 dwelling and alive in Mexico , many ancient man that Mexico be of the conqueror at the first conquest with conquer Hernando Cortes : for than it be about 36 . year ^ ” 1520 ^ a § oe ’ at sa ^ country be conquer . about Mexico there be diverse mine of silver , and also in other place there about , but the principali Mines that be in all new Spain be in Sacatecas , 80 . league from Mexico , and the mine of S . Martin , thirty league , both to the northwestward of Mexico , where be great store of gold and silver . also there be a place call the Misteca , fifty league to the northwest , which do yield great store of very good silk , and Cochinilla . wine and oil there be none grow in the country , but what come out of Spain . also there be many goodly fruit in that country , whereof we have none such , as Plantanos , guyave , Sapotes , Tunas , and in the wilderness great store of black cherry , and other whol - cochinilla be some fruit . the Cochinilia be not a worm , or a fly , not a worm as some say ft be > but a berry that grow upon certain beny bush in the wild field , which be gather in time of the year , when it be ripe . also the indigo that do come from thence to die blue , be a certain herb that grow in the wild field , and be gather at one time of the year , and burn , and of the ash thereof , with indigo . other confection put thereunto , the say indigo be make . balm , Salsa perilla , Cana fistula , sugar , ox hide , and many other good and serviceable thing the country do yield , which be yearly bring into Spain , and there sell and distribute to many nation . Robert Tomson .