of a tree , and a gourde set for the mlde datereceive thereof , which fall in by drop , and yield fresh wine again within a month , and this divide part and portion - like to every man , by the judgement of the captain and elder , every man hold himself content : and this sure i judge to be a very good order : for otherwise , whereas scarcity of Palmito be , every man will have the same , which may breed great strife : but of such thing , as every man do plant for himself , the sour thereof reap it to his own use , so that nothing be common , but that which be unset by man hand . in their house there be more common passage of lizards like evat , and other great , of black and blue colour , of near a foot long , beside their tail , than there be with we of Mise in great house . the sapy and sambose also use in their war bow , and arrow make of reed , with head of iron poison a venomous with the juice of a Cucumber , whereof i have many in Cucumber . my hand . in their battle they have target - man , with broad wicker target , and dart with head at both end , of iron , the one in form of a two edge sword , a foot and a half long , and at the other end , the iron long of the same length make to counterpoise it , that in cast it may fly level , rather than for any other purpose as i can judge . and when they espy the enemy , the captain to cheer his man , cry hungry , and they answer heygre , and with that every man place himself in order , for about every target man three bowman will cover themselves , and shoot as they see advantage : and when they give the onset , they make such terrible cry , that they may be hear two mile off . for their belief , i can hear of none that they have , but in such as they themselves imagine to see in their dream , and so i dole like worship the picture , whereof we see some like unto devil . devil . in this island aforesaid we sojourn unto the one and twenty of December , where have take certain negro , and asmuch of their fruit , rise , and mill , as we can well carry away , ( whereof there be such store , that we may have lade one of our bark therewith ) we depart , and at our departure diverse of our man be desirous to go on shore , to fetch pomnion , 20 1 which have prove , they find to be very good , certain of the tiger man go also , among the which there be a carpenter , a young man , who with his fellow have fetch many , and carry they down to their boat , as they be ready to depart , desire his fellow to tarry while he may go up to fetch a few which he have the extreme lay by for he self , who be more liquorous than ne &^ gence of circumspect , go up without weapon , and as he go up mfanie . alone , possible be mark of the negro that be upon the tree , espy he what he do , perceive he to be alone , and without weapon , dog he , and find he occupy in bind his pompion together , come behind he , overthrow he and straight cut his throat , as he afterwards be find by his fellow , who come to the place for he , and there find he naked . the two and twenty the captain go into the river , call Callowsa , with the two bark , and the John pinnace , and the Salomons boat , leave at anchor a wsa ‘ in the river mouth the two ship , the river be twenty league in , where the Portugal road : he come thither the five and twenty , and dispatch his business , and so return with two caravel , load with negro . the 27 . the captain be advertise by the Portugal of a town of the negro call Bymba , be in the way tie town as they return , where be not only great quantity of tm gold , but also that there be not above forty man , and a hundred woman and child in the town , so that if he will give the adventure upon the same , he may get a hundred slave : with the which tiding he be glad , because the Portugal shall not think he to be of so base a courage , but that he dare give they that , and great attempt : and be thereunto also the more provoke with the prosperous success he have in other island adjacent , where he have put they all to flight , and take in one boat twenty together , determine to stay before the town three or four hour , to see what he can do : and thereupon prepare his man in armour and weapon together , to the Portugal not to be trust . want of circumspection in our man . [ Iii . 506 . ] m . field captain of the Salomon slay . the english voyage number of forty man well appoint , have to their guide certain Portugal , in a boat , who bring some of they to their death : we land boat after boat , and diverse of our man scatter themselves , contrary to the captain will , by one or two in a company , for the hope that they have to find gold in their house , ransack the same , in the mean time the negro come upon they , and hurt many be thus scatter , whereas if five or six have be together , they have be able , as their companion do , to give the overthrow to 40 of they , and be drive down to take their boat , be follow so hardly by a route of negro , who by that take courage to pursue they to their boat , that not only some of they , but other stand on shore , not look for any such matter by mean that the negro do flee at the first , and our company remain in the town , be sudden so set upon that some with great hurt recover their boat ; othersome not able to recover the same , take the water , and perish by mean of the oaze . while this be do , the captain who with a dozen man , go through the town , return , find 200 negro at the water side , shoot at they in the boat , and cut they in piece which be drown in the water , at who come , they run all away : so he enter his boat , and before he can put off from the shore , they return again , and shoot very fierce and hurt diverse of they . thus we return back some what discomfort , although the captain in a singular wise manner carry himself , with countenance very cheerful outward , as though he do little weigh the death of his man , nor yet the great hurt of the rest , although his heart1 inward be break in piece for it ; do to this end , that the Portugal be with he , shall not presume to resist against he , nor take occasion to put he to further displeasure or hindrance for the death of our man : have get by our go ten negro , and lose seven of our best man , whereof m . field captain of the Salomon , be one , and we have 27 of our man hurt . in the same hour while this be do , there happen at the same instant , a marvelous miracle to they in the ship , who ride ten league to seaward , by many shark or tiburon , who come about the ship : among which , one be take by the Jesus , and four by the Salomon , and one very sore hurt escape : and so it fall out of our man , whereof one of the Jesus man , and four of the Salomons be kill , and the five have twenty wound be rescue , and escape with much ado . the 28 they come to their ship , the Jesus , and the Salomon , and the 30 depart from thence to Taggarin . Taggarin . the first of January the two bark , and both the boat forsake the ship , and go into a river call river of the Casserroes , and the 6 have dispatch their busi - asserroe . ness , the two bark return , and come to Taggarin , where the two ship be at anchor . not two day after the come of the two ship thither , they put their water cask a shore , and fill it with water , to season the same , think to have fill it with fresh water afterward : and while their man be some on shore , and some at their boat , the negro set upon they in the boat , and hurt diverse of they , and come to the cask , and cut of the hoop of twelve butt , which lose we 4 or 5 day time , beside great want we have of the same : sojourn at Taggarin , the swallow go up the river about her traffic , where they see great town of the negro , and canoas , that have threescore man in a piece : there they understand by the Portugal , of a great battle between they of Sierra Leona side , and they of Taggarin : they of Sierra Leona , have prepare three hundred canoas to invade the other . the time be appoint not past six day after our departure from thence , which we will have see , to the intent we may have take some of a new assault by the negro . great town . very great canoas . the contagion they , have it not be for the death and sickness ofthecou - t of our man , which come by the contagiousness of the Jof Sierra place , which make we to make haste away . Leona . the english voyage the 18 of Januarie at night , we depart from Taggarin , be bind for the west Indies , before which departure certain of the Salomons man go on shore to fill water in the night , and as they come on shore with their boat be ready to leap on land , one of they espy a negro in a white coat , stand upon a rock , be ready to have receive they when they come on shore , have in sight of his fellow also eight or nine , some in one place leap out , and some in another , but they hide themselves straight again : whereupon our man doubt they have be a great company , and seek to have take they at more advantage , as God will , depart to their ship , not think there have be such a mischief pretend towards they , as then be in deed . which the next day we understand of a Portugal that come down to we , who have traffic with the negro , by who he understand , that the king of Sierra Leona have make all the power he can , to take some of we , partly for the desire he have to see what kind of people we be , that have spoil his people at the idol , whereof he have news before our come , and as i judge also , upon other occasion provoke by the Tangomangos , but sure we be that the army be come down , by mean that in the evening we see such a monstrous fire , make by the water place , that before be not see , which fire be the only mark for the Tangomangos to know where their army be always . if these man have come down in the evening , they have do we great displeasure , for that we be on shore fill water : but God , who work all thing for the best , will not have it so , and by he we escape without danger , his name be praise for it . the 29 of this same month we depart with all our ship from Sierra Leona , towards the west Indies , and for the space of eighteen day , we be becalm , have now and then contrary wind , and 24 some ternado , among the same calm , which happen to we very ill , be but reasonable water , for so great a company of negro , and our self , which pinch we all , and that which be worst , put we in such fear that many never think to have reach to the Indies , without great death of negro , and of themselves : but the almighty God , who never suffer his elect to perish , send we the sixteenth of February , the ordinary brise , which be the northwest wind , which never leave we , till we come to a island of the canybal , call Dominica , where we arrive Dominica the nine of march , upon a Saturday