use a marvellous policy for their own safeguard , which be by clasp a tree in their arm , and yet shoot notwithstanding : this policy they use with the french man in their fight , whereby it appear that they be people of some policy : and although they be call by the Spaniard Gente triste , that be to say , bad people , mean thereby , that they be not man of capacity : yet have the french man find they so witty in their answer , that by the captain own report , a counseller with we can not give a more profound reason . the woman also for their apparel use paint skin , but most of they gown of moss , somewhat long than our moss , which they sow together artificial , and make the same surplesse wise , wear their hair down to their shoulder , like the Indian . in this river of may aforesaid , the captain enter with his pinnace , find a french ship of fourscore tun , and two pinnace of fifteen tun a piece , by she , and speak with the keeper thereof , they tell he of a fort the french two league up , which they have build , in which their fa ? - . captain monsieur Laudonniere be , with certain soul - £ aujmnierei diers therein . to who our captain send to understand of a watering - place , where he may convenient take it in , and to have licence for the same , he straight , because there be no convenient place but up the river five league , where the water be fresh , do send he a pilot for the more expedition thereof , to bring in one of his bark , which go in with other boat provide for the same purpose , anchor before the fort , into the which our captain go ; where he be by the general , with other captain and soldier , very gentle entertained , who declare unto he the time of their be there , which be fourteen month , with the extremity they be drive to for want of victual , have bring very little with they ; in which place they be two hundred man at their first come , have in short space eat all the maiz they can buy of the inhabitant about they , and therefore be drive certain of they to serve a king of the floridians against other his enemy , for mill and other victual : which have get , can not serve they , be so many , so long bread make a time : but want come upon they in such sort , that ofakorn . be fajne to gather acorn , which be stamp small , and often wash , to take away the bitterness of they , they do use for bread , eat withal sundry time , root , whereof they find many good and wholesome , and such as serve rather for medicine then for meat alone . but this hardness not content some of they , who will not take the pain so much as to fish in the river before their door , but will have all thing put in their mouth , they do rebel against the captain , take away first his armour , and afterward imprison he : and so to the number of fourscore of they , depart with a bark and a pinnace , spoil their store of victuali , and take away a great part thereof with they , and so go to the island of Hispaniola and Jamaica a rove , where they spoil and peel the Spaniard ; and have take two caravel [ three . 518 . ] lade with wine and casavi , which be a bread make of root , and much other victual and treasure , have not the grace to depart therewith , but be of such haughty stomach , that they think their force to be such that no man dare meddle with they , and so keep harbour in Jamaica , go daily ashore at their pleasure . but God which will not suffer such evil doer unpunished , do indurate their heart in such sort , that they linger the time so long , that a ship and galliass be make out of Santa Domingo come thither into the harbour , and take twenty of they , whereof the most part be hang , and the rest carry into Spain , and some ( to the number of five and twenty ) escape in the pinnace , and come to Florida ; where at their land they be put in prison , and incontinent four of the chief being condemn , at the request of the soldier , do pass the harquebusier , and then be hang upon a gibbet . this lack of threescore man be a great discourage and weaken to the rest , for they be the best soldier that they have : for they have now make the inhabitant weary of they by their daily crave of maiz , have no ware leave to content they withal , and therefore be enforce to rob they , and to take away their victual perforce , which be the occasion that the floridians ( not well content therewith ) do take certain of their company in the wood , and slay they ; whereby there grow great war betwixt they and the Frenchman : and therefore they be but a few in number dare not venture abroad , but at such time as they be enforce thereunto for want of food to do the same : and go twenty harquebusier in a company , be set upon by eighteen king , have seven or eight hundred man , which with one of their bow slay one of their man , and hurt a dozen , and drive they all down to their boat ; who policy in fight be to be marvel at : for have shoot at diverse of their body which be arm , and perceive that their arrow do not prevail against the same , they shoot at their face and leg , which be the place that the Frenchman be hurt in . thus the Frenchman return , be in ill case by the hurt of their man , have not above forty soldier leave unhurt , whereby they may ill make any more invasion upon the floridians , and keep their fort withal : which they must have be drive unto , have not God send we thither for their succour ; for they have not above ten day victuali leave before we come . in which perplexity our captain see they , spare they out of his ship twenty barrel of meal , and four pipe of bean , with diverse other victual and necessary which he may convenient spare : and to help they the better homeward , whither they be bind before our come , at their request 55 the occasion of the fall out with the floridians . the french great relieve by m . Hawkins . we spare they one of our bark of fifty tun . notwithstanding the great want that the Frenchman have , the ground do yield victual sufficient , if they will have take pain to get the same ; but they be soldier , desire to live by the sweat of other man brow : for while they have peace with the floridians , they have fish sufficient , by wear which they make to catch the same : but when they grow to war , the floridians take away the same again , and then will not the Frenchman take the pain to make any more . the ground yield natural grape in great store , for in twenty the time that the Frenchman be there , they make 20 hogshead of it hogshead of wine . also it yield root pass good , Florida like dear marvellous store , with diverse other beast , and to the wine of fowl , serviceable to the use of man . Theise be thing Orleans . wherewith a man may live , have corn or maiz wherewith to make bread : for maiz make good savoury bread , and cake as fine as flower . also it make good meal , beat and sodden with water , and eat like pap wherewith we feed child . it make also good beverage , sodden in water , and nourishable ; which the Frenchman do use to drink of in the morning , and it assuage their thirst , so that they have no need to drink all the day after . and this maiz be the great lack they have , because they have no labourer to sow the same , labourer and therefore to they that shall inhabit the land it be “ inhabit new to have labourer to till and sow the ground : for country . they have victual of their own , whereby they neither rob nor spoil the inhabitant , may live not only quiet with they , who natural be more desirous of peace then of war , but also shall have abundance of victual proffer they for nothing : for it be with they as it be with one of we , when we see another man ever take away from we , although we have enough beside , yet than we think all too little for our self : for sure we have hear the Frenchman report , and i know it by the Indian , that a very little content they : for the Indian with the head of maiz roast , will travel a whole 56 day , and when they be at the Spaniard find , they give they nothing but sodden herb and maiz : and in this order i see threescore of they feed , who be lade with ware , and come fifty league off . the floridians when they travel , have a kind of herb tobacco and the dry , who with a cane and a earthen cup in the end , at virtue with fire , and the dry herb put together , do suck * through the cane the smoke thereof , which smoke satisfi their hunger , and therewith they live four or five day without meat or drink , and this all the Frenchman use for this purpose : yet do they hold opinion withal , that it cause water and flame to void from their stomach . the commodity of this land be more than be yet know to any man : for beside the land it self , whereof there be more than any king Christian be able to inhabit , it flourish with meadow , pasture ground , with wood of cedar and cypress , and other sort , as better can not be in the world . they have for apothecary herb , tree , root and gum great store , as storax liquida , turpintine , gum , myrrh , and frankincense , with many other , whereof i know not the name . colour both red , black , yellow , and russet , very perfect , wherewith they so paint their body , and dear skin which they wear about they , that with water it neither fade away , nor alter colour . gold and silver they want not : for at the frenchmens first come thither they have the same offer they for little or nothing , for they receive for a hatchet two pound weight of gold , because they know not the estimation thereof : but the soldier be greedy of the same , do take it from they , give they nothing for it : the which they perceive , that both the Frenchman do great esteem it , and also do rigorous deal with they , by take the same away from they , at last will not be know they have any more , neither dare they be the same for fear of be take away : so that save at their first come , they can get none of they : and how they come by this gold and silver the 57 [ three . 519 . ] the variety of commodity in Florida . colour . gold and silver . this copper be find perfect gold , call by the savage , a . d . the english voyage 1565 . French man know not as yet , but by guess , who have travel to the southwest of the cape , have find the same dangerous , by mean of sundry bank , as we also have find the same : and there find mast which be wrack of Spaniard come from Mexico , judge that they have get treasure by they . for it be most true that diverse wrack have be make of Spaniard , have much treasure : for the Frenchman have travel to the capeward a hundred and fifty two span - mile , do find two Spaniard with the floridians , which yard live they bring afterward to their fort , whereof one be floiidaans . '^ in a caravel come from the Indies , which be cast away fourteen year ago , and the other twelve year ; of who fellow some escape , othersome be slay by the inhabitant . it seem they have estimation of piece of gold their gold and silver , for it be wrought flat and grave , gr ^ en which they wear about their neck ; othersome make you on tan . rounj a pancake , with a hole in the midst , to bolster up their breast withal , because they think it a deformity to have great breast . as for mine either of gold or silver , the Frenchman can hear of none they have upon the island