such , as he may not so do : for be in one of the queen armada of England , and have many soldier in they , he have need both of some refresh for they , and of victual , and of money also , without the which he can not depart , and with much other talk persuade they not to fear any dishonest part of his behalf towards they , for neither will he commit any such thing to the dishonour of his prince , not yet for his honest reputation and estimation , unless he be too rigorous deal withal , which he hope not to find at their hand , in that it shall as well redound to their profit as his own , and also he think they may do it without danger , because their prince be in amity one with another , and for our part we have free traffic in Spain and Flanders , which be in his dominion , and therefore he know no reason why he shall not have the like in all his dominion . to the which the Spaniard make answer , that it lie not in they to give any licence , for that they have a governor to who the government of those part be commit , but if they will stay ten day , they will send to their governor who be threescore league off , and will return answer within the space appoint , of his mind . in the mean time they be content he shall bring his ship into harbour , and there they will deliver he any victual he will require . whereupon the four day we go in , where be one day and receive all thing accord to promise , the captain advise himself , that to remain there ten day idle , spend victual and man wage , and perhaps in the end receive no good answer from the governor , it be mere folly , and therefore determine to make request to have licence for the sale of certain lean and sick negro which he have in his ship like to die upon his hand if he keep they ten day , have little or no refresh for they , whereas other man have they , they will be recover well enough . and 31 A . D . I565 . this request he be force to make , because he have not otherwise wherewith to pay for victual and for necessary which he shall take : which request be put in writing and present , the officer and town - dweller assemble together , and find his request so reasonable , grant he licence for thirty negro , which afterward they cause the officer to view , to the intent they shall grant to nothing but that be very reasonable , for fear of answer thereunto afterward . This be pass , our captain accord to their licence , think to have make sale , but the day past and none come to buy , who before make show that they have great need of they , and therefore wit not what to surmise of they , whether they go about to prolong the time of the governor his answer because they will keep themselves blameless , or for any other policy he know not , and for that purpose send they word , marvel what the matter be that none come to buy they . they answer , because they have grant licence only to the poor to buy those negro of small price , and their money be not so ready as other man of more wealth . more than that , as soon as ever they see the ship , they convey away their money by their wife that go into the mountain for fear , and be not yet return , and yet ask two day to seek their wife and fetch their money . notwithstanding , the next day diverse of they come to cheapen , but can not agree of price , because they think the price too high . whereupon the captain perceive they go about to bring down the price , and mean to buy , and will not confess if he have licence , that he may sell at any reasonable rate , as they be worth in other place , do send for the principal of the town , and make a show he will depart , declare himself to be very sorry that he have so much trouble they , and also that he have send for the governor to come down , see now his pretence be to depart , whereat they marveil much , and ask he what cause move he thereunto , see by their work he be in possibility to have his licence . to the which he reply , that it be not only a [ three . 510 . ] licence that he seek , but profit , which he perceive be not there to be have , and therefore will seek further , and withal show he his write what he pay for his negro , declare also the great charge he be at in his ship , and man wage , and therefore to countervail his charge , he must sell his negro for a great price than they offer . so they doubt his departure , put he in comfort to sell better there then in any other place . and if it fall out that he have no licence that he shall not loose his labour in tarry , for they will buy without licence . whereupon , the captain be put in comfort , promise they to stay , so that he may make sale of his lean negro , which they grant unto . and the next day do sell some of they , who have buy and pay for they , think to have have a discharge of the customer , for the custom of the negro , be the king duty , they give it away to the poor for God sake , and do refuse to give the discharge in write , and the poor not trust their word , for fear , lest hereafter it may be demand of they , do refrain from buy any more , so that nothing else be do until the governor come down , which be the fourteenth day , and then the captain make petition , declare that he be come thither in a ship of the queen majesty of England , be bind to guinie , and thither drive by wind and weather , so that be come thither , he have need of sundry necessary for the reparation of the say navy , and also great need of money for the payment of his soldier , unto who he have promise payment , and therefore although he will , yet will not they depart without it , and for that purpose he request licence for the sale of certain of his negro , declare that although they be forbid to traffic with stranger , yet for that there ten 33 c be a great amity between their prince , and that the thing pertain to our queen highness , he think he may do their prince great service , and that it will be well take at his hand , to do it in this cause . the which allegation with diverse other put in request , be present unto the governor , who sit in counsel for that matter , grant unto his request for licence . but yet there fall out another thing which be the abate of the king custom , be upon every slave 30 . ducat , which will not be grant unto . whereupon the captain perceive that they will neither come near his price he look for by a great deal , nor yet will abate the king custom of that they offer , so that either he must be a great loser by his ware , or else compel the officer to abate the same king custom which be too unreasonable , for to a high price he can not bring the buyer : therefore the sixteenth of April he prepare one hundred man well arm with bow , arrow , harquebus and pike , with the which he march to the townewards , and be perceive by the governor , he straight with all expedition send messenger to know his request , desire he to march no further forward until he have answer again , which incontinent he shall have . so our captain declare how unreasonable a thing the king custom be , request to have the same abate , and to pay seven and a half per centum , which be the ordinary custom for ware through his dominion there , and unto this if they will not grant , he will displease they . and this word be carry to the governor , answer be return that all thing shall be to his content , and thereupon he determine to depart , but the soldier and mariner find so little credit in their promise , demand gage for the performance of the premise , or else they will not depart . and thus they be constrain to send gage , we depart , begin our traffic , and end the same without disturbance . thus have make traffic in the harbour until the 28 . our captain with his ship intend to go out of the road , and purpose to make show of his departure , because now the common sort have employed their money , the rich man be come to town , who make no show that they be come to buy , so that they go about to bring down the price , and by this policy the captain know they will be make the more eager , for fear lest we depart , and they shall go without any at all . the nine and twenty we be at anchor without the road , a french ship call the green dragon of Newhaven , whereof be captain one Bon temps come in , who salute we after the manner of the sea , with certain piece of ordinance , and we resalute he with the like again : with who have communication , he declare that he have be at the mine in guinie , and 2 % report off be beat off by the Portugal galley , and enforce to , . 1 ' , i 0 1 j the Minton tn come thither to make sale or such ware as he have : and further that the like be happen unto the minion : beside the captain Davie carlet and a merchant , with a dozen mariner betray by the negro at their first arrival thither , and remain prisoner with the Portugal ; and beside other misadventure of the loss of their man , happen through the great lack of fresh water , with great doubt of bring home the ship : which be most sorrowful for we to understand . thus have end our traffic here the 4 . of may , [ three . 51 i . i we depart , leave the Frenchman behind we , the night before the which the caribe , whereof i have make mention before , be to the number of 200 . come in their canoas to Burboroata , intend by night to have burn the town , and take the Spaniard , who be more vigilant because of our be there , than their custom be , perceive they come , raise the town , who in a moment be a horseback , by mean their custom be for all doubt to keep their horse horse keep ready saddle , in the night set upon they , and take one , read ? saddle - but the rest make shift for themselves , escape away . but this one , because he be their guide , and be the occasion that diverse time they have make invasion upon they , have for his travel a stake thrust through his fundament , and so out at his neck . the sixth of May aforesaid , we come to a island call Cura $ ao , where we have think to have ancker , but can not find ground , and have let fall a anchor with two cable , be fain to weigh it again : and the seven sail along the coast to seek a harbour , and find none , we come to a anchor where we ride open in the sea in this place we have traffic for hide , and find great refresh both of beef , mutton and lamb , whereof there be such plenty , that save the skin , we have the flesh give we for nothing , the exceed plenty whereof be so abundant , that the worst in the ship think scorn not only of mutton , but also of ’ sodden lamb , which they disdain to eat unroast . the increase of cattle in this island be marvelous , which from a dozen of each sort bring thither by the governor , in 25 . year he have a hundred thousand at the least , and of other cattle be able to kill without spoil of the increase 1500 . yearly , which he kill for the skin , and of the flesh save only the tongue , the rest he leave to the foul to devour . and this i be able to affirm , not only upon the governor own report , who be the first that bring the increase thither , which so remain unto this day , but also by that i see my self in one field , where a hundred ox lie one by another all whole , save the skin and tongue take away