. and it be not so marvelous a thing why they do thus cast away the flesh in all the island of the west Indies , see the land be great , and more than they be able to inhabit , the people few , have delicate fruit and meat enough beside to feed upon , which they rather desire , and the increase which pass man reason to believe , when they come to a great number : for in saint Domingo a island call by the 36 finder thereof Hispaniola , be so great quantity of cattle , and such increase thereof , that notwithstanding the daily kill of they for their hide , it be not possible to assuage the number of they , but they be devour by wild dog , who number be such by suffer they qreat first to range the wood and mountain , that they eat number of and destroy 60000 . a year , and yet small lack find wme d » and - of they . and no marveile , for the say island be almost as big as all England , and be the first place that be find of all the Indies , and of long time inhabit before the rest , it ought therefore of reason to be most populous : and to this hour the viceroy and counsel royal abide there as in the chief place of all the Indies , to prescribe order to the rest for the king behalf , yet have they but one city and 13 . village in all the same island , whereby the spoil of they in respect of the increase be nothing . the 15 . of the foresay month we depart from Curasao , be not a little to the rejoice of our captain and we , that we have there end our traffic : but notwithstanding our sweet meat , we have sour sauce , for by reason of our ride so open at sea , what with blast whereby our anchor be a ground , three at once come home , and also with contrary wind blow , whereby for fear of the shore we be fain to hale off to have anchorhold , sometime a whole day and a night we turn up and down ; and this happen not once , but half a dozen time in the space of our be there . the 16 . we pass by a island call Aruba , and Aruba . the 17 . at night ancker six hour at the west end of Cabo de la vela , and in the morning be the 18 . weigh again , keep our course , in the which time the captain sail by the shore in the pinnace , come to the Rancheria , a place where the Spaniard use to LaRanchena . fish for pearl , and there speak with a Spaniard , who tell he how far off he be from Rio de la Hacha , which 7 ? » de la because he will not overshoot , he anchor that night hac , in - m . Hawkins his letter to the treasurer of Rio de la Hacha . the english voyage again , and the 19 come thither ; where have talk with the king treasurer of the Indies resident there , he declare his quiet traffic in Burboroata , and show a certificate of the same , make by the governor thereof , and therefore he desire to have the like there also : but the treasurer make answer that they be forbid by the viceroy and council of saint Domingo , who have intelligence of our be on the coast , do send express commission to resist we , with all the force they can , insomuch that they dare not traffic with we in no case , allege that if they do , they shall loose all that they do traffic for , beside their body at the magistrate commandment . our captain reply , that he be in a armada of the queen majesty of England , and send about other her affair , but drive beside his pretend voyage , be enforce by contrary wind to come into those part , where he hope to find such friendship as he shall do in Spain , to the contrary whereof he know no reason , in that there be amity betwixt their prince . but see they will contrary to all reason go about to withstand his traffic , he will it shall not be say by he , that have the force he have , to be drive from his traffic perforce , but he will rather put it in adventure to try whether he or they shall have the better , and therefore will they to determine either to give he licence to trade , or else to stand to their own harm : so upon this it be determine he shall have licence to trade , but they will give he such a price as be the one half less than he have sell for before , and thus they send word they will do , and none otherwise , and if it like he not , he may do what he will , for they be not determine to deal otherwise with he . whereupon , the captain weigh their unconscionable request , write to they a letter , that they deal too rigorous with he , to go about to cut his throat in the price of his commodity , which be so reasonable rate , as they can not by a great deal have the like at any other man hand . but see they have send he this to his supper , he will in the morning bring they as good a breakfast . and therefore in the morning be the 21 . of may , he shoot off a whole culverin to summon the town , and prepare one hundred man in armour , go a shore , have in his great boat two falcon of brass , and in the other boat double base in their nose , which be perceive by the townsman , they incontinent in battle array with their drum and ensign display , march from the town to the sand , of footman to the number of a hundred and fifty , make great brag with their cry , and weave we a shore , whereby they make a semblance to have fight with we in deed . but our captain perceive they so brag , command the two falcon to be discharge at they , which put they in no small fear to see , ( as they afterward declare ) such great piece in a boat . at every shot they fall flat to the ground , and as we approach near unto they , they break their array , and disperse themselves so much for fear of the ordinance , that at last they go all away with their ensign . the horseman also be about thirty , make as brave a show as may be , course up and down with their horse , their brave white leather target in the one hand , and their javelin in the other , as though they will have receive we at our land . but when we land , they give ground , and consult what they shall do , for little they think we will have land so bold : and therefore as the captain be put his man in array , and march forward to have encounter with they , they send a messenger on horseback with a flag of truce to the captain , who declare that the treasurer marveil what he mean to do to come a shore in that order , in consideration that they have grant to every reasonable request that he do demand : but the captain not well content with this messenger , march forward . the messenger pray he to stay his man , and say , if he will come apart from his man , the treasurer will come and speak with he , whereunto he do agree to commune together . the captain only with his armour without weapon , and the treasurer on horseback with his javelin , be afraid to come near he for fear of his armour , which he say be worse than his weapon , and so keep aloof commune together , grant in fine to all his request . which be declare by the captain to the company , they desire to have pledge for the performance of all thing , doubt that otherwise when they have make themselves strong , they will have be at defiance with we : and see that now they may have what they will request , they judge it to be more wisdom to be in assurance then to be force to make any more labour about it . so upon this , gage be send , and we make our traffic quiet with they . in the mean time while we stay here , we water a good breadth off from the shore , where by the strength of the fresh water run into the sea , the salt water be make fresh . in this river we see many crocodile of sundry bigness , but some as big as a boat , with 4 . foot , a long broad mouth , and a long tail , who skin be so hard , that a sword will not pierce it . his nature be to live out of the water as a frog do , but he be a great devourer , and spare neither fish , which be his common food , nor beast , nor man , if he take they , as the proof thereof be know by a negro , who as he be fill water in the river be by one of they carry clean away , and never see after . his nature be ever when he will have his prey , to cry and sob like a christian body , to provoke they to come to he , and then he snatch at they , and thereupon come this proverb that be apply unto woman when they weep , lachrymae Crocodili , the meaning whereof be , that as the crocodile when he cry , go then about most to deceive , so do a woman most common when she weep . of these the master of the Jesus watch one , and by the bank side strike he with a pike of a bill in the side , and after three or four time turn in sight , he sink down , and be not afterward see . in the time of our be in the river guinie , we see many of a monstrous bigness , among the which the captain [ three . 513 . ] be in one of the bark come down the same , shoot a falcon at one , which very narrow he miss , and with a fear he plunge into the water , make a stream like the way of a boat . now while we be here , whether it be of a fear that the Spaniard doubt we will have do they some harm before we depart , or for any treason that they intend towards we , i be not able to say ; but then come thither a captain from some of the other town , with a dozen soldier upon a time when our captain and the treasurer clear all thing between they , and be in a communication of a debt of the governor of Burboroata , which be to be pay by the say treasurer , who will not answer the same by any mean . whereupon certain word of displeasure pass betwixt the captain and he , and part the one from the other , the treasurer possible doubt that our captain will perforce have seek the same , do immediate command his man to arm , both horseman and footman : but because the captain be in the river on the back side of the town with his other boat , and all his man unarm and without weapon , it be to be judge he mean he little good , have that advantage of he , that come upon the sudden , he may have mischieve many of his man : but the captain have understanding thereof , not trust to their gentleness , if they may have the advantage , depart aboard his ship , and at night return again , and demand among other talk , what they mean by assemble their man in that order , and they answer , that their captain be come to town do muster his man accord to his accustom manner . but it be to be judge to be a cloak , in that come for that purpose he may have do it soon , but the truth be , they be not of force until then , whereby to enterprise any matter against we , by mean of pike and harquebus , whereof they have want , and be now furnish by our captain , and also 3 . falcon , which have get in other place , they have secret convey thither , which make they the bold , and also for that they see now a convenient place to do such a feat , and time also serve thereunto , by the mean that our man be not only unarm and unprovide , as at no time before the like , but also be occupy in hew of wood , and least think of any harm : these be occasion to provoke they thereunto . and i suppose they go about to bring it to effect , in that * 1 with another gentleman be in the town , think of no harm