the voyage make by m . John Hawkins esquire , [ hl 501 . ] and afterward knight , captain of the Jesus of Lubek , one of her majesty ship , and general of the Salomon , and other two bark go in his company , to the coast of Guinea , and the Indies of Nova Hispania , begin in An . Dom . 1564 . Aster John Hawkins with the Jesus of Lubek , a ship of 700 . and the Salomon a ship of 140 . the tiger a bark of 50 . and the swallow of 30 . ton , be all well furnish with man to the number of one hundred threescore and ten , as also with ordinance and victuali requisite for such a voyage , depart out of Plymmouth the 18 . day of October , in the year of our lord 1564 . October 18 . with a prosperous wind : at which depart , in cut the foresail , a marvelous misfortune happen to one of the officer in the ship , who by the pully of the sheet be slay out of hand , be a sorrowful beginning to they all . and after their set out ten league to the sea , he meet the same day with the minion a ship of the minion , queen majesty , whereof be captain David carlet , and also her consort the John baptist of London , be merune bind bind to Guinea also , who hail one the other after far guinea . the custom of the sea with certain piece of ordinance for joy of their meeting : which do , the minion depart from he to seek her other consort the Merlin of London , which be a stern out of sight , leave in m . Hawkins company the John Baptist her other consort . thus sail forward on their way with a prosperous wind until the 21 . of the same month , at that time a great storm arise , the wind be at Northeast about nine a clock in the night , and continue so 23 . hour together , in which storm m . Hawkins lose the company 9 good order for a fleet in a long voyage . a dreadful mischance by fire . the english voyage of the John Baptist aforesaid , and of his pinnace call the swallow , his other 3 . ship be sore beat with a storm . the 23 . day the swallow to his not small rejoice , come to he again in the night , 10 . league to the northward of cape Finister , he have put roomer , not be able to double the cape , in that there rise a contrary wind at Southwest . the 25 . the wind continue contrary , he put into a place in Galicia , call Ferroll , where he remain five day , and appoint all the master of his ship a order for the keep of good company in this manner : the small ship to be always ahead and aweather of the Jesus , and to speak twice a day with the Jesus at least : if in the day the ensign be over the poop of the Jesus , or in the night two light , then shall all the ship speak with she : if there be three light aboard the Jesus , then do she cast about : if the weather be extreme , that the small ship can keep company with the Jesus , than all to keep company with the Salomon , and forthwith to repair to the hand of Teneriffe , to the northward of the road of sirroes ; if any happen to any misfortune then to show two light , and to shoot off a piece of ordinance . if any lose company , and come in sight again , to make three yaw , and strike the Myson three time : serve God daily , love one another , preserve your victual , beware of fire , and keep good company . the 26 . day the minion come in also where he be , for the rejoice whereof he give they certain piece of ordinance , after the courtesy of the sea for their welcome : but the minion man have no mirth , because of their consort the Merline , who at their departure from master Hawkins upon the coast of England they go to seek , and have meet with she , keep company two day together , and at last by misfortune of fire ( through the negligence of one of their gunner ) the powder in the gunner room be set on fire , which with the first blast strike out her poop , and therewithal ! lose three man , beside many sore burn ( which escape by the brigan - io dine be at her stern ) and immediady , to the great loss of the owner , and most horrible sight to the beholder , she sink before their eye . the 20 . day of the month m . Hawkins with his consort and company of the minion , have now both the brigandine at her stern , weigh anchor , and set sail on their voyage , have a prosperous wind thereunto . the four of November they have sight of the hand of Madera , and the sixth day of Teneriffe , which they think to have be the canary , in that they suppose themselves to have be to the eastward of Teneriffe , and be not : but the minion be three or four league ahead of we , keep on her course to Teneriffe , have better sight thereof then the other have , and by that mean they part company . for m . Hawkins and his company go more to the west , upon which course have sail a while , he espy another hand , which he think to be Teneriffe , and be not able by mean of the fog upon the hill , to discern the same , nor yet to fetch it by night , go roomer until the morning , be the seven of November , which as yet he can not discern , but sail along the coast the [ m . 502 . ] space of two hour , to perceive some certain mark of Teneriffe , and find no likelihood thereof at all , account that to be , as it be in deed , than he of the lie of palm : and so sail forward , espy another hand pflmes - called Gomera , and also Teneriffe , with the which he make , and sail all night , come in the morning the next day to the port of Adecia , where he find his pinnace which have depart from he the sixth of the month , be in the weather of he , and espy the pike of Teneriffe all a high , bear thither . at his arrival somewhat before he come to anchor , he hoist out his ship pinnace row a shore , intend to have send one with a letter to Peter de ponte , one of the governor of the hand , who dwell a league from the shore : but as he pretend to have land , sudden there appear upon the two point of the road , man level of base and harquebus to they , with diverse other to the number of fourscore , with halberd , pike , sword and target , which happen so contrary to his expectation , that it do great amaze he , and the more , because he be now in their danger , not know well how to avoid it without some mischief . wherefore he determine to call to they for the better appease of the matter , declare his name , and profess himself to be a especial friend to Peter de ponte , and that he have sundry thing for he which he great desire . and in the mean time , while he be thus talk with they , whereby he make they to hold their hand , he will the mariner to row away , so that at last he get out of their danger : and then ask for Peter de ponte , one of his son be signior Nicolas de Ponte , come forth , who he perceive , desire to put his man aside , and he himself will leap a shore and common with he , which they do : so that after communication have between they of sundry thing , and of the fear they both have , master Hawkins desire to have certain necessary provide for he . in the mean space , while these thing be provide , he trim the main mast of the Jesus which in the storm aforesaid be spring : here he sojourn 7 . day , refresh himself and his man . Santa Cruz . in the which time Peter de ponte dwell at saint Cruz , a city 20 . league off , come to he , and give he as gentle a brief de - entertainment as if he have be his own brother . to scription of the speak somewhat of these hand , be call in old commodity of f t , c . , ’ s - , n • . • the Canarie time insulae fortunatae , by the mean of the nourish hand . thereof , the fruitfulness of they do sure exceed far all other that i have hear of : for they make wine better than any in Spain , they have grape of such bigness , that they may be compare to damson , and in taste inferior to none : for sugar , sucket , raisin of the sun , and many other fruit , abundance : for rosine and raw silk , there be great store , they want neither corn , pullet , cattle , nor yet wild foul : they have many camel also , which be young , be eat of the people for victual , and be old , they be use for carriage of necessary : who property be as he be teach to kneel at the take of his load , and unlade again : he nature be to engender backward contrary to other beast : of understanding very good , but of shape very deform , with a little belly , long misshape leg , and foot very broad of flesh , without a hoof , all whole , save the great toe , a back bear up like a molehill , a large and thin neck , with a little head , with a bunch of hard flesh , which nature have give he in his breast to lean upon . this beast live hardly , and be content with straw and stubble , but of force strong , be well able to carry 500 weight . in one of these hand call Fierro , there be by Fierro . the report of the inhabitant , a certain tree that rain continual , by the drop whereof the inhabitant and cattle be satisfy with water , for other water have they none in all the hand . and it rain in such abundance , that it be incredible unto a man to believe such a virtue to be in a tree , but it be know to be a divine matter , and a thing ordain by God , at who power therein we ought not to marvel , see he do by his providence as we read in the scripture , when the child of Israel be go into the land of promise , feed they with manna from heaven , for the space of 40 . year . of the tree aforesaid we see in guinie many , be of great tree dropheight , drop continual , but not so abundant as ™ ater tn the other , because the leaf be narrow , and be like mme ' the leaf of a pear tree . about these hand be certain flit hand , which have be oftentimes see , and when man approach near they , they vanish : as the like have be of these hand now know by the report of the inhabitant , which be not find of long time one after the other : and therefore it shall seem he be not yet bear to who God have appoint the find of they . in this hand of Teneriffe there be a hill call the pike , because it be pike , which be in heighth by the pike of their report twenty league , have both winter and teneriffe - summer abundance of snow in the top of it : this pike cape Blanco . the english voyage may be see in a clear day fifty league off , but it show as though it be a black cloud a great heighth in the element . i have hear of none to be compare with this in heighth , but in the India i have see many , and in my judgement not inferior to the pike , and so the Spaniard write . the 15 . of November at night we depart from Teneriffe , and the 20 . of the same we have sight of ten caravel , that be fish at sea , with who we will have speak , but they fear we , flee into a place of Barbary , call Cape de las barbas . the twenty , the ship pinnace with two man in she , sail by the ship , be overthrow by the oversight of they that go in she , the wind be so great , that before they be espy , and the ship have cast about for they , she be drive half a league