: and because it be the most desolate place in all the island , we can see no canybal , but some of their house where they dwell , and as it shall seem forsake the place for want of fresh water , for we can find none there but rain water , and such as fall from the hill , and remain as a puddle in the dale , whereof we fill for our negro . the canybal of that island , and also other adjacent be the most desperate warrior that be in the Indies , by the Spaniard canybal exreport , who be never able to conquer they , and they be molest by they not a little , when they be drive that to water there in any of those island : of very late , not two month past , in the say island , a caravel be drive to water , be in the night set upon by the inhabitant , who cut their cable in the hals , whereby they be drive a shore , and so take by they , and eat . the green dragon of Newhaven , whereof be captain one Bontemps , in march also , come to one of those island , call Granada , and be drive to water , can not do the same for the canybal , who fight with he very desperate two day . for our part also , if we have not light upon the desert place in all that island , we can not have miss , but shall have be great trouble by they , by all the Spaniard report , who make they devil in respect of i . the testigps island . Margarita island . Cumana . the english voyage the ten day at night , we depart from thence , and the fifteen have sight of nine island , call the testigo : and the sixteenth of a island , call Margarita , where we be entertain by the Alcalde , and have both beef and sheep give we , for the refresh of our man : but the governor of the island , will neither come to speak with our captain , neither yet give he any licence to traffic : and to displease we the more , whereas we have hire a pilot to have go with we , they will not only not suffer he to go with we , but also send word by a caravel out of hand , to Santo Domingo , to the viceroy , who do represent the king person , of our arrival in those part , which have like to have turn we to great displeasure , by the mean that the same viceroy do send word to cape de la Vela , and to other place along the coast , command they that by the virtue of his authority , and by the obedience that they owe to their prince , no man shall traffic with we , but shall resist we with all the force they can . in this island , notwithstanding that we be not within four league of the town , yet be they so afraid , that not only the governor himself , but also all the inhabitant forsake their town , assemble all the Indian to they and flee into the mountain , as we be partly certify , and also see the experience our self , by some of the Indian come to see we who by three Spaniards a horseback pass hard by we , go unto the Indian , have every one of they their bow , and arrow , procure they away , who before be conversant with we . here perceive no traffic to be have with they , nor yet water for the refresh of our man , we be drive to depart the twenty day , and the 2 and twenty we come to a place in the main call Cumana , whither the captain go in his pinnisse , speak with certain Spaniards , of who he demand traffic , but they make he answer , they be but 26 sir John Hawkins soldier new come thither , and be not able to by one negro : whereupon he ask for a water place , and they point he a place two league off , call Santa F ^ , where we find marvelous goodly water , and commodious for the take in thereof : for that the fresh water come into the sea , and so our ship have aboard the shore twenty fathom water . near about this place , inhabit certain Indian , who the next day after we come thither , come down to we , present mill and cake of bread , which they have make of a kind of corn call Maiz , in bigness of a pease , the ear whereof be much like to a teasell , but a span in length , have thereon a number of grane . also they bring down to we hen , potato and pine , which we buy for bead , pewter whistle , glass , knife , and other trifle . Theise potato be the most delicate root that may be eat , and do far exceed our passenep or carat . their pine be of the bigness of two fist , the outside whereof be of the make of a pineapple , but it be soft like the rind of a Cucomber , and the inside eat like a apple , but it be more delicious than any sweet apple sugar . Theise Indian be of colour tawny like a olive , have every one of they both man and woman , hair all black , and no other colour , the woman wear the same hang down to their shoulder , and the man round , and without beard , neither man nor woman suffer any hair to grow in any part of their body , but daily pull it off as it grow . they go all naked , the man cover no part of their body but their yard , upon the which they wear a gourd or piece of cane , make fast with a third about their loin , leave the other part of their member uncover , whereof they take no shame . the woman also be uncover , save with a cloth which they wear a hand - breath , wherewith they cover their privity both before and behind . Theise people be very small feeder , for travel they carry but two 27 Santa Fe . [ Iii . 508 . ] the description of the Indian of terra firma . small bottle of gourd , wherein they put in one then the use of juice of Sorrell whereof they have great store , and in sorrel . the o ^ er flower of their Maiz , which be moist , they eat , take sometime of the other . Theise man carry every man his bow and arrow , whereof some arrow be poison for war , which they keep in a cane together , which cane be of the bigness of a man arm , other some with broad head of iron wherewith they strike fish in the water : the experience whereof we see not once nor twice , but daily for the time we tarry there , for they be so good archer that armour of the Spaniard for fear thereof arm themselves and two ^ nche ^ horse with quilt canvas of two inche thick , thick . and leave no place of their body open to their enemy , save their eye which they may not hide , and yet oftentimes be they hit in that so small a the make of scantling : their poison be of such a force , that a their poison . man be strike therewith die within four and twenty hour , as the Spaniard do affirm , and in my judgement it be like there can be no strong poison as they make it , use thereunto apple which be very fair and red of colour , but be a strong poison , with the which together with venomous bat , viper , adder and other serpent , they make a medley , and therewith anoint the same . the manner of the young woman . the Indian woman delight not when they be young in bear of child , because it make they have hang breast which they account to be great deform in they , and upon that occasion while they be young , they destroy their seed , say , that it be fit for old woman . Moreover , when they be deliver of child , they go straight to wash themselves , without make any further ceremony for it , not lie in bed as our woman do . the bed which they have be make of gossopine cotton , and wrought artificial of diverse colour , which they carry about with they when they travel , and make the same fast to two tree , lie therein they and their woman . the people 28 1565 . be sure gentle and tractable , and such as desire to live peaceable , or else have it be unpossible for the Spaniard to have conquer they as they do , and the more to live now peaceable , they be so many in number , and the Spaniard so few . from hence we depart the eight and twenty , and the next day we pass between the main land , and the island call Tortuga , a very low island , in the the of year of our lord God one thousand five hundred tortusa - sixty five aforesaid , and sail along the coast until the first of April , at which time the captain sail along in the Jesus pinnace to discern the coast , and see many caribe on shore , and some also in their canoas , which make token unto he of friendship , and show he gold , mean thereby that they will traffic for ware . whereupon he stay to see the manner of they , and so for two or three trifle they give such thing as they have about they , and depart : but the caribe be very importunate to have they come on shore , which if it have not be for want of ware to traffic with they , he will not have deny they , because the Indian which we see before be very gentle people , and such as do no man hurt . but as God will have it , he want that thing , which if he have have , will have be his confusion : for these be no such kind of people as we take they to be , but more devilish a thousand part and be eater and devourer of any man they can catch , as it be afterward declare unto we at Burboroata , by a caravel come out of Spain with certain soldier , and a captain generail send by the king for those eastward part of the Indian , who sail along in his pinnace , as our captain do to descry the coast , be by the caribe call a shore with sundry token make to he of friendship , and gold show as though they desire traffic , with the which the Spaniard be move , suspect no deceit at all , go ashore among they : who be no soon ashore , but with four or five Burbonata . the english voyage moor be take , the rest of his company be invade by they , save themselves by flight , but they that be take , pay their ransom with their life , and be present eat . and this be their practice to toll with their gold the ignorant to their snare : they be bloodsucker both of Spaniards , Indian , and all that light in their lap , not spare their own countryman if they can convenient come by they . their policy in fight with the Spaniards be marvelous : for they choose for their refuge the mountain and wood where the Spaniard with their horse can follow they , and if they fortune to be meet in the plain where one horseman may overrun 100 of they , they have a devise of late practise by they to pitch stake of wood in the ground , and also small iron pike to mischief their horse , wherein they show themselves politic warrior . they have more abundance of gold then all the Spaniard have , and live upon the mountain where the mine be in such number , that the Spaniard have much ado to get any of they from they , and yet sometime by assemble a great number of they , which happen once in two year , they get a piece from they , which afterward they keep sure enough . thus have escape the danger of they , we keep our course along the coast , and come the three of April to a town call Burboroata , where his ship come to a anchor , and he himself go a shore to speak with the Spaniard , to who he declare himself to be a Englishman , and come thither to trade with they by the way of merchandise , and therefore require licence for the same . unto who they make answer , that they be forbid by the king to traffic with any foreign nation , upon penalty to forfeit their good , therefore they desire he not to molest they any further , but to depart as he come , for other comfort he may not look for at their hand , because they be subject and may not go beyond the law . but he reply that his necessity be