the arrival of a viceroy , so that he have authority , both in all this a viceroy . province of Mexico ( otherwise call Nueva Espanna ) and in the sea , who send we word that we shall send our condition , which of his part shall ( for the better maintenance of amity between the prince ) be both fare word favourable grant , and faithful perform , with many fair word how pass the coast of the Indies he have understand of our honest behaviour towards the inhabitant where we have to do , aswell elsewhere as in the same port , the which i let pass : thus follow our demand , we require victual for our money , and our request . the english voyage licence to sell as much ware as may furnish our want , and that there may be of either part twelve gentleman as hostage for the maintenance of peace : and that the hand for our better safety may be in our own possession , during our abode there , and such ordinance as be plant in the same hand which be eleven piece of brass : and that no Spaniard may land in the hand with any kind of weapon : these condition at the first he somewhat mislike , chief the guard of the hand to be in our own keep , which if they have have , we have soon know our fare : for with the first north wind they have cut our cable and our ship have go ashore : but in the end he conclude to our request , bring the twelve hostage to ten , which with all speed of either part be receive , with a write from the viceroy sign with his hand and seal with his seal of all the condition conclude , and forthwith a trumpet blow with commandment that none of either part shall be mean to violate the peace upon pain of death : and further it be conclude that the two general of the fleet shall meet , and give faith each to other for the performance of the premise which be so do . thus at the end of 3 day all be conclude and the fleet enter the port , salute one another as the manner of the sea do require . thus as i say before , Thursday we enter the port , Friday we see the fleet , and on Monday at night they enter the port : than we labour 2 . day place the english ship by themselves and the spanish ship by themselves , the captain of each part and inferior man of their part promise great amity of all side : which even as with all fidelity it be mean on our part , so the Spaniard mean nothing less on their part , but from the main land have furnish themselves with a supply of man to the number of 1000 , and mean the next Thursday be the 23 of September at dinner time to set upon we on all side . the same Thursday in the morning the treason be at hand , some appearance show , as shift of weapon from ship to ship , plant and bend of ordinance from the ship to the hand where our man ward , pass too and fro of company of man more than require for their necessary business , and many other ill likelihood , which cause we to have a vehement suspicion , and therewithal ! send to the viceroy to inquire viceroy what be mean by it , which send immediate straight commandment to plant all thing suspicious , and also ■ they ' send word that he in the faith of a viceroy will be our defence from all villainy . yet we be not satisfy with this answer , because we suspect a great number of man to be hide in a great ship of 900 ton , which be more next unto the minion , send again to the viceroy the master of the Jesus which have the spanish tongue , and require to be satisfy if any such thing be or not . the viceroy now see that the treason must the treason be discover , forthwith stay our master , blow the brake four . trumpet , and of all side set upon we : our man which ward a shore be strike with sudden fear , give place , flee , and seek to recover succour of the ship ; the Spaniard be before provide for the purpose land in all place in multitude from their ship which they may easy do without boat , and slay all our man a shore without mercy , a few of they escape aboard the Jesus . the great ship which have by the estimation three hundred man place in she secret , immediate fall aboard the minion , but by god the minion appointment , in the time of the suspicion we have , which es / a be only one half hour , the minion be make ready you to avoid , and so lose her hedfast , and hail away by the sternefaste she be get out : thus with god help she defend the violence of the first brunt of these three hundred man . the minion be pass out , they come aboard the Jesus , which also with very much a doe and the loss of many of our man be defend and keep out . than there be also two other ship that assault the Jesus the Jesus at the same instant , so that she have hard get loose , but yet with some time we have cut our head - fast and get out by the stern - fast . now when the Jesus and the minion be get about two ship sharp war , length from the spanish fleet , the fight begin so hot on all side that within one hour the admiral of the Spaniard be suppose to be sink , their vice - admiral 3 . ship of the burn and one other of their principali ship suppose to consume sun ^ e > so that the ship be little able to annoy we . sum ’ then it be to be understand , that all the ordinance upon the island be in the Spaniard hand , which do we so great annoyance , that it cut all the mast and yard of the Jesus , in such sort that there be no hope a hard case , to carry she away : also it sink our small ship , whereupon we determine to place the Jesus on that side of the minion , that she may abide all the battery from the land , and so be a defence for the minion till night , and then to take such relief of victuali and other necessary from the Jesus , as the time will suffer we , and to leave she . as we be thus determine , and have place the minion from the shot of the land , sudden the Spaniard have fire two great ship which be come direct with we , and have no mean to avoid the fire , it breed among our man a marvellous fear , so that some say , let we depart with the minion , other say , let we see whither the wind will carry the fire from we . but to be short , the minion man which have always their sail in a readiness , think to make sure work , and so without either consent of the captain or master cut their sail , so that very hardly i be receive into the minion . the most part of the man that be leave alive in the Jesus , make shift and follow the minion in a small boat , the rest which the little boat be not able to receive , be enforce to abide the mercy of the Spaniard t0 ( which i doubt be very little ) so with the minion tyrants ^ on ^ and Ju ( iith ( a small bark of 50 ton ) we at storm , escape , which bark the same night forsake we in our great misery : we be now remove with the minion from the spanish ship two bowshootes , and there ride all that night : the next morning we recover a hand a mile from the Spaniard , where there take we a north 1568 . wind , and be leave only with two anchor and two cable ( for in this conflict we lose three cable and two anchor ) we think always upon death which ever be present , but God preserve we to a long time . the weather wax reasonable , and the Saturday we set sail , and have a great number of man and little [ hl 525 . ] victual our hope of life wax less and less : some ^ es desire to yield to the Spaniard , some rather desire to obtain a place where they may give themselves to the infidel , and some have rather abide with a little pittance hard choice . the mercy of God at sea : so thus with many sorrowful heart we wander in a unknown sea by the space of 14 day , till hunger enforce we to seek the land , for hide be think very good meat , rat , cat , mouse and misery . dog , none escape that may be get , parrot and monkey that be have in great price , be think there very profitable if they serve the turn one dinner : thus in the end the 8 day of October we come to the land in the bottom of the same bay of Mexico in 23 degree and a half , where we hope to have find inhabitant of the Spaniard , relief of victual , and place for the repair of our ship , which be so sore beat with shot from our enemy and bruise with shoot off our own ordinance , that our weary and weak arm be scarce able to defend and keep out water . but all thing happen to the contrary , for we find neither people , victuali , nor haven of relief , but a place where have fair weather with some peril we may land a boat : our people be force with hunger desire to be set on land , whereunto i consent . and such as be willing to land i put they apart , and such as be desirous to go homewards , i put apart , so that they be indifferent part a hundred of one side hundred and a hundred of the other side : these hundred man we set a land with all diligence in this little place beforesaid , an ^ a which be land , we determine there to take in fresh half . water , and so with our little remain of victual to take the sea . the next day have a land with i fifty of our 73 the english Voyages hundred man that remain for the speedy prepare of our water aboard , there arise a extreme storm , so that in three day we can by no mean repair aboard our ship : the ship also be in such peril that every hour we look for shipwreck . but yet God again have mercy on we , and send fair weather , we have aboard our water , and depart the sixteenth day of October , after which day we have fair and prosperous weather till the sixteenth day of November , which day God be praise we be clear from the coast of the Indies , and out of the channel and gulf of Bahama , which be between the cape of Florida , and the island of Lucayo . after this grow near to the cold country , our man be oppress with famine , die continual , and they that be leave , grow into such weakness that we be scant able to manage our ship , and the wind be always ill for we to recover England , we determine to go with Galicia in Spain , with intent there to relieve our company and other extreme want . And be arrive the last day of December in a place near unto Vigo call Ponte Vedra , our man with excess of fresh meat grow into miserable disease , and die a great part of they . this matter be bear out as long as it may be , but in the end although there be none of our man suffer to go a land , yet by access of the Spaniard , our feebleness be know to they . whereupon they cease not to seek by all mean to betray we , but with all speed possible we depart to Vigo , where we have some help of certain english ship and twelve fresh man , wherewith we repair our want as we may , and depart the 20 day of January 1568 arrive in mount bay in Cornwall the 25 of the same month , praise be God therefore . if all the misery and troublesome affair of this sorrowful voyage shall be perfect and thorough write , there shall need a painful man with his pen , and as great a time as he have that write the life and death of the martyr . John Hawkins .