towards we , and see man assemble in armour to the treasurer house , whereof i marveil , and revoke to mind the former talk between the captain and he , and the unreadiness of our man , of who advantage may have be take , depart out of the town immediate to give knowledge thereof , but before we come to our man by a flightshot , two horseman ride a gallop be come near we , be send , as we do guess , to stay we lest we shall carry news to our captain , but see we so near our man they stay their horse , come together , and suffer we to pass , belike because we be so near , that if they have go about the same , they have be espy by some of our man which then immediate will have depart , whereby they shall have be frustrate of their pretence : and so the two horseman rid about the bush to espy what we do , and see we go , to the intent they may shadow their come down in post , whereof suspicion may be have , feign a simple excuse in ask whether he can sell any wine , but that seem so simple to the captain , that stand in doubt of their courtesy , he return in the morning with his three boat , appoint with base in their nose , and his man with weapon accord , where as before he carry none : and thus dissemble all injury conceive of both part , the captain go ashore , leave pledge in the boat for himself , and clear all thing between the treasurer and he , save for the governors debt , which the one 1565 . by no mean will answer , and the other , because it be not his due debt , will not molest he for it , but be content to remit it until another time , and therefore depart , cause the two bark which ride near the shore to weigh and go under sail , which be do because that our captain demand a testimoniali of his good behaviour there , can not have the same until he be under sail ready to depart : and therefore at night he go for the same again , and receive it at the treasurer hand , of who very courteous he take his leave and depart , shoot off the base of his boat for his farewell , and the townsman also shoot off four falcon and 30 . harquebus , and this be the first time that he know of the conveyance of their falcon . the 31 . of may we depart , keep our course to Hispaniola , and the four of June we have sight of a island , which we make to be Jamaica , marvel that by the vehement course of the sea we shall be drive so far to leeward : for set our course to the west end of Hispaniola we fall with the middle of Jamaica , notwithstanding that to all man sight it show a headland , but they be all deceive by the cloud that lie upon the land two day together , in such sort that we think it to be the head land of the say island . and a Spaniard be in the ship , who be a merchant , and inhabitant in Jamaica , have [ three . 514 . ] occasion to go to guinie , and be by treason take of the negro , and afterward buy by the Tangomangos , be by our captain bring from thence , and have his passage to go into his country , who perceive the land , make as though he know every place thereof and point to certain place which he name to be such a place , and such a man ground , and that behind such a point be the harbour , but in the end he point so from one point to another , that we be a leeboord of all place , and find our self at the west end of Jamaica before we be aware of it , and be once to leeward , there be no get up again , the deceitful ! force of the current . the english voyage so that by trust of the Spaniard knowledge , our captain seek not to speak with any of the inhabitant , which if he have not make himself sure of , he will have do as his custom be in other place : but this man be a plague not only to our captain , who make he loose by overshoot the place 2000 pound by hide , which he may have get , but also to himself , who be three year out of his country , and in great misery in guinie , both among the negro and Tangomangos , and in hope to come to his wife and friend , as he make sure account , in that at his go into the pinnace , when he go to shore he put on his new clothes , and for joy fling away his old , can not afterward find any habitation , neither there nor in all Cuba , which we sail all along , but it fall out ever by one occasion or other , that we be put beside the same , so that he be fame to be bring into England , and it happen to he as it do to a duke of Samaria , when the Israelite be besiege , and be in great misery with hunger , and be tell by the prophet Elizaeus , that a bushel ! of flower shall be sell for a sickle , will not believe he , but think it unpossible : and for that cause Elizaeus prophesy he shall see the same do , but he shall not eat thereof : so this man be absent three year , and not ever think to have see his own country , do see the same , go upon it , and yet be it not his fortune to come to it , or to any habitation , whereby to remain with his friend accord to his desire . thus have sail along the coast two day , we depart the seven of June , be make to believe by the Spaniard that it be not Jamaica , but rather Hispaniola , of which opinion the captain also be , because that which he make Jamaica seem to be but a piece of the land , and thereby take it rather to be Hispaniola , by the lie of the coast , and also for that be ignorant of the force of the current , he can not believe he be so far drive to leeward , and therefore set his course to Jamaica , and after certain day not find the same , perceive then certain that the island which he be at before be Jamaica , and that the cloud do deceive he , whereof he marvel not a little : and this mistake of the place come to as ill a pass as the overshoot of Jamaica : for by this do he also overpass a place in Cuba , call Santa Cruz , where , as he be inform , be great store of hide to be have : and thus be disappoint of two of his port , where he think to have raise great profit by his traffic , and also to have find great refresh of victual and water for his man , he be now disappoint great , and such want he have of fresh water , that he be force to seek the shore to obtain the same , which he have sight of after certain day overpass with storm and contrary wind , but yet not of the main of Cuba , but of certain island in number two hundred , whereof the most part be desolate of inhabitant : by the which island the captain pass in his pinnace , can find no fresh water until he come to a island big than all the rest , call the isle of pina , where we ancker with our ship the 16 . of June , and find water , which although it be neither so toothsome as run water , by the mean it be stand , and but the water of rain , and also be near the sea be brackish , yet do we not refuse it , but be more glad thereof , as the time then require , than we shall have be another time with fine conduit water . thus be reasonable water we be desirous to depart , because the place be not very convenient for such ship of charge as they be , because there be many shoal to leeward , which also lie open to the sea for any wind that shall blow : and therefore the captain make the more haste away , which be not unneedful : for little soon be their anchor weigh , and foresail set , but there arise such a storm , that they have not much to spare for double out of the shoal : for one of the bark not be full ready as the rest , be fain for haste to cut the cable in 45 two hundred island for the most part not inhabit . the hawse , and loose both anchor and cable to save her self . the cape of thus the 17 . of June , we depart and on the 20 . we ^ cuba ^^ ' in west end of Cuba , call cape S . Antony , of where for the space of three day we double along , till we come beyond the shoal , which be 20 . league beyond saint Anthony . and the ordinary brise take we , which be the north - east wind , put we the 24 . from the shore , and therefore we go to the northwest to fetch Florida . wind , and also to the coast of Florida to have the help of the current , which be judge to have set to the eastward : so the 29 . we found our self in 27 . degree , and in the sounding of Florida , where we keep our self the space of four day , sail along the coast as near as we can , in ten or twelve fathom water , have all the while no sight of land . [ Iii . 515 . ] the five of July we have sight of certain island of the isle of sanj3 call the Tortugas ( which be low land ) where great store of the captain go in with his pinnace , and find such bird . a number of bird , that in half a hour he jade she with they ; and if they have be ten boat more , they may have do the like . Theise island bear the name of tortoise , because of the number of they , which there do breed , who nature be to live both in the water and upon land also , but breed only upon the shore , in make a great pit wherein they lie egg , to the number of three or four hundred , and cover they with sand , they be hatch by the heat of the sun ; and by this mean come the great increase . of these we take very great one , which have both back and belly all of bone , of the thickness of a inch : the fish whereof we prove , eat much like veil ; and find a number of egg in they , taste also of they , but they do eat very sweet . here we anchor six hour , and then a fair gale of wind spring , we weigh anchor , and make sail towards Cuba , whither we come the sixth a hill call day , and weather as far as the table , be a hill the table . so call , because of the form thereof : here we lay off and on all night , to keep that we have get to windward , intend to have water in the morning , if we can have do it , or else if the wind have come large , to have ply to windward to Havana , the port of which be a harbour whereunto all the fleet of they ha ™ 1 ™ - Spaniard come , and do there tarry to have one the company of another . this hill we think to have be the table , make account ( as it be indeed ) that Havana be but eight league to windward , but by the persuasion of a french man , who make the captain believe he know the table very well , and have be at Havana , say that it be not the table , and that the table be much high , and near to the sea side , and that there be no plain ground to the eastward , nor hill to the westward , but all be contrary , and that behind the hill to the westward be Havana . to which persuasion credit be give by some , and they not of the worst , the captain be persuade to go to leeward , and so sail along the seven and eight day , find no habitation , nor no other table ; and then perceive his folly to give ear to such prater , be not a little sorry , both because he do consider what time he shall spend year he can get so far to windward again , which will have be , with the weather which we have