to leeward of the pinnace , and have lose sight of she , so that there be small hope of recovery , have not God help and the captain diligence be , who have well mark which way the pinnace be by the sun , appoint 24 of the lusty rower in the great boat , to row to the windward , and so recover , contrary to all man expectation , both the pinnace and the man sit upon the keel of she . the 25 he come to cape Blanco , which be upon the coast of Africa , and a place where the Portugal do ride , that fish there in the month of November especial , and be a very good place of fish , for pargoe , Mullet , and dog fish . in this place the Portugal have no hold for their defence , but have rescue of the barbarian , who they entertain as their soldier , for the time of their be there and for their fish upon that coast of Africa , do pay a certain tribute to the king of the moor . the people of that part of Africa be tawny , have long hair without any apparel , save before their privy member . their weapon in war be bow and arrow . the 26 we depart from saint Avis bay , within cape Blanco , where we refresh our self with fish , 14 and other necessary : and the 29 we come to cape cape Verde Verde , which lie in 14 degree , and a half . Theise in h degree . people be all black , and be call negro , without any apparel , save before their privity : of stature goodly man , and well like by reason of their food , which pass all other guyneans for kine , goat , pullin , rise , fruit , and fish . here we take fish with head like cony , and tooth nothing vary , of a jolly thickness , but not past a foot long , and be not to be eat without flay or cut off his head . to speak somewhat of the sundry sort of these guyneans : the people of cape Verde be call Leophares , and Leophares . count the goodly man of all other , save the congo , which do inhabit on this side the cape de buena esperanza . Theise Leophares have war against the leloffe , which be borderer by they : their weapon be bow and arrow , target , and short dagger , dart also , but vary from other negro : for whereas the other use a long dart to fight with in their hand , they carry five or six small one a piece , which they cast with . Theise man also be more civil than any other , because of their daily traffic with the Frenchman , and be of nature very gentle and love : for ca while we be there , we take in a Frenchman , who be one of the 19 that go to Brasile , in a bark of diepe , of 60 ton , and be a sea board of cape Verde , 200 league , the plank of their bark with a sea break out upon they so sudden , that much a do they have to save themselves in their boat : but by god providence , the wind be westerly , which be rare see there , they get to the shore , to the isle Brava , and in great penury get to cape Verde , where they remain six week , and have meat and drink of the same people . the say Frenchman have forsake his fellow , which be three league off from the shore , and wander with the negro too and fro , fortune to come to the water side : and commune with certain of his countryman , which be 15 the traffic of the french in our ship , by their persuasion come away with we : but his entertainment among they be such , that he desire it not : but through the importunate request of his countryman , consent at the last . here we stay but one night , and part of the day : for the 7 of December we come away , in that pretend to have take negro there perforce , the minion man give they there to understand of our come , and our pretence , wherefore they do avoid the snare we have lay for they . the 8 of December we anchor by a small island alcatrarse or call Alcatrarsa , wherein at our go a shore , we find ganet . nothing but sea - bird , as we call they ganet , but by the Portugal , call Alcatrarses , who for that cause give the say island the same name . herein half of our boat be lade with young and old fowl , who not be use to the sight of man , fly so about we , that we strike they down with pole . in this place the two ship ride , the two bark , with the sapy , their boat , go into a island of the sapy , call la Formio , to see if they can take any of they , and there land to the number of 80 in armour , and espy certain make to they , but they flee in such order into the wood , that it boot they not to follow : so go on their way forward till they come to a river , which they can not pass over , they espy on the otherside two man , who with their bow and arrow shoot terrible at they . whereupon we discharge certain harquebus to they again , but the ignorant people weigh it not , because they know not the danger thereof : but use a marvellous cry in their fight with leap and turn their tail , that it be most strange to see , and give we great pleasure to [ three . 504 . ] behold they . at the last , one be hurt with a harquebus upon the thigh , look upon his wound and wit not how it come , because he can not see the pellet . here master Hawkins perceive no good to be do among they , because we can not 16 find their town , and also not know how to go into Rio grande , for want of a pilot , which be the Rio grande . very occasion of our come thither : and find so many shoal , fear with our great ship to go in , and therefore depart on our pretend way to the idol . the idol . the 10 of December , we have a north - east wind , with rain and storm , which weather continue two day together , be the occasion that the Salomon , and tiger lose our company : for whereas the Jesus , and pinnace anchor at one of the island call Sambula , island the twelve day , the Salomon and tiger come not thither till the 14 . in this island we stay certain the cambase . day , go every day on shore to take the inhabitant , with burn and spoil their town , who before be sapy , and be conquer by the sambose , sapy . inhabitant beyond Sierra Leona . Theise Samboses have inhabit there three year before our come thither , and in so short space have so plant the ground , that they have great plenty of Mil , rise , root , pompion , Pullin , goat , of small fry dry , every house full of the country fruit plant by God providence , as Palmito tree , fruit like date , and sundry other in no place in all that country so abundant , whereby they live more delicious than other . Theise inhabitant have diverse of the sapy , which they take in the war as their slave , who only they keep to till the ground , in that they neither have the knowledge thereof , nor yet will work themselves , of who we take many in that place , but of the sambose none at all , for they flee into the main . all the sambose have white tooth as we have , far unlike to the sapy which do inhabit about Rio grande , for their tooth be all file , which they do for a bravery , to set out themselves , and do jag their flesh , both leg , arm , and body , as workemanlike , as a jerkinmaker with we pink a jerkin . Theise sapy be more civil than the sambose : for ten 17 b then Naples bury their dead with glide . the canoas of Africa . the firm of their town . the english voyage whereas the sambose live most by the spoil of their enemy , both in take their victual , and eat they also . the sapy do not eat man flesh , unless in the war they be drive by necessity thereunto , which they have not use but by the example of the sambose , but live only with fruit , and cattle , whereof they have great store . this plenty be the occasion that the sapy desire not war , except they be thereunto provoke by the invasion of the sambose , whereas the sambose for want of food be enforce thereunto , and therefore be not wont only to take they that they kill , but also keep those that they take , until such time as they want meat , and then they kill they . there be also another occasion that provoke the sambose to war against the sapy which be for covetousness of their riches . for whereas the sapy have a order to bury their dead in certain place appoint for that purpose , with their gold about they , the sambose dig up the ground , to have the same treasure : for the sambose have not the like store of gold , that the sapy have . in this island of Sambula we find about 50 boat call almadye , or canoas , which be make of one piece of wood , dig out like a trough but of a good proportion , be about 8 yard long , and one in breadth , have a beakhead and a stern very proportionable make , and on the out side artificial carve , and paint red and blow : they be able to carry twenty or thirty man , but they be about the coast able to carry threescore and upward . in these canoas they row stand upright , with a oar somewhat long than a man , the end whereof be make about the breadth and length of a man hand , of the large sort . they row very swift , and in some of they four rower and one to steer make as much way , as a pair of oar in the Thames of London . their town be pretty divide with a main street at the enter in , that go through their town , and another overthwart street , which make their town across way : their house be build in a rank very orderly in the face of the street , and they be make round , like a dove - cote , with stake set full of Palmito leave , in stead of a wall : they be not much more than a fathom large , and two of heighth , and thatch with Palmito leave very close , other some with reed , and over the roof thereof , for the better garnish of the same , there be a round bundle of reed , pretty contrive like a lover : in the inner part they make a loft of stick , whereupon they lie all their provision of victual : a place they reserve at their entrance for the kitchen , and the place they lie in be divide with certain mat artificial make with the rind of Palmito tree : their bedstead be of small staff lay along , and raise a foot from the ground , upon which be lay a mat , and another upon they when they listen : for other cover they have none . in the middle of the town there be a house large and high than the other , but in form alike , adjoin unto the which there be a place make of four good stancion of wood , and a round roof over it , the ground also raise round with clay a foot high , upon the which floor be straw many fine mat : this be the consultation - house , the like whereof be in all town , as the Portugal affirm : in which place , when they sit in counsel the king or captain sit in the midst , and the elder upon the floor by he : ( for they give reverence to their elder ) and the common sort sit round about they . there the consultation house or towne - howse . [ HL 5O5 - ] they sit to examine matter of theft , which if a man be take with , to steal but a Portugal cloth from another , he be sell to the Portugal for a slave . they consult also , and take order what time they shall go to war : and as it be certain report by the Portugal , they take order in gather of the fruit in the season of the year , and also of Palmito wine , which be gather by a Palmito be a hole cut in the top