answer any thing , as great ashamed thereof . for by some of our company it be tell they , that if the queen of England [ three . 541 . ] will resolute prosecute the war against the king of Spain , he shall be force to lay aside that proud and unreasonable reach vain of his : for he shall find more then enough to do to keep that which he have already , as by the present example of their lose town they may for a beginning perceive well enough . now to the satisfy of some man , who marvel great that such a famous and goodly build city so well inhabit of gallant people , very brave in their apparel ( whereof our soldier find good store for their relief ) shall afford no great riches then be find there : herein it be to be understand that the Indian people , which be the natural of this whole island of Hispaniola ( the same be near hand as great as England ) be many year since clean consume by the tyrannic of the Spaniard , which be the cause , that for lack of people to work in the mine , the gold and silver mine of this island be whole give over , and thereby they be fain in this island to use copper money , whereof be find very great quantity . the chief trade of this place consist of sugar and ginger , which grow in the island , and of hide of ox and cow , which in this waste country of the island be breed in infinite number , the soil be very fertile : and the say beast be feed up to a very large growth , and so kill for nothing so much , as for their hide aforesaid . we find here great store of strong wine , sweet oil , vinegar , olive , and other such like provision , as excellent wheat - meal pack up in winepipe and other cask , and other commodity likewise , as woollen and linen cloth , and some silk : all which provision be bring out of Spain , and serve we for ” 5 great relief . there be but a little plate or vessel of silver , in comparison of the great pride in other thing of this town , because in these hot country they use much of those earthen dish fine paint or varnish , which they call Porcellana , which be have out of the east India : and for their drink , they use glass altogether , whereof they make excellent good and fair in the same place . but yet some plate we find , and many other good thing , as their household garniture very gallant and rich , which have cost they dear , although unto we they be of small importance . from saint Domingo we put over to the main or firm land , and go all alongst the coast , we come at Cartagena , the last in sight of Cartagena , stand upon the sea side , so near , as some of our bark in pass alongst , approach within the reach of their culverin shoot , which they have plant upon certain platform . the harbour mouth lay some three mile towards the westward of the town , whereinto we enter about three or four of the clock in the afternoon without any resistance of ordinance , or other impeachment plant upon the same . in the evening we put our self on land towards the harbour mouth , under the lead of master Carliell our lieutenant general , who after he have digest we to march forward about midnight , as easy as foot may fall , express command we to keep close by the sea - wash of the shore for our best and sure way , whereby we be like to go through , and not to miss any more of the way , which once we have lose within a hour after our first beginning to march , through the slender knowledge of he that take upon he to be our guide , whereby the night spend on , which otherwise must have be do by rest . but as we come within some two mile of the town , their horseman which be some hundred , meet we , and take the alarm , retire to their townward again upon the first volley of our shot that be give they : for the place where we encounter be 116 woody and bushy even to the water side be unmeet for their service . at this instant we may hear some piece of artillery discharge , with diverse small shot towards the harbour , which give we to understand , accord to the order set down in the evening before by our general , that the viceadmiral accompany with captain Venner , captain white , and captain cross , with other sea captain , and with diverse pinnace and boat shall give some attempt unto the little fort stand on the entry of the inner haven , near adjoin to the town , though to small purpose , for that then be strong , and the entry very narrow be chain over : so as there can be nothing get by the attempt , more than the give of they a alarm on that other side of the haven be a mile and a half from the place we now be at . in which attempt the viceadmiral have the rudder of his skiff strike through with a saker shoot , and a little or no harm receive elsewhere . the troop be now in their march , half a mile behither the town or less , the ground we be on grow to be strait , and not above fifty pace over , have the main sea on the one side of it , and the harbour - water or inner sea ( as you may term it ) on the other side , which in the plot be plain show . This straight be fortify clean over with a stone wall and a ditch without it : the say wall be as orderly build with flank in every part , as can be set down . there be only so much of this strait unwalled , as may serve for the issue of the horseman , or the pass of carriage in time of need : but this unwalled part be not without a very good barricado of wine - but or pipe , fill with earth , full and thick as they may stand on end one by another , some part of they stand even within the main sea . this place of strength be furnish with six great piece , demi - culverin , and saker , which shoot 117 [ he . 542 - ] direct in front upon we as we approach . now without this wall upon the inner side of the strait , they have bring likewise two great galley with their prowess to the shore , have plant in they eleven piece of ordinance , which do beat all cross the strait , and flank our come on . in these two galley be plant three or four hundred small shot , and on the land in the guard only of this place , three hundred shot and pike . they in this their full readiness to receive we , spare not their shot both great and small . but our lieutenant general , take the advantage of the dark ( the day light as yet not break out ) approach by the low ground , accord to the express direction which himself have former give , the same be the sea - wash shore , where the water be somewhat fall , so as most of all their shot be in vain . our lieutenant general command our shot to forbear shoot until we be come to the wall side , and so with pike roundly together we approach the place , where we soon find out the barricade of pipe or butt , to be the meet place for our assault , which , notwithstanding it be well furnish with pike and shot , be without stay attempt by we : down go the butt of earth , and pell mell come our sword and pike together , after our shot have first give their volley , even at the enemy nose . our pike be somewhat long than they , and our body better arm ; for very few of they be arm : with which advantage our sword and pike grow too hard for they , and they drive to give place . in this furious entry , the lieutenant general slay with his own hand the chief ensign bearer of the Spaniard , who fight very manful to his life end . we follow into the town with they , and give they no leisure to breathe , we win the marketplace , albeit they make head , and fight a while before we get it , and so we be once seize and assure of 118 1586 . that , they be content to suffer we to lodge within their town , and themselves to go to their wife , who they have carry into other place of the country before our come thither . at every street end they have raise very fine Barricados of earth - work , with trench without they , as well make as ever we see any work do : at the enter whereof be some little resistance , but soon overcome it be , with few slay or hurt . they have join with they many Indian , who they have place in corner of advantage , all bowman , with their arrow most villanous empoison , so as if they do but break the skin , the party so touch die without great marvel : some they slay of our people with their arrow : some they likewise mischieve to death with certain prick of small stick sharp point , of a foot and a half long , the one end put into the ground , the other empoison , stick fast up , right against our come in the way , as we shall approach from our land towards the town , whereof they have plant a wonderful number in the ordinary way : but our keep the sea - wash shore miss the great part of they very happy . i overpass many particular matter , as the hurt of captain Samson at sword blow in the first enter , unto who be commit the charge of the pike of the vanguard by his lot and turn ; as also of the take of Alonso Bravo the chief commander of Ahnto Bravo that place by captain Goring , after the say captain have first hurt he with his sword : unto which captain be commit the charge of the shot of the say vanguard . captain winter be likewise by his turn of the vanguard in this attempt , where also the lieutenant general march himself : the say captain winter through a great desire to serve by land , have now exchange his charge by sea with captain Cecil for his band of footman . 119 captain Powel the sergeant mayor have by his turn the charge of the four company which make the battle . captain Morgan , who at saint Domingo be of the vanguard , have now by turn his charge upon the company of the rearward . Every man as well of one part as of another , come so willing on to the service , as the enemy be not able to endure the fury of such hot assault . we stay here six week , and the sickness with mortality before speak of still continue among we , though not with the same fury as at the first : and such as be touch with the say sickness , escape death , very few or almost none can recover their strength : yea , many of they be much decay in their memory , insomuch that it be grow a ordinary judgement , when one be hear to speak foolish , to say he have be sick of the calenture , which be the [ three . 543 . ] Spanish name of their burn ague : for as i tell you before , it be a very burn and pestilent ague . the originali cause thereof , be impute to the evening or first night air , which they term la serena , wherein they say and hold very firm opinion , that who so be then abroad in the open air , shall certain be infect to the death , not be of the Indian or natural race of those country people : by hold their watch , our man be thus subject to the infectious air , which at saint Iago be most dangerous and deadly of all other place . with the inconvenience of continual mortality , we be force to give over our intend enterprise to go with number de dios , and so overland to Panama , where we shall have strike the stroke for the treasure , and full recompense of our tedious travail . and thus at Cartagena we take our first resolution to return homeward : the form of which resolution i think good here to put down under the principali captain hand , as follow .