a resolution of the land - captain , what course they think most expedient to be take . give at Cartagena the xxvij . of February 1585 . Hereas it have please the general to demand the opinion of his captain what course they think most expedient to be now undertake , the land - captain be assemble by themselves together , and have advise hereupon , do in three point deliver the same . the first , touch the keep of the town against the force of the enemy , either that which be present , or that which may come out of Spain , be answer thus . we hold opinion , that with this troop of man which we have present with we in land - service , be victual and munition , we may well keep the town , albeit that of man able to answer present service , we have not above 700 . the residue be some 150 . man by reason of their hurt and sickness be altogether unable to stand we in any stead : wherefore hereupon the sea - captaine be likewise to give their resolution , how they will undertake the safety and service of the ship upon the arrival of any spanish fleet . the second point we make to be this , whether it be meet to go present homeward , or else to continue further trial of our fortune in undertake such like enterprise as we have do already , and thereby to seek after that bountiful mass of treasure for recompense of our travail , which be general expect at our come forth of England : wherein we answer . that it be well know how both we and the soldier be enter into this action as voluntary man , without any impress or gage from her majesty or any body else : 121 and forasmuch as we have hitherto discharge the part of honest man , so that now by the great blessing and favour of our good god there have be take three such notable town , wherein by the estimation of all man will have be find some very great treasure , know that S . Iago be the chief city of all the island and traffic thereabouts , saint Domingo the chief city of Hispaniola , and the head government not only of that hand , but also of Cuba , and of all the hand about it , as also of such inhabitation of the firm land , as be next unto it , and a place that be both magnificent build , and entertain great trade of merchandise ; and now last the city of Cartagena , which can be deny to be one of the chief place of most especial importance to the Spaniard of all the city which be on this side of the west India : we do therefore consider , that since all these city , with their good and prisoner take in they , and the ransom of the say city be all put together , be find far short to satisfy that expectation which by the generality of the enterpriser be first conceive : and be further advise of the slenderness of our strength , whereunto we be now reduce , as well in respect of the small number of able body , as also not a little in regard of the slack disposition of the great part of those which remain , very many of the better mind and man be either consume by death , or weaken by sickness and . hurt : and last , since that as yet there be not lay down to our knowledge any such enterprise as may seem convenient to be undertake with such few as we be present able to make , and withal of such certain likelihood , as with God good success which it may please he to bestow upon we , the same may promise to yield we any sufficient contentment : we do therefore conclude hereupon , that it be better to hold sure as we may the honour already get , and with the same to return towards our gracious [ three . 544 . ] sovereign and country , from whence if it shall please her majesty to set we forth again with her orderly mean and entertainment , we be most ready and willing 122 to go through with any thing that the uttermost of our strength and endeavour shall be able to reach unto ; but therewithal we do advise and protest that it be far from our thought , either to refuse , or so much as to seem to be weary of any thing , which for the present shall | be further require or direct to be do by we from our general . the three and last point be concern the ransom of this city of Cartagena , for the which , before it be touch with any fire , there be make a offer of some xxvij . or xxviij . thousand pound sterling . thus much we utter herein as our opinion agree ( so it be do in good sort ) to accept this offer aforesaid , rather than to break off by stand still upon our demand of one hundred thousand pound , which seem a matter impossible to be perform for the present by they , and to say truth , we may now with much honour and reputation better be satisfy with that sum offer by they at the first ( if they will now be content to give it ) then we may at that time with a great deal more , inasmuch as we have take our full pleasure both in the uttermost sack and spoil of all their household good and merchandise , as also in that we have consume and ruin a great part of their town with fire . and thus much further be consider herein by we , that as there be in the voyage a great many poor man , who have willing adventure their life and travail , and diverse among they have spend their apparel and such other little provision as their small mean may have give they leave to prepare , which be do upon such good and allowable intention as this action have always carry with it , meaning , against the Spaniard our great and most dangerous enemy : so sure we can but have a inward regard so far as may lie in we , to help either in all good sort towards the satisfaction of this their expectation , and by procure they some little benefit to encourage they and to nourish 123 this ready and willing disposition of they both in they and in other by their example against any other time of like occasion . but because it may be suppose that herein we forget not the private benefit of our self , and be thereby the rather move to incline our self to this composition , we do therefore think good for the clear of our self of all such suspicion , to declare hereby , that what part or portion soever it be of this ransom or composition for Cartagena , which shall come unto we , we do free give and bestow the same whole upon the poor man , who have remain with we in the voyage , mean as well the sailor as the soldier , wish with all our heart it be such or so much as may seem a sufficient reward for their painful endeavour . and for the firm confirmation thereof , we have think meet to subsign these present with our own hand in the place and time aforesaid . captain Christopher Carliell lieutenant general . captain Goring . captain Samson . captain Powell etc but while we be yet there , it happen one day , that our watch call the sentinel , upon the Churchsteeple , have discover in the sea a couple of small bark or boat , make in with the harbour of Cartagena , whereupon captain moon and captain Varney , with John grant the master of the tiger , and some other seaman , embark themselves in a couple of small pinnace , to take they before they shall come nigh the shore , at the mouth of the harbour , lest by some straggle spaniard from the land , they may be warn by sign from come in : which fall out accord , notwithstanding all the diligence that our man can use : for the spanish boat , upon the sight of our pinnace come towards they , run themselves ashore , and so their man present hide themselves in bush hard by the sea side , among some other that have call they by sign thither . our man present without any due 124 regard have to the quality of the place , and see no man of the Spaniard to show themselves , aboord the spanish bark or boat , and so stand all open in they , be sudden shoot at by a troop of spaniard out of the bush : by which volley of shot there be slay captain Varney , which die present , and captain moon , who die some few day after , beside some four or five other that be hurt : and so our folk return without their purpose , not have any sufficient number of soldier with they to fight on shore . for those man they carry be all mariner to row , few of they arm , because they make account with their ordinance to have take the bark well enough at sea , which they may full easy have do , without any loss at all , if they have come in time to the harbour mouth , before the Spaniard boat have get so near the shore . during our abode in this place , as also at saint Domingo , there pass diverse courtesy between we and the Spaniard , as feast , and use they with all kindness and favour : so as among other there come to see the general , the governor of Cartagena , with the bishop of the same , and diverse other gentleman of the better sort . this town of Cartagena we touch in the out part , and consume much with fire , as we have do saint Domingo upon discontentment , and for want of agree with we in their first treaty touch their ransom , which at the last be conclude between we , shall be 100 and xoooo . ducat for that which be yet stand , the ducat value at five shilling six penny sterling . this town though not half so big as saint Domingo , give as you see , a far great ransom , be in very deed of far more importance , by reason of the excellende of the harbour , and the situation thereof , to serve the trade of number de dios and other place , and be inhabit with far more rich merchant . the other be chief inhabit with lawyer and brave gentleman , 125 [ hl 545 - ] be the chief or high appeal of their suit in law of all the island about it , and of the main land coast next unto it . and it be of no such account as Cartagena , for these and some other like reason , which i can give you , over long to be now write . the warning which this town receive of our come towards they from saint Domingo , by the space of twenty day before our arrival here , be cause that they have both fortify and every way prepare for their best defence . as also that they have carry and convey away all their treasure and principali substance . the ransom of a hundred and ten thousand ducat thus conclude on , as be aforesaid , the same be write , and express for nothing more than the town of Cartagena , upon the payment of the say ransom , we leave the say town , and draw some part of our soldier into the priory or abbey , stand a quarter of a english mile below the town upon the harbour waterside , the same be wall with a wall of stone , which we tell the Spaniard be yet we , and not redeem by their composition : whereupon they find the defect of their contract , be content to enter into another ransom for all place , but special for the say house , as also the blockhouse or castle , which be upon the mouth of the inner harbour . and when we ask as much for the one as for the other , they yield to give a thousand crown for the abbey , leave we to take our pleasure upon the blockhouse , which they say they be not able to ransom , have stretch themselves to the uttermost of their power : and therefore the say blockhouse be by we undermine , and so with blow up in piece . while this latter contract be in make , our whole fleet of ship fall down towards the harbour mouth , where they anchor the three time , and employ their man in fetch of fresh water aboard the ship for our voyage homeward , which water be have in a great well , 126 gun powder 1586 . that be in the island by the harbour mouth : which island the island of be a very pleasant place as have be see , have in cam - it many sort of goodly and very pleasant fruit , as the orange tree and other , be set orderly in walk of great length together . insomuch as the whole island be some two or three mile about , be cast into ground of gardening and orchard . after six week abode in this place , we put to sea the last of march , where after two or three day a great ship which we have take at saint Domingo , and thereupon be call the new year gift , fall into a great leak , be lade with ordinance , hide , and other spoil , and in the night she lose the company of our fleet ; which be miss the next morning by the general , he cast about with the whole fleet , fear some great mischance to be happen unto she , as in very deed it so fall out : for her leak be so great , that her man be all tire with pump . but at the last have find she and the bark Talbot in her company , which stay by great hap with she , they be ready to take their man out of she , for the save of they . and so the general be full advertise of their great extremity , make sail direct back again to Cartagena with the whole fleet , where have stay eight or ten day more , about the unlade of this ship , and the bestow thereof and her man into other ship , we depart once again to sea , direct our course towards the cape S . Antony , be the westermost part of Cuba , where we arrive the seven and twenty of April . but because fresh water can not present be find , we weigh anchor , and depart , think in few day to recover the matan ^ as , a place to the eastward of Havana . after we have sail some fourteen day , we be bring to cape S . Anthony again , through lack of favourable wind : but than our scarcity be grow such , as need make we look a little better for water , which we find in sufficient quantity , be indeed , as i judge , none other then rain water new