a summary and true discourse of sir Francis drake West Indian voyage , begin in the year 1585 . wherein be take the city of saint Iago , Santo Domingo , Cartagena , and the town of saint Augustine in Florida ; publish by m . Thomas cate . his worthy knight for the service of his prince and country have prepare his whole fleet , and get they down to Plymouth in Devonshire , to the number of five and twenty sail of ship and pinnaces , and have assemble of soldier and mariner , to the number of 2300 . in the whole , embark they and himself at Plymouth aforesaid , the 12 . day of September 1585 . be accompany with these man of name and charge , which hereafter follow : master Christopher carleil lieutenant general , a man ten 97 g of long experience in the war as well by sea as land , who have former carry high office in both kind in many fight , which he discharge always very happy , and with great good reputation . Anthony Powel sergeant major . captain Matthew Morgan , and captain John Samson , corporal of the field . Theise officer have commandment over the rest of the land - captaine , who name hereafter follow . captain Anthony Plat . it captain Edward winter . captain John Goring . captain Robert Pew . captain George Barton . " captain John merchant . captain William Cecill . « captain Walter big . captain John Hannam . captain Richard Stanton . captain Martine Frobisher vice - admiral , a man of great experience in seafaring action , who have carry the chief charge of many ship himself , in sundry voyage before , be now ship in the primrose . captain Francis Knolles , reereadmirall in the Galeon Leicester . master Thomas Vennor captain in the Elizabeth bonad - venture under the general . master Edward winter captain in the aid . master Christopher carleil the lieutenant general , captain of they tygar . Henry white captain of the sea dragon . Thomas Drake captain of the Thomas . Thomas silly captain of the minion . Baily captain of the bark Talbot . Robert across captain of the bark bond George Fortescue captain of the bark Bonner . Edward careless captain of the hope . James Erizo captain of the white lion . Thomas moon captain of the Francis . John Rivers captain of the vantage . John Vaughan captain of the drake . John Varney captain of the George . John Martin captain of the Benjamin . Edward Gilman captain of the scout . Richard Hawkins captain of the galiot call the duck . Bitfield captain of the swallow . after our go hence , which be the fourteen of September , in the year of our lord 1585 . and take our course towards Spain , we have the wind for a few day somewhat scant , and sometime calm . And be arrive near that part of Spain , which be call the moor , we happen to espy diverse sail , which keep their course close by the shore , the weather be fair and calm . the general cause the vice - admiral to go with the pinnace well man to see what they be , who upon sight of the say pinnace approach near unto they , abandon for the most part all their ship ( be Frenchmen ) lade all with salt , and bind homeward into France , among which ship ( be all of small burden ) there be one so well like , which also have no man in she , as be bring unto you general , he think good to make stay of she for the service , mean to pay for she , as also accord he perform at our return : which bark be call the drake . the rest of these ship ( be eight or nine ) be dismiss without any thing at all take from they . who be afterward put somewhat far offend from the shore , by the contrariety of the wind , we happen to meet with some other french ship , full lade with Newland fish , be upon their return homeward from the say Newfoundland : who the general after some speech have with they ( and see plain that they be Frenchman ) dismiss , without once suffer any man to go aboard of they . the day follow stand in with the shore again , we descry another tall ship of twelve score ton or thereabouts , upon who master Carliel the lieutenant 99 [ hl 535 - j general being in the tygar , undertake the chase , who also anon after the admiral follow , and the tygar have cause the say strange ship to strike her sail , keep she there without suffer any body to go aboard until the admiral be come up : who forthwith send for the master , and diverse other of their principali man , and cause they to be several examine , find the ship and good to be belong to the inhabitant of saint Sebastian in Spain , but the mariner to be for the most part belong to saint John de Luz , and the passage . in this ship be great store of dry Newland fish , common call with we poor John , whereof afterward ( be thus find a lawful prize ) there be distribution make into all the ship of the fleet , the same be so new and good , as it do very great bestead we in the whole course of our voyage . a day or two after the the isle of take of this ship , we put in within the isle of Bayon , Bayona . for jack of favourable wind : where we have not soon anchor some part of the fleet , but the general command all the pinnace with the shipboat to be man , and every man to be furnish with such arm as be needful for that present service ; which be do , the general put himself into his galley , which be also well furnish , and row towards the city of Bayon , with intent , and the favour of the almighty to surprise it , before we have advance one half league of our way , there come a messenger be a english merchant from the governor , to see what strange fleet we be , who come to our general , confer a while with he , and after a small time spend , our general call for captain Samson , and will he to go to the governor of the city , to resolve he of two point . the first , to know if there be any war between Spain and England . the second , why our merchant with their good be embarge or arrest . thus depart captain Samson with the say messenger to the city , where he find the governor and people much amaze of such a sudden accident . 100 the general with the advice and counsel of m . carleil he lieutenant general , who be in the galley with he , think not good to make any stand , till such time as they be within the shot of the city , where they may be ready upon the return of captain Samson , to make a sudden attempt if cause do require before it be dark . captain Samson return with his message in this sort . first , touch peace or war the governor say he know of no war , and that it lie not in he to make any , he be so mean a subject as he be . and as for the stay of the merchant with their good , it be the king pleasure , but not with intent to endamage any man . and that the king counter - commandment be ( which have be receive in that place some sevennight before ) that english merchant with their good shall be discharge : for the more verify whereof , he send such merchant as be in the town of our nation , who traffic those part : which be at large declare to our general by they , counsel be take what might best be do . and for that the night approach , it be think needful to land our force , which be do in the shut up of the day , and have quarter our self to our most advantage , with sufficient guard upon every strait , we think to rest our self for that night there . the governor send we some refresh , as bread , wine , oil , apple , grape , marmalad and such like . about midnight the weather begin to overcast , insomuch that it be think meet to repair aboard , then to make any long abode on land , and before we can recover the fleet , a great tempest arise , which cause many of our ship to drive from their anchorhold , and some be force to sea in great peril , as the bark Talbot , the bark Hawkins , and the Speedwell , which Speedewel be [ three . 536 . ] only drive into England , the other recover we again : the extremity of the storm last three day , which no soon begin to assuage , but m . carleil our lieutenant general be send with his own ship and three other : as also with the galley and with diverse IOI pinnace , to see what he may do above Vigo , where he take many boat and some caravel , diverse lade with thing of small value , but chief with household stufie , run into the high country , and among the rest , he find one boat lade with the principal church - stuff of the high church of Vigo , where also be their great cross of silver , of very fair emboss work , and double gilt all over , have cost they a great mass of money . they complain to have lose in all kind of good above thirty thousand ducat in this place . the next day the general with his whole fleet go from up the isle of Bayon , to a very good harbour above Vigo , where m . carleil stay his come , aswell for the more quiet ride of his ship , as also for the good commodity of fresh water , which the place there do afourd full well . in the mean time the governor of Galicia have rear such force as he may , his number by estimate be some two thousand foot , and three hundred horse , and march from Bayon to this part of the country , which lie in sight of our fleet , where make a stand , he send to parley with our general , which be grant by our general , so it may be in boat upon the water : and for safety of their person , there be pledge deliver on both side : which do , the governor of Galicia put himself with two other into our viceadmirals skiff , the same have be send to the shore for he , and in like sort our general go in his own skiffe ; where it be by they agree , we shall furnish our self with fresh water , to be take by our own people quiet on the land , and have all other such necessary , pay for the same , as the place will affburd . when all our business be end , we depart , and take our way by the island of Canaria , which be esteem some three hundred league from this part of Spain , and fall purposely with Palma , with intention to have take our pleasure of that place , for the full digest of many thing into order , and the better 102 furnish our store with such several good thing as it afford very abundant , we be force by the vile sea - gate , which at that present fall out , and by the naughtiness of the land place , be but one , and that under the favour of many platform well furnish with great ordinance , to depart with the receit of many of their canon - shot , some into our ship , and some beside , some of they be in very deed full canon high . but the only or chief mischief be the dangerous sea - surge , which at shore all alongst plain threaten the overthrow of as many pinnace and boat , as for that time shall have attempt any land at all . now see the expectation of this attempt frustrate by the cause aforesaid , we think it meet to fall with the isle Hierro , to see if we can find any better fortune : and come to the island , we land a thousand man in a valley under a high mountain , where we stay some two or three hour , in which time the inhabitant , accompany with a young fellow bear in England , who dwell there with they , come unto we , show their state to be so poor , that they be all ready to starve , which be not untrue : and therefore without any thing get , we be all command present to embark , so