certain spanish letter intercept by ship of the worshipful master John Wattes write from diverse place of the island and of the main land as well of Nueva Espanna , as of Tierra Firma and Peru , contain many secret touch the aforesaid country , and the state of the south sea , and the trade to the philippinas . a letter send from Havana in Cuba from the general of the fleet John de orimo to the king of Spain the 18 of October 1590 , touch the build of certain excellent frigate , etc t may please your majesty that at the date hereof one of the frigate be launch : and three more will be ready against the fleet depart from hence . they be very big and excellent of sail , which will carry 150 man a piece with soldier and mariner . and have good ordinance , there be few or none of our enemy that can ofiend we . for we shall both leave and take at all [ three . 558 . ] time when we listen . but it behoove your majesty to send both soldier and mariner to man the frigate . for we have great want of soldier and mariner , with tackle , anchor , powder , shot , caliver , and all kind of furniture for they . for these thing be not here to be have for money : and likewise to send some great ordinance for the zabra . for the merchant ship be so weak and so unprovide , that they have almost none to defend themselves . also we shall be constrain to give the carena again unto all the ship ; for they be very weak by reason of the long voyage : and the mariner and soldier be weary with their long travel and keep of they here . thus if it will please your majesty to 158 command with all expedition that these soldier and mariner with all kind of other furniture may be send we , than the fleet may set forward and so proceed on their voyage . God preserve your catholic royal majesty . from Havana the 20 of October 1590 . your majesty servant , who royal foot i kiss . John de orimo general of your fleet . a letter send from the governor of Havana John de Trexeda , to the king of Spain , the twenty of October 1590 , touch the want of that place . y three ship which depart from this harbour since the fleet arrival here , i have give your majesty at large to understand , what have happen as much as i can , and what thing be here to be do in this city , and what your majesty must provide . and now once again i will return to put your majesty in mind thereof . i beseech your majesty to command to be provide and to . be send hither two hundred negro , if you will have this ™ fortification to go forwards : because your majesty be here at great charge with the master workman and the officer . and for want of pioner the work go not forwards . for as the work go daily forward and increase far and far , so we want man to work , and to guard it , and likewise to keep it . we dare not meddle with those of the galy . and likewise it may please your majesty to send new work tool of iron , accord to a remembrance which i have send to your majesty of late , which do signify our want more at large . likewise it be needful that your majesty shall send powder and match to furnish these fort . and likewise soldier send to send money to pay those soldier which be new * havana - come hither , and for that company of soldier which be 159 five frigate make at Havana , John de orimo general of the fleet . the excellency of the great Frygates build in Cuba . copper mine new find in Cuba . the english voyage send from Mexico to this place . for it behoove your majesty not to have they as yet leave , till such time as the defence about the fort be finish , and that which be in build upon the hill , which will be end very short if you send the negro and iron tool . likewise i have certify your majesty , that with all speed i be make ready of the five frigate , that they may carry all the treasure . also John de orimo see that it be of so great importance to have they dispatch , do furnish i with some money , although somewhat scant , until such time as your majesty do send he some order therefore . i beseech you to command it to be do ; consider the great charge and expense that we be at here , as by the account your majesty shall more at large perceive , what have be spend . Theise frigate will be make a end of without all doubt by the month of February : but as yet their tackle and sail be not here arrive : but i do stay the come thereof every day , accord as the duke of Medina and John de Ibarra have write unto i , that those ship which shall bring the same be ready to depart from thence . all these thing it behoove your majesty to send in time : for i can assure your majesty that you shall not have upon the sea such good ship as these be . for as touch the other ship of the fleet , which be in this harbour , it be not convenient to venture the silver in they . this counsel your majesty shall not take of i , for i be a soldier , and have but small skill in navigation . but every day it be tell i open and in secret by many of the pilot , captain , master and mariner . as touch the copper , 1 have put it in practice twice more , and have make proof thereof : wherein there have be more spend , then encage be willing there shall have be , because i have get no fruit thereof : i know not the cause , but that it be not do effectual by those that have the work thereof . therefore i beseech your majesty to send i that same founder which i write to 160 reissue . a pdf can be download from the web address give on page iv , “ woa ®^^^^ on 30 at ™ 2021 * “ °' 24 ' " ‘ ° h ‘‘ ps : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO97 ' 11072 ' 6337 . 014 your majesty heretofore of . our lord keep your majesty many year . from Havana the 20 of October , 1590 . your majesty servant , who royal foot i kiss , John de Trexeda governor of Havana . a letter send to don Petro de Xibar one of his [ ill . 559 . ] majesty privy counsel of the west Indies , from don Diego Mendez de Valdes governor of S . Juan de Puerto Rico the 20 of November 1590 , touch the state of that city and island . receive your honour letter the 20 of February , whereby i receive great content , to hear that your honour be in good health . as touch the imprisonment of our cousin don Pedro de Valdes , it do grieve i to the very soul . i beseech God to send he his liberty : and likewise the imprisonment of Diego flores de Valdes grieve i very much : i pray God to send good justice . the m . of the field Juan de Texela , and the m . workman Juan Baptista Antonio arrive here in safety , and have view this city with all the circuit round about and the situation as i have inform his majesty thereof . they have mark a place to build a strong fort , whereat the country remain very well content . and it stand in a good situation , and in a convenient place on a high mount which do lie upon the enter in of the harbour , and so cut over to a point of land , leave in the fort as much space as will contain 3000 person , without join thereunto any part of the coast . So the m . deal campo have name the fort Citadella . he leave i great store of iron work , tool eight workman , and 200 negro , which be the king . and the island do find 400 pioner which be continual at work . his majesty have send i a ten i6t i * Pedro de Valdes , prisoner in England . John Baptista Antonio the generail inge - nour of the west Indies . a strong fort new build in saint Juan de Puerto Rico . warrant to spend the provision of the island , and to take those rent which his majesty have here , and to certify his majesty what there be want for the maintain of the workman and that they may have all thing necessary . so i have send to Nueva Espanna , for such thing as be here want . i have write to the m . of the field , which be go to Havana , inform he that it do great import that the work with all expedition shall go forward , see that it be begin for the defence of the island . and we do defend it as well as we can from the enemy , in respect of the great danger which otherwise may happen , if the enemy shall come and find it begin , and not end . and likewise that his majesty will send i that which i do request . and the most principal thing of all be , to send more negro . And send i all these thing which be needful , i trust in God i shall in short time build up the fort , to defend Thisfirt be we from the enemy . the fort must be build triangle t ^ en by the wjse . for reach infO the bay : and we shall be able berland to plant in the same 40 piece of good ordinance , canon , 1598 . demi - canon , and culverin . the m . of the field , have promise to send i some from Havana . for that he be determine to cast some there , by reason of the great copper mine store of copper , which now of late be find in Havana : ^ H ^ vana ™ f ° r ere we have as yet but small store of ordinance to ’ defend we . i look for 5 canon which his majesty shall send from Spain , with shot and powder and all kind of weapon , because that here be great want in the island . his majesty have send the whole number of 200 soldier 200 soldier , and in the company there come two SdePuertoRico captain . the corpse de guard be keep in the market 1500fight place : and twice in a month i muster all the man in man inn . Juan the hand , and find very near 1500 fight man , and depuerto Rico go horseman . the fort when it be end will be the san ' strong that his majesty have in all the Indies . and now the people of the country sleep in security . for the boldness of common before , the Englishman will come and beard the english . we t0 haven mouth . God keep your honour , and 162 send you long health . from Puerto Rico the 20 of November 1590 . the governor Diego Mendez de Valdes . a letter to John Lopez canavate , alderman in the town of canavate in Spain write from his servant Juan de Porva canavate , from Havana the seventeenth of October 1590 , touch the state of the say place . he be to give you to understand , that since my departure from saint Lucar i have write unto you twice of my arrival here , and what success i have have . and now you shall understand that i be determine to go for Nueva Espanna . for i stay but opportunity of time . for here be great watch daily keep and great look to the soldier in keep of they together , for run away . but nevertheless i hope in God , to find some friend to convey i away from hence . this country be so close and narrow , that if a man steal not away hide in some ship , it be not possible for he to escape , nor to go a league out of the town , no way but by sea . and because the harbour be so close , it be the best harbour and the sure in the world . the harbour be make in this order . the entry in toward the land be by a narrow strait chanel , which continue as long as a caliver shoot , and from that place the river open broad and broad : there be in the enter in , two point which make with the land , whereupon be new build two strong fort , which be fortify with very great store of ordinance : beside another strong and famous fort which be in the city , so that it be impossible to take it . there be in these three fort , a thousand soldier in garrison . and likewise here be two galy to keep the coast . yet for all this , the audacious Englishman be without all shame be 163 the soldier run away from Havana . [ Iii . 560 . ] the boldness of the english . 18 ship build in Cuba against England . Acapulco the harbour where the ship lie that go for China . the english voyage not afraid to come and dare we at our own door . our journey to go for England be most certain in the year 1592 . here be make with great expedition 18 ship , which be call frigate for that effect . they be very strong ship , and will draw but very little water , whereby they may enter among the should on the bank of Flanders : they be build the high because here be great store of timber and excellent good and incorruptible . it be report that the fleet will depart from hence in February , by reason that at that time the Englishman be not depart out of their own country . and thus i rest , from this island of S . Christopher in Havana this present day on saint Luke even ; the 17 of October 1590 . your worship servant , John de Porva canavate . a letter from Mexico , of Sebastian Biscaino to his father Antonio Biscaino in Corchio in Spain , touch the great profit of the trade to China , and somewhat of m . Thomas Candish . write the 20 of June 1590 . ave write to your worship by a friend of i at large , now i will be somewhat short . and