a voyage of the honourable gentleman m . Robert Duddeley , now knight , to the isle of Trinidad , and the coast of Paria : with his return home by the isle of Granata , Santa Cruz , Sant Juan de puerto rico , Mona , Zacheo , the shoald call Abreojos , and the isle of Bermuda . in which voyage he and his company take and sink nine spanish ship , whereof one be a armada of 600 ton . write at the request of m . Richard Hakluyt . ave ever since i can conceive of any thing be delight with the discovery of navigation , i foster in my self that disposition till i be of more year and better ability to undertake such a matter . to this purpose i call to i the advice of sufficient seaman , and principal undertake a voyage for the south sea ; but by reason that many before have miscarry in the same enterprise , i can not be suffer to hazard more of her majesty subject upon so uncertain a ground as my desire : which make i by constraint ( great charge already by i defray ) to prepare another 203 course for the west Indies , without hope there to do any thing worth note : and so common be it indeed to many , as it be not worth the register . neyer - thelesse , i have yield to your former importunity , and send you this my journal to supply a vacant room among your more important discourse . now be provide for this last enterprise , rather to see some practice and experience , than any wonder or profit , i weigh anchor from Southampton ride the six of November 1594 . but the wind fall scant , it be the 17 . day of the same month before i can put into the sea upon this day my self in the bear a ship of 200 . ton my admiral , and captain monk in the bear whelp viceadmiral , with two small pinnace call the frisk and the earwig pass through the needle , and within two day after bare in with Plymouth . my business at this port - town dispatch , i set sail ; whither again by contrary wind to my great misfortune , i be enforce to return back . i may call it misfortune ; for by this mean i utter ( for all the voyage ) lose my viceadmiral ; which be the cause likewise of loose my own pinnace , which three be the principali stay of my voyage . for at this last leave of England in a storm i lose my own pinnace , as be before say . notwithstanding all these cross all alone i go wander on my voyage , sail along the coast of Spain within view of cape Finister , and cape S . Vincent , the north and south cape of Spain . in which space have many chace , i can meet with none but my countryman or country friend . leave these spanish shore i direct my course the 14 . of December towards the isle of the canary . here i linger 12 day for two reason : the one , in hope to meet my vice - admiral : the other , to get some vessel to remove my pester man into , who be 140 . almost in a ship of 200 . ton , there grow many sick . the first hope be frustrate , because my vice - admiral be return into 204 England with two prize . the second expectation fall out to our great comfort : for i take two very fine caravel under the calm of tenerif and Palma , which both refresh and amend my company , and make i a fleet of 3 . sail . in the one caravel this m . Ben - call the intent , i make Benjamin wood captain , -------- in the other , one captain Wentworth . thus cheer as a desolate traveller with the company of my small ftheyeere and new erect fleet , i continue my purpose for 1596 . scent the west Indies , and first for cape Blanco in Africa with two upon the desert of Libya . my last hope be to meet my lose ship , and withal to renew my victual upon u ^ on pa the canther , which be Portugal fisherman : but the fir the south canther have be so fright by Frenchmen , as i sea and fir can get none . ride under this white cape two es ^ / this day , and walk on shore to view the country , i saint find it a waste , desolate , barren , and sandy place , gentleman the sand run in drift like snow and be very stony ; for so be all the country sand upon stone ( like Arabia deserta , and Petrea ) and full of black venomous lizard , with some wild beast and people which be tawny moor , so wild , as they will but call to my caravel from the shore , who ride very near it . but not desirous to make any long abode in this place , by reason of the most infectious serena or dew that fall all along these coast of Africa , i cause my master Abraham Kendal to shape his course direct for the isle of Trinidad in the west Indies ; which after 22 . day we descry , and the first of February come to a anchor under a point thereof call Curiapan , in a bay which be very full of pelican , and i call it pelican bay . about 3 . league to the eastwards of this place we find a i of Marcazites which glister like gold ( but all be not gold that glister ) for so we find the same nothing worth , though the Indian do assure we it be Calvori , which signify gold with they . Theise Indian be a fine shape and a gentle people , all naked and paint red , their com - 205 sir Robert Dudley . a description ofCapeBlanco in Africa . the ysle of Trinidad descry . Punta de Curiapan . 1595 - mander wear crown of feather . Theise people do often resort unto my ship , and bring we hen , hog , plantan , potato , pino , tobacco , and many other pretty commodity , which they exchange with we for hatchet , knife , hook , bell , and glass button . from this Paracoa , or Parico . bay i fall down low to a place call Paracoa , where i desire rather to ride , because it be a convenient they ensconce themselves . place to water , ballast , ground , and grave my caravel . than i command all my man to lie on shore , after i have cause to be make for they a little sconce like a half moon for their defence , be jealous of the Spaniard , of who estate i can gather no certainty , till from Margarita Antony Berreo for his defence have get some 300 . soldier , a great number than i be able to encounter withal , have then but 50 . man , because my caravel before their come be send away . the Simerones of the island trade with i still in like a treasonable practice of the Spaniard . sort . and the Spaniard now provide for i , begin to send messenger to i in kindness . notwithstanding though i have no reason to assault they , because they be both poor 8c strong , yet for my experi - they march from one side of the island to the other . ence and pleasure i march 4 . long march upon the island , 8c the last from one side of the island to the other , which be some 50 . mile : go and come through a most monstrous thick wood ( for so be most part of the island ) 8c lodging my self in Indian town . the country be fertile , and full of fruit , strange beast , and fowl , whereof munkei , babion 8c parats be in great abundance . be much delight with this island , and mean to stay here some time about discover the main right against the same ( the entrance into the captalne Harpers intelligence of Guiana . [ Iii . 576 . ] empire of Guiana ) be show the discovery thereof by captain Popham , who receive the discovery of the say empire from one captain harper , which be a prisoner learned of the Spaniard at the canary in the self same manner almost , as sir Walter Ralegh very discreet have write . the intelligence of harper , i conceive , the captain have yet to show 206 in spanish . this discovery of Guiana i great desire : yet lest i shall adventure all occasion upon it only , i send my two caravel from i the 17 . day of HistwoCara - February , to try their fortune in the Indies not appoint any other place to meet but England , fur - e nish they with all the provision that i can spare , and divide my victual equal with they , know they be able to do more good in the Indies then great ship . the caravel be go , i begin to inquire private of the savage concern the main over against we , and learn that the name of the kingdom join to the sea - coast be in order these . the kingdom of Morucca , the kingdom of Seawano , the Seawano call kingdom of waliame , the kingdom of caribe , the filter in stir kingdom of yguirie , and right against the northermost s 0 part of Trinidad , the main be call the high land of covery cia - paria , the rest a very low land . Morucco i learn to want . be full of a green stone call Tacarao , which be good ^ Walter for the stone . in Seawano i hear of a mine of gold ff ^ aima to be in a town call Wackerew , the captain name andwikeri ’ in Semaracon . of waliame i will speak last , because his discovery . therein i make most discovery . the caribe i learn to be man - eater or cannibal , and great enemy to the islander of Trinidad . the kingdom of yguiri i hear to be full of a metal call by the Indian arara , which be either copper ( as i can learn ) or very base gold . in the high land of Paria i be inform by diverse of these Indian , that there be some Perota , which with they be silver , and great store of most excellent cane - tobacco . but lasdy to come to waliame , it be the first kingdom of the empire of Guiana . the great wealth which i understand to be therein , and the assurance that i have by a Indian , my interpreter , of a golden mine in a town of this kingdom call Orocoa , in the river ( as he call it ) of owrinoicke be much to be esteem . this Indian speak Spanish , and whatsoever he know , he reveal it to my self only by a private interpreter , not in word alone , but offer upon pain of life to be guide 207 this Indian name be Balthasar , who afterward give our man the slip at their great need . the river of Amana and the kingdom of TivlAvas be both mention by sir Walter Ralegh . a people sprinkle with powder of gold . the english voyage himself to any place that he speak of . this discovery of the mine i mention to my company , who altogether mutine against my go , because they something fear the villainy of Abraham Kendal , who will by no mean go . i then want my lose pinnace , and be constrain to send 14 . man in my shipboat for this discovery , with most of the discreet man in my ship , and give they their direction to follow , write under my own hand . they go from i , and enter into one of the mouth by the break land , which river go under the name of the great river Orenoque , the foreland whereof be call Capulio bear south and by west , want a four part , from the point of Curiapan aforesaid , be 4 . leag distant . they find the main ( as China be report ) full of fresh river run one into another , abound with fish , and a land all woody , seem to have great store of strange beast and fowl , and very populous . they enter into a small river call Cabota , the people name Veriotaus , a courteous people . the next river they pass be call Mana in the kingdom of Tivitivas , where the king offer to bring a Canoa full of this golden oar , and to this purpose send a Canoa , which return and bring my man this answer , that Armago captain of the town of Orocoa and the mine refuse they , but if they will come thither , he himself will make they answer . upon this my boat go , and at his appoint place he meet they with some 100 man in canoas , and tell they that by force they shall have nothing but blow , yet if they will bring he hatchet , knife , and jewes - harp , he bid they assure i , he have a mine of gold , and can refine it , and will trade with i : for token whereof , he send i 3 . or 4 . croissant or half moon of gold weigh a noble a piece or more , and two bracelet of silver . also he tell they of another rich nation , that sprinkle their body with the powder of gold , and seem to be gild , and far beyond they a great town call el 208 Dorado , with many other thing . my man be satisfy , and think their company too few to stay among these savage , and their victuali spend , return . This Balthasar my Indian their guide run from they : which distress cause they to borrow of Armago new guide , who bring they home another way through a river call Braha by the high land of Paria , and so to my ship . they account Orocoa 150 . mile distant , so they row in my boat above 250 . mile . their absence from i be 16 . day , make but one night abode any where . the report of this make i attempt my company to go with they again . but now they be worse than before ; for unless i will have go my self alone , not one man will go with i ( not albeit i have have commission to hang or kill they ) for my man come home in very pitiful case almost dead for famine ; and indeed such be their misery , as they drink not in three day , for so long they be out of the fresh river , before they recover the ship , and yet the boat be fill with as much victuali , as it can hold . in this time of my boat absence there come to i a pinnace of Plymouth , of which captain Popham captain pop - before name be chief , who give we great comfort . ham arrival . and if i have not lose my pinnace , wherein i may [ ill . 577 . ] have carry victual and some man , we have discover further the secret of those place . also this captain and i stay some six or eight day long for sir Walter Ralegh ( who , as we surmize , have some purpose for this discovery ) to the end , that by our intelligence and his boat we may have do some good : but it seem he come not in six or eight week after . so captain Popham and i hold it not convenient to stay they depart any long : therefore new water our self at Paracoa , fr ™ we set sail to see further of the Indies , leave the isle nnt a ' of Trinidad the 12 . day of march . the 13 . i take a a prize take small prize of sack 25 . league to the northward of a north of the island which i sail by , call Granata . this prize ranata . ten 209 o the isle of Santa Cruz and inferno . Cape roxo . they disemboque by the isle of Zacheo . the shold call Abreojos , that be , open thy eye , or look out . Bermuda . Flores and Cuervo . a fight of two day with a spanish armada of 600 ton . they arrive at saint Ives in Cornwall in may 1595 . the english voyage refresh we well : yet mean to sei she at the isle of Sant Juan de Puerto rico , and shape our course thither by the island of Santa Cruz and Infierno , i coast all the south side of the say isle of saint John , till i come to a anchor at cape Roxo : where ride 14 . day to expect saint Domingo man , which oftentimes fall with the island of Mona , and find none ( neither will the Spaniards of S . Juan de puerto rico buy my prize ) i unlade she , take in the good , and after burn she . This end , i disemboque ( where few Englishmen have do before , by reason of the great danger between this island of saint Juan de puerto rico and Hispaniola ) by a little island call Zacheo . and after careful double the shoulde of Abreojos , i cause the master , ( hear by a pilot , that the spanish fleet mean now to put out of Havana ) to bear for the meridian of the isle of Bermuda , hope there to find the fleet disperse . the fleet i find not , but foul weather enough to scatter many fleet ; which companion leave i not in great extremity , till i come to the isle of Flores and Cuervo : whither i make the more haste , hope to meet some great fleet of her majesty my sovereign , as 1 have intelligence , and to give they advise of this rich spanish fleet : but find none , and my victual almost spend , i direct my course for England . return alone , and worse man by half then i go forth , my fortune be to meet a great armada of this fleet of some 600 . ton well appoint , with who i fight board and board for two day , be no way able in all possibility with fifty man to board a man of war of six hundred ton . and have spend all my powder i be constrain to leave she , yet in such distress without sail and mast , and hull so often shoot through with my great ordinance between wind and water , that be three hundred league from land , i dare say , it be impossible for she to escape sink . thus leave she by necessity in this miserable estate , i make for England , where i arrive at saint Ives in Cornwall 210 about the latter end of May 1595 , escape most dangerous in a great fog the rock of silly . thus by the providence of God land safe , i be kind entertain by all my friend , and after a short time learn more certainty of the sink of that great ship , be also repute rich by diverse intelligence out of Spain : which we then suppose not , and be doubtful whether she have be of Biscay or S . John de Luz in France lade with fish only from Newfoundland . in this voyage i and my fleet take , sink and burn nine spanish ship ; which be loss to they , though i get nothing .