a relation of the port , harbour , fort and city in the west Indies which have be surveyed , edify , finish , make and mend , with those which have be build , in a certain survey by the king of Spain his direction and commandment : write by Baptista Antonio , surveyor in those part for the say king . anno 1587 . Santa Marta . make of cane , irst Santa Marta the principali city of nta Marta the bishopric or diocese of the coast s ^ mte w ա- of Tierra firma , or the firm land , lie Mfe * m a in 10 . degree and i , the city be situate upon a sandy bay adjoin unto the sea side , contain in it about 30 . household ; all the house be and cover over with Palmito tree , and some of they be cover with tile . they have traffic with none , but with the Indian of the say country , which do bring unto the city for to [ three . 549 . ] sell earthen pot and pipkin , and coverlit of Cotton wool , and great earthen jar . also they do traffic to Cartagena . it be a country which have but small store of cattle , because it be all mountainous , and have small store of people . there be a very good harbour before the say town , environ with mighty hill and great rock , which reach even unto the sea side , the which high land do great succour the harbour , as also two hand which lie about of a league on the north side : so that although they be subject to easterly wind , and that with great storm , yet they do no great harm to go on land . within this harbour there be a place which be call la Caldera , where in time past they be wont to trim and carene their ship . as touch the harbour , there be no cause to fortify it , nor to make 135 any account of it , by reason there be no trade nor tramque to this place from any other place , accord as i have certify your majesty thereof . and also because here be but few dweller or inhabitant , and loose every day so many as it do , by reason that it be every day rob a new course and spoil by the enemy . but if your majesty will an ' t ^ b the command that the fleet of Nova Hispania may direct way1 of ' santa t ^ le ^ r course to this harbour be in their way , and here Marta less to water and refresh themselves , all the pilot do say subject to that the fleet may proceed on their voyage from this danger then place , still go before the wind , and so go to the tnarS cape of saint Anthony which lie on the hand of Cuba , and from thence go their direct course to Nova Hispania ; and by this mean the fleet shall have no occasion to pass so many danger as they do , by reason of the Huricanos or stormy wind which many time do come upon they , when they be upon the coast of Hispaniola : and this be the cause that there be so many ship cast away , as your majesty do well know . and as concern this course accord as i have certify your majesty , they shall come into no danger at all , nor shall make any further way about ; so by this mean both the fleet may come from Spain in company , and then come to saint Marta , and the fleet of Nova Hispania may come into this harbour , and the fleet which do go unto the firm land , may go direct to Cartagena as they do . than your majesty may send to fortify the say harbour , and the fortification must be thus : that on the morro or mount which be in the enter in of the say harbour , there be build a little fort , and so to plant some small quantity of ordinance . and hard by on the south side , there to build a little tower , and another sconce , where we may plant some more ordinance . so by this mean not only the ship may ride here in security , but also it will be a defence for those which dwell here in the town : and the better to effect this purpose , there be hard by the town great 136 store of Lyme , stone , sand , and timber , if occasion shall serve . Cartagena . CArtagena be a city , and the principali place of the bishopric ; it lie fourty league from Santa Marta : it stand in scant u . degree . the say city Cartagena be situate upon a sandy bank or bay like unto a hand : sljuate m both it have about 450 . dweller therein . there be very fair ' building therein : as concern their house , they be make of stone , and there be three monastery , of which two of they be of friar which be within the city , the one call Santo Domingo , and the other call Santo Augustin , and the other which be call saint Francis , which stand without the city about 30 . pace off . and for to go unto the say friary , you must go upon a Causey make of stone , and water on both side . this city have great trade out of Spain , and out of the new kingdom of Granada , and out of the hand there adjoin , from Peru , and from all the coast of this firm land , and of the fish of the pearl of Rio de la Hacha , and of Margarita : it be a very sound country . this city have a very good harbour , and sufficient to receive great store of ship : this say harbour have two entrance in , the one of they lie half a league from the city , where all the ship do enter into the say harbour : the mouth or enter in of the say harbour be 1400 . yard or pace in breadth , and very deep water . the other enter in which be call la boca chica , or little mouth , lie a league beyond this place to the westwards . it be 900 . yard in breadth , and in the enter in thereof there lie a channel in the midst of it , which be 200 . yard broad , and 20 . or 15 . fathom water , some place more , some less . and to enter into the harbour you must go through this channel , and the land do double in and out . and at the enter in of the say harbour , after you have pass this channel , you must bear up to the shoareward near unto the hand of care , and look 137 how much be overplus more than the two hundred yard of the channel , all the rest be certain ledge of rock , cover with two or three foot water upon the top of they , some place more , and some less . So the ship [ three . 550 . ] which must enter in at the mouth , must bring very good pilot with they , which must be very skilful : yet all this will not serve , but they must carry their boat before , and sound with their lead to know where the best place of the channel lie for they to go in , so it will be small hindrance to any ship that shall enter , neither yet danger at all of sink . there be three place about the say city , where the Francis enemy may give a attempt by land the one of they drake . js where the enemy do enter in and land , which be a sandy bay , and on the other side of the bay be the sea , and on the other side a great lake which go towards the harbour . the sandy bay or bank , on the one side be 500 yard broad , all sandy ground without any tree . so that the enemy which give the assault in this place must be constrain to march all alongst this sandy bay , the enemy lie open these 500 yard , which reach until you do come to the trench : and on the backside other 500 yard , till you do come unto the city . the say sandy bay or bank be 130 . yard broad , where the trench be build . and in this place this city have be take by the enemy twice . wherefore here we have drive in a great many of wooden stake , which go down into the sea 50 . yard deep : and this we have do , because this be a very dangerous and filthy coast . and below in the bottom of the valley there we have build a little sconce , where we may plant 3 . or 4 . piece of ordinance . and likewise we have make a deep ditch , which do answer to both part of the sea ; so on this side the city be very strong and sufficient . for this be the place whereof the citizen be most afraid . the other enter be lower down by the say sandy 138 bay , which be call Cienaga , or the fen deal Roreado . this be another place which be on the say sandy bay , which be 300 . yard broad from the one place down to the sea . and on the other side there lie the Cienaga , which be a certain plat of ground that be overflow with water all the year long . so that the enemy which shall come this way to win the city , must come march over land a good way upon a sandy bank or bay , where the sea lie on the one side , and a grove or bosk of wood on the other side , and through a plat of ground which be overflow with water , but not all cover . so in this place we have make a fort or sconce with certain flanker belong thereunto . and i have cause a deep ditch to be dig of 60 . foot in breadth , so that the sea do come to that plat or place which be overflow . and in this order we have stop this passage , so that the city stand in manner like unto a hand . there be 2600 . yard distance from this place to the other trench where the enemy Francis Drake do land last . the enter in of this harbour be by the bridge and Causey which do go from the city to saint Francis ; the say Causey be 300 . yard in length , and 12 . yard in breadth : and the water be on both the side of the say Causey : so this be the strong place of all the rest of the three place . also in this place there be order take to make a draw bridge , and upon the top of the say bridge to build a platform , and plant ordinance upon it : and on both side of the bridge there be certain trench make , where our man may be close keep . at the point of this land call ycaco , which be in the enter in of the harbour towards saint Anna , we have make a fort of timber foursquare of 300 . foot every way , and trench , where we may plant 15 . or 16 . piece of ordinance , and keep 50 . man in garrison , and behind the bourd on the backside of the timber , a barricade of earth or mud wall be four foot in thickness , and behind the mudwall , sand : so this fort will be of 139 great importance for safeguard of this harbour , because all the ship which do enter into this harbour do come close to this place where it be strong , so that sometime one may cast a stone into the ship when they be come in : and when any ship of war or pirate will give any attempt to enter into this harbour , there be the galres tf order give that the two galley shall go forth , and put Cartagena . themselves behind the fort with their prow to the sea , and so shoot at their enemy in the forepart of the ship , and then the fort answer likewise with their ordinance at the side of the ship , and at their tackle , so the enemy be in the harbour all unrip , they must of necessity be constrain to lie hover within the harbour , or else they must drive upon the rock call the ismo , or else upon those rock which be cover with the sea at the hand of care . And put case that in this place we can do no good by this mean , and that the enemy will venture to come in with their long boat and pinnace through this narrow mouth ; then we be to have in a readiness 4 . frigate to aid and help the galley , and to row with oar , and so to go to the narrow mouth , and there to stay in the channel . and forasmuch as the enter in be so dangerous , accord as i have certify your majesty , there can no ship come into this harbour , but we must needs sink they ; so that these defence shall not only be [ three . 551 . ] annoyance to the enemy , but also animate and encourage the inhabitant of this city : for they have be and be in such fear of the enemy , and pirate , that if we have not make these fortification , strengthen the city in this order , and put some soldier in garrison , the citizen will have flee , and forsake this city : for all the persuasion make to they by the governor can not persuade they to the contrary , but they will be go , if it have not be for this fortification , and yet for all this we have much to do to make they to stay here : so now by reason of these soldier which shall come hither , the people of the city have take 140 heart of grass : so i have tell they that your majesty will command that this city and the harbour shall be better fortify and make strong , and all this which i have cause to be build , be with that money which i have borrow of the citizen . as touch the safeguard and defence of this harbour , thepoyntof if your majesty so please , here may we build a very fair and strong castle with four bulwark , on the point of the ycaco which do lie on the side where the city be build , because all the ship which do come to this harbour , must come close aboard this shore , so near , that we may cast a stone into they , and so overtake any ship .. so likewise if the ship will go on the other shore , than they do go in great danger , because of those shoald and ledge of rock , and so be often cast away . and forasmuch as those ship which here do arrive be bring hither by easterly wind , and sometime with those wind which come out from the sea , and therefore perforce must give a good birth off , otherwise they can enter into this harbour , therefore of necessity they must come so close to the shore : and on the other side where the island of care stand , there may we build another tower foursquare , and plant some four or five piece of ordinance , and this will serve for the night , if occasion be offer that any small ship or bark shall come in here , or any pinnace in the night , to do any harm , or to attempt to burn any fleet which shall ride here at a anchor within this harbour : so the fort be on the one side , and the tower on the other side , keep good watch , there can no ship nor bark come into this harbour , but they will be espy . in the narrow mouth at the enter in the other way towards the island of care , where the channel ! do run near the shore , as i have already certify your majesty , there may another castle be make , and there four or five piece of ordinance plant , and some six or eight man to keep watch and ward : this be do , 141 your majesty shall have this city very well fortify , by reason it be of such importance for the service of your majesty , and the trade of all Spain and Peru , and all the Indies : for this be the principali fort of all this country . over against this point of the