fall , and gather [ three . 54 . 6 . ] 127 a most commendable example of diligence in a general . the english voyage up by make pit in a plot of marsh ground , some three hundred pase from the sea side . i do wrong if i shall forget the good example of the general at this place , who to encourage other , and to hasten the get of fresh water aboard the ship , take no less pain himself then the mean ; as also at saint Domingo , Cartagena , and all other place , have always so vigilant a care and foresight in the good order of his fleet , accompany they , as it be say , with such wonderful travel ! of body , as doubtless have he be the mean person , as he be the chief , he have yet deserve the first place of honour : and no less happy doe we account he , for be associate with master Carliel his lieutenant general , by who experience , prudent counsel , and gallant performance he achieve so many and happy enterprise of the war , by who also he be very great assist , in set down the needful order , law , and course of justice , and the due administration of the same upon all occasion . after three day spend in water our ship , we depart now the second time from this cape of S . Anthony the thirteenth of May , and proceed about the cape of Florida , we never touch any where ; but coast alongst Florida , and keep the shore still in sight , the 28 . of May early in the morning we descry on the shore a place build like a beacon , which be in deed a scaffold upon four long mast raise on end , for man to discover to the seaward , be in the latitude of thirty degree , or very near thereunto . our pinnace man , and come to the shore , we march up alongst the river side , to see what place the enemy hold there : for none among we have any knowledge thereof at all . here the general take occasion to march with the company himself in person , the lieutenant generail have the vanguard ; and go a mile up or somewhat more by the river side , we may discern on the other side of the river over against we , a fort which new have 128 be build by the Spaniard : and some mile or thereabouts above the fort be a little town or village without wall , build of wooden house , as the plot do plain show . we forthwith prepare to have ordinance for the battery ; and one piece be a little before the evening plant , and the first shot be make by the lieutenant general himself at their ensign , strike through the ensign , as we afterward understand by a french man , which come unto we from they . one shot more be then make , which strike the foot of the fort wall , which be all massive timber of great tree like mast . the lieutenant general be determine to pass the river this night with 4 . company , and there to lodge himself entrench as near the fort , as that he may play with his musket and small shot upon any that shall appear , and so afterward to bring and plant the battery with he : but the help of mariner for that sudden to make trench can not be have , which be the cause that this determination be remit until the next night . in the night the lieutenant general take a little row skiff , and half a dozen well arm , as captain Morgan , and captain Samson , with some other beside the rower , and go to view what guard the enemy keep , as also to take knowledge of the ground . and albeit he go as covert as may be , yet the enemy take the alarm , grow fearful that the whole force be approach to the assault , and therefore with all speed abandon the place after the shoot of some of their piece . they thus go , and he be return unto we again , but nothing know of their flight from their fort , forthwith come a french man be a phipher ( who have Nicholas be prisoner with they ) in a little boat , play on his borsoisnm - phiph the tune of the prince of Orange his song ; and be call unto by the guard , he tell they before he put foot out of the boat , what he be himself , and how the Spaniard be go from the fort , offer either to remain in hand there , or else to return to the place with they that will go . ten 129 i upon this intelligence , the general , the lieutenant general , with some of the captain in one skiff , and the viceadmiral with some other in his skiff , and two or three pinnace furnish of soldier with they , put present over towards the fort , give order for the rest of the pinnace to follow . and in our approach , some of the enemy bold than the rest , have stay behind their company , shoot off two piece of ordinance at we : but on shore we go , and enter the place without find any man there . when the day appear , we find it build all of timber , the wall be none other but whole mast or body of tree set up right and close together in manner of a pale , without any ditch as yet make , but whole intend with some more time ; for they have not as yet finish all their work , have begin the same some three or four month before : so as , to say the truth , they have no reason to keep it , be subject both to fire , and easy assault . [ Iii . 547 . ] the platform whereon the ordinance lie , be whole body of long pine tree , whereof there be great plenty , lay a cross one on another , and some little earth among . there be in it thirteen or fourteen great piece of brass ordinance , and a chest unbroken up , have in it the value of some two thousand pound sterling by estimation of the king treasure , to pay the soldier of that place , who be a hundred and fifty man . the fort thus win , which they call S . Johns fort , and the day open , . we assay to go to the town , but can not by reason of some river and break ground which be between the two place : and therefore be enforce to embark again into our pinnace , we go thither upon the great main river , which be call as also the town , by the name of saint Augustin . at our approach to land , there be some that begin to show themselves , and to bestow some few shot 130 1586 . upon we , but present withdraw themselves . and in their run thus away , the sergeant Major find one of their horse ready saddle and bridle , take the same to follow the chase ; and so overgo all his company , be ( by one lay behind a bush ) shoot through the head : and fall down therewith , be by the same and two or three more , stab in three or four place of his body with sword and dagger , before any can come near to his rescue . his death be much lament , be in very deed a honest wise gentleman , and a soldier of good experience , and of as great courage as any man may be . in this place call S . Augustin , we understand the king do keep , as be before say , one hundred and fifty soldier , and at another place some dozen league beyond to the northward , call S . Helena , he do there likewise keep a hundred and fifty more , serve there for no other purpose , than to keep all other nation from inhabit any part of all that coast ; the government whereof be commit to one Pedro Melendez marquess , nephew to that Melendez the admiral , who have overthrow master John Hawkins in the bay of Mexico some seventeen or eighteen year ago . this governor have charge of both place , but be at this time in this place , and one of the first that leave the same . here it be resolve in full assembly of captain , to undertake the enterprise of saint Helena , and from thence to seek out the inhabitation of our english countryman in Virginia , distant from thence some six degree northward . when we come thwart of saint Helena , the shold Santa Helena , appear dangerous , and we have no pilot to undertake the entry , it be think meet to go hence along . for the admiral have be the same night in four fathom and a half , three league from the shore : and yet we understand by the help of a know pilot , there may and do go in ship of great burden and draught then any we have in our fleet . 131 we pass thus alongst the coast hard aboard the shore , which be shallow for a league or two from the shore , and the same be low and break land for the most part . the nine of June upon sight of one speciali great fire ( which be very ordinary all alongst this coast , even from the cape of Florida hither ) the general send his skiff to the shore , where they find some of our english countryman ( that have be send thither the year before by sir Walter Ralegh ) and bring they aboard : by who direction we proceed along to the place which they make their port . but some of our ship be of great draught unable to enter , anchor without the harbour in a wild road at sea , about two mile from shore . from whence the general write letter to master Ralph lane , be governor of those english in Virginia , and then at his fort about six league from the road in a island which they call Roanoac , wherein especial he show how ready he be to supply his necessity and want , which he understand of , by those he have first talk withal . the morrow after , master lane himself and some of his company come unto he , with the consent of his captain he give they the choice of two offer , that be to say : either he will leave a ship , a pinnace , and certain boat with sufficient master and mariner , together furnish with a month victuali , to stay and make far discovery of the country and coast , and so much victuali likewise as may be sufficient for the bring of they all ( be a hundred and three person ) into England , if they think good after such time , with any other thing they will desire , and that he may be able to spare . or else if they think they have make sufficient discovery already , and do desire to return into England , he will give they passage . but they , as it seem , be desirous to stay , accept very thankful and with great 132 gladness , that which be offer first . whereupon the ship be appoint and receive into charge by some of their own company send into she by master lane , before they have receive from the rest of the fleet the provision appoint they , there arise a great storm ( which they say be extraordinary and very strange ) that last three dayes ' together , and put all our fleet in great danger , to be drive from their anchor upon the coast . for we break many cable , and lose many anchor : and some of our fleet which have lose all ( or which number be the [ three . 548 . ] ship appoint for master lane and his company ) be drive to put to sea in great danger , in avoid the coast , and can never see we again until we meet in England . many also of our small pinnace and boat be lose in this storm . notwithstanding after all this , the general offer they ( with consent of his captain ) a other ship with some provision , although not such a one for their turn , as may have be spare they before , this be unable to be bring into their harbour . or else if they will , to give they passage into England , although he know we shall perform it with great difficulty than he may have do before . but master lane with those of the chief of his company which he have then with he , consider what shall be best for they to do , make request unto the general under their hand , that they may have passage for England : the which be grant , and the rest send for out of the country and ship , we depart from that coast the 18 . of June . and so , God be thank , both they and we in good safety arrive at Portesmouth the 28 . of July 1586 . to the great glory of God , and to no small honour to our prince , our country , and our self . the total value of that which be get in this voyage be esteem at three score thousand pound , whereof the company which have travel in the voyage be to have twenty thousand pound , the adventurer ! 33 the other forty . of which twenty thousand pound ( as i can judge ) will redound some six pound to the single share . we lose some seven hundred and fifty man in the voyage ; above three part of they only by sickness . the man of name that die and be slay in this voyage , which i can present call to remembrance , be these . captain Powel . ) ( captain Bigges . captain Varney . ( ) captain Cecill . captain moon . ( ) captain Hannam . captain Fortescue . ) ( captain Greenefield . Thomas Tucker a lieutenant . Alexander Starkey a lieutenant . master Escot a lieutenant . master Waterhouse a lieutenant . master George candish . master Nicholas winter . master Alexander Carliell . master Robert Alexander . master Scroop . master James Dier . master Peter duke . with some other , who for haste i can sudden think on . the ordinance get of all sort brass and iron , be about two hundred and forty piece , whereof the two hundred and some moor be brass , and be thus find and get . at saint Iago some two or three and fifty piece . in saint Domingo about fourscore , whereof be very much great ordinance , as whole cannon , demi - canon , culverin , and such like . in Cartagena some sixty and three piece , and good store likewise of the great sort . in the fort of S . Augustin be fourteen piece . the rest be iron ordinance , of which the most part be get at saint Domingo , the rest at Cartagena .