ycaco , in the isle of care , hard by the water side , there be great store of stone , free stone , and other stone to make lime , and wood to burn the stone withal for the lime , and great part of the stone do lie about the water : so the wood will cost but the cut of it down , and the work of it , and with little pain take it will be bring to good perfection , for we have already make trial thereof , for there be never building that go to decay after it have be make , nor perish by the sea : so the charge hereof will be but little or nothing . and for to put this in practice to build a fort , it be needful that your majesty shall send hither and to many other place , where any fort shall be make , some store of negro , and to this place will be send 150 negro bring from Guyney : and if the negro of Havana be not to be employ there , nor those which be in Sant Juan de ullua , it may please your majesty to cause they to be send for to this place , for most of they be artificer , some mason , bricklayer , smith and sawyer , and to send some mason from Spain to teach our man these occupation . and after these fortification be end and all furnish , than the negro may be sell to great profit , for a negro that be of any occupation be sell here for 600 . and 700 . pezo . number de Dios . number de Dios be build upon a sandy bay hard by the sea side , it be a city of some thirty household or inhabitant : their house be build of timber , and most of the people which be there be foreigner , they be there to day and go to morrow : it be full of wood and some place of the land be overflow 142 with water continual by reason of much rain which do fall upon the hill . it be a very bad harbour , neither be there any good water : and it be subject to northerly wind and easterly wind , which continual do blow upon this coast : many of the great ship which do come to this place do unlade half their commodity between the two ledge of rock , for that there be but little water in the harbour : and after that a ship have unlade half of her good , than she go to the second rock , as it do appear by the platform , but the small ship come near unto another rock on the west side . if the wind chance to come to the north and northwest , and that it overblow , than such great ship as then be in the road must of force more themselves with six cable a head , especial in a storm , and yet nevertheless sometime they be drive ashore and so cast away , and all because they dare not vier cable enough , because of so many shelf and rock which be in both those place : also the ship do roll very much in the harbour , by reason in foul weather the sea will be mighty grow , which be the cause that their cable do oftentimes break , and their ruther be unhanged , the cause thereof be by reason the ship do ride but in little water , yet go there a great sea . the city be build and situate very well if it be a good harbour , it stand upon the Eastside upon a rock where they may build a very good fort , accord to the platform for the safeguard of this harbour : but see it be but a bad haven and shallow water , therefore i do think that it be not needful for your majesty to be at any charge in fortify that place , but only a trench to be make of earth or clay , so that these townsman may defend themselves from danger of 3 . or 4 . ship . the city of Panama be eighteen league from number de dios , the way be exceed bad thitherwards ; yet notwithstanding all the silver be bring this way to number de dios , as well your majesty treasure 143 [ three . 552 . ] number de dios in 9 deg . and one tierce . the english voyage as other merchandise ; so likewise the most part of those commodity which be carry to Peru , and the rest of the merchandise be carry to the river of Chagre which be some 18 league from this city and it be bring up by this river within five league of Panama unto a inn or lodge call Venta de cruze , and from this place afterward they be transport to Panama upon mule . the high way which go from number de dios to Panama may be very well mend , only to remove this way and to stop it quite up , and so to make it again upon the side of a mountain . this city lie in nine degree and one tierce , and if your majesty will give order that this city shall be pluck down and new build again in Puerto bello , than you be to make a new way through the mountain of Capira , by reason it may not be frequent and because the high way be very bad : with little charge they may be break and so shut up , and the channel of this harbour may be stop with the timber of those old ship which be lay up here every year , and then afterward may be cast a great number of stone into the same , and so by this mean to dam up the harbour : and here be great want of stone to ballast the ship : wherefore they be fain to go to a island three league from Cartagena call Isla de los bastimentos , and this be a thing very needful for this country , as by experience i have see . Puerto bello . puerto bello lie five league from number de dios westward : it be a very good harbour and sufficient to receive great store of ship , and have very good ankering , and fresh water : for near the shore you shall find some six fathom water , and in the midst of the same harbour you shall find twelve fathom , very good and clean ground or sand , without either bank or rock . there be twelve small river or brook of water which do belong to this harbour , and so do meet all together : 144 so that the fleet may at all time provide themselves off fresh water so much as shall serve their turn . and like wise there be in this place great store of timber to build ship , and stone to ballast ship . also the harbour have no danger at all in come in , but only when the wind be westerly , which be seidome see upon this coast . the wind which do most blow upon this coast be northerly wind , and they be more dangerous and hurtful than the easterly wind be . within this harbour there lie a small creek safe from all wind that can blow . this creek be about five hundred yard long , and so many in breadth , and in the enter in of this creek mouth it be some 300 . yard broad , and four fathom and a half of water : and enter further in , six fathom , all oaze and muddy ground : so that if a ship shall chance to strike or come aground , she can take no harm be soft oaze ; also it do ebb and flow accord as i have certify your majesty already . and likewise the come in and go out of this harbour be very good ; and with all kind of weather a ship may set sail from this place except with a westerly wind : and all this coast be very clean where a ship at all time may come to anchor without the harbour mouth . this harbour be environ round about with wood : and at the end of this harbour there be certain land which be overflow with water : it may be easy dry up and wall round about , so this land will serve very well to feed cattle . for that be the chief thing which do belong to any city or town , and of this pasture ground there be great want in number de dios , for there be no pasture at all to breed cattle , for all kind of flesh which be spend in this place be bring from Panama : so towards the south there be a very good place , where the city may be new build on a certain plain ground which lie at the foot of certain mountain , which be not very high ; and in this place there run three little river of fresh water very sweet and good , and here be good arable ground to till and to ten 145 king [ in . 553 . ] sow Maiz and other kind of grain . also in this circuit there be great stone to make lime , and these stone must needs prove very good as i do think , but we never have any trial thereof . this harbour have all thing necessary to build a . city , where your majesty may have your army and fleet of ship to ride at a anchor in safety without danger of loose : and it be a very healthful country , and where the city shall be build it be all stony ground : and forasmuch as the rain water which do fall from the mountain may do hurt unto the city , there at the foot of the mountain we will make a great pond to receive in all the water which do fall from the mountain , and so from thence to go into the sea , as more at large your majesty may see by my platform . if it will please your majesty , it be good that the city of number de Dios may be bring and build in this harbour : it will not be very chargeable unto the citizen by reason that all their house be make of timber , and they may benefit themselves with the same again , and likewise with the tile of their house : the great charge will be to land timber and to cut down the mountain of wood . if it please your majesty that the say city of number de Dios shall be build in this harbour the first thing which must be finish be to make up this high way , and so to pull down the church which be in number de dios , and the contractation house , and so new build it in this harbour : and then to command all the fleet of ship from time to time to come and unlade their good in this say Puerto bello : and that those merchant and factor of Spain which be lyger in Panama and number de dios , shall come to this harbour and build anew their warehouse for receive of their good . so by these mean in short time it will be great inhabit with people : also the fleet shall not pass so many danger as they daily do in number de dios : neither will there so many people die as there daily doe in number de 146 Dios : and the cause thereof be , that those labour man which do use to unlade those merchandise , be all the whole day wade in the water up to the armpit to bring the pack of cloth and other commodity aland ; for there be no land place where there can come any boat to land any good close to the shore , so this wade and the parch of the sun be the cause why so many do dye of a burn fever . there be but 60 . dwell house in number de dios , and but thirty dweller which do continual dwell there , and the rest do go to Panama after the fleet be go , and then this town do remain desolate , every man forsake it because it be so full of disease . in the enter in of this harbour for the more security thereof and defence of the town it be needful to build upon the top of the mount which lie to the northward , a little fort foursquare that will hold four or five piece of ordinance , and to appoint six man to watch and ward ; and this be do we shall have no occasion to make any more defence , by reason the country be full of rock and filthy way , and all full of wood round about the harbour . and so likewise on the other side to build a little tower in manner of a fort , with eight piece of ordinance and five and twenty soldier to keep it . and this will be of more importance because it must be build on the town side . and a little beyond this place on the northside there lie a creek , where there be a very good anker in eight fathom water : so this fort be build in this place it will defend the harbour and offend the enemy : and will defend the coast along and a point of the land which do run from the east to the west , and reach to the hand of buena Ventura . And put case that the fort which be build on the other side do decay , or be take by the enemy , with this other fort we may defend the city very well , if the enemy shall chance to come into the harbour , and be succour and help by the 147 citizen , and twenty musketeer be plant upon a mount which lie over the fort , will be sufficient to defend we from a good many of our enemy , that shall come to assault we , because all the country be full of rock and stone , and full of mountain . so from this wood there may a way be make to go to the city , and to join with that way which shall go to Panama ; and this may be do with small charge . this harbour do lie in nine degree and one tierce , and if occasion shall serve we may stop up the way which do go to Capira , and the rest of the way which go from number de dios to Venta de cruze , accord as it be certify i by the negro call Simerons ; for they tell i that this way will not be very troublesome . although in the winter it be report that here be good store of water in this place , which in the summer be all dry up , and where these water be , there we may build a causey , to which purpose there be great quantity of stone and timber very serviceable : so this way may be make with that treasure which your majesty do receive of the average and custom of number de dios and Panama , which do amount unto twelve or fourteen thousand pezo yearly : and a order may be take for the same , that the say money may serve for the building and repair of these way . Panama . PAnama be the principali city of this diocese : it lie 18 . league from number de dios on the south sea , and stand in 9 degree . there be 3 . monastery in this say city of friar , the one be of dominick , the other be of augustines , and the three be of saint Francis friar : also there be a college of Jesuit , and the royal audience or chancery be keep in this city . this city be situate hard by the sea side on a sandy bay : the one side of this city be environ with the sea , and on the other side it be enclose with a arm of the sea which run up into the land 1000 yard . 148 this city have three hundred and fifty house , all Panama have build of timber , and there be six hundred dweller and 35 ° tone . eight hundred soldier with the townsman , and four hundred negro of Guyney , and some of they be freeman : and there be another town which be call Santa Cruz la real of Negros Simerons , and most of negro sime - them be employ in your majesty service , and they rons ™ rtaU be ioo . in number , and this town be a league from this pan ^ ar ^ s city upon a great river side , which be a league from the sea right over against the harbour of Pericos . but there be no trust nor confidence in any of these negro , and therefore we must take heed and beware of they , for they be our mortali enemy . there be three sundry way to come to this city , beside the sea , where