this be only to give you to understand , that four month past , i come from China , and land in Acapulco , 70 league from Mexico , which be the harbour where the ship that go down to China lie : and all the merchant of Mexico bring all their spanish commodity down to this harbour , to ship they for that country . it be one of the best harbour in all Nueva Espanna ; and where the ship may ride most safe without all kind of danger . for it lie under a neck of land , and behind a great point . and in this harbour here be four great ship of Mexico of 600 and 800 ton a piece , which 164 only serve to carry our commodity to China , and so to return back again . the order be thus . from hence to China be above two thousand league , far than from hence to Spain . and from hence their two first ship depart at one time to China : and be 13 or 14 month return back again . and when those two ship be return , than the other twain two month after depart from hence . they go now from hence very strong with soldier . i can certify you of one thing ; that 200 ducat in spanish commodity , and some flemish ware which i carry with i thither , i make worth 1400 ducat there in the country . so i make account that with those silk , and other commodity which i bring with i from thence to Mexico , i get 2500 ducat by the voyage : and have get more , if one pack of fine silk have not be spoil with salt water . so as i say , there be great gain to be get if that a man return in safety . but the year 1588 i have great mischance , come in a ship from China to Nueva Espanna : which be lade with rich commodity , be take by a Englishman which rob we and afterward m - Thomas burn our ship , wherein i lose a great deal of treasure c ^ ish . and commodity . A . D . 1590 . FromAcapulco , to China above 2000 league . Flemish ware good in China . a wonderful gain . if i shall write to you of the state of this country of China , and of the strange thing which be there , and of the wealth of the country , i be not able to do it , in a whole quire of paper . only i may certify you , that it be the goodly country , and the rich , and most plentiful in all the world . for here be great store of gold mine , silver mine , and pearl , great store of cotton cloth : for the country people wear nothing else but fine cotton cloth , which be more accept than silk . for here be great store of silk , and they be good cheap . all kind of victual , as bread , flesh , wine and hen and all kind of fowl , be very plentiful . here be great store of fresh river . the people be very love . here be very fair city and town with costly building , better than those in Spain . and 165 gold mine , silver mine , and pearl , in China . fine linen cloth great esteem in China . the country people go very rich apparel both in silk and gold . but here we have order from the king of Spain , that a Spaniard may not dwell in China , above 3 year , and afterward they must return again into Nueva Espanna , and other soldier must come in their place . the country be very unwholesome for we Spaniard . for within these 20 year of 14000 , which have go to the philippinas , there be 13000 of they not above one dead , and not past 1000 of they leave alive . there be ^ iart ^ t ^ a p ^ ace in China which be a harbour , call Macaran , P ^ pp ^ , which the king have give to the Spaniard free : which shall be the place where the ship shall come and traffic . for in this harbour there be a great river which go up into the main land , unto diverse town and city , which be near to this river . and thus trouble you no far i rest . from Mexico the 20 of June 1590 . your obedient son , Sebastian Biscaino . [ ill . 561 . ] a letter of Bartholomew canon to Peter de Tapia in Seville , from Mexico the 30 of May 1590 , touch the state of Nueva Espanna , and the fleet of that year . ecause i have answer your letter which i have receive in the last fleet , as touch that matter i have no more to say . the occasion of my write unto you at this time , be to give you to understand , that those commodity which come in the last fleet , be sell at the first good cheap , and those that buy they , get much by they . for now at this instant white roan cloth be sell for 8 or 9 real a vare . the cause of this be , by reason there come a caravel of advise from Havana ; which bring we news , how the army that his majesty do send for England , be all spoil and cast away : and therefore they of Spain do write that there will come no fleet from Spain hither this year : and this be the cause that 166 all linen cloth be very dear in these part . Wines also be very dear : for they be sell for 90 and 100 demina a pipe . when the frigate depart from hence in August last 1589 . Cochinilia be sell at that instant for 50 peso the quintail ; and now it be sell for 55 pesoe . and since that news come from Spain in a caravel of saint Lucar , that it be sell there for 72 ducat the quintail , there be lade in this fleet 14000 Arovas of Cochinilia , and 7000 Arovas moor be lade in the frigate which depart before the fleet . there be lade in the fleet great quantity of treasure , more than have be send to Spain these many year , both for the king and the viceroys account . and the merchant and gentleman of all these province do send great quantity to supply the king want : for that his majesty have write to the viceroy and to the gentleman of these country to aid he with much money towards the maintenance of his war against France and other place , and therefore they have send good store : God send it well to Spain . there be likewise lade aboard the fleet to the number of 100000 . hide , and great store of other kind of this country commodity . so that the fleet go very rich lade . quick silver be here very dear , for here be almost none to be have for any money to work in the gold mine : for without quick silver we can refine our gold . and no man upon pain of death may bring any from Spain hither ; but all must come for the king account : and so the king do sell it here : there be exceed great gain therein . and thus i rest : from Mexico , the 30 of May 1590 . Bartholomew canon . 167 [ a letter a letter of Frier Alonso new elect bishop of mechuacan , to the king of Spain , write in Peru in the city de los Reyes the first of march 1590 , touch the state of Arica a chief haven in Peru . the people of the river of plate . 100 man want . Pon Christmas even the year 1589 , i receive your majesty commission in Potossi . for which i be and shall be continual bind to pray for your majesty long health , for the great benefit which your majesty have bestow upon i , in send i to mechuacan : whereby my great travel and pain may be recompense , which i have take with that ungrateful and desperate people of the river of plate , which they have be the occasion of , in deal so bad with i their pastor , which have counsel they , that they shall have a great care to serve God , and be dutiful to your majesty , accord as every good and true subject aught to do . now for this gift which your majesty have bestow on i , i most humble kiss your majesty hand a thousand time . thus present i depart from Potossi somewhat sickly , to accomplish that which your majesty have command i . so i arrive at Lima in safety the first of February by the way of Arica , which be a haven town , where they embark all the bar of silver . and there i have see what be do , 8c what they have provide against the Englishman in that haven : which be ; that there be a little fort make hard by the water side , with certain small piece of ordinance in the say fort to offend the enemy , if occasion shall serve that they shall offer to come into the harbour and offer any violence . but the principali thing of all that we want be to have soldier , foot man , and horseman . for accord as i be inform , here want 100 man which shall keep the coast , if they shall offer to land and march up into the 168 country . and likewise the people of this country have tell i , that if upon a high mount which be here in the harbour near to the haven mouth , on the southside of the harbour where the sea do beat , there be two or three great canon plant on the top of the hill , ( where very good watch be continual keep ) from that place they good watch may reach to do the enemy great hurt , a league into the c ^ nua ^ sea . the new viceroy don Garcia Urtado de Mendosa , ‘ worthy of that dignity , be in great favour with all those of these realm : for that he be a great solliciter both by [ three . 562 . ] sea and land in all kind of diligence , not loose one hour in your service , and that which he have in charge . with as much speed as may be i will depart from hence to mechuacan , to serve that church and your majesty : and there i will remain accord to your majesty commandment , with the bull or indulgence . our lord keep your majesty many year in his holy service . from the city de los Reyes the first of march 1590 . Frier Alonso bishop of mechuacan . a letter of don John de Miramontes suasola to don John Garcias de Penalosa from Arica on the coast of Peru the ten of march 1590 . Fter my long travel and bid success , my fortune bring i to the Indies ; where be void of all hope , and full of grief , i be become a soldier : a thing in this country which be most hate of all other thing , not only of man , but of the wild beast : and be a occupation which be choose of idle person . the occasion of this be , that there have be in these sea , and yet be certain English rover : and in seek of they i have travel these three year : the one of the year a soldier , and the other two year i have go for captain and ensign - bearer . and at this time here be arrive don Garcias english man in the south sea seek 3 year . Urtado de Mendosa viceroy of these realm : who have 169 this be m . Chidleys fleet , whereof the delight be in the strait ofMagelan in January and Feb . 1589 . the english voyage choose i to be chief ensign - bearer of a army which depart from hence to scour the coast . for here we have news of the enemy , which be come upon the coast : for we have stay for their come these four month the same way which they must come , in a haven call Arica , which be the first entry of Peru . so i have 90 pezo a month , beside other profit , at nine real the pezo ; and four share at nine real the pezo . so that i have 1800 pezo every year of pay : for the viceroy be my dear friend , and make great account of i . and i have always 400 ducat in my chest to go like a man . i beseech God send we quietness . but yet it be the part of a gentleman to serve the king his master in these action . and thus i rest . from the harbour of Arica the ten of march 1590 . i kiss your worship hand , and be at your commandment don John de Miramontes suasola . there be four great galleon of 350 ton a piece , which be in Arica man of war , with a general , admiral , vice - admiral , with great store of soldier which keep this haven : for the viceroy have intelligence this be m . that there be certain Englishman of war come fleet thither . this haven of Arica be the best harbour in all ' the south sea : for all the silver which come from the mine of Potossi , be ship in this harbour , and so bring to Lima . and likewise all the commodity which come from Spain , and all the king quicksilver , be unlade in this harbour , and so carry to the city of Lima and other place , where the mine of silver be . 170 a letter of the licentiate Christopher Uslano to Gonsalvo de Solana in the city of Encisa in Spain , write from the city of Potossi in Peru the 20 . of July 1590 , touch a great plague in Peru , and the shortness of the passage from the river of plate into Potossi in Peru . he last year 1588 i receive letter from your worship and from my sister : and since that time i have receive none , nor in the fleet which come to Cartagena 1589 . and this year 1590 there have famine . bene great want of corn in this kingdom of Potossi : for that there have be no rain in this kingdom of long time . for in march the husbandman use to sow their corn : and in April winter do begin . and if in April there be no rain , the corn which be sow will consume away : and so for want of rain we have have two bid