as that night we put off to sea southsoutheast along towards the coast of Barbary . upon Saturday in the morning , be the 13 . of November , we fall with cape blank , which be a low land and shallow water , where we catch store of fish , and double the cape , we put into the bay , where we find certain french ship of war , who we entertain with great courtesy , and there leave they . this afternoon the whole fleet assemble , which be a little scatter about their fish , and put from thence to the isle of cape Verde , sail till the 16 . of the same month in the morning , on which day we descry the island of S . Iago , and in the evening we anchor the fleet between the town call the Playa or Praya , and 103 saint Iago , where we put on shore 1000 man or more , under the lead of m . Christopher carleil lieutenant general , who direct the service most like a wise commander . the place where we have first to march do afford no good order , for the ground be mountainous and full of dale , be a very stony and troublesome passage ; but such be his industrious disposition , as he will never leave , until we have get up to a fair plain , where we make stand for the assemble of the army . and when we be all gather together upon the plain , some 2 mile from the town , the lieutenant general think good not to make attempt till daylight : because there be not one that can serve for guide or give knowledge at all of you place . and therefore after have well rest , even half a hour before day , he command the army to be divide into 3 speciali part , such as he appoint , whereas before we have march by several company , be thereunto force by the badness of the way as be aforesaid . now by the time we be thus range into a very brave order , daylight begin to appear , and be advance hard to the wall , we see no enemy to resist , whereupon the lieutenant general appoint captain Samson with thirty shot , and captain Barton with other thirty , to go down into the town which stand in the valley under we , and may very plain be view all over from that place where the whole army be now arrive : and present after these captain be send the great ensign , which have nothing in it but the plain english cross , to be place toward the sea , that our fleet may see saint George cross flourish in the enemy fortress . order be give that all the ordinance throughout the town and upon all the platform , which be above fifty piece all ready charge , shall be shoot off in honour of the queen majesty coronation day , be the seventeenth of November , after the yearly custom of England , 104 which be so answer again by the ordinance out of all the ship in the fleet which now be come near , as it be strange to hear such a thunder noise last so long together . in this mean while the lieutenant general hold still the most part of his force on the hill top , till such time as the town be quarter out for the lodging of the whole army : which be do every captain take his own quarter , and in the evening be place such a sufficient guard upon every part of the town that we have no cause to fear any present enemy . thus we continue in the city the space of 14 . the title of day , take such spoil as the place yield , which ta ^ en be for the most part , wine , oil , meal , and some such like thing for victuali , as vinegar , olive , and some such other trash , as merchandise for their Indian trade . but there be not find any treasure at all , or any thing else of worth beside . the situation of saint Iago be somewhat strange , in form like a triangle , have on the east and west side two mountain of rock and cliff , as it be hang over it , upon the top of which two mountain be build certain fortification to preserve the town from any harm that may be offer , as in a plot be plain show . from thence , on the south side of the town be the main sea , and on the north side , the valley lie between the foresay mountain , wherein the town stand : the say valley and town both do grow very narrow , insomuch that the space between the two cliff of this end of the town be estimate not to be above 10 . or 12 . score over . in the midst of the valley come down a riveret , rill , or brook of fresh water , which hard by the sea side make a pond or pool , whereout our ship be water with very great ease and pleasure . somewhat above the town on the north side between the two mountain , the valley wax somewhat large than at the town end , which valley be whole convert into i ° 5 the english voyage garden and orchard well replenish with diverse sort of fruit , herb and tree , as lymmon , orange , sugar - cane , cochar or cocho nut , plantan , potato - root , cucumber , small and round onion , garlic , and some other thing not now remember , among which the cocho nut , and plantan be very pleasant fruit , the say cocho have a hard shell and a green husk over it , as have our walnut , but it far exceed in greatness , for this cocho in his green husk be big than any man two fist : of the hard shell many drink cup be make here in England , and set in silver as i have often see . next within this hard shell be a white rind resemble in show very much even as any thing may do , to the white of a egg when it be hard boil . and within this white of the nut lie a water , which be whitish and very clear , to the quantity of half a pint or thereabouts , which water and white rind before speak of , be both of a very cool fresh taste , and as please as any thing may be . i have hear some hold opinion , that it be very restorative . the plantan grow in cod , somewhat like to bean , but be big and long , and much more thick together on the stalk , and when it wax ripe , the meat which fill the rind of the cod become yellow , and be exceed sweet and pleasant . in this time of our be there happen to come a Portugal to the western fort , with a flag of truce , to who captain Samson be send with captain Goring , who come to the say messenger , he first ask they what nation they be , they answer Englishmen , he then require to know if war be between England and Spain , to which they answer that they know not , but if he will go to their general he can best resolve he of such particular , and for his assurance of passage and repassage , these captain make offer to engage their credit , which he refuse for that he be not send from his governor . than they tell he , if 106 his governor do desire to take a course for the common benefit of the people and country , his best way be to come and present himself unto our noble and merciful governor sir Francis Drake , whereby he may be assure to find favour , both for himself and they inhabitant . otherwise within three day we shall march over the land , and consume with fire all inhabit place , and put to the sword all such live soul as we shall chance upon : so thus much he take for the conclusion of his answer , and depart , he promise to return the next day , but we never hear more of he . upon the four and twenty of November , the general accompany with the lieutenant general and six hundred man march forth to a village twelve mile within the land , call saint Domingo , where the governor and the bishop with all the better sort be lodge , and by eight of the clock we come to it , find the place abandon , and the people flee into the mountain : so we make stand a while to ease our self , and partly to see if any will come to speak to we . after we have well rest our self , the general command the troop to march away homeward , in which retreat the enemy show themselves , both horse and foot , though not such force as dare encounter we : and so in pass sometime at the gaze with they , it wax late and towards night before we can recover home to saint Iago . on Monday the six and twenty of November , the general command all the pinnace with the boat , to use all diligence to embark the Annie into such ship as every man belong . the lieutenant general in like sort command captain Goring and lieutenant Tucker , with one hundred shot to make a stand in the market place , until our force be whole embark , the viceadmiral make stay with his pinnace and certain boat in the harbour , to bring the say last 107 [ he . 538 . ] a wise course to be imitate in all great action . the english voyage company aboard the ship . also the general will forthwith the galley with two pinnace to take into they the company of captain Barton , and the company of captain big , under the lead of captain Samson , to seek out such munition as be hide in the ground , at the town of Praya or Playa , have be promise to be show it by a prisoner , which be take the day before . the captain aforesaid come to the Playa , land their man , and have place the troop in their best strength , captain Samson take the prisoner , and will he to show that he have promise , the which he can not , or at least will not : but they search all suspect place , find two piece of ordinance , one of iron , a other of brass . in the after noon the general anchor with the rest of the fleet before the Playa , come himself ashore , will we to burn the town and make all haste aboard , the which be do by six of the clock the same day , and our self embark again the same night , and so we put off to sea Southwest . but before our departure from the town of saint Iago , we establish order for the better government of the army , every man muster to his captain , and oath be minister to acknowledge her majesty supreme governor , as also every man to do his uttermost endeavour to advance the service of the action , and to yield due obedience unto the direction of the general and his officer . by this provident counsel , and lay down this good foundation before hand , all thing go forward in a ' due course , to the achieve of our happy enterprise . in all the time of our be here , neither the governor for the king of Spain , ( which be a Portugal ) neither the bishop , who authority be great , neither the inhabitant of the town , or island ever come at we ( which we expect they shall have do ) to entreat we to leave they some part of their needful provision , 108 or at the least , to spare the ruin of their town at our go away . the cause of this their unreasonable distrust ( as i do take it ) be the fresh remembrance of the great wrong they have do to old m . William Hawkins of Plymouth , in the voyage he make 4 . or 5 . the treason of year before , when as they do both break their promise , the fortug . al5 and murder many of his man , whereof i judge you have understand , and therefore it be needless to be re - Hawkins . peat . but since they come not at we , we leave write in sundry place , as also in the spittle house , ( which building be only appoint to be spare ) the great discontentment and scorn we take at this their refrain to come unto we , as also at the rude manner of kill , and savage kind of handle the dead body of one of our boy find by they straggle all alone , from who they