the enemy may assault we . the one be at the bridge which be build upon the river : and on the one side of this , there lie a creek : so on this side the city be very strong , because it be all soft muddy ground , for in no way they can go upon it . and right over against it there lie a river which be in manner like unto a ditch or moat ; and on the other side of the river there lie a great lake or pond which be full of water all the winter , and part of the summer , so that on this side the city be very strong , for with very small store of soldier this place may be keep very well . the great danger for the surprise of this city be the way that do come from number de dios : for all this way be plain ground and no wood : and 2000 yard from this city there lie a river call Lavanderas , where the woman do use to wash their linen : and this river do go into the creek , accord as i have certify your majesty : and be once pass this river , there be a causey which go direct unto they . the other way which do go towards the city be low down towards the sea at a stone bridge lie upon the way which go to the harbour of Perico . Theise two way can be keep nor resist , because it be all plain ground and meadow . 149 the best way to take Panama . Perico . upon the east side of this city there be your majesty royal house build upon a rock join hard to the sea side , and they do aswell lean towards the sea as the land . the royal audience or chancery be keep here in these house , and likewise the prison . and in this place all your majesty treasure be keep . there dwell in these house your majesty treasurer , the lord precedent , and 3 . judge , and master attorney . all these do dwell in these house , and the rest of your majesty officer : which be six house beside those of the lord precedent , the which be all dwell house , and all adjoin together one by another along upon the rock . and they be build all of timber and bourd , as the other house be . so where the prison stand and the great hall , these two place may be very well fortify , because they serve so fit for the purpose , by reason they be build towards the sea , and that there lie certain small rock , which at a low water be all discover and dry , and some of they be a island in see at a high water . right over these house to the tpanamaur astwardes there lie a island about five hundred ’ yard from these house , and the island be in form of a half moon ; and in this order it run all alongst very near the main land : so over against these house [ three . 555 . ] there lie the harbour where all the ship do use to ride at a anchor , after that they have discharge and unlade their merchandise . for when they have their lade aboard , there can come in none but small bark , and at a low water the ship be all aground and dry , and so be all the space some thirty yard from those house . right over against they stand the city . when news be bring to this city of those pirate which be come upon this coast , the lord precedent and judge command that there shall a sconce be make , and trench round about , make all of timber for the defence of this city against the enemy , place good to and to keep your majesty treasure . so your officer land tn . cause Venta de cruze to be fortify , and likewise 150 Chagre , and quebrada , and fortify the garrison of Ballano : for all these be place where the enemy may land , and by this mean spoil all this country . there be three sundry place where this city may without difficulty be take , and spoil by the pirate . the first be on the north sea in a certain place which 1 . place . lie fourteen league from number de dios , the place be call aele to the eastwards , where once before certain man of war have enter into those sea . the other place be number de dios , although this be a bad 2 - flueplace and naughty way , and full of water and a very as dirty way : for three part of the year the country people do travel upon those water , and a other very bid way , which be the go up of certain rock and mountain which they must climb , call the mountain of Capira , which be of height three quarter of a league , so in this place with very small store of soldier we can defend our self from the fury of the enemy , so these dweller do say that in summer the way be very good without either dirt or water . the other entrance be up the river of Chagre , which 3 - place . river mouth lie eighteen league from number de dios to the westwards fall into the north sea , and this be the place which the citizen of Panama do most fear , for they may come up this river to Venta de the place of cruze , and so from thence march to this city , which be but five league offi so up this river there go boat and bark which do carry 320 . quintals weight . these be they which carry the most part of the merchandise which do come from Spain to be transport to Peru , and from Venta de cruze it be carry to Limaret which be three league off that place , and the dweller do report that it be a very good way : and if any man of war will attempt to come into these sea , they may very easy come up this river as far as Venta de cruze , and from thence march unto this city , and if the enemy will , they may bring their pinnace ready make in four quarter , and so take in sunder , may 151 rebellion fear , in the west Indies . the english voyage afterward set they together again : as it be report that Francis Drake have use it once before when he come that voyage ; and so he may attempt we both by sea and land . and forasmuch as the most part of these people be merchant , they will not fight , but only keep their own person in safety , and save their good ; as it have be see heretofore in other place of these Indies . so if it will please your majesty to cause these house to be strong fortify , consider it stand in a very good place if any sudden alarm shall happen , than the citizen with their good may get themselves to this place , and so escape the terror of the enemy : and so this will be a good security for all the treasure which do come from Peru . so all the pirate and rebel , which have rob in these part , have go about what they can to stop this passage , and so by this mean to stop the trade of Spain , and to set soldier in this place , for to intercept and take your majesty treasure , whereby none may be carry into Spain . therefore it behoove your majesty to fortify these place very strong . Theise place be fortify in this manner , your majesty shall have all your gold and silver bring home in safety which come from Peru . and all those commodity which be lade in Spain may come safe to this place . and if perchance any rebel shall rise in these part , which will rebel against your majesty , which God forbid , and if they shall chance to join with any of these pirate , have this place so well fortify , and Puerto bello in the north part , and so to send some garrison your majesty need not to fear : for here in this harbour be always 10 or 12 bark of 60 or 50 ton apiece , which do belong to this harbour . so if any of these place shall | be intercept , than your majesty have no other place fit than this to land your majesty soldier , for than they have but 18 . league to march by land , and present they may be 152 ship to supply these place which shall stand in most need of they . in all the coast of Peru there be no harbour that have any ship but only this place , and the city of Lima , where there be some ship and bark . the harbour be thus open without any defence , a man of war may very easy come to this place , as i have certify your majesty , through the streit of magellane , and arrive at that instant , when those bark , do come from Peru with your majesty gold and silver , for sometime they bring 5 or 6 million in those bark ; so the enemy may come and take all their treasure , and not lose one man , because here be not one man to resist he , therefore this place be thus fortify , the treasure may be keep in the fort . there be a trench make round about your majesty house which be build of timber : the precedent and judge do cause it to be make , for that here be news bring that there be certain man of war , and pirate come for these part . so this trench be thus maintain until such time as your majesty pleasure be to the contrary , and in such wise that your soldier may fight lie behind the trench ; so there be order give to build a platform upon the plain ground , and so to plant such ordinance in those place , as shall be think most convenient . if it will please your majesty , here we may make a sconce or fort towards the land side , and so trench it round about and build it with stone , because here be a place and all thing ready for the same purpose ; and by this mean the ci tie will be secure keep : as for the sea there be no danger at all , by reason that the water do ebb and flow twice a day , and then when it be ebb water it will be all ozy and muddy ground and rock , so that in no wise at a low water the enemy can wade over the mud to come to this city , and it reach from the island till you come to the bridge call Paita . two league from this city there lie a harbour call Perico down to the westward : this be 153 5 . or 6 . million of gold wonderful silver . [ HL 556 - 1 the harbour of Perico . sea . the english voyage a very sure harbour by reason of 3 . Islands which do join in manner of a half moon , they lie half a league from the main , the island do enclose the harbour round about , the harbour be a very high land , and the hand be but reasonable high , there be good store of fresh water : also there have never any ship be cast away in this harbour , for there be 7 . fathom water at full sea , and 3 or 4 fathom at low water , and very good ground for their anker , and when they will trim their ship , they may hale they ashore . all those ship and bark which come from Peru with gold , silver or any other kind of commodity , do first come to a anchor in this harbour , and if they have a contrary weather they can come into the harbour of Panama ; and for so much as the harbour have no defence for the safeguard of the ship , if a man of war shall chance to come into the harbour , all the bark with the treasure may be very easy take . and likewise these bark and ship which do navigate in the south sea carry not so much as one piece of ordinance or a rapier to defend they withal . from this place to Venta de cruze be not pass 5 league ; so that if any pinnace shall happen to arrive there , no doubt but they may rob and take all your treasure which be in those bark , by reason that from the shore they can be rescue nor help , because it be a island and refuge for all ship and bark . if it will please your majesty here may some fort or defence be make in the middlemost island , and some ordinance plant , and this may be make with little charge , because in the say island there be all kind of necessary fit for that purpose , so by this mean your majesty may have both the harbour and the city very well keep . and likewise there be another enter into the south sea which be call the river of Francisca , which lie on this side of the Cabe ? a de Cativa , and this river do come into another river which be call Caracol , and be 154 five league from this city ; and once before these Simerons bring into this place certain Frenchmen . the river of Chagre . the river of Chagre lie in 9 degree and one tierce . the mouth of this river be in the north sea 18 . league from number de dios , and 13 . league Thue five from Puerto bello : there be carve up this river certain 8 * " a , e quantity ot those merchandise which be unlade at ground or number de dios which come from Spain . from the champion mouth of this river to Venta de cruze be eighteen eountrey . league . from this place where the bark unlade their commodity , they be carry upon mule to Panama , which be but five league off from this place . this river have great store of water in the winter . and the bark which belong to this river be common of 320 . quintals that be of 16 . ton in burden : but in the summer there be but small store of water : so than the bark have much to do to get up this river : and in many place these bark be constrain to unlade their commodity ; and be draw by man strength and force a good way up the river , and therefore if it will please your majesty to command that all those good may be first unlade in Puerto bello , and there to build a little castle in the mouth of the say river , and at the foot of the castle to build a storehouse to unlade and keep all the say good , and there to build other bark of less burden : than these will serve for summer , and the great bark for the winter . if it will please your majesty , there may a very good high way be make on the one side of the river , and so they may be tow , for it may be make and not with much cost because it be all plain ground , and there be grow upon the say river great store of timber and tree which do lie over - [ three . 557 . ] thwart the say river ; so that they be very cumbersome and great annoyance unto the say boat , aswell those 155 that go up the say river , as also that do come down the say river . and therefore if it may please your majesty to command , that Puerto bello may be inhabit , and the town make near the river side , every thing will be a great deal better cheap , if the commodity be carry up the river : for it be a great danger to carry they up by land , for it be daily see that the mule do many time fall and break their neck with their lade upon their back , as well the treasure as other kind of commodity , because it be such a bad way . and your majesty may be at this charge and spend your revenue of number de dios and Panama , which do yearly yield 12 or 14 thousand pezo , and this be once do it will be a great aid and benefit to those , which do trade and traffic , and to those merchants which do send their good overland , and ease they much of pain and purse , because the - oth be a most filthy way , as any be in the world .