year of corn . and likewise here have be in these country of Potossi , and in the city de la paz , great sickness among the plague . Indian , Mullatos , and mestizo , call the small pock , and a certain plague , which have destroy all this country . and there have no old people die , nor Spaniard , but only this country people , from one year to 30 year of age : so for want of Indian we can not work in the mine . this sickness run all along the coast of Peru , and have pass into the strait of magalane , whence we have news that those soldier which be send from Spain thither to build those fort be most of they dead , and especial the workman which come to make the fort . the general don Diego de abolos have write to his majesty to send more soldier and more workman , whereby these three fort may be build accord to the king commandment . this sickness come first from Carta - 171 gena to this country , which be 1000 league distant : [ three . 563 . ] and , as i say , it have go all Peru over , to the utter Peru utter undo of this country : i pray God to cease it . i the ^ plame pray you w ^ en you write any letter to i , send they in those ship which come to saint Thome , and take in negro . and there be great store of ship which go to saint Thome for negro , and it be but 15 . day sail over a gulf to Brasill . and from Brasill their ship bring their negro to a haven call a short pas - the haven of Buenos Aeres , which be within the entrance ^ buenos1 Aeres mig ^ tie river of plate . and from this harbour in the river of kind of spanish and Portugal commodity be carry plate to Peru , to this city of Potossi in cart and on horse : for it be but 10 . or 12 . day journey , and the country be very plain for cart to travail . and from Potossi to this harbour be great store of treasure bring to buy that country commodity , and so they be ship for 172 spanish letter intercept a . d . . i59 ° - Portugal : and the ship go and come again in short time . if his majesty will consent that we may have traffic from Spain to this harbour , it will be very profitable : and in five or six month i shall hear from you , and you shall do the like from i . and by the way of Cartagena it be sometime 2 . year before 2 % tedlous - we can receive your letter from Spain . by this way t my brother may write , and so by this mean the letter p ^ may speedy come to my hand . and thus i rest . from this city of Potossi the 20 . of July 1590 . the licenciate Christopher Uslano . a letter of Steven de Tresio to Alonso Martin Vaca in Sivil from Panama the 21 . of August 1590 . touch the king desire to borrow money upon privy seal , and the want of the country . t may please your worship to understand , that i have receive a packet of letter from you , wherein you write unto i of the great misery and the calamity of Spain . and i promise you that these country be in no less . for here be great want of corn and other kind of provision : for here be almost none to be have for any money , by reason that from Lima there be no ship come with maiz . here we have have news from Spain of the great provision which be make ready for those great war which his majesty be in prepare , and of the great sum of money that his majesty stand in need of : so that it do put we all that be dweller here in such a perplexity and confusion , that we know not what we shall do . i pray God his majesty take not away our money which we have send to Spain in the fleet . for here be merchant that have send some 200000 . pezo , some 100000 . pezo , some 60000 . some more some less , to have it employ in commodity of that 173 privy seal to borrow money send into Peru . abundance of money to come from Lima and from the valle . the english voyage country . although the king have send hither his schedule or bill of assignment sign and seal by his majesty , which have be proclaim here : the content whereof be , that what man soever merchant or other will send their money into Spain in that fleet , his majesty will not take away any part or portion thereof , ( which in so do will be a great comfort unto we all ) yet here we be in doubt that he will take it from we all . news from the city of Lima as yet we have none : but i can certify your worship , that all thing be very dear here , and that we stand in great extremity for want of victual ; and likewise we have great want of money . also here be order come from the king with certain privy seal for to lend his majesty money , for that he have great need thereof . this country at this instant be very poor , and there be none that can lend the king at this time any money at all , by reason that this land be leave so provide of money : but we be look for great store of money , which be to come from Lima and from the valle . from Panama the 12 . of August 1590 . Steven de Tresio . a letter of the licentiate John de labera to the licentiate Alonso Sapata de Henao in Castille in Calamea de la Sorengo , write from saint fee de Bogota in the new kingdom of Granada , the 10 . of May 1590 . touch the rich silver mine of marequita new find out , and the long way thither by the river of Magdalena . in | the other letter which i dispatch from hence in August 1589 . i write unto your worship by 2 . or 3 . way : but i know not whether you have receive they or not . present after i depart to the government of Popayan , which join with the city of Quito in the coast of Peru , in company of the governor lieutenant don Diego Ordonez the 174 Lara of Salamanca . but i be fain to forsake his [ three . 564 . ] company , by reason i fall sick in the city of marequita , where they have discover the great silver mine : which city be above 200 . league from Cartagena : where i remain a certain time very sick . and because this country be extreme hot , and i every day grow worse and worse , i be fain to travail 30 . league further up into the main land to a city call the atu of saint fee in the new kingdom of Granada , be on the ta fee in coast of Peru : which be a cold country : where i be off admit a procurator , for that the royal audience be Granada . keep in this city . so i find my self very healthy of body , by reason this country be full of all kind of victual , very good and very plentiful , as bread , cheese , bacon , beef , great store of hen , and great store of comfeiture . only here be want of gold : so that this country will be utter undo , if the mine of marequita help not to restore the same again : whereof there be good hope : for here be great store of metal already great store of find , and the workman be in hand to refine the say metal : so that we be in good hope that great store of silver will be find in these mine of great value and profit to his majesty . this river be call the great river of Magdalena . there be a fish in the river call the great cayman , which follow after the canoas : and if it can ° fmag - reach any man in the canoa , it will hail he out and a of devour he . all night they lie in the sand on shore . in this river as we be go up , there be at certain season great store of lightning and thunder , with such abundance of rain , as though the sky will fall down : and so it do continue from midnight until morning : so that we be fain to go aboard the canoas , and with certain broad leaf which grow in the country , the mariner make a cover to cast over the ware which be lade in the canoas : and it do keep both the rain and sun from we which be passenger . the canoas be draw up this river of Magdalena by main force of the mariner in row and hale they with 175 rope . there be 7 . or 8 . Indian common which guide these canoas , beside the master which keep the helm , and the passenger . we be common two month in go up this river . it be 150 . league to the land place . and there the merchant unlade their merchandise , which serve for all the city and town which be in this new kingdom e of Granada . and the merchant lade the canoas back again from thence with great store of silver and gold which be get out of the mine for Cartagena , and there it be ship for Spain . and likewise here be great quantity of treasure lade in the say canoas which be for the king custom and other duty which be pay : but they be but a month or three week go down the river to Cartagena . these be the rich mine in all Peru . and thus i rest . from Santa Fee de Bogota in the new kingdom of Granada in Peru the 10 . of May 1590 . the licentiate John de labera . a letter of Hieronymo de Nabares to the licenciat John Alonso dwell in Valladolid , write from Panama to Sivil the 24 . day of August 1590 . touch the gainefulnes of the trade to the philippinas , and the extreme fear they have of the Englishman . ot long ago i write to your worship from Panama by the way of Havana : give you to understand of my be here , and of the state of these country . \ HC1 cj oc ul lhc oLdLv oi Lil CSC COU . i i after i depart from Spain , in 37 . day we arrive at Cartagena : ' . Cartagena : and from thence i take ship to go to number de dios , which be 80 . league from Cartagena : and in 4 . day we get thither . and from thence i go to Panama : where i have remain these 20 . day , till the ship go for the philippinas . 176 my meaning be to carry my commodity thither : for it be constant report , that for every hundred ducat a the great man shall get 600 . ducat clear . we must stay here ° f in Panama from August till it be Christmas . for in August , September , October and November it be winter here , and extreme foul weather upon this coast of Peru , and not navigable to go to the philippinas , nor to any place else in the south sea . so that at Christmas the ship begin to set on their voyage for those place : and then in these part the summer begin with very fair weather , and always we shall have the wind with we . for in July until October here be terrible thunder and lighten with extreme rain , so that it be not possible to go any way in this country . here be in Panama 10 . great ship of 500 , 400 , 300 , and 200 . tun apiece , and some 15 . bark which use common to sail in the south sea to Lima , to the valle , to Arica , and to the philippinas . this country in the summer be so extreme hot , that it be not possible to travel in the day time : [ three . 565 . ] it stand in 8 . deg . and and all this coast be in 9 and 10 . deg . here be great store of adder , snake and toad , which be in the house , but they do but small hurt . here bread , wine , and bacon be very dear , by reason the country do not yield it : for it be bring from Peru . a livre . of bread be worth here 2 . rial of plate : a quart of wine be sell for 4 . rial : for none grow here . here be very few sheep , and those extreme dear . the only food here for flesh , be ox , cow , bull and heffker : you may buy 20 . livre . Twenty li . off of beef for one rial of plate . their small money beefi may be of silver be a rial of plate , and very few of they , but all piece or 4 . a 8 . ror the silver mine which daily be find in Peru be wonderful to be speak of . if a man do not see the silver make , he will never believe it : for the very earth which come out of the mine , and be afterward wash , be but 3 . or 4 . year on a mount , yield great store of ten 177 m silver afterward again . but as here we get much , so our charge in meat , drink and apparel do cost very much . as for fruit here be none that be good , but only musk melon , and they be sell for 6 . or 8 . rial apiece . i can certify your worship of no news , but only , that all this country be in such extreme the english - fear of the Englishman our enemy , that the like be man extreme never see or hear of : for in see a sail , present fear earn Peru , . - . „ . • / here be alarm in all the country . 1 pray you to write unto i as touch the war that his majesty have with our enemy , and how his majesty do prevail . and thus i rest . from Panama in the firm land the 28 . of Aug . 1590 . Hieronymo de Nabares .