and upon the river of saint Peter and S . Paul , take heed : for the say bay be a deep bay , and the hill of Tuspa have their end upon this bay . and in the mouth of this river of saint Peter and S . Paul be two hammock of white sand , the westermost be big than that on the north - east . and by and by you shall perceive the water to change white which come out of the river , and sound you shall find sand mix with clay upon your lead ; and look upon the west 319 all these be upon the coast of Tabasco . Las sierras de s . Pablo . Punta delgada , or the slender point . Cabezas anegada be sink head or rock under water . Comedera de pescado . the english voyage side , and you shall see the Sierras or mountain of saint Paul , which be two , and that on the north side be high than the other . mark of Almeria . if you shall chance to fall or come upon the plain of Almeria , it be a land full of many hammock , some with tufte of tree on they , and some bear with white sand , and in 60 . fathom you shall have clay or oaze , and in 30 . fathom to the landward sand . and from thence to Punta de hidalgo or Punta delgada the coast lie north - east and Southwest . sounding of Villa rica . if you fall with villa Rica in 30 . fathom , you shall find clay or oaze , and in some place stone , and near the land you shall have sand : and upon the port of saint Juan de ullua you shall have in some place clay or oaze , and in some place herring bone , and in other place maze and , and upon the rock call Cabezas anegada you shall have small black sand at 17 . fathom two league from land . and if you see a coast that lie north - east and Southwest , and another northwest and southeast , you shall be upon saint Paul : and if you shall be upon Cabezas anegada , you shall find in 30 . fathom great sand and black , and in 28 . fathom you shall have the sand white like the shave of free stone : and from saint Paul to the bar of Vera Cruz it be clay or oaze , and from thence to saint Juan de ullua you have many deep , which at one sound bring you clay , and at another sand , and at another clay and maze together , and herring bone : and in some 35 . or 40 . fathom you shall find rocky ground , and in some place sand , and in some other place herring bone : and we call this comedera de pescado , or the food of fish . 320 the course from Cabo de Corrientes and Cabo de S . Anton upon the west end of Cuba , towards Nueva Espanna , within the isle call los Alacranes , or the scorpion . f you sail from cape de Corrientes toward Nueva Espanna on the inside of the alacranes , you must stir west : and when you think you have sail 35 . or 40 . leag . you shall sound upon the pracel , and you shall come upon » = = = ^ = = 1 many bristling of water , which , if it be fair weather , will seem a skull of fish . and before you come out of the bristling , if you sound you shall have depth as i have say . if you go from cape de S . Anton by the inside of the alacranes , you must stir away west and by south , and you shall find sound in the same order as i have say : you shall have white sand , and near the land you shall find it like the shave and pecking of free stone , and white sand like houre - glasse - sand , and sometime periwinkle or small shell . also if you sound in deep water , and on the sudden find rock , then know that you be upon the alacrane , and then stir away westsouthwest until you find clean ground , and till you bring your self into 18 . or 20 . fathom . and if you go deep your water , then stir away west , and by these depth you shall go sound ; and then take your heighth by sun or star , you must beware that you pass not 21 . degree and J . or 21 . degree and J . at the most ; and in this heighth , and at 18 . or 20 . fathom you shall follow your way : and if you deepen water , edge to the northwestward , and if you alter more your depth , edge to the southwestward , until you have get so far ahead as cape sisal , and discover the coast of campeche , which coast lie north and south , and you shall take up on your lead ten 321 ten Cabo de Corrientes . Cabo de S . Anton . [ Iii . 620 . ] cape sisal upon the coast of campeche in Yucatan or Isla de Arenas . white sand like hourglass sand , and sometime periwinkle or small shell ; and by and by you shall go increase depth , until you lose it , and so shall you pass between the triangle and the sandy hand . the course between the triangle and the sandy island to saint Juan de ullua . when you have lose your depth , stir away south 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 west to fetch the Sierras or hill of saint Martin : Martin . and to know the hill of saint Martin , there be 2 . hill stretch north - east and Southwest , and the southwest be great than that on the north - east , but the northermost hill be high , and make on the top a flat point and very high , and without it , it have a island which Roco partida . be call Roca partida , or the cleave rock : and if it be clear , on the southwest side a high land like a topsail will appear , and then shall you be north and or minsapa . south with the pan or loaf of Nisapa . note , that these Sierras or hill of Sant Martin be all black and full of tree , and make no show as villa rica do : and mark this , that by how much you come near they , so much the high will they show unto you : neither shall you find any bottom till you be at the very shore . the course from Roca partida or the cleave rock to saint Juan de ullua . if you depart from Roca partida or the cleave rock for Sant Juan de ullua , you must stir away westnorthwest , and so shall you fetch or fall with or Antoni - the point of Anton Mislardo : and if you happen to serro ' sound upon the sink rock call Cabezas anegada , you shall have black sand and 17 . fathom water , and you shall be but a league from the land , and if you be 2 . league from the land , you shall have 34 . fathom . 322 the course from Sant Juan de ullua in the bay of Mexico to Spain in Europe . god ' s you depart from saint Juan de ullua to Havana , you must stir away north - east until you bring your self in 25 . degree , and from thence you must stir away east from the little island call las Tortugas , until you have the sound of they ; and if you find white sand very small , you shall be east and west with they , and if your sound bee shel ground and periwinkle , or small shell or scale , then shall you be Northeast and Southwest , and the shell or scale must be read , and if at some time you take up black sand , then be you north and south with the say Tortugas . mark off the Tortugas . if you chance to fall with the Tortugas , they be 5 . or 6 . little island of white sand , low and close by the sea , save one which have on it some shrub or bush of tree : and they be in 25 . degree . the course from the Tortugas towards Havana . if you depart from the Tortugas towards Havana with a fresh wind , you must stir away Southwest : and if it be fair weather , and a small gale of wind , then stir south , that the current may not draw you in , nor set you too much to the westward : and if you fall with los organos , they be a rank of high and low hill with many sharp head like unto organ pipe and at the enter thereof on the south side be Rio de puercos , or the river of hog ; and at the further end be the deep bay call Baya honda , and there be the round loaf or heap call el pan de baya honda , that be to say , the loaf of the deep bay : and from this place until you come to cape 323 Las Tortugas , the hill call los organo upon Cuba near Havana . Rio de puercos . Baya honda . [ Iii . 621 . ] the tower of Havana . de saint Anton all be sholde and flat 4 . or 5 . league into the sea , even as far as the say cape : and from Baya honda or the deep bay to Havana , all the coast be full of high and low hill , which they call la quadrilla de sierras , which be as much to say , as a company of hill together like soldier on a heap ; and more to the eastward you shall descry a high hill which be call el pan de Cabannas . and if you fall with Havana , you shall see on the southwest side a hill call la meza de Marien , or the table of Marien ; and if it be clear , you shall see low to the westward the heap or loaf that be call el pan de Cabannas . you must note , that about Havana it be all low land even with the sea , till you come to Mesa de Marien , and then look well within the land , and you shall see 2 . little round tree like to the teat of woman breast ; and bring your self north and south , you shall be with the harbour of Havana , and then shall you soon perceive the tower that be upon the cliff of Havana . mark off the haven or port call Puerto de Marien . puerto de Marien be a harbour that you may enter into without any danger or fear , but at the entrance thereof you must borrow on the west side , by reason of the rock and shelf , and when you be within , then borrow on the east shore , and leave the note . other side , and so shall you enter safe : and from this place to Havana be all low land . note , that if you overpass the harbour of Havana to the eastward , or if the current have set you past it by mean of calm , then shall you perceive at full sea upon the Chipiona a coast certain break place like the entrance of har - towne stand bour , because the land be low ; and come near ^ fAndalu ^ ia shore you shall see in some place of the coast next unto saint Playas or strand of sand which show like unto Lucar . Chipiona : and look eastward along the sea coast , 324 you shall see a round loaf which be call el pan de ElPan Matanzas : and also you shall perceive in certain tanz ^ ' place round white heap of sand call Barrancas , if you will recover Havana , go along the coast close creek or by the land , for the current run very swift in the break channel , and there be no fear but of that which you may see ; for all the coast be clean ground . * the course from Havana to Spain . if you will sail from Havana to Spain , you must stir away Northeast , till you come to the head of the martyr call la Cabeza de los martyr . if it chance before you come to the say head , that the wind shall chap up at north on you , then stand to the eastward , until you bring your self as far ahead as Matanzas ; then cast about to the west , to discover the land of the martyr , or of Florida , that the current may not set you on the mimbre : and if by chance you see the pan de Matanzas at full sea , it have these mark follow . it be a round heap or loaf , and high withal , and on the western side thereof , appear a rock like to the head of a tortoise : and between this pan and the hill of Seluco , there will appear unto you a great break land , like as it be sink place , and upon the east side of this pan towards Punta de los puercos it be all low land , and you shall see no high land at all : and be so far shoot , that this pan de Matanzas shall bear westnorthwest and southsoutheast off you , and be desirous also to avoid the fury of the current of the channel of Bahama , stir away northnortheast , and by this course you shall pass the channel , and win the coast of Florida . Cabeza de los MarAres . which MarAres be a number of small hand lie ahead the cape of Florida . los mimbre . the mark of pan de Matanzas . Punta de los puercos . the furious current in the channel of Bahama . mark off the head of the martyr call Cabeza de los martyr . the head of the martyr be three heap of white sand full of tree , and that in the midst have on the top a crown , as it be of white sand , and be high 325 direction to and big than the other two : and to know whether you know whether be entrej ; unto the channel , mark well how the coast lie chaneuof you ;