a principal ruttier contain most particular direction to sail from saint Lucar in andalusia by the isle of the canary , the small isle call las Antillas , along the south part of the isle of S . Juan de Puerto rico , Hispaniola and Cuba : and from Cabo de Corrientes , or Cabo de S . Anton without and within the little isle call los Alacranes , to the port of saint Juan de ullua in nueva espanna : and the course from thence back again by Havana , and through the channel of Bahama to Spain : together with the speciali mark of all the cape , island , and other place by the way ; and a brief declaration of their latitude and longitude . Punta de Naga . f you depart from the bar of saint Lucar de Barameda towards the west India in the summer time , you must stir away southwest until you come to the headland call Punta de Naga upon the isle of tenerif . but if your departure be from the say bar in the winter , you must stir away Southwest and by south , until you come to the height of cape Cantin on the coast of Barbary : the mark and sign whereof be these follow . [ in . 614 . ] the mark to know cape Cantin . cape Cantin be a low cape and small to the sea ward , and make a snout like the nose of a galley , and have upon the top of the point a heath or shrubby place , and on the top thereof stand two hammock , that to the seaward be high than the other ; but that on the Souther side show like a tower : and his cape be in 32 . degree and J . 306 and he that will seek from this cape to discover Punta de Naga beforesaid , must stir away Southwest and by west , until he bring himself north - east and Southwest with the same point , and then he must stir away south to fetch the say point . the sign of Punta de Naga . the say point or headland be a high point of land , and plain upon the top like a table , and without it there be two little rocky island ; and upon the north side of the say point be another point call Punta de hidalgo , and upon the top thereof be 2 . pick p ™ 1 ? and rock like unto the ear of a hare . 1 a ' the course from the canary to the west Indies . f you set sail from any of the island of the canary for the west India , you must stir away 30 . or 40 league due south , to the end you may avoid the calm of the island of Fierro : calm off and be so far distant from the say pterr °- island , then must you stir away west Southwest , until you find your self in 20 . degree , and then sail west and by south until you come to 15 . degree and and from thence stir away west and by north ; and so shall you make a west way by reason of the northwest of the compass : which west variation way will bring you to the island of Deseada . °^ the i ° i compass . the mark of the island of Deseada . this island Deseada lie east Northeast , and west Southwest , have no tree upon it , and it be proportion like a galley , and the north - east end thereof make a low nose like the snout of a galley ; and by come near it , and pass by the norther end thereof , you shall perceive white break patch like heap of sand with red strike in they : and the southwest 3 ° 7 Deseada in 15 . degree and a half . end of this island make like the tilt of a galley . and this island stand in 15 . degree and J . mark off the island of monserate . monserate be a high island , and round , full of tree , and upon the east side thereof you shall perceive certain white spot like sheet : and be upon the south side at the very point of the island , somewhat off the land , it make like a little island , and put your self either east or west from that point , in the midst thereof will appear a great break land . mark off the island of Marigalanta . MArigalanta be a smooth island , and full of wood or tree , and as it be of the fashion of a galley upon her deck : and be on the southeast side about half a league off you shall make certain hammock of black stone , and certain white patch : but on the west side appear fair white sandy shore or plain . mark off the isle of Dominica . the island of Dominica lie northwest and southeast , and upon the northwest side it show more high : and if you come near it at full sea , it will show like two island , but by come near unto it , you shall perceive it to be but one : and upon the southeast side you shall make or see a plain and long point , and upon the same point appear a cliff like to the cliff of cape Tiburon ; and upon the north side a little from the land it show like a little island , and upon the top thereof be , as it be , a high steeple , and upon the norther side you shall perceive it like many white sheet . mark off the island of Guadalupe . the island of Guadalupe lie on the west of Deseada , and upon the southwest part thereof appear many high mountain , but upon the east side it make certain table , which be call the high part of guada - 308 lupe . and this island be cut north and south ; so that the canoas of India do pass from the north to the south of it , as if it be two island . mark off the isle of Matalina , or Martinino . [ ill . 615 . ] the isle of Matalina be high and full of mountain , have in the midst thereof 3 . hammock : the middlemost homocke be high show like the great bowl of a hat . and upon the north side it appear like three little island . and in this island there be warlike Indian like those of Dominica . mark off the three small island call Islas de los santos , or the island of Saintes . warlike and dangerous Indian like those of Dominica . los Santos be 3 . Islandes lie one close by another upon the south side of Guadalupe . for to go with saint Juan de Puerto rico you must stir away northwest , until you fall with the isle of Saba . mark to know the isle of Saba . SAba be a little island , and round about it you shall see the bottom ; but fear not , for there be no danger but that which you shall see ; and round about it , it make as it be certain heap of white sand ; and by the side thereof it show like a ship under sail : but follow that direction that i have give , and you shall see la virgin gorda . mark to know the isle call la virgin gorda . la virgin gorda be a high island and round , and see it , you shall espy all the rest of the virgin which lie east and west one from another , and be bare without any tree . you may go about by they until Theise z . the white and the grey island be rather bare rock in the sea , fir so do far - rallon the spanish word signify . but 1 interpret it island , because all the rock separatedfrom the big island be say to be little island . this white y bare island be make white by the dung of bird and sea you see the little grey island , which you shall see by it self by the virgin ; and come near to the say island , over that you shall by and by raise sight of the white that little island , which seem like a ship under sail . and if resort unto it . 3 ° 9 you will pass between this little white island or bare rock , and the green island , you must beware that you leave the white island on the larbourd side of you , and come no near it then a caliver - shot , and so shall you pass through 12 . fathom - water : and then stir away northnorthwest , and so shall you enter into the haven of Puerto rico : and if you chance to pass the say island by night , go by the foresay direction , until the first watch be out , and then take in your sail , and so drive until it be near day : and then hoist sail , and stir away Southwest , seek the say port : and when you come to the enter within , you must stay till 10 . of the clock for the sea - turne . and know , that have the Loguilo at Southwest , then shall the harbour be off you north and south . direction from monserate to Santa Cruz . he that depart from monserate to Santa Cruz , must stir away westnorthwest : and by the same course you shall seize upon saint Juan de Puerto rico . ' mark to know the isle of Santa Cruz . santa Cruz be a island not very high , all full of hammock : and come with it at full sea , it will show like the virgin : and upon the east side there be two hammock high than all the rest . and by this course you may go to the isle of S . Juan de Puerto rico ; and have find it , you may sail along the south coast east and west , until you come to Cabo roxo . mark to know cape Roxo . cape Roxo be a low cape and trail to the seaward , have certain heap of break ground thereon , which be like a homocke , and at full sea the same show like a little island from the land by it self , but come near unto it , it will make all a whole land . 310 direction from Cabo roxo to the isle of Mona . if you will seek Mona from cape roxo , you must stir away west and by north . mark off the isle of Mona . the isle of Mona be a low , round , and smooth island , lie low by the sea , and full of tree : and to go from thence to the isle of Saona you must stir away west ; and if you fall with it in the night season , and come any thing near the land , then stir away west and by south , until it be near day , that you may keep your self by the land ; and if so be that in the morning you see it not , then stir away northwest , and so shall you find it : and if it be fair weather , and you perceive that the current have set you to the southwest , then stir away northnorthwest , and so shall you go clear off the land . mark off the isle of Saona . [ ill . 616 . ] if you chance to see the isle of Saona , it be a island smooth with the sea , and lie north - east and Southwest , and you shall see the tree before you see the island : and on the southwest end of this island appear a great high bank of white sand which be call the head of Saona . and if you will come to a anchor , you may , for all be clear ground . and to go from this island to Santa Catelina , you must stir away northwest . mark off the isle of Santa Catelina . santa Catelina be a little low island all full of low rock even from the water , and have not any tree , and it be close by the land ; and if you do not run along the coast of Hispaniola , you shall not see it : and from that island to go to saint Domingo , you shall sail along as the land lie , west and by north : ^ 11 and before you come to the point call causedo , you shall see certain hole in rock , which lie alongst as these rock the rock do that cast up the water , which will show be call los to spout of whale . and a little ahead off the mute ’ ° r that » y ° u shah see the point of Andresa : and ahead the point of thereof the point of causedo . this point or causedo causedo . lie low close by the water , and pass thereby , the coast will make to thou northwest and southeast ; and San Domingo , from thence to saint Domingo be 5 . league . and if the wind chap up at north upon you , by mean whereof you shall be cast off from the coast or port , and that Sierras de las you happen to see the old mine ( call Sierras de las mina mejas . mjnas viejas ) bear northwest off you , and the teat which be within the land be open of you , then shall you be north and south with the harbour ; and if the old mine bear north off you , then shall you be below the harbour . the point of Hisao . the isle of Beata . Ocoa . Puerto hermoso . the isle of Alto velo . direction from saint Domingo to Nueva Espanna . if you will sail from saint Domingo in Hispaniola to Nueva Espanna , stir away southsouth west , until you come up as far as the point of Nizao : and from thence stir away westsouth west , and so you shall find the isle of Beata . and if you sail from this point of Nizao for Ocoa , you must pass along the coast west and by north , until you come to Puerto Hermoso , or the beautiful haven , which be 18 . league distant from saint Domingo : and if you proceed from Puerto Hermoso for Nueva Espanna , you must stir away southsouthwest , until you look out for Beata and Alto velo . mark off the isle