the victorious voyage of captain Amias Preston now knight , and captain George Sommers to the west India , begin in march 1595 . wherein the isle of Puerto Santo , the isle of coach near Margarita , the fort and town of Coro , the stately city of saint Iago de Leon be take sack and burn , and the town of Cumana ransom , and Jamaica enter . write by Robert Davie one of the company . aptaine Amias Preston , and captain Sommers , both valiant gentleman and discreet commander , lie ready with two tall ship , the ascension and the gift , and a small pinnace at Plymouth , for the space of a month attend the come of captain Jones their consort , which in all that time , through the bad deal of those which he put in trust , can not make his ship in readiness , accord to his appointment , the 12 . of march 1595 . set forward on their voyage for the west Indies . we with captain Jones in the darling , and captain Prowse in the angel , follow after they the 19 of the say month . the last of march , captain Preston by give chase to a sail , be separate from captain Sommers , and his pinnace , so that they utter lose sight each of other : whereupon captain Preston in his ship alone , resolve to surprise the isle of Puerto santo , and short after come before the same . this island stand in the northerly latitude of 33 . degree , and lie to the northward of the isle of Madera , and be inhabit by old soldier , which the king of Portugal be wont to reward for their former old service , by place of they there . this island be rich in corn , wine , and oil : and have good store of sheep , ass , goat and cow : they have also plenty of fowl , fish , and fruit . 213 the isle of Puerto Santo take and the chief town in it burn . the english voyage captain Preston come before this island with one ship only seek with 2 . long boat to land his man and to force the same : but the people be on shore in warlike array , with barricado and trench make , ready to withstand they . whereupon , consider the great danger , and disadvantage of the place , he cause his people to return aboard again . and the next morning 3 or 4 hour before day , he land in a place of great security , with 6o man only , who lie close in a chapel , to defend themselves from the rain till break of the day , and so march forward upon the back of their enemy , which keep their barricado upon the shore . by this time the enemy be 500 strong . but , be so sudden surprise , after some resistance of our musket , when they see our pike approach , and have taste somewhat of their force they begin to flee into certain thicket , and shrub , think from thence to gall our man : but with very little or no loss at all , our man dislodge they of that place also . hereupon , they all flee towards the chief town of the island : but once again they think to make a new stand at a certain house by the way , from whence they be repulse by captain Roberts . so in the flight part of they be slay , and a ensign , which one captain Harvey a english man have lose not long before , be recover : and the chief town it self be by our man whole win and possess . but before the entrance of our man they have convey their wife , their child , and the rest of their good into a exceed high hill which stand near the town , and can not be conquer , but with exceed loss . although they send diverse time to redeem their town , which be very fair and large , yet in regard of their cruelty and treachery , which they use towards captain Harvey and his people , captain Preston will show they no favour , but utter burn their town to ash , and send his man to waste the rest of their village of the island , prefer the honour and just revenge of his country man , before his own private gain , and 214 Amias Preston and George Sommers a . d . .. * 595 - commodity . and so with small pillage and great honour he retire in safety and all his small company with he , from the conquer island unto his ship . but we in our ship meet not with he , until the 12 . of April follow . we therefore in the darling pursue our voyage , have [ three . 579 . ] sight of the isle of the canary the 6 of April , and the 8 of the same , we water on the southeast side water of the grand Canaria . there we meet with captain . o o i • • o 1 • / * t t - Canaria . bommers , and his pinnace , and 3 ship or Hampton , in one whereof be cap . Willis . the 9 of April we all depart for tenerif to seek captain Preston : and stand over towards tenerif , the 9 day at night i come into captain summer ship . the 10 in the morning we break our main yard , yet we recover tenerif , and the same day towards night we anchor under the southside of the same . there i go aland in our boat , and find 3 or 4 fisher boat , and bring one of they off . the rest bulge themselves . here we ride to mend our yard till the 11 at night : than we set sail to find captain Amias Preston : and stand towards Gomera , the 12 in the morning we have sight of he . than we think to have land in Gomera : but the wind blow so much , that we can not . so we depart altogether with joy the 13 of April , and set our course for the west Indies . and the 8 of may next ensue , we arrive at the island of Dominica . in all which time Dominica . nothing happen unto we save this , that the 18 day of April at midnight , our admiral lose her long boat in tow . we stay at Dominica till the 14 of may , to refresh our sick man . here the Indian come unto we in canoas mad of a whole tree , in some whereof be 3 man , in some 4 or 6 , and in other 12 or 14 , and bring in they plantan , pino , and potatos , and truck with we , for hatchet , knife , and small bead - stone . here in refresh of our man , we find a excellent hot bath hard join to a cold river side : wherein our hlesome sick man bathe themselves , and be soon recover on ^ a in of their sickness . this be a goodly island , and some - 215 thing high land , but all overgrow with wood . the 14 we depart from thence , and the 16 sail southwestward , we have sight of Granada , but land not there . the isle call the 17 we arrive at the testigo and anchor there , and testigo , consort with the 3 ship of Hampton , wherein captain Willis be . the 18 we land our man and take view and muster of all , and the same night set sail away . the 19 we have sight of Margarita , where the Spaniard by their Indian fish for pearl : we stand in very near the road , but see nothing there . therefore we go no further in , but stand from it again . the same day towards night , we have sight of a little island , between Margarita and the main , call coach . we come near it in the night with our ship within some 3 league , and there anchor under the main side , and about midnight we man our pinnace and boat , and in the morning about break of day , we land on the island , wherein be few or none inhabitant , but they common come from Margarita in boat on the Monday , and remain there fish for pearl until the Saturday , and then return and carry all that they have take to Margarita . certain here we take some few Spaniards and Negros their t ^ taken s ^ aves an ^ and some small quantity of pearl . intheyletf ^ e remain on this hand the 20 and 21 , in which time Cache where we go a fish with our seine , and take good store they fish fir of mullet and other fish , and among the rest draw pearl . a shore in the seine a fish call by the Spaniard Lagarto , and by the Indian Caiman , which be indeed a crocodile , for it have 4 foot and a long tail , and a wide mouth , and long tooth , and will devour man . some of these lagartos be in length 16 foot , some 20 foot , and some 30 foot : they have musk in they , and live as well on the land , as in the water . the 21 of may we depart for Cumana , think to have get in that night to have land : but the current strike so strong out of the bay that we can not recover the town till day light . in the morning we espy 2 sail before the town , but can not fetch they . here we ply 216 too and again in the sound all the forenoon , but can not get up so far as the town . Theise 2 sail come room to we , after they see that we be at a anchor , and come somewhat near we , and send their skyph aboard our admiral . they be 2 flyboat of Middleburgh which trade there , 8c have secret advertise the country of our come , to our great hindrance : but we know it not at our first arrival . here they of Cumana perceive that we will land , come to parley with we , and tell we , if we will land , we may easy take the town , for they mean not to withstand we , but that they have carry all their good into the mountain , but , if we will not land to burn and spoil the town , they will give we some reasonable ransom , and any victual that we want . so our general agree with they , receive their ransom , and depart without land . but at our first arrival in this bay , our general long boat be send forth well man , and take 3 caravel , but find little or nothing of value in they : save in one be some side of bacon , and some maiz and guiny - wheat . here we stay till the 23 of may , 8c in the evening we set sail , and depart from thence . and the 26 of the same we think to have land at a fort that stand by the sea - coast in the caraco , as you go for saint Iago . this be a marvelous high land , as high as the pike of tenerif . we can not land here over night , by reason of the roughness of the sea , which go in that place , 8c there be but one little creek against the fort , to come in with your boat . So , we perceive no fit place to land , by reason of the sea , stand away some league to the westward , about a little headland , there we anchor all night : and the 27 in the morning we all land in safety , none resist we . than we present set our self in array , and march towards the fort , 8c take it without any resistance . here we remain all the rest of this day until the 28 , about three of the clock in the afternoon . we find nothing in this fort but a 217 two jlieboat of Middleburgh forewarn the Spaniard of our come . the town of Cumana ransom . three caravel take . a fort near the caraco take . [ Iii . 580 . ] all our action betray by dangerous spy out of England . little meal , or 2 or 3 ton of wine , which by reason of some disorder among the company overcharge themselves with the wine , our general for the most part cause to be spill . while we remain here , some of our company range the wood , find the governor of the fort where he lie asleep , bring he to our general : who examine he touch the state of the city of saint Iago de Leon . who declare unto we that they have news of our come a month before , and that they of the town have make preparation for our come : and that if we do go the common beat way , it be never possible for we to pass , for that they have make in the midst of the way between this fort and the say city , a exceed strong barricado on the top of a very high hill , the passage be not above 25 or 30 foot in breadth , and on each side marvelous steep - upright , and the wood so thick that no man can pass for his life : which indeed at our return back we find to be true . upon which speech our general demand of he if there be not any other way : who answer , there be another way marvelous bad and very ill to travel , which the Indian do common use : but he think that the Spaniard have stop the same , by cut down of great tree and other thing , as indeed they have . This Spaniard be a very weak and sickly man not able to travel , so our general scent he aboard his ship , and there keep he . in the take of our 3 small caravel at Cumana , we have a Spaniard in one of they that have travel these way to the city of saint Iago . he tell we he will carry we thither by any of both these way , if afterward we will set he at liberty : the which be grant . while we remain at the fort by the water side , the Spaniard come down unto we by the great 8c beat way on horseback , who be discover , our general scent out to meet they captain Roberts with some 40 or 50 musketeir , who come to skirmish with they , but they will not stay . the same day in the afternoon we march forth towards saint Iago , and take 218 the Indian way call the unknown way . in our march we come to diverse Indian house , which we never hurt , but pass by and leave they untouched : but the Indian be all flee into the wood , and other place , we know not whither . we march until it be night over such high mountain , as we never see the like , and such a way as one man can scarce pass alone . our general be in the forward , at length come whereas a river descend down over the mountain , and there we lodge all that night . here in go this way , we find the spanish governor confession to be true : for they have barricade the way in diverse place with tree , and other thing in such sort , that we be drive to cut our way through the wood by carpenter , which we carry with we for that purpose . the next day be the 29 of May early in the morning we set forward to recover the top of the mountain : but ( God know ) they be so extreme high and so steep - upright , that many of our soldier faint by the way : and when the officer come unto they , and first entreat they to go , they answer , they can go no further . than they think to make they go by compulsion , but all be in vain : they will go a little and then lie down , and bid they kill they , if they will , for they can not , nor will not go any further . whereby they be enforce to depart , and to leave they there lie