the voyage true discourse , make by sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins , chief pretend for some speciali service on the island and main of the west Indies , with six of the queen ship , and 21 other ship and bark , contain 2500 man and boy , in the year 1595 . in which voyage both the foresay knight die by sickness . i break ground out of the sound of Plymouth on Thursday the 28 of August , and that night ankor again in Causon bay , where we ride till Friday . than we set sail and stand Southwest : and about three of the clock the next morning the hope , wherein sir Thomas Baskervil go , strike upon the eddy stone , and shoot oflr a piece , but after clear herself well enough . on Monday at six of the clock in the morning the land end bare northwest and by north , and 226 last voyage of drake and Hawkins then we stand away Southwest and by south for the coast of Spain . the 8 of September we take two small flemish fliboat bind for Barbary ; which we carry a while with we and afterward dismiss they without do they any harm : only we learn news of they , and stay they from descry our fleet to the enemy . the 26 we see Forteventura , be one of the island of the canary . the 27 be Saturday by break ot day we nad overshot the chief town of grand Canaria to the north - east , and then stand about for it again , and by nine of the clock be at anchor fair before the fort to the eastward of the town some league . at one of the clock we offer to land one thousand and four hundred man in the sandy bay betwixt the fort and the town : but by our detract of the time they have make a bulwark in the sandy bay and plant ordinance : so that by reason thereof , and the great breach of the sea that go then on shore we be not able to land without endanger our whole force , which our general will not do . there be of Spaniards horseman and footman some 900 , which play upon we out of their trench , most of they be shoot . at the time of our land there go by commandment of our general within musket shoot of the shore , and ride there at anchor some three hour , the Salomon , the Bonaventure , the Elizabeth Constance , the phoenix , the jewel , the little John , the delight , the Pegasus , the exchange , the Francis , the caravel , and the two catch : but when the general sir Francis Drake give over the land being in his barge , the ship weigh be in some danger , and stand off again to the great ship . than we go to the west end of the island and there water : where captain Grimston go up the hill with 6 or 7 in his company be set upon by the herdsman , who with their dog and staff kill the captain and three or four of his company : 227 the rest be sore wound : the Salomons chirurgeon take prisoner , who disclose our pretend voyage as much as in he lie : so as the viceroy send a caravel of adviso into the Indies , unto all such place as we do pretend to go to . howbeit they have intelligence from the king of all our voyage the eight of August , which be three week before we set forth of England : as also by a fleme that have see all our provision at London . the 28 be Sunday at ten of the clock at night we set sail , and stand away Southwest and Southsouthwest some 200 league , until we come in the height of the island of cape Verde , and then more westerly for Martinino , one of the island of the west Indies , which we see the 27 of October : but the night before we have a storm , in which sir Francis with four or five other ship bear on head of the fleet be Dominica , separate . than we stand for Dominica , a island full of inhabitant of the race of the cannibal , not past ten league distant from Martinino . in it grow great store of tobacco : where most of our English and french man barter knife , hatchet , saw , and such like iron tool in truck of tobacco . before we come to Dominica our general sir Francis Drake alter his course , and go for Marigalante , which we have sight of the 28 day , and come to a anchor on the north - east side a saker shoot off the shore in 13 fathom water fair shold . there the general go on shore in his barge , and by chance meet a Canoa of Dominicans , to the people whereof he give a yellow [ three . 584 . ] waistcoat of flannel and a handkerchief ; and they give he such fruit as they have , and the dominicanes row to Dominica again . they come thither to fetch some fruit which they sow and plant in diverse place of that island , which they keep like garden . the next morning by break of day we weigh and stand between the todo santos , which be 4 or 5 little island between Guadalupe and Dominica . there 228 be nothing upon these island but wood . we come to the southeast side of Guadalupe and there anchor hard aboard the shore : the southwest side of the island be deep water and good ankorage : where that day sir John Hawkins come to we again stand up from the south side of Dominica . there we water , wash our ship , set up our pinnace , and refresh our soldier on shore . the 30 captain Wignol in the Francis , a bark of 3 5 ton , be the sternmost of sir John Hawkins fleet be chase by five of the king of Spain frigate or zabra be ship of 200 ton a piece , which come of purpose with 3 . other zabra for the treasure of saint Juan de Puerto rico : the Francis go room with they , suppose they have be our own fleet , be by they take in sight of our caravel . they leave the Francis drive in the sea with 3 or 4 hurt and sick man , and take the rest of our man into their ship , as the prisoner which we take at saint Juan de Puerto rico tell we . the 4 of November we begin to unlade the Richard , one of our victualler , which be by the next day unlade , unrip and then sink . than we stand northwest and by north : and the next morning see the hand of monserrata , Redonda , Estazia , saint Christopher and Saba . the big of these island be not past 8 league long . there be good ankorage in 8 , 7 , and 5 fathom water fair white sand . than we stand away Southwest , and on the 8 in the morning be Saturday come to a anchor some 7 or 8 league off within certain break hand call las virgin , which have be account dangerous : but we find there a very good road , have it be for a 1000 sail of ship in 14 , 12 , and 8 fathom fair sand and good ankorage , high island on either side , but no fresh water that we can find : here be much fish to be take with hook and net : also we stay on shore and foul . here sir John Hawkins be extreme sick ; which his sickness 229 the fight at saint Juan de Puerto rico . the english voyage begin upon news of the take of the Francis . the 18 day we weigh and stand north and by east into a lesser sound , which sir Francis in his barge discover the night before , and ankor in 13 fathom , have high steep hill on either side , some league distant from our first ride . the 12 in the morning we weigh and set sail into the sea due south through a small strait but without danger , and then stand west and by north for saint Juan de Puerto rico , and in the after noon leave the 3 small island call the passage to the southward of we , and that night come up to the eastermost end of saint John , where sir John Hawkins depart this life : upon who decease sir Thomas Baskervil present go into the garland . at 2 of the clock we come to anchor at the estermost side of the chief town call Puerto rico in a sandy bay 2 mile off : where we receive from their fort and place where they plant ordinance some 28 great shot , the last of which strike the admiral through the mizzen , and the last but one strike through her quarter into the steerage , the general be there at supper , and strike the stool from under he , but hurt he not , but hurt at the same table sir Nicholas Clifford , m . brown , captain Stratford , with one or two more . sir Nicholas Clifford and master brown die of their hurt . than we set sail and stand to the eastward , and at midnight tack about to the west , and in the morning come to a anchor before the point without the town , a little to the westwards by the 3 island . the 13 we ride still until night , when in the beginning with twenty five pinnace , boat and shallop man and furnish with firework and small shot we go into the road within the great castle , and in despite of they fire the five zabra of frigate , all ship of two hundred ton the piece or more , quite burn the rearadmiral down to the water , which be the great ship of they all , and also mighty spoil 230 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a . d . ... I595 - the admiral and viceadmiral , notwithstanding the castle and ship give we a hundred eighty and five great shot , beside small shot abundance . they have also sink a great ship in the mouth of the channel and raft it over with her mast almost to the very fort and castle , so as they think it impregnable . the frigate have in each of they twenty piece of brass , and a hundred barrel of powder . their chief lade that they bring thither be silk , oil , and wine . the treasure which they go to fetch , which be bring thither in a ship call the Vigonia , be convey into the strong and sure castle of defence ; be , as one of the prisoner confess , three million of ducat or five and thirty ton of silver . also they have send all the woman , child , and unable person into the wood , and leave none but soldier and fight man in the town . the fight on our side be resolute , hot , and dangerous : wherein we lose some forty or fifty man , and so many [ in . 585 . ] be hurt . there be also great death of the Spaniard aboard the frigate , with burn , drown , and kill , and beside some take prisoner . the 14 we ride still , be within shot of the uttermost castle : but they fear the next night we will come in again , begin to warp up the other 4 frigate , begin first with the admiral : which whether by chance or their own will we see to sink ; and as we suppose so do they with all the rest , or else by stealth get up far within their chief force . the 15 also we ride still , and at afternoon we espy a caravel come from the castle point : but before our pinnace can fetch she up , she run on shore , where our boat can not come at she because of the breach , and also many of the islander come down to guard she with shot . the beginning of this night we weigh , and stand one hour to the east , and then tack about to the west . the 16 be Sunday , and the 17 also we be becalm . 231 the 18 we anchor a little to the southward of the southwest point of the island , give the point a birth because of a shall of sand that lie some two cable length off : there we ride in four , five , and six fathom fair white sand , where we set up more pinnace , wash our ship , and refresh our man on shore . here the general take a pinnace of Hispaniola with diverse letter , signify that two Englishmen of war have do great hurt along their island . the 20 the general row to the phoenix , the delight and the caravel , and cause they to weigh and anchor right against the mouth of a fresh river in two fathom water in ozy sand to the southward of the other ship some league or more . the general go into this river three or four league up , and take horse in the country . sir Thomas Baskervil row up the river , and stay there all night , and go up into the land three or four league . the 23 we discharge a bark call the pulpit and burn she : and at three of the clock that afternoon , when we be ready to set sail , there come aboard the defiance our admiral , a Spaniard with his wife , who fear some great torment for not have repair to the town accord to the general commandment of that island , who have command that all able man of the fleet shall repair to the town to defend it against we . than we stand again west and by north because of a ledge of rock that lie sink 4 or 5 league off the southside of the island . the 25 we stand away southwest , and see Mona Mona , be a low flat island between Hispaniola and S . Juan de Puerto rico . that day the exchange of captain winter spend her boult - sprite ; and in the begin of the night the phoenix be send back to seek she : which by God help that night meet with she , and keep her company until the next morning , then take in a small cable from she for a tow : but by 9 that morning she spend her main mast and split her foreyard , 232 last voyage of drake and Hawkins oh .. 1595 - break also her tow : so as they be fain to save some trifle out of she and the man , and to sink the hull . than we