and if you perceive that the coast bear off Bahama or no . you east and west , you be not in the channel ; but if the coast shall bear off you north - east and Southwest , then be you in the channel ; and take your heighth you shall know : for if you find your self in 24 . degree and then be you east and west with the head of the martyr : and if you see the coast bear off you north - east and Southwest , ( as i have say ) stir away 4 . or 5 . league from the landward right off ; and then stir away Northeast : and be in 28 . degree and a Cabo de half , you shall be shoot out of the channel , and then shall Cannaveralin you he gast anj west with cape de cannaveral , or ahalfi : the cape of reed . the course to come through the channel of Bahama homeward for Spain . the course in t f in winter you shall pass through the channel of winter . i [ Bahama for Spain , stir away the first Sangradura or course Eastnortheast , and afterward east and by north , and so shall you pass by the south side of Bermuda : and you must take heed that you go these four hundred or five hundred league , because you shall the isle of not come near the say isle of Bermuda ; and when Bermuda . you be go this course , then put your self in what heighth you will , and make your way as you will your the course in self . but if you pass the channel in the summer time over ™ 1 ™ ? towards Spain , stir away eastnortheast , and you shall northerly . pass by the north side of Bermuda ; and when you have bring your self in 35 . degree , stir east and by north until ! you bring your self to 25 . degree and and from thence stir away east for the isle of Fayal or of Flores . [ in . 622 . ] mark to know the isle of Fayal . the island call Fayal upon the southwest side , make a high hill or loaf like to the top of Brasilia in the island of Terzera ; and behind that 326 high pike or loaf be a harbour call Puerto Pini , Puerto Pint . and upon the east side it make a little plain island ; and upon the north side there stand a rock or island by it self . and from this island be one of the azore , you may shape your course to which of the island you please , or to any other place which you know . mark to know the isle of Flores . if you happen to fall with Flores first , by this you shall know it : the island lie Northeast and Southsouthwest , and the west end thereof make a rock or cliflfe like the cliff of Tiburon ; and come near the land , you shall see two little island near the point of the land ; and to the northward of this cliff or rock a little from the land you may ride and water ; and between that and the village , in every bay you may likewise ride and water : and you shall see the water run into the sea in every part that you look on . now follow the course and direction to sail from passage on the north - east part of saint Juan de Puerto rico , unto Havana , by the north side of the isle of Hispaniola , and by the old channel . f you depart from saint Juan de Puerto rico to seek Cabo deal Enganno , you must stir away westnorthwest , and so shall you see a round heap or loaf in the sea , which lie on the southwest side of the gulf of Semana ; and from thence it begin about the hill of the cape deal Enganno , and this be the mouth of the gulf . and if it shall be near night when you see this land , stir away northwest with a small sail , because of certain rock el passaje a place on the north - east part of the isle of S . Juan de Puerto rico . Cabo deal Enganno the most easterly cape of Hispaniola . or Samana . call alas ovejas , or the sheep : and in the morning cast alas ovejas . about to see the land to the southwestward ; and if when 327 Isla de tortuga : otherwise call Hinagua . the isle of Jaico . Las sierras de cabanca . Cayo Romano . this word Cayo in the biscaian tongue signifies a flat or a shall . Cabo de Cruz . the english voyage you see the land , it seem unto you a small island at full sea like a round mountain , then be it the cape deal Enganno : and from thence stir away west and by north towards Cabo Franco . mark of Cabo Franco . CAbo Franco be a low cape even with the sea , and have these markes * and from thence stir away west , and you shall see a high mountain , and on the top thereof a cloudy homock like the top of a hat : and at the foot of this hill be the haven or harbour call el puerto de plata . and if you will go into this port , you must leave the island on the west side , and then take heed of that which you see , and borrow on the castle side . and from thence to go with the old channel , you must stir away northwest , until you come out of sight of land , and then stir away west and by north , and so shall you go with the land of Baracoa , and here be hill very high , which make the teat which look like 3 . crown . and you shall pass between the isle of Tortugas , or Hinagua , and the island of Jaico : and from thence run alongst the coast Northeast and Southwest ; and have double the outmost high hill or mountain , you shall see in the midst thereof a round hill , and upon the southwest side by the sea you shall see a low even land four or five league long , and a low point , and this point of the hill be call la sierras de cabanca ; and then begin the bay of Cayo Romano : and ahead the sierras you shall see a round loaf which be in the midst of the same bay , and ahead of that you shall see a hill flat on the top like a table six or seven league , which hill be not very high , and from these hill to Cayo Romano you have five and thirty league , and you must stir the one half of the course northwest , and the other half northwest and by west , and so shall you make or see the say Cayo Romano upon the larboard side of you . note , that from Cayo Romano to Cabo de Cruz you have three league , and they lie north and south one from another . 328 Romano be a high island , and lie north - east Southwest , and stretch it self as it be 4 . league : and come on it north - east and Southwest , it make a loaf or round heap or homock ; in the midst this island lie ioo . league from Havana . there be two saddle , as we term they , or low partition , the one on the one side , and the other on the other side ; and come with it north and south , it make all one low send or saddle in the midst . and if night shall come on you at this Cayo Romano , enter not the [ he . 623 . ] channel , because in the mid way be a isle , flat , or Cayo , which lie north and south with Cayo Romana , and it be call Cayo de la Cruz : and at full sea you shall discern a heath , which this Cayo have in the midst of it , which be like to a sail ; but all night bear but your foresail a glass one way and another glass the other way until it be day , and then enter the channel , and leave these Cayos , on the larbourd side of you . note , that if you be within sight of the parcel , and the g - eat see two little island of white sand , that than you be parcel - on the cantle of the parcel : and if you go more a head coast the parcel , about fifteen league , you shall see three island full of tree , which be call las lasanguiuas . Anguillas and all these three island bear north and south one from another . item from Cayo de Cruz to Havana , if it be by day , stir away west northwest ; but if it be by night , then stir a point more to the westward : and if in this course you chance to see the parcel , fear not ; for in the low water there be six fathom ; then cast about to the southwestward to get out about two glass , and then stir away westnorthwest until it be day and so shall you go by the Cayos : and in this course you must keep twenty four league or thereabouts . and from this Cayo the another Cayo Cruz six or seven league lie another Cayo upon and ° r 7 segue the north - east and by north , which be great and white , e and all even ; but the point on the southwest be 329 el puerto de Matanzas or the haven of slaughter . Las Sierras de Guana . Cruz deal Padre . la Bata de Conel . la Baia de chaos , or Cayos . or Cameloquea . small , and upon the say point be a shrub or bush which show like a sail : also there be a bank of white sand along by the seaside , which in the midst thereof make a cliff full of tree that seem like a saddle : and upon the north - east side ( for on this manner the coast lie along from the cape ) go by the channel you shall see certain hill eighteen or twenty league long lie north - east and Southwest be all saddle - like : and bring the point Southwest off you , you shall be in the midst of the channel : and from thence you have as far to Matanzas as to Cayo Romano . likewise from thence on the side of Havana you shall see certain hill which show to be three , and lie Northeast and Southwest , and that on the southwest be high : they be call las Sierras de Guana : and north and south from they lie a flat , which be call Cayo de Nicola , which stretch out two league into the sea , and in the middle of the say flat there be a little island of white sand : and from thence you must sail to Cruz deal Padre . mark of Cruz deal Padre . cruz deal Padre be a cape all break in piece : and from thence you must stir away Northeast , because of the bay that be there , call the bay of Conell , and this bay stretch to the bay of chaos , which be within 20 league of the say point : and then stir away west northwest to go with the port of Matanzas , and with the hill of Camoniaca . mark off the hill of Camoniaca . the hill of Camoniaca lie northwest and southeast , and the southeast side be low land and even : also upon the north - east side it be even land , and run towards the bay of Matanzas , and in the middle of these hill there be one high hill , and upon the north - east side there appear a round heap : and 330 if you see this hill at west Southwest , the pan or round heap of Matanzas will bear off you west and by south . mark off the round hill call el pan de Matanzas . this pan be a round heap stand on a low land and if you bring your self north and south with it , it will make you two saddle ; and on the west side it make a great part land as it be sink with the sea . note that wheresoever you shall go to seek the Tortugas , and shall come with the coast and find it bear off you north - east and Southwest , i advise you to go along the coast to the southwestward : you may not deepen more than forty five fathom , for if you do , you shall cast your self without the Tortugas . also you must note , that if by chance you find your self shoot between the Tortugas , and the martyr , and that you can go on the outside of the say Tortugas , then cause one to go to the top , to see if you can descry they ; and if you can see they , stir away southwest until you see they ; and have get sight of they , sound , and you shall find eighteen or nineteen fathom : and so shold stir away south and by west , and go by this course . and fear you not the shold , for you shall meet with 12 fathom , and shall have black sand in your sound . And go near to the end of the say Tortugas ( for he that be on the top shall see they all ) as you pass by , you shall find but eight fathom , and stony ground , and that be the shall water you shall have . and you shall pass by a bustle of a tide , that shoules out of the chanel that way : but you need not fear any thing for you shall have no less than eight fathom water : and be past the say bustle but a minion shoot , you shall loose the ground and be in the channel . 331 note . [ Iii . 624 . ] when you shall pass this course , go not out of sight of the Tortugas . and if you will go from thence to Havana , have a fair wind , stir away Southwest because the current may not set you off : and if with a fresh wind and northerly , then stir away southerly .