, and give to much rain : here we wash our ship , and set up the rest of our pinnace . the 15 day captain plat die of sickness , and then sir Francis Drake begin to keep his cabin , and to complain of a scour or flux . the 23 we set sail and stand up again for Puerto bello , which be but 3 league to the westwards of number de Dios . the 28 at 4 of the clock in the morning our general the death of sir Francis Drake depart this life , have be sir Francis extreme sick of a flux , which begin the night before drake . to stop on he . he use some speech at or a little before his death , rise and apparel himself , but be bring to bed again within one hour die . he make his brother Thomas Drake and captain Jonas Bodenham executor , and m . Thomas drake son 239 his heir to all his land , except one manor which he give to captain Bodenham . the same day we ankor at Puerto bello , be the best harbour we find all along the main both for great ship and small . there stand a saker shoot off the shore at the eastern point a little hand : and there be betwixt the main and that 5 or 6 fathom : but the best come in be the open mouth betwixt that hand and another hand that lie to the westward with a range of rock . in Puerto bello be but 8 or 10 house , beside a great new house which they be in building for the governor that shall have be for that place : there be also a very strong fort all to the water side with flanker of great tree and stone fill with earth between : and have not our come disappoint their pretence , they will have make it one of the strong place in all the main . there they mean to have build a great town . we find there three piece of brass ordinance sink in the sea , which we weigh up , all the people be flee and their good carry away . up within this bay there be a little village but of no force , where we find a great fresh river , our man row up some two league find pillage , as wine and oil , and some small quantity of iron . after our come hither to anchor , and the solemn burial of our general sir Francis in the sea : sir Thomas Baskervill be aboard the defiance , where m . bride make a sermon , have to his audience all the captain in the fleet , sir Thomas command all aboard the garland , with who he hold a council , and there show his commission be accept for general , and captain Bodenham make captain of the defiance , and m . Savill captain of the adventure . the 27 die captain Josias of the delight , and captain Egerton a gentleman of the foresight , and James wood chief chirurgeon of the fleet out of the garland . 240 the 28 die Abraham Kendal out of the saker . at this place we water again , wash our ship and make new sail , it be by the general and all the captain agree , that if we can by any mean turn up again for Santa Martha , we shall , if not , to go direct for England . here also we take in some ballast as our need require . the 6 of February the Elizabeth of m . Wattes be discharge and sink , and that day the Pegasus jolly be go on shore for water , carry no guard : the Spaniard perceive it come down upon they , kill two of they , and take 2 or 3 prisoner , and so run up into the wood again . the seven the delight and captain Eden frigate be discharge and sink because they be old and leak , and the queen ship want sailor . that day our man be muster we have sick and whole 2000 and the next day we set on shore all our prisoner as Spaniards and Negros . but before at our first come to Puerto bello sir Thomas send two of those Spaniard to number de dios and to Panama to fetch ransom for some of the chief prisoner , but they never return again . as we be set sail there come one with a flag of truce , and tell the general that they have take 18 of our man , and that they be well use , add that if he will stay 8 or 10 day long they shall be bring from Panama . we suppose this to have be but a delay to have keep we there while the king force have come about by sea , as they daily expect . we set sail the 8 of February , turn up for Santa Martha , and the 14 day we see the hand of Baru some 14 league to the westward of Carthagena : the general that night tell we he will stand in for the town of Baru in the bay : but that night blow so much wind and continue that small moon , that the same night we lose the foresight , and the next day stand again to make the land which we have make , ten 241 q we lose company of the Susan parnel , the help , and the Pegasus . then the next day we put over for cape [ three . 589 . ] S . Antony , and give over Santa Martha . the grand the 25 we see the hand of grand cayman some cayman . league to the northwestward of Jamaica , be a low sandy hand , have many tortoise about it . the 26 we see the high land of Cuba to the eastward of the break hand , to the east of the hand of Pinos , and be imbay in among those dangerous place . but perceive it , we stand out again southsoutheast and so get clear , and then stand away west the ik of and by north for the he of Pinos , which we see the Pinos . first of march . it be a low land with wood and fresh water to the western end . if you come in with the midst of it you shall see rise up above the rest of the land 8 or 9 round hammock , and the westermost have three in one . be shoot forth with the west end , and stand in for to water we espy 20 sail of ship about one in the afternoon . this be a three part of the fleet which the king send for Carthagena , the rest of the fleet be go for the Honduras . they be in all 60 sail send only to meet our fleet , be command wheresoever they hear we be , to come upon we with all their three force . this fleet which we meet withal come stand for cape de los Corrientes , and have be refresh at Havana . as soon as they descry we , they keep close upon a tack , think to get the wind of we : but we weather they . and when our admiral with all the rest of our fleet be right in the wind eye of they , sir Thomas Baskervil put out the queen arm , and all the rest of our fleet their bravery , bare room with they , and command the defiance not to shoot , but to keep close by to second he . the vice - admiral of the Spaniard be a great ship than any of we , and the best sailor in all their fleet loof by and give the concord the two first great shot , which she repay 242 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a . d . . 1596 . present again , thus the fight begin . the Bonaventure the fight bebare full with she , ring her such a peal of ordinance between they and small shot withal , that he leave she with tear side . ^ nSllsh the admiral also make no spare of powder and shot . but the defiance in the midst of the spanish fleet i thunder of her ordinance and small shot continue the fight to the end . so that the vice - admiral with 3 or 4 of her consort be force to tack about to the eastward , leave their admiral and the rest of the fleet , who come not so hot into the fight as they do . the fight continue two hour and better . at sun set all the fleet tack about to the eastward , we continue our course to the westward for cape de los Corrientes , suppose we shall have meet with more of their consort . in this conflict in the defiance we have five man slay , three english man , a greek and a negro . that night some half hour after , their fleet keep upon their weather quarter , we see a mighty smoke qne of the rise out of one of their great ship which stay behind : punish great which happen by mean of powder as we think , burn . and present after she be all on a light fire , and so be consume and all burn , as we may well perceive . the next day be the second of march in the morning by break of day we be hard aboard cape de los Corrientes , which be a bare low cape , have a bush of tree high than the rest some mile to the eastward of the cape . all Cuba be full of wood on the southside . the spanish fleet which then be but 14 not more than we be , keep still upon our weather quarter , but dare not to come room with we although our admiral stay for they . assoon as we have clear our self of the cape 3 of their best sailor come room with the Salomon , which be so near the land that she can not double the cape , but tack about to the eastward , and so be both a stern and also to leeward of all our fleet : but when we see the Spaniard work , the defiance tack about to rescue she : which the Spaniard see , and have not forget the fight which she 243 make the night before , they loof up into the midst of their fleet again , and then all the fleet stay until the Salomon come up , and so stand along for cape Zante cape S . Antonio , which we come in sight of by two Antonio . } n after noon , be a low cape also , and to the southwest a white sandy bay , where 3 or 4 ship may very well water . there be a good road for north and easterly wind : there the Spaniard begin to fall a stern . that night we stand away a glass or two northwest , and northnorthwest , and Northeast , and in the morning - watch south , and in the morning have sight of Cuba about the east part of the organ , which be dangerous rock lie 8 league off upon the north part of Cuba , present assoon as you pass cape S . Anthony : than we stand to the eastward of the land , the wind at Southsouthwest , and at 6 at night have foul weather , but after be becalm all night . the 5 the wind come scant . the 7 we see a high land like a crown , which appear so 13 or 14 league to the westward of Havana , and another place in Cuba call the table , 8 league to the eastward the crown . of the crown . the land over Havana make two small mountain like a woman breast or pap . here we find no great current until we come to the gulf of Bahama . the cape of the io we see the cape of Florida be but Florida . a reasonable low land and break hand to the southward of the cape . and at two in the afternoon we [ three . 590 . ] lose sight of the land 12 league to the northward of the cape . after we have disemboque , we stand west till midnight , and be in 28 degree , and then stand Northeast till the 13 at night , when we be in 31 degree . and after the wind scant with a great storm , in which we lose the Bonaventure , and the little John , they bear on head . than we stand with our larboard tack eastsoutheast . the 19 we be in 29 degree our course Eastnortheast . the 21 we have a great stormy gale of wind 244 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a . d . j596 - and much rain but large . and then all the rest of our fleet fall a stern except the hope , which bear a head : so that there keep no more with the admiral , but the defiance , the adventure , and the phoenix . the 28 we be in 39 degree , and stand away for Flores , which the 8 of April we see , and the 9 come to a anchor on the southside , where we water because the defiance when we come in have but two butt of water . we barter with the Portugal for some fresh victual , and set here on shore at our come away out of the admiral our two Portugal pilot ; which sir Francis Drake carry out of England with he . the 10 be Easter - eve at night we set sail the wind serve we to lie some slent in our course . that night and easter day we have much rain : the wind come up at Northeast , we beat it up some 30 league to the eastward , and then about to the west , and so again to the east , and try , and the next board to the west . on Thursday towards night , be the 16 we have sight of Corvo again , we try all that night : and on Friday towards night we come to a anchor to the westward of the point of Santa Cruz under Flores : but before midnight we drive , and set sail the next day stand away north - east . about three of the clock in the afternoon the wind come up again at north . on Sunday the 19 by two of the clock in the afternoon we have make 20 league a east way : and then the wind come up a good gale at northwest , and so Northeast with a fly sheet we make the best way we can : but be disperse by bad weather we arrive about the begin of may in the west part of England . and the last ship which come in together to Plymouth be the defiance , the garland , the adventure , and the phoenix .