a true relation of the voyage undertake by sir Anthony Shirley knight in anno 1596 . intend for the he of San Tome , but perform to saint Iago , Dominica , Margarita , along the coast of Tierra firma , to the he of Jamaica , the bay of the Honduras , 30 league up Rio dolce , and homeward by Newfoundland . with the memorable exploit achieve in all this voyage . e depart from Hampton the 23 of April with nine ship and a galley . the bevice admiral be 300 ton , the Galeon vice - admiral be 240 ton . the George rearadmiral be 160 ton . the Archangel be 250 ton . the swan 200 ton , the George Noble be 140 ton , the wolf 70 ton , the mermaid 120 ton , the little John 40 ton the galley and a pinnace . all which ship we sufficient victual and furnish for ten month , with all necessary fit for the voyage . they be also man with soldier and sailor , exceed well appoint with all furniture necessary for the intend purpose of our general to the full number of 900 . ratable and orderly distribute into every ship . we arrive at Plymouth the 29 of April , where we find the right honourable earl of Essex ready for the attempt of his Cadiz action , with who our general left three ship and 500 soldier well victual and furnish . So the 21 of may we depart from Plymouth with the bevice , the Gallion , the George , the George noble , the wolf and the galley and pinnace , determine our voyage for the he of saint Tom6 . but if our whole force have remain with we our general purpose be to have first sack the Madera he , and 266 so to have proceed for saint Tome . the 27 of may we arrive upon the coast of Spain , coast all the shore , hope to meet with some of the king ship . from thence we pass in sight of the coast of Barbary , and come to masagant , within shot of the fort , which the fort of our general report to be a excellent fortification , masagant . where the Spaniard be in strong garrison . And bend our course for the canary isle there purpose to water , our galley lose her rudder ; so our general direct the George noble to go for the lie mogador , there to repair the galley want . between which place and the canary isle we take a flyboat of two flyboat hundred ton bind for Brasill , have nothing aboard ta ^ en ‘ her but some small portion of victual for their relief . the captain of this flybote take upon he to be a perfect pilot of S . Tome , and willing consent to stay with we , be a fleming . have water at the canary , by the counsel of this Fleming we shape our course for the isle of cape Verde , he assure we that we shall there meet the fleet of saint Tome , for the year be so far pass , that we know they be all depart from saint Tome . the first of July we fall with the isle Maio , where [ he . 599 . ] we see small hope of any fleet to be expect , and therefore depart for cape Verde , the appoint place * for the George noble to meet we : where we arrive the five of July , and there find he . and so instant we proceed for our voyage , because the year be far spend . at this place most unfortunate our general fall exceed sick , and we want water be enforce to go with a place name pescadore in 10 degree of north latitude , where we have many skirmish with the barbarous negro . Oure general now hopeless of life , and we all dismay and comfortless through that his exceed extremity , have his memory very perfect , he call all his captain , master , and officer unto he , unto who he make a very pithy and brief speech , tend to this purpose : that as we 267 be Christians and all baptise and breed up under one and the true faith , so we shall live together like Christians in the fear and service of God : and as we be the subject of our most excellent sovereign , and have vow obedience unto she : so we shall tend all our course to the advancement of her dignity , and the good of our country , and not to enter into any base or unfit action . and because we come for his love into this action that for his sake we will so love together as if himself be still live with we , and that we will follow ( as our chief commander ) he , unto who under his hand he will give commission to succeed himself : all which with solemn protestation we grant to obey . then for that the year be pass , and find the cost of guinea most tempestuous , he see in reason that the bay of . / Ethiopia will be our utter overthrow , and infect we all to death : whereupon he advise we to be respective of our self , and to divert our purpose from saint Tome , either for Brasil or the west India , yield many reason that it be our best course : but we all with one voice desire to proceed for saint Tome . and so depart from this contagious filthy place , we direct our course for saint Tome , but can by no mean double the shold of Madrabomba , but very dangerous run into shall water , still hope of the best . in fine we be enforce to bear up and take some other course ; for the time waste , our man fall sick , and the coast be contagious always rage and tempestuous . the water fall from the heaven do stink , and do in 6 hour turn into maggot where it fall either among our clothes , or in wad of Ocombe . so by a general consent it be hold to be our best course to go for the west India ; and so much the rather , because we have good pilot for that place , who undertake more than be after perform . so we bend our course for the isle of cape Verde , and arrive at the isle of S . Iago the 30 of August , we present land at Praia , 268 1596 . where we find a small bark in the road lade with wine and meal . after we be depart from this vile coast of Guyny our general to our great comfort begin to recover strength ; so that be now at Praia , he be able to the town of land with we . in our land the people make a show $ of great resistance , but we enter the town without ta ^ n 0 ‘ hindrance , be a very pretty town , have a small fort in it , with 6 or 8 cast piece . be here on shore , and find nothing leave in the town , diverse of our company be very importunate with our general , that he will go to the city of saint Iago be 6 mile off : through their importunity he yield consent , and so we march towards the city with 280 soldier . as we pass by the negro and herdsman , they will cry unto we guarda s . Iago . that night we lose our way , and lie under a hedge . the next morning the ordinance of saint Iago be shoot off to give we notice where the town be : so we march towards it at the break of the day . the country then be all spread over with people make show of fear only to draw we into the town : but we far march with our colour fly by the drum . the gentleman will come gallop by we and view we very much . but when we come in sight of the town , we can see no way how to get into it , but by one little path down a very steep hill , only man by man to go down . the strength a description and situation of this town be sufficient to have daunt town ° f a man of very good courage , for it stand between two ? ' it take steep cliff strong house , and three exceed good drake fort command the whole , the chief and best stand upon the top of the hill right over the town : so that from thence with musket they command every street , the other 2 fort stand by the water side , all three command then ride , and these two every street in the town . upon the front of the town the sea beat , the rest stand between two mighty cliff , not accessible 269 but by one small path , by which we be enforce to go . Oure general see himself thus straight , and perceive the drift of the Portugal be to draw he into this trench , and know well that he can not return as we come , by reason of many straight and advantageable place , with a excellent resolution ( like unto himself ) cry out , all courage my heart : assure your self that the device of the Portugal shall serve our turn this day ; for they will suffer we quiet to pass down into their suppose trap , and then will pursue we , than [ three . 600 . ] which nothing can happen better . the day be we now show your self as i know you will : and so present we descend into the trench . And be down the enemy pursue with a mighty cry , and all the cliff on both side be beset full of man ; shot , and stone we want none from they on every side in great plenty ; for this natural trench be not half a musket shoot over . those that attempt our rearward by our general policy be so receive that they make a stand , and never more come near we . we have now half a mile to the town , into the which when we come , we be receive with the street full of soldier , who join with we at the push of the pike . but their captain and diverse of they be slay ( fear possess they ) the town of they flee : and our general pursue with such furious * ien speed , do so dismay they that they flee the town , and Sherle ^ the three of August we possess both the low fort . be now master of the town , we present by the general direction ( who skill , spirit , and diligence can never have sufficient commendation ) barricade up all the street , and bring our self into a very convenient strength . after we have be six hour in the town the Portugal still come in great multitude to the upper fort , begin to sally down upon we , and to assault we at every barricado : so that in the first assault they slay and wound eighty of our man , to our very great weaken . but they have small cause of triumph , for their loss be thrice more than we : but they still 270 .... I596 ’ prosecute their assault , not give we ● ime either to sleep or eat , so that we be in exceed extremity ; for their force do daily increase to the number of three thousand person : but we daily lose of our poor number . while we be thus keep the town , our ship come about unto we , who receive many dangerous shot from the upper castle . Oure general find himself thus straight , and discreet look into the policy and strength of the enemy , and scarce able to defend any one assault more , send to the fort and to his ship that about ten of the clock in the dark of the night they shall shoot at the upper fort with all possible diligence , and send all the boat ashore , which be accord perform . and we likewise keep a tumult in the town , the enemy suppose that our purpose be to assault the upper fort , ( which God know be most impregnable for we ) retire from their plot purpose for the defence thereof . so we in a soldierlike order with very good safety depart the town , although the Portugal have espy our general policy come very furious upon the back of we , after we have keep it two day and two night . in the road of saint Iago we take a ship with wine and cloth , which do great refresh our man .