spanish general May the more plain appear , the say Henry Savile do answer particular to every untruth in the same letter contained , as hereafter follow . the answer to the spanish letter . First the general do say , that Francis Drake die at number de dios , as he have intelligence by a Indian . he general send this news into his then general country confirm with his hand and first news , and ■ * - 0 .. - - his best news seal of arm : it be the first news in his letter , and it be the best news that he can send into Spain . for it do ease the stomach of the timorous Spaniard great to hear of the death of he , who life be a scourge and a continual plague unto they : but it be a point of great simplicity , and scarce beseem a general , to tie the credit of his report local to any place upon the report of a silly Indian slave . for it have be sufficient to have ' sayd , that Francis Drake be certain dead , without publish the lie in print , by name number de dios : for it be most certain sir Francis Drake die betwixt the hand of Escudo , and Puerto bello : but the general be ravish with the sudden joy of this report as a man that have escape a great danger of the enemy , do break out into a insolent kind of brag of his valour at sea , and heap one lie upon another , do not cease until he have draw they into sequence , and so do commend they unto Peter the doctor , as censor of his learned work . 253 be in part lie news . second , the general do write unto the doctor , that Francis Drake die for very grief that he have lose so many bark and man . a thing very strange that the general or the Indian who he do vouch for his lie , shall have such speculation in the body of he who they never see , as to deliver for truth unto his country , the very cause or disease whereof he die : and this second report of he be more gross than the first . for admit the mistake of the place may be tolerable ; notwithstanding , this precise affirm the cause of his death do manifest prove that the general do don Bernal - make no conscience to lie . and as concern the < rno m lie loss of any bark or man in our navy , by the impudent . valour of Spaniard before sir Francis Drake his death , we have none ( one small pinnace except ) which we assure know be take by chance , fall single into a fleet of five frigate ( of which be general Don Pedro Telio ) near unto the hand of Dominica , and not by the valour of don Bernaldino : the which the success five frigate of the king afterwards have but ill success , of the king for one of they we burn in the harbour of saint Juan [ three 594 ] de Puerto rico , and one other be sink in the same harbour , and the other three be burn among many other ship at the take of Cadiz . this i think in wise man judgement , will seem a silly cause to make a man sorrow to death . for true it be , sir the certain Francis Drake die of the flux which he have grow ‘ sirtrmcis ^ upon eight day before his death , and yield drake die up his spirit like a christian to his creator quiet in his cabin . and when the general shall survey his loss , he shall find it more than the loss of the english , and the most of he , destroy by the bullet : but the death of sir Francis Drake be of so great comfort unto the Spaniard , that it be think to be a sufficient amends , although their whole fleet have be utter lose . 254 third , the general do say of his own credit , and not by intelligence from any Indian or other , that on the eleven of march last he meet the english fleet at the he of Pinos , be fourteen good ship : who although they have the wind of he , yet he set upon they three time with all their ship : but the english fleet flee , and refuse to fight , shoot now and then a shot , but especial the vice - admiral . this three lie of the general don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda ( who name for the prolixity thereof may be draw somewhat near the length of a cable ) have not colour of protection , but it have a just proportion in measure to the lie of old Bernardino de Mendoza his countryman , concern the A payee of overthrow of her majesty navy in the year one spanish she thousand five hundred eighty and eight . for except don Bernaldino the general do purpose to win the whetstone from don Bernardino de Mendoza the old spanish Iyer ; i can conjecture why he shall write to his country for a truth , that he chase the english navy with nine ship , and do three several time give the onset to the english fleet , who be fourteen good ship ( as he say ) do fly and refuse to fight ; consider that the spanish vice - admiral ( if he be live ) the spanish and many other can witness the contrary : who fight vice - admiral like a true valiant man , depart from the fight with a turn and batter ship to save she from sink . it neither can i imagine that there be any one in the spanish fleet ( don Bernaldino except ) that will say they be less than twenty sail of ship when they meet the english fleet : and the spanish navy can witness that they receive such store of bullet from the english fleet , that they be glad to depart , and in despite of they the english navy do hold their determine course : and take a view of the spanish fleet the next day , their number be not above thirteen after the fight . 255 ’ * the translation of the spanish word lancha be here mistake . this lie be make in the general own forge . the english voyage ship , which do argue that they be either sink or flee to harbour to save themselves . four , the general say , that the english fleet flee away , and leave their * oar for haste behind they in the sea . it be strange that they shall leave behind they oar in the sea , since there be not in the english fleet either galley or galliass , which require the use of oar : as for the oar of their ship - boat and other such small vessel , they have stow they aboard their ship , and be not impediment unto they , but most necessary for they to use , and therefore not likely they will cast they overboard : but it be more likely , that the general fall into some pleasant dream at sea , wherein he do see a false apparition of victory against the english , and for lack of matter do set this down in his letter for news to his country : it be sin to belie the devil , and therefore the general shall have his right : the letter be so well contrive , and yet with no great eloquence , but with such art , that there be not many more line , than there be lie , which show that there be wonderful and extraordinary gift in the general : but i be persuade if don Bernaldino have think that his letter shall have be print , he will have omit many thing contain in the letter : for the doctor do use he somewhat hardly in show the letter open , and more in suffer it to be print : for friend may like good fellow send lie one to the other for recreation , and feed their friend with some small taste thereof , so it be keep close , without danger to incur the title of a lie general : but as the matter be now handle through the simplicity of the doctor , i can see but the general don Bernaldino be like to carry the title equal betwixt both his shoulder . 256 five , the general do say in his print letter , that [ hl 595 - ] notwithstanding all the diligence he can use , he can not cause the english fleet to stay nor come near they , nor discharge one harquebus or piece of artillery , but flee away as fast as they can . a nd this lie also he do not receive by intelligence from any other , but himself be a eyewitness in the action , which make he bold to send this with the rest into his country for current news : but herein don Bernaldino be more bold than wise , for the turn and batter side of his galleon , be compare the tomb side with her majesty ship , and other that serve in of the spanish that fight , do declare , that his ship receive at least two bullet for one . neither can it be conceal but Bernaldino oj he own countryman ( if any do favour truth ) may lie . easy see the loss , and late reparation , do unto the king fleet , since they do encounter with the english navy , whensoever they that remain shall arrive in Spain . but the general seem to be a very good proficient in his profession , and wax somewhat bold , tread the true step of old Bernardino de Mendoza : and yet Mendoza be somewhat more wary in his lie , for he have sometime the colour of intelligence to shadow they : but the general grow from boldness to impudency make no scruple to say , that the english navy flee as fast as they can without discharge any harquebus or piece of artillery , when as the batter side of his ship do return the lie to his face : for in this conflict don Bernaldino do behave himself so valiant , that he be always far off7 in the fight , and have so great care of his own person , that he stand clear from the danger of musket or any small shot , and dare not apprpch ; whereas our the order of general be the foremost , and so hold his place , the english until by order of fight other ship be to have naw . their turn , accord to his former direction : who wise and politic have so order his vangarde , ten 257 r and rearward , that as the manner of it be altogether strange to the Spaniarde , so may they have be without all hope of victory , if their general have be a man of any judgement in sea - fight : i know no reason why the english navy shall fly from he ; the Spaniard for the Spaniarde may put all the gain in his eye that can brag ever he do win from the english : peradventure some of his gain . novice of our country meet the general in Spain , and hear a repetition of so many syllable in one name , as don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , may think they to be word of conjuration , and for fear of raise a spirit , may fly from he as from the devil : or some simple Indian slave hear the like repetition of his long and tedious name , may suppose it to be a army of Spaniards , and for fear run away : but the commander and captain of the english navy spanish brag be man of such resolution , that no spanish brag can be of no value dismay they ( for they have often meet they with their ^ ent ^ pike in their spanish beard ) nor the countenance of it don Bernaldino quail they , although he be acowtre in his gild leather buskin , and his Toledo rapier . six the general say in his letter , that notwithstanding their fly away so fast , the english leave they one good ship well man , who tell he that Drake die in number de dios : in which ship be one hundred and forty man , and fifteen noble captain of the best sort . the general don Bernaldino , like a resolute Spaniarde have already go over his shoe , make no danger to wade over his boot also : and as he have begin , so he do conclude . i marvel that he do not in write his discourse remember this old say : that be , a liar ought to have a good memory : it be much better for he in my opinion to revoke the testimony which he say he have from the Englishman , concern sir Francis Drake his death at number de dios , and stand to the intelligence receive from 258 the silly Indian slave , as it appear in his first lie : for without all doubt there be no english man that will say ( if he have his right sense ) that he die at number de dios , for they all know the contrary : neither can the general avouch that he receive intelligence from any english man , that after the death of sir Francis drake they do elect for general colonel Quebraran don Bernal - ( as he do most false affirm in the latter end of ra ™ his vain and frivolous letter ) see that this name new ^ nd ^ be strange and unknown to any in the english navy . Grange name . neither do i imagine that any of those which the general say he have take , be so forgetful , as not to remember their general name . but without all doubt this addition of so new and strange a name to the english general , do prove that don Bernaldino be not unfurnish of a forge and storehouse of lie , from whence as from a everflow fountain , he send forth lie of all