until thou bring thy self northwest , and southeast with the cape of saint Vincent . the cape of and thou may work thus be in summer : for s - vincent - alwayes thou shall have the wind at northwest . And be northwest and southeast with this cape , thou shall stir southeast and by east , and thou shall so fall with the land 6 . or 7 . league to the windward off they the wind cape on the coast , which lie north and south : than thou shall go along the coast to the south , until thou , 1 . see the cape . and the cape stand in 37 . degree : themarke of the mark be these . it be a cape not very high , and be cape . black , slope to the sea . and from thence thou shall Vincent . double they asagresal southeast : and so run , thou shall then go east unto the cape of saint mary : and thfcape of from this cape go east Northeast , and so thou shall saint marry . 299 the course in winter from the chanel of Bahama . the variation of the compass . many lose upon Bermuda by negligence . the isle of saint marie . faial . the bar of saint Lucar . Sierras de Monchico . run to have sight of Arenas Gordas : and than thou shall see present a little hill towards the east which be call Cabeza de Pedro Garcia . and if thou be benight , and come into 8 . or 9 fathom , than i wish thou to come to anchor , until it be day , and then call for a pilot , that may by some mean carry thou into harbour . i advise thou , if in the winter time thou be shoot out of the narrow of the chanel of Bahama , and will go for Spain , that thou must go east Northeast , until thou be in 30 . degree rather less than moor ; and than thou may go east and by south , because of the variation of the compass . And stir hence east southeast , thou shall go on the southside of Bermuda : and must go with great care , because many have be lose here about this island , because of their negligence . and when thou be sure thou be past this island , then go east Northeast , until thou be in the height of seven and thirty degree : which be in the height of the island of saint marie . And go thus , and not see land , but see the sea to break , make account it be the rock call las Hormigas . and if thou think good to go to faial , thou shall go till thou be in 38 . degree scant , and than thou shall go east , and so shall have sight of faial . the mark of it be these . * come out from faial , and leave all the island , than all go east and by south until thou bring thy self in 37 . degree , which be the height of cape saint Vincent : and then go east , and thou shall see the cape have the mark aforesaid . and from cape S . Vincent thou must go east southeast , till thou be Northeast , and Southwest , with the bar of saint Lucar : and then go Northeast for the bar . take this for a warning , that if go in 37 . degree thou have not sight of cape S . Vincent , and haste sight of certain high hill , make account they be Sierras de Monchico . 300 i advise thou , that if thou stand in fear of man off to avoid war about the cape of S . Vincent , then go in 36 man tf ^ arre . degree | . And find thy self within the cape , if thou see many sign of green weed , then cast about to the north Northeast , and by this way find land , and the same show white , be sure it be the castle of the castle of Aimonte . Aimmte ' a rutty for the old chanel from the east point of [ he . 612 . ] Cuba by the north side thereof to Havana . go from the cape of S . Nicolas , thou shall go the cape of north northwest , but thou must keep to windward off - the point , that thou may weather it , and it be call the point of Mayaci : and it be a very low land Punta de and smooth : and above up within the land about a Mayaci . league it have a long hill , which be not very high but flat . and from that point to Baracoa be 7 . league . And be dispose to go into Baracoa , keep the Baracoa . weather - shore all along , until thou open the harbour . and to know if thou be open of the harbour , look upon the south side ; and thou shall see a hill by it self , which make as it be a crown upon it . and if thou come along , it make as it be a fort with port about it : and this be the mark if thou come out of the sea and this hill be north and south of the harbour , over the harbour of Baracoa . and if thou will go in , thou must take heed of a shall which asholdonthe lie on the east side , and thou must keep the west east side 째 f side : and go not much from the shall , because the baracoa - foote of they shall that shoot westward have 5 . fathom water . and when thou be within the shoalds , thou must go a little within they , and then let fall a anchor : and look that thou come not much on the east side , for it be shoaldie . And come out from Baracoa , be to pass through the old chanel , you shall set your course northwest until you come with the Cayo de Moa , or Cayo de Moa . then shall of Moa , until you think you be Northeast 301 this word Cayo in the Biskayne tongue signifies a flat or a shall . Pracellas . the mosowes . Camoloquea . the flat of i ala to be avoid . Cropeda a flat island . z . rock of stone . Punta de Caucus . Matanzas . and Southwest with it , or till you think you be go 12 . league : and you shall know that you be upon Cayo de Moa . for before you come at it by 2 . league or more , you shall understand that it have a point of low land , and upon the point it have a palm tree ; which tree you shall see always , before you see the point : and it be like a sail . from thence to the pracella or flat you shall stir northwest two part of your way , that you have to run from Cayo de Moa to the say Pracellas or flat , and the one half part of the way north northwest and by west . and this way you shall see the pracella or flat in a clean place of they shall above the water , for all the breach of the sea . the mosowes be from the Pracell west , and you shall leave they to windward . and if you will go with the pracella or flat , you shall find 4 . or 5 . fathom : and you may go sure without danger a northwest course until you come in 7 . fathom . and if you will go upon they shall , you shall go upon that depth , until you have run 40 . or 45 . league : and from thence you shall set your course Southwest , till you see the flatte of the main land . you shall then see to the westward a rock divide into 3 . part , which be call the camoloquea . and look that when you come from the pracellas southwest , you have certain flat before you : take heed of they that you fall not by night with they by four league , for fear of the Mecala : and you shall set your course west northwest until day : and when it be day , you must bear close aboard the shore , and than you shall see a flat island with many break sand , which be call Cropeda , and lie but a little out of the trade way , somewhat to the northward . off that you shall see 2 . rock of stone , which be the point of all the flat : and two league from they on the main land you shall see a point which show like break land . this be call the point of Caucus . and from that point to Matanzas 302 on the northside of Cuba be 12 . league , and your course lie west and by north : and than you must borrow upon the land all that you can , because of the current : for the current will carry you into the channel . And be at Matanzas , you must run all along the shore , because of the current . Remember that when the current . you see one league before you a rock , and a shall , that have upon it but 2 . fathom water ; and your mark if you come out of the sea be a hill , and the hill be not very high , it stand east and west , and upon it be some little rise and they be not very high , and upon these rise stand two round hammock close together , you shall see the teat of Havana . the teat of to know along the shore when you be against the ^ avana - harbour of Xaroca , the mark be these . a little to the harbour the westward one league , you shall see along the shore 째 fxanca - a hill that be break , and that break hill be over the harbour of Xaroca : and then a little more to the westward a league , there be another break hill and you shall see that north and south from these break hill be a flat off . and from that to Havana be 7 . league : and it be all clean ground , and you may go along the shore till you come to Havana . to know mark to the harbour of Havana , you shall see before you come ttie - at it one little rock ot stone not very high , and smooth Havana . towards the sea : upon the rock stand a little white tower , wherein they keep watch . and then if you have the wind large , you shall see the harbour open , and than you may bear in with it . your ship be of great burden , when you be within , then keep on the west side , because on the east [ three . 613 . ] side , on the west end of the rock aforesaid , there lie a ledge to the westward which have but three or four fathom i upon it . if your ship be of small burden , you may run along the weather shore , until you come right against the castle ; and then half the bay over you may come to a anchor . [ how to 3 째 3 how to work come through the old channel , if you be not mind to go over the pracella or shoald . if you will come through the old chanel , when you come as high as the shoalds , come upon your caio de Moa . course from the Caio de Moa , as i tell you , keep 2 . league from the pracel or shall : and then set our course west unto the low island of the firm land . and upon this course you shall ken the flat on the Caio Romano , point of Caio Romano : and within it be one flat high than the other , and smooth upon , and in the midst it make as it be break land ; and when you be in the chanel in the day time , you must take heed you come not near the shore by 2 . league , and by your sound no near than 3 . fathom . and you must take heed still when you night come to keep 2 . or three league off for fear of the shoald . and in the night you must go northwest as be aforesaid . and also you must take heed that you keep in the middle of the chanel , as near as you can towards they shall . And find much wind and be benight , from midnight till day stir west northwest , and when it be towards day , than you may edge towards the flat as be aforesaid . Alcane de Barasoga . Savano . Basque . the flat of Mecala . and as you stir hence one day and one night from Caio Romano to the inward of the channel , you shall see the firm land of Cuba , and other mark ; and among the rest , a round hamocke , which you may easy know . it be call Alcane de Barasoga . and from thence to Savano and to Basque be 6 . league , and likewise Havana 6 . league . and from thence to cross under the fort be 45 . league . and stir hence upon your course aforesaid . and if you have go from Barasoga 30 . league , you shall see none of the flat of Mecala : and give they a breadth off two or three league , and keep your course west northwest , as 3 째 4 aforesaid , until it be day , and present you may edge round to the flat . and thus stir , keep your course until you see the hill of Camaloqua . and look that when you come from Caio de Moa , along the pracel or shall by night close by it , you shall not see what land it be , till it be day : and in the morning you shall set your course as be aforesaid until you see the shall , and in see it , you may stir on your course as be above mention , until you come to Havana . for to set your course from the point of Mance to Caio Romano , when you be north and south with the point of Mance , you shall stir thence west northwest , until you think you be Northeast and Southwest with the hill of Hama . and this hill be a high hill and smooth to the seaside . and from this hill to Caio Romano you shall stir northwest and by west : and upon this course you may be bold to see Caio Romano . and the mark of this flat be , that it make a high land and smooth upon the top : and in the midst of it , it show as it be break . and when you come to it , you must take heed you come not near it by 2 . league , because it be foul . and look that you bring not yourself too near the hill of Hama by night . for you must take heed of Caio Romano to keep off it until morning : in the morning you may go your course until you see it , and then set your course , as be abovesaid . take heed of that which be here say , for it have title reason . Sierras de Camahquea . Caio de Moa . Pracellas . Havana . Punta de Mance . Sierra deal Hama . Caio Romano . the mark of the flat of Caio Romano . ten