advise thou that go from Martinino or Dominica , if thou will go for Margarita , that thou stir south and by west , because of the great current that go here , and set northwest . and by this course thou shall find the testigo , which be 4 or 5 island : and the testigo . if thou will not go so much to windward , than thou shall see frail , which be three small island . and frail . if thou will go into the harbour of Manpater , it be present in double of the point on the east side to the southward . And be mind to go for puerto de Puerto de Juan Griego , which lie on the northside , then go Juan g ™ ? . 0 - neere the land , and along the coast of the west , and present thou shall have sight of puerto de Juan Griego ; it stand in 11 . degree . i advise thou that go from Matalino , which stand in 13 . degree , if thou will go to Cartagena , thou shall go west and by south , and by this way thou shall have sight of the isle of Curazao and Aruba , Curasao . which stand in 12 . degree : from these island thou aruba - shalt go west ; and when thou be north and south with Monjes , thou shall see they to be three little Monjes three white hand , and they be white because of the multitude an ^ s ‘ of bird that be there : they stand in a triangle . from thence thou shall go west , if it be by day , and so shall have sight of Coquebacoa that stand in 12 . Coquebacoa . degree . And be by night , then go northwest : and by day thou shall cast to go for the land again westsouthwest . Coquebacoa have a certain point not very high , and within this point thou shall see in the inland certain hill which be call las Sierras de Avite . go from this point of Coquebacoa thou shall run west , and shall run along the coast , and shall go to have the sight of Baya honda and Portete , which be a low honda . land even with the sea . Portete . 287 Rio de palominos . morn hermoso . Rio grande . Isla de Arenas . Samba or hamba . the cape de la Vela lie with a red show not very high ; and without this cape about a league there be a little copple rock . a man may be bold to go betwixt this rock and the main . And go from this cape to have sight of cape deal Aguja thou must stir Southwest , and thou shall have sight of the Ancones which lie at the end of the hill call Sierras Nevadas . and then present thou shall see the cape deal Aguja : the mark whereof be these : it be a low cape , and upon it be a copy not very high , and there begin the high land of the Sierras Nevadas , or snowy mountain . take this for a warning that if thou go for cape de la Vela by night by the course abovesaid , and come into a whitish water , then sound and thou shall find 40 . fathom , and thy sound will be certain small sandy white oaze , and some small weed . and than thou may make account that thou be north and south with the river call Rio de Palominos , which come out of the midst of the Sierras Nevadas . And be benight thou shall go westnorthwest , or west and by north until day : and be day then thou may hale in with sight of the land Southwest , because thou may be sure to come right in with it . if thou go from cape deal Aguja for Cartagena , if it be by day , thou shall go west and by south , and shall go to have sight of Morro Hermoso , that be the fair mountain , which lie to the westward of Rio grande . And be alone , and with a good ship of sail , and draw towards night , than thou must come to anchor behind Morro hermoso : and after the first watch thou must set sail , and go out west and by north , because thou must be sure to keep a seaboord from the island de Arenas , which lie 2 league to seaward right against Samba . and if thou go from cape deal Aguja by night , thou shall go west and by north : and so thou shall go without the force of the water of Rio Grande . and 288 being by day thou shall go along the coast , and shall see Morro hermoso , which , as i have say , lie to the west of Rio Grande , and have for mark , a face of a black land not very high , and it be round . and if thou depart by day from Morro hermoso , thou must go west , and must take heed , as i say before , of the isle de Arenas , which lie north and south of Samba . Samba have for a mark as it be a galley tow . And go this way by day , thou shall see el buio del Gato , which be a high el buio < kl land with certain white cliff to the seaward : and also Gat0 ‘ moor to the west thou shall see the point call Punta Punta de la de la Canoa , which be a low land even with the water : cmoa ' and there end the coast which lie east and west . and the bay that go to Cartagena begin here , Cartagena . and lie north - east and Southwest . and take this for a warning , that if thou be benight against Samba , thou shall take in thy sail , and lie off to the offward until midnight without any sail abroad until midnight : and from midnight forward thou shall lie so into the land without sail : and if in the break of day thou see no land , then go Southwest , and if this way thou have sight of certain white cliff , make account it be buio deal Gato . take this for a warning , if thy ship be great come not nigh the land in the bay : i mean thou may not with a great ship come nigh the land from the point de la Canoa until thou come to Cartagena , because in many place there be not above 3 or 4 fathom at the most . in all this bay there be no high land but the galley , which be right over the harbour of Cartagena . and if it chance that any man come for this place that the land never be here before , then let he look for a little ° f hill like a tow galley lie east and west , and all carta & na - the land be low , and seem to be full of tree . have these sight , then make account thou be against Cartagena , and to go in thou have nothing to be afraid of : but keep thyself hard aboard the point the point of of ycaco : and then when thou come to double the Acatos . ten 289 t a shall half a league to the sea . the isle of care . Sal Medina . Cabeza de Cativa . Rio de Francisco . the isle of Cativa . Punta de samblas . Sierras de Santa Cruz . [ Iii . 608 . ] the english voyage point del judeo , give a breadth off , because there be a shall . i advise thou that if thou be benight , when thou be at the point de la canoa , and will enter into Cartagena by night , that thou take good heed of a shall that lie half a league to the sea , and so thou shall go in 8 fathom , and sandy ground . and when thou find thy self in deep water , as in 30 fathom and more , than the harbour will be open before thou . and if thou have any fresh northern wind , then loof up to the seaward , and lie with thy stem eastsoutheast , and so thou may go in east through the midst of the channel : and though it be by night , yet thou may go in safe , because it be all clear . and if the night be clear thou shall have sight of the island call care , and it be a high land . come from Cartagena to go for number de dios in the time of the northern wind , thou must bring thy self to the offward of sal medina : and thence stir west till thou bring thy self north and south with Cabeza de Cativa ; and then go Southwest and by west , and thou shall so fall with Rio de Francisco . it have for mark a certain land not very high , and within the land certain high hill lie east and west . and on the west of the river of Francisco thou shall see certain cliff that bee six league from number de dios , incline towards the sea . i advise thou that go this course above write ; if thou see 3 or 4 isle lie low with the sea , and also lie east and west , thou may make account that they be the island de Cativa , and then run west , and so thou shall go along the coast . and if thou see by this way a point of low land , make account it be Punta de samblas : and upon it thou shall see a row of high rocky hill , and they be the mountain of Santa Cruz . if thou come from Cartagena to go to number de dios in the time of the sea wind , when thou be out from sal Medina , thou shall go west and by north , that thou 290 may have sea - room , and take the Brisas or northern wind when they come : and go till thou be north and south with the harbour of number de dios : and from thence go Southwest , and if by this way thou see a row of high hill on a coast that lie north - east and Southwest , make account they be Sierras de las mina Sierras de las viejas , which mina vieja lie north and south with the mina vtejas - harbour of velo alto . have keep this course abovesaid , Puerto de and have sight of the former mark , thou may a ^ 0 ' account that thou be on the west side of number de number de Dios . Dios - furthermore when thou have sight of a high land , and thou be north and south with it , and in the top thereof thou see as it be a little table , if it be high towards the east , then make account that thou be north and south with number de dios , i say , with the harbour of number de dios , and this hill be call Sierra de sierra de Capira . and if thou will go into the harbour , thou must keep thy prow right against this hill , and come near to the shore , thou shall see a ledge of rock , and ° f it be without , and thou may go in what depth thou rocks - think good , or at which place thou find most water in . and to the west of the harbour thou shall see two or isla de hs three island call Islas de los bastimentos . Bastimentos . take this for a warning , if thou come out of number Tbe course to de dios in the time of the Brisas or northern wind , and will go for Cartagena , thou shall come out in the dios to morning , and shall go northnorthwest until 3 of the Cartagena . clock at afternoon , and then cast about to the land , until thou be hard aboard the shore , and so thou must go turn until thou have double Cabeza de Cativa : and have double it then ply to windward all that thou may : and if thou be eastnortheast off it , than thou shall have sight of the hand of Baru , which be 3 or 4 island Islas de Baru . lie low , and be all full of tree : and then present thou shall have sight of the galley that be over Cartagena , and it be like a galley tow . i advise thou , that if thou come for Cartagena in the 291 time abovesaid , and come from Cabeza de Cativa , if the wind will not suffer thou to lie but west , then go thus if thou see a great high island full of mountain , and on the north side thereof thou see a ledge of rock two league into the sea , thou may be islafuerte . sure it be Isla fuerte : but if thou see not the rock , give they a good breadth : and if thou will come to nc s ' anchor , thou may ride well on the west side of they , betwixt the main and they in fifteen fathom ; and the sound be clay . and if thou will go between this and Islas de San the island of saint Barnardo to go into Cartagena , thou bat nardo . may go safe . and if any man ask thou how thou know the island of Baru and San Barnardo , thou may answer true , that the isle of San Barnardo be full of high hill , and certain sandy bay to seaward ; and the say isle have a good depth two or three league la Bacilla , to the sea : and this depth be call the Bacilla . and these be all the mark for the island of San Barnardo . And touch the isle of Baru , they be 3 or 4 little island and very even with the sea , and full of tree , and there be no good depth about they , but hard aboard they . the shoald ofSerrana . Seranilla . a rutty from Cartagena to Havana in Cuba . come from Cartagena to go to Havana , thou must go northnorthwest until thou be in fourteen degree : and then forwards thou shall go with great care to anchor every night , and when it be day set sail . and this be to be do in this place because of the shoald of Serrana : and so thou may proceed with a care to anchor when thou come about Seranilla , or near to it , which be in fifteen degree and a half . and upon it thou shall see a low flat land lie north - east and Southwest : and the sea beat upon it round about , except that on the southeast part it have certain shelf of sand , and on the west side it have a certain little copy , which from sea seem to be a ship under sail : and 292 being Northeast and Southwest off it , scant a league from they shall come out on the west side a certain shall , whereupon the sea do always beat . i advise thou that if thou can not pass on the west side , than thou must go betwixt the say little copy that it be like a sail and then shall : for the passage be good . but if thou depart from the serranilla to the northwest , and see a low land with the sea , and certain white sandy bay , and on the west side see a low land , and on the Eastside a little coast lie east and west , thou may make account it be cape de Corrientes