from hence we sail to a isle call Fuego , be a very Isla deal Fuego . small isle , with a very high hill in the midst of it , which continual burn : this isle be invincible by nature , high cliff round about , yet by diligent search we find a small path where we land our man with exceed much difficulty , and so be master of the isle the eleven of September , where we take in water , but the isle yield we nothing but miserable infection . one night we have a shower of ash which fall so thick into our ship from that burn hill of Fuego , that you may write your name with your finger upon the upper deck . depart from this place the twenty of September , we shape our course for Dominica a isle in the 271 west India : but before we come thither our man fall general down , so that the hole can not relieve the sick , the disease be so vile that man grow loathsome unto themselves , frantic and desperate rave , among who our good general part be not the least ; for his disease be vehement , the grief of his mind , the lamentation of his man , and the loss of those who he love be to he torment more than durable : all which with patience and humility in prayer he humble himself unto . but have not his mind be invincible and his desire above the ordinary course of man , it have be impossible that life shall now have rest in he : but God ( i hope ) have preserve he to some exceed good purpose . Dominica . arrive at Dominica the seventeenth of October , with two excellent all our man sick and feeble , we find there two hot hot bath . bath , wherein our weak man wash themselves be great comfort : and the Indian of this place use we with great kindness , so that we be all perfect well before we depart from this place . for here we stay Margarita . until the 2 5 of November . from Dominica we sail to Margarita , between the isle and the main , think to meet with the pearl dredger , but we find they not . And come to the point of Araia in the road of Cumana , we see a flemish ship ride ; the merchant and man whereof come aboard we , and bring with they my lord admiral pass . by which mean our general will in no sort meddle with they , yet they be very rich . depart thence by cape Coadera , go for cape de la Vela at the isle buenaire our fliboat be cast away , and some of the man lose , but the most part save . coast all the shore from cape de la Vela , be bind for saint Martha , we take a small frigate lade with guiny corn , the eleven of September : she have in her money to the value of 500 [ three . 601 . ] pound , linen cloth and china silk , all which our general bestow upon his company to comfort they after their long sustain misery : out of which 272 Antonius scherleyns ANGLVS , e - qucs aurat . magni Sophi perfarum ad cxfarem 6s chriftianos principe extero , legate we . sir Anthony Shirley frigate we have 2 good pilot for those coast : for our pilot , that promise many thing before we come thither , be now absent in the wolf , who , we think , do wilful loose we . arrive at saint Martha , two Santa Marta league west from the town in a fair bay , we land the 12 of September , and so march to the town be often time encounter by the way , and in a narrow way at our descent down a hill , they have place two cast piece of brass , which we recover , and so enter the town , the enemy fly before we . while we abide in this town , there come one don Martin de Castilia , a gentleman of good education and a very great traveller , who know the whole state of the west India , Malucos , and philippinas : he have be in China , and make many relation to our general , his purpose be to save the town from burn , wherein he prevail , but ransom i know of none we have : for this gentleman make many great protestation of great poverty to be in that place . so we depart , only take their ordinance , and a prisoner lose there by sir Francis Drake , with some relief of victual . Having stay there all the time of Christmas , we depart thence on newyere day , with term of great content to our general in the Spaniard great submission unto he , for they be now within a league of we with 700 soldier . And be challenge by he to defend their town like man of worth , they do notwithstanding entreat favour with great humility . while we be at saint Martha , the wolf come again unto we : so we shape our course for Jamaica , and miss the road , be constrain to sail round about the isle , a thing not before do . in this place the wolf absolute again forsake we with the small bark that we take at saint Iago , and return for England with hard news of our ruin , but by God favourable help we arrive in the road of Jamaica the 29 of January , which be very dangerous to enter by reason of the shold and rock that lie before it . here we land and march 6 mile into the country , where the town stand ; ten 273 s the I | will and chief town oj Jamaica take . the english voyage the people all on horseback make show of great matter , but do nothing . now be master of the town and whole isle , the people submit themselves to our general mercy : and here they provide for we great store of dry beef , and cassavi meal , a base food , yet the best that the country yield , to continue at sea . this isle be a marvelous fertile isle , and be as a garden or store house for diverse part of the main . it be full of plain champion ground , which in the rest of the Indies we have not see : it abound with beef and cassavi , beside most pleasant fruit of diverse sort . we have not find in the Indies a more pleasant and wholesome place . during the time that we remain in this isle the captain of the isle come often aboard we , we have pledge for the security of their promise . they be in fine at our general devotion , to dispose of all thing , and in all thing as he please , so that now we be as one people and in one peace together . be almost ready to depart , m . captain Parker of Plymouth come into the road in his ship boat the second of march , with who our general consort to go for the bay of Honduras , where by his persuasion we have great hope of a very good voyage . And depart from Jamaica the 6 of march , we sail to cape de Corrientes in Cuba , to look for a bark of m . Parkers for our better strength : but not find she , we go for the cape of Honduras , where we purpose to entrap the watch , and so to sack the town of Truxillo , but the watch discover we , make great fire , and the town present shoot off a great piece , and answer with fire . notwithstanding the next day be the 31 of march we bring our ship under the fort , and land our man , but it be a vain purpose : for the town be not to be take but by exceed multitude , for it be invincible by nature . it stand upon the top of a very steep hill , border close to the sea : so environ with wood of such exceed thickness , that there be no passage among the 274 tree , which if they be go , yet there be no climb up the hill , only have one narrow lane to go into the town ; at the end whereof be a great gate very strong fortify , so that it be not to be approach unto , so that with the loss of some few man , we retire from this enterprise , be altogether impossible to be achieve by our few and weak man . we depart from Truxillo the second of April and Puerto de go for Puerto de Cavallos lower down in the bay , ken ^ still nourish our hope of good success : and come - ‘ ming thither find it reasonable fortify , but we present prevail and take it the 7 of April , be the most poor and miserable place of all India . now our hope be all frustrate and no likelihood remaining how we can by any mean make a voyage : our general reserve unto himself his silent inward impatience , labour to do some memorable thing . and in fine conclude by Rio dolce to search with his boat some narrow passage or Isthmos for the south sea , allege that if he can but find a boat there , it shall serve he to great purpose ; against which there can be no reasonable contradiction . all his chief sea man consent hereunto , but especial the captain of the admiral . So sail with the ship to cape de tres puntas in the bottom of the bay , there leave the ship well more the ten of April [ three . 602 . ] he depart with his boat for Rio dolce , which in many Charts have his passage through the land . up this river by many uncertain wind we pass 30 league and better , where we find a strong build fort , a town , and diverse storehouse : but for money or merchandise we find none . we learn by the miserable people that we take , that the south sea be 20 league from the near of that river , and that it be 50 league to Guatimala , 40 league to sonsonate , and 30 league to Sacatocaluca , be town which we hope to march unto : so that now we be in worse case than before : for we be fall sick with the Guatemala , Sanson eat , and Sacatocaluca . 275 unholsomenesse of this air , and our victual so waste , as that we be desperate how to recover our country . theirreturne . whereupon with most unwilling mind we return to our ship , and with all possible expedition weigh , and so labour upon the tack to turn out of this very deep bay , be 60 league within the point of land . be out of the bay , we shape our course for cape S . Anthony . our general , who restless spirit continual labour to avoid the frown of fortune , have now plot with the bevice and Galeon to go for Newfoundland , and there to revictual , and to have fresh man , of which we stand in good assurance , and so to depart for the streit of Magellan , and so by his very good policy will have conclude his voyage in the east India , which plat i think it unnecessary here to reveal , be put in principali trust by he . be thwart Havana , by what chance i know not , but all his ship forsake he the 13 of may , and here in a desperate place he be leave desperate alone . the George depart by consent with his letter , the Galeon i know not how : but our misery in the admiral be very great , for there be not one in the ship that be ever before in the Indies , beside our miserable want of victual , the danger of the place , and the furious current of the chanel . notwithstanding we be enforce without stay to disemboque : which happy be perform , we shape our course for Newfoundland . and by God mercy we arrive there the fifteen of June , not have one hour victual to spare , and there by our countryman we be well refresh : where we stay till the 24 of June , still expect the Galeon , for the execution of this his last purpose : but she not come , and that plat overthrow , we return for England , where we find the right honourable the earl of Essex bind to the sea , with who we present depart in his lordship ship , to do he our humble service .