sort sufficient for his own store , and great plenty to furnish his friend : the general be much behold to his godfather who give he the name Bernaldino , which we in english do take to be plain Barnard , which name have as it be a kind of privilege from be sharp reprehend , when the party be think to err : for it be a common say among the schoolman that Bernardus non videt omnia , viz . Barnard see not all thing , ( when he do dissent from their opinion ) the which favour we can be content to yield to Bernaldino for the name sake , if he be not take with so many manifest and impudent lie : neither do i think that signior Bernaldino will say , that he see all that he have write , be it speak in council for shame the general : for be there any man so void of reason as to think , that any Englishman be demand of his general name , will write or speak Quebraran for Baskervil . so much difference there be in the sound of the syllable , as there be no affinity at all , or likelihood of truth . but such be the general rare gift , ( be it speak to 259 [ three . 596 . i the schoolman of modesty do use this kind of reprehension , when they do think the author to err . the difference betwixt Quebraran and basker - vill . his small praise ) that we Englishman must of force confess , that the general have give a proud onset to carry the whetstone from signior Bernaldino de Mendoza : neither will the hundred and forty man and fifteen noble captain ( which he say he do take , of who he may have be right inform of their general name ) acquit he of lie forgery , for give the name of Quebraran to the english general . as for the good ship well man , which he say the english leave they after the fight , i be persuade he have no man to witness that lie , for the ship be separate by weather from the english fleet in the night , thirteen day before the fight with the spanish navy , and never to any man knowledge come more in sight the general of the english fleet . if the spanish ship by chance make great do take the say well man ship ( as they call she ) ^ “ di ^ si ^ 1 doubt not but they have the ship , the hundred and ship which be forty man , and the fifteen noble captain to show : suppose not to but evermore i guess the spanish reckon will fall strike one short when it be examine , for the fifteen noble Capi noble ta ' ne prove , ( as i take it ) but three , who loss captain ™ ‘ i grieve to think on : neither do the Spaniard gain contrary to the they by valour , or we loose or leave they for cowgeneral lie ardise , as most untrue this brag liar have certify . wi ^ rme but ® ut tbe general like a provident man , to make his ‘ ‘ three ™ ** fame and credit the great with his prince and country , take upon he ( among other his miracle perform before the english fleet ) by way of amplification to make small matter seem great , as a little shoe to serve a great foot , and find that it can hardly be bring to pass , he do so stretch the leather with his tooth that it be ready to break : and yet notwithstanding all this will not serve his purpose ; for the print of the letter do mar the play , and bring such matter in question , as the general do wish might be conceal , and be he not of so dry and choleric a complexion , as common Spaniards be , he will blush for very shame in publish so impudent 260 such manifest untruth . for sithence his meeting with the english fleet at the he of Pinos , there have be by the worthy english general a honourable expedition from England into the continent of Spain , where among other exploit have take the city of Cadiz , in the sack thereof be find some of don the first Bernaldino his print letter : which come to the hand of a captai ne that serve in sir Francis drake last voyage to the west Indies , he have think very fit ( in regard of the slander to the english navy contain in the say letter ) to quote the error , that the truth only may appear , to all such as have a desire to be right inform of such accident as befall they in this late voyage to the west Indies : and this may suffice to show don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda his great judgement in amplify small matter , or of nothing to make in show somewhat . and now have thus far inform you of the truth in reproof of the slanderous , false , and untrue report of this glorious lie general , with a true disproof to some of the gross of his lie , i will leave he with the rest of his lie letter , and the circumstance therein contain to your censure : who in discretion may easy discern the same : and have here follow plain and true set down the course and order of our whole fight after we meet . the meeting of our english navy and the spanish fleet , and the order of our encounter . Unday the first of march , accord to our computation , we descry the hand of Pinos , where hale in for the western part thereof , think there to have water , be within four league off it southerly , we send in three of our pinnace to discover the harbour , and to sound afore we , about one of the clock in the afternoon ; the same day we discover a fleet of twenty 261 the first discovery of the spanish fleet . [ « i - 597 - ] hie incoimt betwixt the english and the spanish ship . the english voyage sail , and deem they to be the spanish fleet , we keep our loof to get the wind , but their vice - admiral with diverse other ship go about to cut off our pinnaces : so that our general with some other of our ship , be force to tack about upon the larbourd tack , and so run in towards the land keep the wind , so as we recover our pinnace ; which force the enemy ship to tack about , and to take the aid of their fleet , and be come near unto they they shoot at we ; we still approach , have our close fight up , our flag , ensign and streamer display , our man orderly place in each quarter , but forbear our fight until our general begin , and give we warning to come in and fight , by shoot off " a great piece , accord to his former direction : so be within musket shoot , the vice - admiral of the spanish fleet come near unto we , to who our vice - admiral John Traughton captain of the Elizabeth bonadventure give fight , betwixt who there be the great volley of small shot change that light have be hear at sea , which continue a long half hour . in which time the spanish fleet come in to fight . Oure general sir Thomas Baskervill be in the garland ( whereof Humphrey Reignolds be captain , be the next ship unto the Elizabeth bonadventure ) bear up to the enemy , play with his great ordinance hot until he come within musket shoot . Jonas boden - ham captain of the defiance , and Henry Savile captain of the adventure , come likewise in to fight with they . after the garland be within musket shot play her part , and make good fight for the space of a hour . the defiance bear up likewise and have her turn : after come the adventure again within musket shoot , who have change many a great bullet with they before , renew his fight , and continue it a hour with small shot . then come Thomas Drake captain of the hope , who last of all have his turn . thus have all the queen ship their course : the 262 merchant ship with other small vessel be without the queen ship , shoot when they see opportunity . after the enemy find no good to be do ( be well beat ) fall from we , the adventure play upon they with her great ordinance , make three of the last shoot at they : their vice - admiral with diverse other of their ship , be so beat that they leave off the fight , and be force to lie in the wind , for that they dare not lie of either board by reason of their many and great leak , which they have receive by our great shot . the general with the rest of their fleet tack about , fall in our wake , think to get the wind , which in the beginning we seek to hinder . but our general see that in hold the wind we shall shoot our self into the bay , give they the wind . all that night they keep themselves upon our broad side , notwithstanding our admiral carry his cresset - light all night , have great care of our small ship . this fight continue about four hour till it be near night , in the which fight , thanks be to God , there be slay so few person of our english fleet , as i think the like conflict have not be perform with so little loss of man : what harm befall the Spaniard in their fleet i leave to your judgement . yet our eye can witness their ship be sore beat and rack through , whereby there be such fall back and lie by the lee to stop their leak , as some of they be drive to haste away , and rather to run on shore to save themselves then sink in the sea : beside within two hour after our fight with they , we see one of their great ship on fire which burn into the sea , and all the stern of another of their ship blow up : and in the morning a ship of our fleet be run so near the land , that to double the cape de los Corrientes he must of necessity tack about and fall in the wake of the enemy , which cause our general in the garland and the defiance to tack about ; which two ship force the three ship of the 263 the spanish vice - admiral can witness , what stucesse they have in this fight . the english admiral carry his cresset light , notwithstanding the enemy be upon his broad side . the english receive little loss in this conflict . enemy ( which be put forth to take our ship , or else to cause she run on ground ) to return to their fleet to save themselves , hoist all their sail the remain - for haste : this morning they be fair by we have derofthe the wonderful [ n ( je of USj be but thirteen sail of their werehut ^ to be see : than we stroke our top sail thirteen think to have fight with they again , which they sail . perceive tack about from we , and after that never dare nor will come near we : what become of the rest of their fleet we know not , but true it be that they be in great distress mighty beat and tear , by have receive many bullet from we . all this day we have sight of they , but they show little will to fight or come near we , so we keep our course west , and by north , about six of the clock at night lose the sight of they . and this be a true discourse of our fight with the spanish fleet . the which the author hereof will justify with the adventure of his life , against any Spaniarde serve in that action , that shall contradict the same . Henry Savile . [ Iii . 598 . ] Thomas Baskervil knight , his approbation to the former twofold discourse of captain Savile . Thomas Baskervill knight , general ot her majesty late Indian armada in the late conflict have between the spanish fleet and we , have peruse the spanish letter write by don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the king of Spain navy , and also have peruse captain Henry Savile his answer unto the six exception in the general letter , with his discourse of the manner of our fight with the spanish fleet , do say that the say Henry Savile have answer the letter , and set down the order of the fight sincere accord to truth , for testimony of which i have hereunto set my hand . 264 and if don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda the general shall take any exception to this my approbation , or stand in the justification of his lie letter write to doctor Peter Florez , precedent of the contractation house for the Indies , and by he for bernaldinos glory late put in print : i then say that he false lie , and that i will maintain against he with whatsoever arm he shall make choice of . and because the kingdom wherein we abide be enemy ( by reason of which there be no mean in either of they , to maintain that i have write ) let he make choice of any indifferent kingdom of equal distance from either realm , and i will there be ready to maintain as much as i have write : but if by my employment into France i be so stay by her majesty commandments , that i can out of that realm meet he in any other , i can see why he shall take any exception to that , consider the equality of the place , and that the army of both our prince be there resident . Thomas Baskervile .