. and if thou go from cape de Corrientes for cape de Santo Antonio , thou must go westnorthwest , and so thou shall go with the cape . the mark be a low land full of tree with certain white sandy bay : and upon the cape it self thou shall see two thick grove of great tree , and they be upon the cape it self . to go from the cape de Sant Antonio for Havana in the time of the north wind , thou shall go northwest until thou be clear of all the shoald of the cape , and then hale thy bowlines , and go as near the wind as thou can possible , until thou bring thy self unto 24 . degree , and there sound , and thou shall find it the Tortugas , and thy sound will be white sand . thou must take heed what be say in the chapter before : for he that write the same have see it , and be witness to this : that come from Seranilla , and stir north and by east he have sight of a island stand in 16 . degree , and it be on the shoald of cape de Camaron . and from thence , if thou have the wind large , go Northeast and by east , because of the variation of the compass , and thou shall make thy way Eastnortheast , and thou shall fall with Isla de Pinos . this i say , because the current set sometime west : and so it fall out to be true in march , anno domini 1582 . i tell thou far , that we come out from this aforesaid isle stir north 293 case the corriente . Cape de San Antonio . [ Iii . 609 . ] the Tortugas . Seranilla . a island in 16 . degree . Baxos de Cabo de Camaron . the variation of the compass . Isla de Pinos . the current set here sometime west . the latitude of Cozumel in 19 deg . and one tierce . Las Tortugas . the little isle call Vermeja . Marks of Villa Rica . the english voyage and by east , for the wind will not suffer we to lie near the east , and one evening at sun go down we fall with a land , that have the same mark to our judgement with the cape de Corrientes : and because night be at hand , we wrought to double cape de Sant Antonio , stir west : and about midnight we have land all high right a head , and the coast lie southwest : and then we cast and lie Northeast till day : and be day , we see the land all a head , and we ply to windward to the east , and keep it a larboard till we have bring it southwest . and to be short , we go here on land in the same place that we first fall with in the evening before : and it be a island call Cozumel , lie on the coast of Yucatan . and this island be the land which we see first , seem by the mark to be the cape de Corrientes . we come to a anchor about the midst of the island , rather to the norther then the Souther part : there we find a town of Indian , who give we all thing which we need for our money : and we carry our astrolab on shore and take the height in 19 degree and one tierce . a man may go between this island and the coast of Yucatan , and the cape de Catoche at pleasure Northeast ; and the water will set in thy favour : and thou must go till thou be in 24 . degree , and so thou shall have the sound of the Tortugas . the course to be keep from the cape de Santo Antonio for Nueva Espanna . if thou go from the cape de Santo Antonio for Nueva Espanna , and be late , thou shall stir westnorthwest till thou be in the height of 24 . degree : and from thence thou shall stir something to the west , until thou bring thy self north and south with the little hand call Vermeja : and when thou be so , thou shall go Southwest , and by this way thou shall find villa Rica , which be in 19 degree and a half , and the sign be these . thou shall find a 294 ledge of high hill lie north - east and Southwest . but if thou chance to fall with a coast that lie north and south , than thou may account , that it be about the low ground of Almeria which have these mark . the it be a land not very high , and it be full of little copy . and if thou have clear weather , thou shall see within the land certain high hill which be call the hill of Papalo . and i advise thou that be so far shoot as the point call Punta delgada , which be the end of all those hill of villa Rica , thou may stir thence south and by west , and thou shall go along the coast , and shall see a low land , and with this land thou shall fall , go for saint Paul , and be so far shoot as saint Paul , if thou will go into the harbour , thou must stir Southwest : and this be the course that thou must keep be shot into the bay and thou shall go along the coast of the low land in sight thereof : and keep this course thou shall see on the other side a black hill , and it be call Monte de Carneros . take this for a note , that it lie over the house of buytron : and as thou do come near to the point of rock , thou must be sure to keep thy lead go , and shall have four fathom and a half or five fathom , and so thou may go through the midst of the channel . And come against the castle , thou shall give it some breadth off towards the arrecife or rock : and have double the castle , thou shall go from thence and shall bring thy self to a anchor hard by the Herreria , which be a clean bay , and thou shall ride against the hospitali . i advise thou that if thou be benight when thou be near to saint Paul , and meet with a northerly wind after midnight , that then thy best way be to bring thy self into thy corpse , and lie by , ply to windward , and to seaward in 20 . fathom which depth thou shall have near the shore , to the northward : and be day , then go in with the harbour as thou can best , observe what be abovesaid . 295 Las Sierras de Papalo . saint Paul . Monte de Carneros . Casa de buytron . the castle of saint Juan de ullua . the hospitali . and i advise thou that if thou come from Villa Rica , and find thy self in 20 . degree and a half , and see not land , and see that the water do alter , [ three . 610 . ] thou shall sound 60 . fathom water : and if in this depth thou have oaze , make account thou be east the river of anJ west with the river of Almeria . this course be mena . from the cape of Santo Antonio to Nueva Espanna without or aseaboord the alacrane or scorpion . now follow how to work , if a man come betwixt the alacrane and the main . if thou go from the cape de Santo Antonio and will go for Nueva Espanna within the alacrane or Alacranes , thou must stir west and by south , and scorpion . wa ^ thou shall bring thy self in 20 . fathom ; and if thou keep this course find less water , then go west and by north , and that way thou shall bring thy self into 20 . fathom again , until thou have bring thy self north , and south with they the triangle , triangle . And be north and south with the triangle , Surta or than thou shall be also north and south with Surta : Zarza . from thence thou shall go Southwest : and by this the high hill coarse thou shall have sight of the high hill of saint of . Martin . Martin , which be certain high hill lie northwest and southeast , and they have a partition in the midst , and to the northwest they be high : and on the southeast part within the land , thou shall see something a high land , call pan de Minsapa , that be , the loaf of Minsapa , which be a round loaf not very high . the hill of saint Martin stand in 18 . degree less one five part . i advise thou that when thou fall with saint Martin , and will go with saint John de ullua , than thou shall go westnorthwest : and this be the course that thou must keep , if thou be far off at sea , i mean so far off as thou may well descry the hill of saint Martin . 296 but if thou be near to the land , than thou must go northwest and by west , and thou shall so come along the coast , and thou shall find the coast to be low land : and come this course thou shall have sight of certain little hill not very high : than thou shall fall with the point call Punta de Antoni Serro : and these hill lie over the river of Medelin . and if when thou be east and west , with the Volcan or hill that cast out fire , any man do ask thou , where the harbour of Sant Juan de ullua be , thou may true answer , west and by south , and it stand in 18 . degree and a half . the course to be keep from Nueva Espanna to the main of Spain in Europe . come from saint Juan de Ullua to go for Spain , thou shall stir north - east until thou be in 24 . degree : and so be thou shall go east until thou bring thy self in the sounding of the Tortugas , and thy ground will be white sand . i advise thou , that if it be by night , thou go east ; and find the water to wax shoalder , then go Southwest , with a care to keep thy lead go , until thou loose ground , and come into great depth , because thou may fall to the north of the Tortugas . And go from this sound for Havana thou must stir southsoutheast , because of the current that carry thou to the east . and if by this way thou have sight of a high land , that seem to be like a loaf , make account it be the loaf of Cabanas . and to the east of this loaf thou shall see a land that have a plain . it show to be low , even with the sea , and as smooth as the sea : and from this land to the east the land be low and low . and from thence to Havana thou must go east . and if the wind will not let thou go that course , thou must turn up till thou be upon the harbour of Havana . the mark of the point of Havana be these , that on the east side it have a high black land , which be slope 297 Rio de Medelin . S . Juan de ullua in 18 . deg . and a half . the Tortugas . the current to the east . Pan de Cabanas . Havana . the shold of mimbre , that be , ofosiar . the chattel ! reachethtozi . degree . the english voyage to the sea , with a little white tower on the top thereof : and as thou go into the port , thou must keep near the high black land , and when thou be hard to it , strike thy top sail in sign of peace to the castle , lest it shoot at thou . what course the Spaniard keep from Havana to Spain . if from Havana thou will set thy course for Spain , thou must go Northeast , and shall so have sight of the martyr , which stand in 24 . degree and a half . and the coast lie east and west . the mark be these , it show like head of tree , and in some place certain rock with white sandy bay . and if the wind be large , thou may go east and by south until thou see the coast to lie Northeast and Southwest : and if the wind be scant , then go turn up : and take good heed that every evening at sun go down thou have sight of the land , and so thou must do be in the channel , until thou bring thy self into the midst of the channel : and thou must lie off from the go down of the sun , until the end of the first watch with thy corpse alone , without any more sail ; and from midnight forward cast about , and lie the other way with the like sail until day : and thus thou must do until thou bring thy self into the chanel . and if be in the chanel thou find the wind large , thou shall stir Northeast , with a care to go clean off the shold of the mimbre or the osiar . and if be in the chanel thou meet with the wind at north , than thou must turn with a little sail 4 . glass one way , and 4 . another , as thou think good . and if thou can not bear sail , than thou may go with all thy sail down , except when thou will cast about , thou may loose some small sail to wind thy ship . i advise thou , that when thou be come out of the chanel , thou shall be in 28 . degree . and if it be 298 in summer , thou shall go north - east until thou be in 39 degree and i , which be the height of Flores : and thou shall go to the northward of Bermuda . and if la Bermuda . thou think good to go in more degree , to have the seawind , thou shall go by the same height , as i have say : and if thou shall find the wind off the sea , thou have no need to go in more height : and from thence thou shall go east and by south : and thou must go thus because of the variation of the compass . the variation and thus thou shall find the isle of Flores and Cuervo , ° ft , u which stand in 39 degree i , and in 40 . large . Theise ' mark be these . * thou may go from betwixt Flores and Cuervo , Flores and and must go east southeast , and so thou shall have cuerv0 - sight of the island of sail , which be the island of S . saint George . George . And be at the land thou shall go along it , and when thou have double a certain little Headland that lie in the east point , than thou shall stir east and by north , and east . and thus go , thou shall have sight of Terzera , which be in 39 degree . the Terzera . mark be these . * and behind a certain black land something high , which be call el Brasil , stand the city call Angra . go from Terzera , thou shall run east Northeast ,