stand away south and south and by west after the fleet : and the 26 in the morning have sight of the fleet again . the 29 we have sight of the island call Curazao the isle of within eight league of the main , and on the north - Curazao . west side come to a anchor in very deep water hard aboard the shore without any danger : but the general weigh present and stand away northwest and by west , and northnorthwest for the main , and that night see Aruba , be somewhat a less island than the Aruba . other : we leave it some three league to the southward of we . on Sunday morning be the last of November we see three or four little island call the Monjes , Monjes . betwixt Aruba and the next north point of the main . at 12 of the clock we see the main , where we see a great current set to the westward , and also the water change very white . the phoenix , the caravel , and one of the catch keep within , and at midnight come under cape de la Vela , and make a fire , cape de la whereby the rest of the fleet come to anchor under ela - the cape , where be a very good road , fair shold and sandy ground , fourteen , twelve , and ten fathom near the shore . the cape be a bare land without tree or shrub , and fall in eight or ten league southeast and northwest : and a saker shoot off the point stand a little island like Mewestone near Plymouth , but somewhat big . in the morning the first of December we embark all our soldier for Rio de la Hacha , which be a town twenty league Rio de la to the westwards , one of the ancient in all the main , HacJia taken - although not very big : but it stand in a most fertile and pleasant soil . our man take it by ten of the clock in the night . the ship bear all that night and the day before in 5 and 6 fathom , the lesser ship in two fathom and a half water : the 233 phoenix go so near the shore by the general commandment , that she strike on ground , but get off again . there lie to the eastward of the town a A shall of mile or thereabouts he shall of sand : therefore give a san ^‘ birth some half league or more before you come right against the town . there we come to anchor in two fathom , but the great ship ride off in five and [ three . 586 . ] six fathom . there be a fresh river about a bowshot afresh river . eastward of the town ; whereinto our pin - ness can scarce enter by reason of a bar of sand in the river mouth , but within it be navigable for bark of twenty or thirty ton some six or eight league up . the six day the Spaniard come in to talk about the ransom of the town , but not to the general his like : and that night sir Thomas Baskervil march up into the country to overrun those part : and the general the same night with some hundred and fifty man go by water six league to the eastward , la Rancheria and take the Rancheria a fisher town , where they take . drag for pearl . the people all flee except some sixteen or twenty soldier , which fight a little , but some be take prisoner , beside many negro , with some store of pearl and other pillage . in the house we refresh our self , and be all embark to come away , and then have sight of a brigandine or a dredger , which the general take within one hour chase with his two barge : she have in her indy - wheat , which we call maiz , and some silver and pearl , but of small value . on Saturday the seven , master York captain of the hope die of sickness , and then master Thomas Drake the general brother be make captain of the hope , and master Jonas Bodenham captain of the adventure , and master Charles Caesar captain of the amity . the ten day the Spaniard conclude for the ransom of the town for 24000 ducat , and one prisoner promise to pay for his ransom 4000 ducat . 234 the fourteenth day they bring in the town ransom in pearl , but rate so dear as the general after conference with they , mislike it , send it back again , give they four hour respite to clear themselves with their treasure . the sixteenth the governor come into the town about dinner , and upon conference with the general tell he plain , that he care not for the town , neither will he ransom it : and that the pearl be bring in without his command or consent , and that his detract of time so long be only to send the other town word , that be not of force to withstand we , whereby they may convey all their good , cattle , and wealth into the wood out of danger . So the general give the governor leave to depart accord to promise , have two hour to withdraw himself in safety . the seventeenth sir Thomas Baskervil with the Eliza beth Constance , the phoenix , the caravel with four or five pinnace go some five league to the westward , and land , march some four league up into the country to a place call Tapia , which he take and Tapia take . burn certain village and farm house about it . he have some resistance as he pass over a river , but have but one man hurt , which he bring aboard alive with he : he march one league far and burn a village call Sallamca , and so return with some prisoner , Sallamca the soldier have get some pillage . burn . the 18 the Rancheria , and the town of Rio de la Hacha be burn clean down to the ground , the church and a lady house only except , which by her letter write to the general be preserve . that day we set sail and fall to leeward , to meet with sir Thomas Baskervil . the 19 we weigh and stand to leeward for cape Cape de de Aguja , which the twenty at sun rise we see . Aguja . it be a cape subject much to flaw , by reason it be a very high land : and within the cape lie a island within 235 the mouth of the sound , which have a white cliff or spot in the westnorthwest part of the island . the land all about the cape rise all in hammock or break steepy hill . a league Southwest within that , ( for so fall the land thereabouts ) there stand on the top of a cliff a watchhouse : and a little within that a small island : you may go in between the main and it , or to leeward if you lust : and hard within that be Santa Martha the road and town of Santa Martha , which at 11 of take . the clock we take , the people all be flee , except a few Spaniard , negro and Indian , , which in a bravado at our land give we some 30 or 40 shot , and so run away . that night their lieutenant general be take and some little pillage bring in out of the wood : for in the town nothing be leave but the house sweep clean . in all the main be not a rich place for gold : for the hop be mix with the earth in every place , and also in the sand a little to the leeward of the town . in the bay we have a bad ride by reason of a small moon , for every small moon make foul weather all the main along . the 21 , the general cause the town to be burn , and all the ship to weigh , and stand out , many of the soldier be embark where the general have appoint , in the small ship which ride near the shore . we lose that night the company of the phoenix , captain Austin , Peter Lemond , and the garland pinnace , which stand along the shore , and be chase off by galley out of Carthagena Peter Lemond with nine of our man be take , the rest come safe to our [ three . 587 . ] fleet . the 26 we see the hand some twelve league to the eastward of number de Dios stand in towards the shore , but towards night we stand to the oflin until the next day . number de the 27 we come into the mouth of number de dios , Dios take , and by one of the clock take the town , the people 236 being all flee except some too Spaniards , which keep the fort , and play upon we , have in the fort some 3 or 4 small piece of ordinance , and one of they break in discharge at we . they give we also a volley of small shot : but see our resolution in run upon they they all flee and take the wood . the town be big , have large street , house very hie , all build of timber , but one church very fair and large wrought all of timber likewise . Nothing be leave in the town of value : there be a show in their shop of great store of merchandise that have be there . there be a mill above the town , and upon the top of another hill in the wood stand a little watchhouse , where we take twenty sow of silver , two bar of gold , some money in coin , beside other pillage . the town be situate in a watery soil , and subject much to rain , very unhealthy as any place in the Indies , have great store of orange , plantan , cassavy - root , and such other fruit ; but very dangerous to be eat for breed of disease . to the eastward of the town within the bay run out a fresh river of excellent good water , with house , and all about it garden : half a league from hence due east into the country be a Indian town , whither as we march a little before our come away with a hundred man they have break down a bridge to hinder our passage , where they lie in ambush with some twenty or thirty small shot , and bow and arrow , set upon we , and kill lieutenant Jones , hurt three or four and so flee into the wood , run before we and fire their own town , and then flee far into the wood : our man fire diverse other house in pursue they , and so return again : our general with sir Thomas be in the river mouth with thirty or forty man fill water about some mile from we . the road of number de Dios be a fair road : but on each side , as you come to ride before the town , lie a ledge of rock , but there be no danger because they 237 a Indian town fire . be in sight . you may ride between they in three or four fathom water , and without if you will in eight or ten fathom , where neither castle nor fort can annoy you . the name of number de dios be great than their strength . for they have no castle nor fort , but only the little fort aforesaid stand on the top of a hill , although they may have make it strong if they will . the 29 sir Thomas Baskervil with 750 arm man , beside chirurgeon and provand boy , go for Panama . the last of December the general burn half the town , and the first of Januarie burn the rest , with all the frigate , bark and galliot , which be in the harbour and on the beach on shore , have house build over they to keep the pitch from melt . the second of January sir Thomas return with his soldier both weary and hungry , have march more than half the way to the south sea . the Spaniard play diverse time upon we both outward and homeward in the wood , the way be cut out of the wood and rock both very narrow , and full of mire and water . the march be so sore as never Englishman march before . Having march some ten league in a marvellous strait way , upon the top of a hill , through which we must needs pass , the Spaniard have set up a fort and keep it with some 80 or 90 man , who play upon we as we come up , before we be aware of they , and so kill some twenty or moor of we , among who be captain Marchant quartermaster general , and ensign Samson , Maurice Williams one of her majesty guard , beside diverse be hurt , as m . captain Nicholas Baskervil a valiant gentleman , with diverse other . then sir Thomas have perfect knowledge that they must pass two such fort more , if he get that , beside Panama to be very strong , the enemy know of our come long before . also our soldier have no victual leave , nor any mean 238 last voyage of drake and Hawkins a . d . ... * 596 - to get more : which consideration cause sir Thomas to return and give over his attempt . as he march thitherward he take a Indian and send he to number de dios with letter of his return and proceed . the 5 we set sail at 12 of the clock , and stand to the westward . the 10 day we see a hand lie westward some the lie of 30 league call escudo , where we come to anchor Escudo . on the southside in 12 fathom water , fair sand and good ankorage . if you come into the eastern point , give it a birth , because of a ledge of rock , that lie out there from the end of the island : come to anchor we see a road , who see we , set sail , but that night with our pinnace we take he , he have nothing in he but a little maiz . the man be examine by the general confess he to be a advisor send from number de dios to all the port along the coast westward . this hand lie 9 or 10 [ three . 588 . ] league from the main , and be not past two league long full of wood , and have great store of fresh water in every part of the hand , and that very good . it be a sickly climate also