a excellent ruttier for the island of the west Indies , and for Tierra firma , and Nueva Espanna . f a man depart from the bar of saint Lucar in summer time , he must steer southwest until he have sight of Punta de Naga , which be in the isle of tenerif . the mark to know it be these . a high point slope to the sea , and at the easter point it have two down fall like partition , and they show to be separate from the main of the island and stand in 28 degree and a half . and if thou will have sight of the grand Canaria , and find thy self with Punta de Naga , thou shall then steer Southwest and by south , and so thou shall have sight of Canaria which stand in 28 degree . and thou must come to anchor on the southeast side 280 of the island . but i advise thou , if it be in winter time , that thou keep another course , and that as follow . the course that a man must keep depart in winter for the Indies from Sant Lucar . depart from Sant Lucar in winter thou shall go west and by south keep along the coast , because if thou go far from the coast , thou shall meet with the wind off the sea until thou be as high shot as cape Cantin , which be a low flat cape with the sea . cape Cantin . and thou shall see a great wood before thou come at a great wood this cape , call Casa deal Cavallero . and from thence before you thou shall steer thy old course , that be southwest and by south for the isle of Alegranza , and Lancerota ; and ' when thou be north and south with Alegranza , thou shall steer thence Southwest , and so thou shall see the Canaria , which be a round high land , and stand in twenty eight degree . what thou must do if a contrary wind take thou fifty league off the shore . when thou be fifty league shoot on thy way into the sea Southwest off , and there thou chance to meet with a contrary wind off the sea , and if it force thou to put room , than thou shall steer Northeast and by east , and shall hall with sight of Cabos del plata , which show when thou be a seaboord so far as thou may descry they , to be like two point of white sand : and if it be clear thou shall see within the land certain high hill lie northwest and by west call las Sierras de Zahara , and be three league from land thou shall have thirty fathom water , and sand : and from thence to the bay of Cadiz thou shall go along northwest by the coast : and if thou be in thirty or forty fathom , thou shall have oaze ; but if thou be in less than thirty fathom , thou shall have other sound ; which if it chance , than thou be against saint 281 the bay of Cadiz . San Pedro Pedro and if it be by day thou shall see the ermi - san Sebastian . tage of gaunt Sebastian , which seem to be a ship under sail . and thou shall go into the bay take los Puercos . heed of the Puercos , give they a good birth off . and if thou chance to be benight when thou fall with the bay , and will go into the bay , thou shall carry thy lead in thy hand , and be sound : and find thy self in rocky ground , thou shall steer north because of shun the puercos : and yet give they not thediamant . too great a birth because of the diamant , and so thou may go in , sound when thou think good . And be benight and then not east and west with the bay , and if thou do not go into it , then make the large board thou can keep off till day . the canary . if thou be at the canary and will sail to Nueva Espanna , thou shall sail four and twenty hour south because of the calm of Fierro . and from thence thou shall go westsouthwest , until thou find thy self in twenty degree . and than thou must go west and the isle de - by south , which be the course for the isle Deseada . and seada in the from Deseada thou shall go west and by north , be - westcause of the variation of the compass . And fall with * degree of Deseada , thou shall find it to rise low with the sea : latitude . and it stand in 15 degree . and the eastermost part be the sharp , and small than the west point . and if thou be go for Tierra firma , thou shall go west and by south until thou come to Dominica , and there on the northwest side be a river , where thou mark to may water . the mark to know it be a certain know domi - high land full of hill . And see it when thou be mca by . far ogr to the it make in the midst a partition ; so that a man will think it divide the island in two part . and this island stand in 14 degree and a half . i advise thou that if thou will go for Nueva Guadalupe . Espanna , and so do pass between Guadalupe and monserate . monserate to the westward , that be thus open off the entrance betwixt they thou shall go westnorthwest , 282 and so shall have sight of Santa Cruz , which stand Santa Cruz . in seventeen degree and a half . and the mark to know it be these . it be a island not very high , and lie east and west , and at the east end it be low than at the west end . And go forward on thy course thou shall run westnorthwest , and so thou shall go to have sight of the isle of San Juan de Puerto rico , which be a island S . Juan the lie east and west , and stand in eighteen degree . P ^ to rico . and the mark be these . that on the west end it be low , and the eastermost be the high . and if thou fall with the midst of the island , than thou shall go a long it to the west unto Cabo Roxo , which be cape roxo . the end of the isle . and from thence the coast run [ ill . 605 . ] north to Punta Aguada . Cape roxo have certain red cliff . thou must steer west and by south from cape Roxo to find Mona , and so thou shall have sight of Mona . Mona . and the mark thereof be these , it be a low land lie east and west : and on the east end it be high , it have a slope towards the sea , and stand in 18 . degree , rather less than moor . and if it be by day , than thou shall run west and shall see Saona : Saona . which be a island lie without Hispaniola , and lie east and west , and be full of tree ; and have certain sandy bay . and if it be clear weather thou shall see within the land of Hispaniola certain high hill call las Sierras the yguey . And be benight upon Mona , alas Sierras de than thou shall steer west and by south , because of certain shoald that lie off Saona : but have day light and no sight of land , thou shall loose up northwest and so pass by it , and as thou go along the coast of Hispaniola , and see the sea to be cast up into the air , than thou shall be about 10 league off the harbour of Santo Domingo , and these mounting up be call the spout . be the spout . but i advise thou , that if thou be benight when Santo thou fall with Santo Domingo , than thou must keep Domingo . the hill call Sierras de las mina viejas to the north - 283 Puerto hermosa . west . and if thou will go into Santo Domingo , and meet there with a forcible northerly wind , than the best way be to run east till it be day . and have daylight thou shall cast about , and so thou must ply to windward until the northerly wind be do : and when it be past , make all the sail thou can to hale with the sight of Calle de las i Damas : and when thou have sight thereof thou shall lie with thy stem with a sandy bay , which lie on the other side : and thou must take in thy main sail , and go so till thou bring thy self open with the midst of the river ; and so have open the river , thou must go with great care in the midst of the same , with all thy sail up , except thy main sail , and thou must have thy boat out , if it be needful to sound or to tow thy ship , if she cast too much to the loof , for the current will cast here to the loof : wherefore be sure to have thy boat out to help thy steerage : and this be the way whereby thou must work . the course from Santo Domingo to go for Nueva Espanna . i advise thou that if thou will go from Santo Domingo for Nueva Espanna , thou shall go Southwest and by south , and so thou shall have sight of Punta de Nizao , which be a low point , and be the end of the hill call Sierras de las mina viejas , and towards the northwest of they thou shall see a low land , and to go into Hocoa thou shall stir from this point of Nizao westnorthwest , and thou shall see the point of Puerto Hermoso , and the bay that it make : and thou must be sure to keep near the shore to find a good road , and fear not to go near the land : for all be deep water , and clear ground , and let not fall thy anchor till thou be past all the river ; and beware of the land , for if thou ride much without , thy anchor will come home , because it be rocky and flat ground . and thou must be ready , that when thy anchor come home , 284 thou have thy moaring ready in thy boat to carry on shore with four or five man , and if thou think good , thou may let they fall on land with a rope . and when thou be come to ’ anchor thou may send on shore to moare , so shall thou be best moar . the course from Hocoa to Nueva Espanna . go from Hocoa to Nueva Espanna thou shall stir Southwest : and this way thou shall find the isle Beata , and Alto velo : Beata have these mark : Beata , and than it be a low land with the sea , and full of tree : and mar ^ s of - on the east side a high land or cliff ; and Alto velo alto velo , and have these mark . a black round land , and the easter - ma ^ s most part thereof be high , and it have a downfall . when thou be north and south with * than thou shall go west , until thou be so far shoot as the frail : and from thence go west and by north , frail . and keep this course thou shall have sight of cape Tiburon . and if by keep this course thou have sight of a little island , thou may make account it be the isle of Baque : and it be hard to the land , and the isle of from thence thou shall go west , keep thy self out until thou double a point that make as it be a great bay , and than thou must go west and by north , till thou come to cape Tiburon , that have a round black cape de land , and in some part thereof certain white cliff . Tiburon . i advise thou that when thou be against cape de Tiburon , thou stir northwest , and so thou shall have sight of Cuba , which lie east and west : and thou Cuba . shall see certain hill which be call Sierras deal Cobre , and in the high of they be the harbour of saint Iago de S . Iago de Cuba : and find thy self so , thou may run west unto cape de Cruz . and before thou see cape de Sierras de tarquino . [ he . 606 . ] self . and if thou chance to have the water trouble , as though thy ship do raise up the sand from the 285 Cruz thou shall see the hill call Sierras de tarquino , and from these hill to cape de Cruz the land wax low and low , and it be low of all at the cape it cape de Cruz in 19 , deg . and better . los Jardines . the isle de Pinos . Cape de Corrientes . Cape de Sant Anton in 22 . degree . ground , be not afraid : for this place be call the nine fathom : for thou shall find no less water upon it , and it be the shallow water that thou shall have . thou must mark that cape de Cruz make a end of the coast that come from the east to the west , and begin the course that go north and south , and stand in 19 degree , rather more then less . from cape de Cruz thou must stir westnorthwest : and this way thou shall have sight of the isle de Pinos , and if thou have fair weather , than thou must go northwest , and by west , because of the current that will set thou out to sea . And keep this course thou shall have sight of a high land . i tell thou it be the mark of the isle call los Jardines , and be common call the land of Zagueio : and than thou shall go west and by south : and if it be by night , then go westsouthwest until thou have bring thy self out from the Jardines . And be by day thou shall keep off the land , and shall go westnorthwest , and so thou shall see the isle de Pinos . the mark to know the cape de Santo Antonio . the headland call Capo de Santo Antonio be a low land , and full of tree , and upon the cape it self it have two or three thick wood , and the coast lie northwest and southeast . and thou must also take good heed that thou have sight on the same coast of a white sandy bay ; and it be on the same coast that lie northwest and southeast . and these be the mark from Punta de las Arenas , or the point of the sand , to the cape of saint Anthony , and from the cape de Corrientes to Punta de las Arenas thou shall have a great bay , be so long , that if thou be not very near the shore thou can not see land , it be so low . and if thou see not the land well , it will show to be a tuft of tree . and the cape of S . Anthony stand in 22 . degree . 286 a rutty that a man must keep from Dominica to Martinino , and so to Tierra firma . i