of Beata . BEata be a small island and not very high : you may pass along the outside thereof , and there be no danger but that you may see ; and by and by you shall raise alto velo : and from thence you must stir away 312 west and by south , to give a birth from the island call los frail , or the friar . and when you los frail . be as far ahead as the frail , then must you stir away west and by north , and so shall you go right with Bacoa , and before you come to it , you shall see bacon . high craggy cliff , and at the descend of they white path like great sheet ; these high craggy mountain be call las sierras de donna maria . and before you alas ster ^ s de come to the say point of Bacoa , you shall discover a anam ' little low island even with the sea and full of tree , which be call Isla Baque . Ida Baque . direction from Isla Baque to cape Tiburon . if you will go from the island Baque , or from the ape point of Bacoa for cape Tiburon , or to the isle of gf Navaza , you must stir away westnorthwest , and edge jqavaza 0 in somewhat to the northwest , and you shall pass between Navaza and cape Tiburon . mark of cape Tiburon , which be the western cape of Hispaniola . cape Tiburon lie slide down to the seaward , and make a sharp cliff like the snout of a tiburon or shark - fish ; and upon the top thereof it appear like white way with certain gullet or drain upon it , which be cause by the passage of the water from the mountain in the winter time . mark off the isle of Navaza . NAvaza be a little round island full of low tree or shrub , and it lie east and west from cape Tiburon , and from this small island to go for Sierras de Cobre , or the mountain or mine of copper upon the southeast part of Cuba , you must stir away northnorthwest . [ direction from 3 * 3 [ in . 617 . ] direction from cape Tiburon to Cabo de Cruz in Cuba . Sierras de Cobre . Sierras de tarquino . if you will sail from cape Tiburon to cape de Cruz in Cuba , you must stir away northwest , and you shall see the Sierras or mountain de Cobre ; and from thence you may go along the coast west towards Cabo de Cruz ; and before you come at it you shall see the great tarquino , and from this tarquino you shall have to cape de Cruz 30 . league , and this great tarquino be the high land upon all that coast ; and then by and by you shall see the lesser tarquino , from whence to the foresay cape you have 12 . league , and so shall you go discover the coast , until you come to Cabo de Cruz . mark of Cabo de Cruz . cape de Cruz be a low cape full of shrub ; and from thence westward you shall see no land ; for the distance or bay be great between the say cape and the isle call los Jardines . direction from cape de Cruz to Isla de Pinos . if you sail from cape de Cruz to seek the island of Pinos , you must stir away westnorthwest . and note , that if in this course you happen to sound , do not fear ; for you have nine fathom . if also go this course , you meet with certain little island upon los Caimanes . the larboard side , which be call the caimanes , or the crocodile , have sight of they , stir away northwest , and so shall you find the island of Pinos . and if by see the say island call Caimanes you be amaze , you shall know by the latitude , whither they be the Jardines or no : for if you find your self in one and twenty degree , then be you sure they be loss Jardines . the Jardines , and then stir out again south , till you be 314 clear of they ; and when you have bring they north of you , then may you stir away west , if it be by day ; if it bee ’ by night , west and by south , till you see the island of Pinos . the mark of Isla de Pinos . the island of Pinos stretch it self east and west , and it be full of hammock , and if you chance to see it at full sea , it will show like 3 . Islands , as though there be diverse sound between they , and that in the midst be the great ; and in row with they , it will make all a firm land : and upon the east side of these three hammock it will show all ragged ; and on the west side of they will appear unto you a low point even with the sea , and oftentimes you shall see the tree before you shall discern the point . direction from the isle of Pinos to cape de Corrientes . if you sail from the foresay isle of Pinos to cape de Corrientes , stir away west and by north ; and before you come to the say cape upon the northside of you , you shall see certain mountain all full of hammock , which be call las Sierras de Guanaguarico , las sierras de and that upon the west part have more hammock than that on the other . mark of cape de Corrientes . cape de Corrientes be a low cape , though not so low as the other part of the land that lie along by it ; for it be more low , and have upon it 4 . or 5 . great splat like unto ox , and the very point of the cape be all white sand : and from thence westward you shall discern no land , for it make a great bay : and from hence you must sail to cape de Sant Anton . [ mark of 315 the cape of Sant Anton be low by the sea , and all full of shrub or tree ; and you shall see within the land a lake of fresh water ; and if you want water , there you may water : and upon the north side of the say cape you shall discern a palm tree high than the rest of the tree , and it show round like a bowl at the top , like to the top of a ship : and north from the cape be certain sholde which be 2 . or 3 . league long . direction from the cape de S . Anton to Nueva Espanna on the outside of the small island call los Alacranes or the scorpion . if you will sail from cape Sant Anton to Nueva Espanna with a north wind , then stir away westnorthwest from 21 . to 22 . degree , and then sound upon the pracel or flat ; and if you see by this direction , that you hold water , then stir away northwest , [ three . 618 . ] until you lose the ground ; and then follow your course again , until you have bring your self into 24 . degree and J . and then sail west until you the isle bring your self north and south with the isle of Vermeja . Vermeja , or the red isle : then stir away Southwest , Villa rica . and by this way you shall find villa rica on the coast of Nueva Espanna . and if by go this course you be in 19 degree and J . and chance not to see the land , then stir away west until you see villa rica , and from thence sail you south for the harbour of 8 . Juan de S . Juan de ullua : and if you shall be near the ullua - land you must stir south and by west towards they a volcan or same harbour . and if you chance to see the Volcan urmng 1 . or burn bill to bear west and by south from you , then know , that the harbour of saint Juan de ullua shall | be east and west off - you . 316 villa rica stand in 19 degree and J . and the sign thereof be certain high hill full of hammock of many head , which have on the top of they certain white patch after the manner of white beat way ; and these hill lie north - east and Southwest . and if you doubt whether these be the Sierras Sierras de or hill of saint Martin , wet your lead or sound , and if Sant Martin . you find bottom , they be the Sierras of Villa rica : Sierras de and sail you to the landward , and look by how much rica ‘ you come near the land , so much will they seem low unto you : but so do not the hill of saint Martin ; for the near you come to they , the high will they appear to you : and likewise if they be the hill of saint Martin , you shall not find bottom , but even at land it self . mark of Rio de las palmas , and of the river of mountain call Rio de las montannas . Rio de las palmas . Rio de las montannas . Rio de panuco . Rio Hermoso , or the beautiful river . the current of the bay of Mexico { the wind be at the east ) set to the north , and 40 . league from the shore to the north - east . f you shall chance to fall with Rio de las palmas , or the river of palm , or else with the river of mountain , it be all a plain land , and full of tree and certain woody hammock , and among they certain heap of sand , and all this along by the sea side : and if you go by land to the river of Panuco , you shall have many mouth or opening of plaias or strand , where also be many liza or oazy place , which stretch to Rio Hermoso . you must beware what part soever you happen of this coast to fall withal , to discover it , and although you know it , you must sound the depth ; because if the wind be easterly , the current set there much to the north : but if you shall be 40 . league at sea , than this current set to the north - east . [ mark of 3 ' 7 S . Luis de tampice . mark of Rio Hermoso or the beautiful river . if you will seek the river call Rio Hermoso , look well within the land , you shall see three hammock of a high hill , and those two which be to the landward within , be round than the other which be near the sea , for that it be long and big , and lie north and south , and you shall be 4 . league at sea when you shall see they : and they be call the sierras , or mountain of Tamaclipa ; and from thence to the river of Panuco there be no high land , but all low and even with the sea , and full of palm tree and other tree . mark off the river of Panuco . if you fall with the river of Panuco ( between which and the foresay villa rica stand the island call Isla de Lobos or the isle of seal ) the mark be these . from the mouth of the river it make a great bay without , and at the end of this bay upon the northside there be oazy , low , and bare ground altogether without tree , and at the out end of the oazy low place upon the west side it make a low homock like to a lizards head : and when you see the aforesaid cliff , you shall be in the open of the mouth of the say river , and then shall you see a little low tower have on the top of it a cross , which the fisherman call Marien : and this bar have on it 2 . fathom water , and 2 . and and you need not to stay for the tide , for that it flow not there : and that you may the better know whether you be in this bay which i have mention , or not , you shall see certain hill at west Southwest , which be call las sierras de tarquia ; and forthwith also you shall see the oazy place that i speak of , which go to the mouth of the river where stand a town call S . Luis de tampice , and from thence to Panuco you have 9 league by land . 318 the mark of Isla de lobos , or the isle of seal . i Sia de lobos be a small island nothing so big as the card do show it , and in it be a little grove or wood of palm tree , and all the rest of the island be without tree , and round about it be sundry playa or [ in . 619 . ] strand , and it be enclose round about with arrazife or shoald , and chief towards the main land . and from thence to cape Roxo or the red cape be 3 . Cabo roxo . league . and if you will come to anchor at this island to a water water , for that there be water in it , you may ride on all the south side close by the point that stretch to the westward , and you may pass by the east side of it , and ride in 22 . fathom , and until you come to 15 . fathom , all be clean ground . mark off the river of Tuspa . if you fall with the river of Tuspa , you must beware the sholde which run 5 . or 6 . league into the sea : and upon this river of Tuspa within the land there be high hill which lie north - east and Southwest , and have their end upon the bay of cassone : and the bay of upon the river you shall perceive a white cliff , which cassone . will show unto you like the castle of saint Juan de ullua . mark off the river of saint Peter and S . Paul . if you chance to fall with the bay of cassone ,