on the ground . to be short , at length with much ado we get the top of the mountain about noon : there we make a stand till all the company be come up , and will have stay long to have refresh our man : but the fog and rain fall so fast , that we dare not stay . so we make haste to descend towards the town out of the fog and rain : because that in these high mountain by report of the Spaniard themselves , it do almost continual rain . assoon as we be descend down near half the way to the town the rain cease , and go down a little further , on the top of a hill we see the town not far distant from we . here we all clear our musket : and 219 when our colour come in sight , we discharge a second volee of shot to the great discouragement of the enemy . thus we march on a round pace . the enemy be in readiness a little without the town to encounter we on horseback . be now full descend from the mountains we come into a fair plain champion field , without either hedge , bush or ditch , save certain trench which the water have make , as it descend from the mountain . here we set our self in a readiness , suppose the enemy will have encounter we : but have pitch our main battle , and march forward a good round pace , captain Beling , and captain Roberts take each of they some loose shoot , and march in all haste towards the enemy before the main battle , wherein be our general with captain . summer and come to skirmish with they : but it be soon end : for the enemy flee . one Spaniard be slay in this skirmish , and not any one of our company touch either with piece or arrow , God be the ci tie of S . thank . we soon march into the town , and have ** without any more resistance : but there we find not tfMaye 2 $ the wealth that we expect : for they have convey all into the mountain , except such good as they can not easy carry , as wine , and iron , and such thing . by three [ three . 581 . ] of the clock in the afternoon the 29 of may , we enter the city . here we remain until the 3 of June without any great disturbance , save sometime by night they will come on horseback hard unto our corpse du guard , and find we vigilant , and ready for they , will depart again . the first of June , there come a Spaniard near unto we alone : the corpse du guard perceive he , call our general , who soon come towards he : but before he approach , the Spaniard make sign that he shall lay aside his arm : which he refuse to do , but promise as he be a soldier , if he will come , he shall have free passage . upon which promise he come to he on horseback , and our general bring he within the 220 town , and there commune with he . who demand what he mean to do with the town : he answer that he mean to remain there and keep it ; or if he do depart from it he will burn it . the Spaniard then demand , what the ransom of it shall be . our general require 30000 ducat . whereunto he reply that it be very much . So have have some other conference together , he show he that he have be a soldier in Flanders a long time , and now be send thither by his king commandment . among other thing our general demand of he , what the reason be they have not wall the city , be so fair a thing as that be . the Spaniard reply , that he think it to be strong wall than any city in the world , meaning , by those huge and high mountain which the enemy must pass over before he can approach it ; which we find very true . thus with many other fair speech , he take his leave for that day , and tell our general , that he will go speak with the governor : ( but it may be himself , for any thing we know ) howbeit because our general have grant he free come and go , he suffer he to depart : who before his departure , request to have a token of our general , that he may show to the governor how he have speak with we , or else he doubt , that he will not believe he . whereupon our general give he a piece of 12 penny : so he depart and promise the next day by ten of the clock to return unto we with a answer : in which mean time nothing befall . the next day be the 2 of June , at his hour appoint , he return with his Indian run by his horse side . so he be bring to the general , and there remain till after dinner , and dine in his company in the governor house that be . the dinner end , with the best entertainment which can be give he , they commune again about the ransom of the city . our general propose his old demand of 30000 ducat . the Spaniard first proffer he 2000 , than 3000 , last of all 4000 , and more he will not give . our general count it a 221 certain village about sant lagp fire . the ci tie of saint Iago burn . the english voyage small sum of money among so many , do utter refuse it . So the Spaniard depart . but before his departure our general tell he , that if he come not to he again before the next day noon , with the ransom which he demand , he will set all on fire . that whole day pass , and the night also without any thing of moment , except some show of assault , by their approach towards our corpse du guard , and retire back again . the 3 day be come , in the morning some of our company go forth , a league or more from the town , and some two league and more unto certain village thereabouts , and set they on fire : but the enemy never come to resist they , so they return back again safe into the town , and bring certain Indian prisoner with they , among who there be one which speak break spanish , which be examine , confess unto we of his own accord , how the general have send to the other town thereabouts for aid , and that he think they will be there with he that day . when we understand this , we grow into some distrust of the Spaniard treachery , and think upon the messenger , how he have use long delay with we : whereupon we be command present , every man to make ready to depart , and to fire the city : which forthwith be do . and after we have see it all on fire , and burn to ash , we take our leaf and so depart , and march away that day be the 3 of June , not that way we come , but by the great beat way . and when we have march half the way towards the water side , we come unto that strong barricado which they have make , and there lay all that night . here we find the spanish captain word to be true which we take at the fort by the water side : for this barricado be of such force , that 100 man in it well furnish , will have keep back from pass that way 100000 : first by reason of the huge and high mountain , next the steepness of they , on both side , last of all in regard of the fine contrive of it with the large trench , and other munition , which i cease to recite . the four 222 Amias Preston and George Sommers a . d . I595 ’ day of June in the morning we depart from thence : but before our departure , we overthrow on the one side of the steep hill two base of iron , which we find there plant by the enemy , and so set forward towards our ship , and by 12 of the clock come to the water side , and there remain in the fort which we have take before , until the five day at night : in which time we jade some small quantity of hide , and salsa - perilla , which we find there at our first land . So the five day at night we depart from thence , to go to a town call Coro : but before we depart , we set fire in the fort , Indian ' and all the Indian house that be about it , and burn they . than we set sail , and stand along the coast , water side our spanish guide signify unto we , that there be burn . four sail of ship about five league from thence , in P11 - 58z ] a place call Checherebiche , and Caio , and Maio . So the 6 day in the morning we be thwart of the place , and there our general scent away his long boat with captain Sommers , unto those place , where they find 3 of the ship : but the Spaniard have convey their sail ashore into the wood , so that they can not bring they off , but set fire in they and burn they . three Spanish from hence we stand along the shore , sail until the burnt - ninth day of June , on which day towards the evening we embark our self in our pinnace and small caravel , to land at Coros : but we have none that know the place certain : wherefore we ankor that night some two league to the eastward of it , and in the morning i go on land , and nine more with i , to see if we can discover the town , but we can not , we go above a league up into the country , but can not see any village or town . So return back , we meet our general , with diverse other which come ashore with he , with who we march into the country again , but can see nothing , and so return . at the water side captain Prowse die . there we remain all that day on land , by reason the wind blow so much that we can not get aboard until the evening . after our 223 the english voyage come aboard a boat which we send into the bay , return and bring we news , that there ride a bark within the bay , and by all likelihood the town shall be there . so present our general go into the bay with the darling and some of the small caravel . the ten day in the morning , the rest of our ship come into the bay , and our man land the same day , about io or two of the clock in the night , Sc so march on towards the town : but in the way they have make barricado , and keep they very strong . notwithstanding the courage of our man be such , as that they fear nothing , and force they to leave their force , and fly . have win this barricado they there remain until the next day be the 11 of June , and then early in the morning they march on towards the town , where by the way , the enemy often time come to skirmish with they , but always flee . in fine they win the town without any great loss of man , God be thank . have get the town , they find nothing in it at all ; for they have intelligence from Sant Iago , how we have use they before , which cause they to convey all their good into the mountain and wood : find nothing in it , our general cause it to be set on fire , think it not good to remain there , but to return again , back to the ship : and the great cause be by reason of the departure of captain Sommers : who the day before in a most furious tempest , be in the pinnace , with some 50 man at anchor , have his cable break and lose all his anchor , and so be fain to put to sea to save himself , otherwise they have be in danger of perish . thus our general and his company , return back again the twelve day and embarked themselves , and depart away with all speed to seek captain Sommers . the 13 towards night , he come where captain Sommers be , and find he ride , but not by any anchor , but by two base , which they have make for to stay their bark by : at which meeting the company be very glad . than they determine to 224 Amias Preston and George Sommers a . d .. J595 - go into a mighty great bay , to a town call Laguna : the bay of but the bay be so deep and shall withal , that we return back again , after we have stand in two day and a night . so we sail over towards the isle of Hispaniola the sixteenth of June : and the twenty day Hispaniola . we see it . the 21 we ankor under cape Tiburon . here we water , and stay until the 25 of the same . after our departure out of the bay of Laguna , a great sickness fall among our fleet , and there die about eighty man of the same . this sickness be the flux of the belly , which be a common disease in that country . we remain about this island until the eight and twenty of this month . than we depart from thence , and the second of July arrive at the island of Jamaica . Jamaica . before our come hither , the three ship of Hampton have forsake we , and leave our company . and the darling wherein be captain Jones , be send the death of to discover some other secret matter , in which dis - captaineJones . covery the valiant gentleman end his life . so our whole fleet be now but our generail , with captain Sommers , and a small pinnace . we stay at this isle of Jamaica until the sixth of July , in which mean time we land to see if we can kill any beef , but we can not , they be so wild : here be great store of they , and great plenty of freshfish . we depart hence the 6 of July , and pass by the island , call Caimanes , and the isle de Pinos , and the 12 of the say month by cape de Corrientes where we cape de cor - watered , and the same night , we set sail towards the riente . cape of saint Anthony , be the westermost part of the isle of Cuba . the 13 day in the morning we be under this cape , and the same day we meet with the honourable knight , sir Walter Ralegh , return from his painful , and happy discovery of Guiana , and his surprise of the isle of Trinidad . so with glad heart , we keep he and his fleet of three ship company till the twenty day at night , what time we lose they . in all which time nothing of moment fall out , save ten 225 p that we give chase to a couple of frigate , but can not fetch they . [ Iii . 583 . ] afterwards we ply to recover Havana , until the five and twenty of July : than we set our course for the head of the martyr , the 27 we be in sight of they . the 28 we enter the gulf of Bahama : than we set the bank of our course homeward towards Newfoundland , but we Newfoundland coul ( l not fetch it , but be on the bank , and take fish there the 20 day of August . the same night we set sail to come home , by reason the wind be contrary to go in with Newfoundland . So the ten day of September , we arrive in safety ( God be thank ) in Milford haven in wale , have perform so long a voyage in the space of six month , or somewhat less .