a libel of spanish lie write by don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the king of Spain armada , concern some part of the last voyage of sir Francis drake ; together with a confutation of the most notorious falsehood therein contain , and a declaration of the truth by m . Henry Savile esquire : and also a approbation of both by sir Thomas baskefvil general of her majesty armada after the decease of sir Francis Drake . to the courteous reader . Hereas don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the spanish fleet , have by his print letter publish to the world diverse untruth , concern our fleet and the commander thereof , seek thereby his own glory , our disgrace ; i have take upon ( though of many least able ) to confute the same , rather for that the print copy come first into hand , have my self be captain of one of and i then my her majesty ship in the same voyage . take this therefore ( gentle reader ) as a token of my duty and love to my country and countryman , and expect only a plain truth , as from the pen of a soldier and navigator : which if you take in good part , you may draw i hereafter to publish some great labour . Henry Savile . the true copy of a letter find at the sack of Cadiz , write by don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the king of Spain his navy in the west Indies , send unto doctor Peter Florez , precedent of the contractation house for the Indies , and by he put in print with privilege : wherein be declare 246 many untruth , and false report , tend to the disgrace of the service of her majesty navy , and the commander thereof , late send to the west Indies , under the command of sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins general at the sea ; and sir Thomas Baskervill general at land : with a confutation of diverse gross lie and untruth , contain in the same letter : together with a short relation of the fight , accord to the truth . [ Iii . 591 . ] Copia de una carta , que ernbio don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general de la armada de sum magestad , embiada all doctor Pedro Florez Presidente de la casa de la contratacion de las India : en que trata del sucesso de la armada de ynglatierra , despue que partio de Panama , de que fue por general Francisco Draque , y de sum muerte . e Cartagena di cuenta a vuestra Merced como sali del puerto de la ciudad de Lisbona , en busca de la armada ynglesa , aunque por la mucha priessa , no se pudieron reparar tanbien los galeones como fuera necessario , y con el tiempo se perdio uno , y por desgracia se quemo un filibote , y aviendo andado muchos dias en busca deal enemigo , hasta que llegue a Cartagena , donde aviendo tornado el parece de don Pedro de Acunna governador y capitan general de aquella ciudad , porque tenia mucha necessidad de agua , y reparar los Navios por que venian falto della , i detuve en aquel puerto , adonde tuve noticia por un Aviso , que Francisco draque murio en number de dios , de pena de aver perdido tanto baxeles y gente , aunque despue se supo mass por estenso . y aviendo dado a vuestro Merced cuenta de lo que hasta alii a sucedido , agora la doy de que sali de aquel puerto a do the Marzo , y tome la derrota de la Havana , donde entendi hallarlo : y aviendo hecho la diligencia ’ 247 possible , lune a onze deal dicho mes , alas do despue de medio dia , all salir de la Ysla de Pinos , en la ensenada de Guaniguanico , tope con el , que yva con catorze Navios muy buenos : fueme arrimando a el , aunque tenia el viento por suyo , y el Almiranta que yva mass all viento con otros do Navios commenzo arrimarsele , y aunque vino sober ella con todo los suyo tres veze , no fue part acercarsele paraque quisiesse envestir : los que estavamo mass apartado fuymos dando bordos acercan - donos hasta jugar la artilleria , Mosqueteria , y arcabuzeria de los mass dello , en lo qual el recibio muy conocido danno , el lo hizo con el artilleria como suele , you particularment el Almiranta , y en reconociendo la voluntad con que a el nos arrimavamo , con mass diligencia de lo que se puede creer se desembarazo de todo , poniendose en huyda , dando las velas , dexando en la mar todas las lancha que traya . the le segui con nueve Navios toda la noche , y con quatro mass todo el dia , hasta hazerle doblar el cabo de Sant Anton , y tomar la derrota de la canal de Bahama , conform a las instruciones de sum magestad : sirvio de poco el for i con menos numero de Navios , ni todas las diligencias que se hizieron , para que se inclinase ah esperar ni abordar , ni tirar un arcabuz , ni una pieza , porque el se dio la diligencia que pudo , porque sus Navios los avia reduzido a la mitad , y los mejores , y estos acabava de reparar en Puerto bello , donde se estuvo mass de quarenta dias , y ansi venian muy reparados ; in the saque los mios desbaratado , que no i dio el tiempo lugar para aderezarlos . a que navego do mese y medio , y traygo la capitana , que desde que parti de Cartagena no a parado las bombas , y el dia que sali se i Io arrimo una zabra con esta necessidad ; la almiranta y los demas Navios vienen con el mismo trabajo , pero sin embargo , por lo que you vi en los enemigo ; era muy conocida la ventaja que nos hazia , y mucha dicha seria apoderarse del , sino es hallarlo sober el Ferro . Con todo esso i a dexado un Navio muy bueno en las manos con muy bvena 248 gente , la qual dize como murio el draque en number de dios , y que va por general de la dicha armada ynglesa el colonel Quebraran , y por el poco lugar que se a dado not a podido tomar Agua , lenna , ni carne , y van de manera que no se como an de hegar a ynglatierra . enter la gente deven de ser ciento y quarenta , y quinze noble capitanes de lo mejor de alii , y algunos ricos , segun se echa de ver en eHos . no se ofrece otra cosa : nuestro sennor guard a vuestra Merced , como puede , y the desseo . de la Havana . 30 de Marzo , the 1596 . annos . don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda . el Licenciado don Juan Bermudes y Figueroa , teniente mayor de assistente desta ciudad de Sevilla y sum tierra , que hago officio de assistente della por ausencia de sum Sennoria del Conde de Priego , Doy licencia a Rodrigo de Cabrera , para que pueda imprimir la Relacion de la muerte de Francisco draque . la qual haga por do mese , y por ello no lo imprima otro alguno . So pena de diez will maravedi para la camara de sum magestad . Fecha en Sevilla a quinze de Mayo , de will y quinientos y noventa y sey annos . el Licenciado don Juan Bermudez y Figueroa . por sum mandado , Gregoria de Gutierez , Escrivano . [ in . 592 . ] 249 [ the spanish the copy of a letter which don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda , general of the king of Spain his army , send unto doctor Peter Florez , precedent of the contractation house for the Indies , wherein he make mention of the success of the english army , after they depart from Panama , whereof be general Francis Drake , and of his death . Rome Cartagena i give relation unto your worship how i depart from the city of Lisbon , in the pursuit of the english army : although for the great haste the galleon can not be so well repair as be needful , and with foul weather one be lose , and a flyboat be burn . and have sail many day in pursuit of the enemy , until i arrive at Cartagena , and there take the advice of don Pedro de Acunna , governor of the city , and captain generail ( for we have great need of water , and to repair our ship ) we stay in that port : whereas i have intelligence by a Indian that Francis Drake die in number de dios , for very grief that he have lose so many bark and man , as be afterward more manifest know . thus have give you a relation of all that happen hitherto , now i let you understand , that i leave this port the second of march , and take our course towards Havana , where i think to have find the english fleet . and have use all the diligence possible , upon Monday the eleven of the say month , about two of the clock in the afternoon , at the end of they he of Pinos , in the entrance of Guaniguanico , i meet with the english fleet , be fourteen very good ship : i draw towards they although they have the wind of we , and our 250 admiral who bear up towards the wind , with other two ship begin to draw near they , and although we set thus upon they , three time with all their ship , yet will they not set again upon we , and those of our man which be far off cry to they amain , be both within shot of artillery , musket , and caliver , whereby they receive evident hurt by we : they ply their great ordinance accord to their manner , and especial their vice - admiral , and see our resolution how sharp we be bend towards they , they with all expedition and speed possible prepare to fly away , hoist sail and leave their boat for haste in the sea : but i follow they , with nine ship all the night follow , and with four more the next day , till i make they double the cape of S . Antony , and to take the course towards the channel of Bahama , accord to the instruction from his majesty . it little avail we to be see , with less number of ship , neither yet all the diligence we can use , can cause they to stay or come near we , nor to shoot off one harquebus or piece of artillery , for they flee away as fast as they can , and their ship be half diminish , and that the best part of they : the rest they repair in Puerto bello , whereas they be about forty day , and so by that mean they be all well repair ; and our ship be very foul , because the time will not permit we to trim they : i have sail 2 month and a half in the admiral , since we depart from Cartagena , we have not repair their pump nor cleanse they : and the same day i depart thence , there come unto i a small pinnace in the like distress : our vice - admiral and the rest of our ship have the like impediment , but no great hindrance unto we , for aught i can perceive by our enemy : it be manifest what advantage they have of we , and by no mean be it possible for we to take they , unless we can have come to have find they at a anchor . nevertheless they leave we one good ship behind for 251 our share , well man , which tell i that drake die in number de dios , and that they have make for general of the english fleet the colonel Quebraran : and also by mean of the small time , be straight follow by we , they have no opportunity to take either water , wood or flesh , and they be also in such bad case , that i know not how they will be able to arrive in England . the number of man we have take be about a hundred and forty , and fifteen e noble captain of their best sort , and some of they rich , as well may appear by their behaviour : i have no other thing to write at this time . our lord keep you who best can , and as i desire . from Havana the 30 of march , 1596 ’ do Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda . the licenciat don John Bermudes of Figueroa lieutenant of the assistant of the city of Seville , and the province thereof , who do supply the office of the assistant in the absence of the right honourable the earl of Priego , give licence to Roderigo de Cabriera to imprint the relation of the death of Francis Drake , which only he may do for two month , and no other to imprint the same within the say term , upon pain of ten thousand maravedi for his majesty chamber . give in Seville the 15 of May 1596 . the licenciat don John Bermudes of Figueroa . by his assign Gregory Gutierez notary . this letter of the general don Bernaldino send into Spain declare the death of sir Francis drake and their suppose victory , be altogether receive for a undoubted truth , and so please be this news unto the Spaniarde , that there be present commandment give to publish the letter in print , that all the people of Spain may be partaker of this common joy : the which letter print in Seville , bear date the 15 of may , 1596 come to the hand of Henry Savile 252 esquire , who be employ in that service for the west Indies , and captain of her majesty good ship the adventure , under the conduct of sir Francis Drake , and sir John Hawkins , have cause the say print letter to be translate into english . and that the impudency of the