to the barge half dead with fear . but our good hap be , that we keep the other old Indian which we handfasted to redeem our pilot withal ; for be natural of those river , we assure our self he know the way better than any stranger can . and indeed , but for this chance , i think we have never find the way either to Guiana , or back to our ship : for Ferdinando after a few day know nothing at all , nor which way to turn , yea and many time the old man himself be in great doubt which river to take . those people which dwell in these break island and drown land , be general call Tivitivas ; there be of they two sort , the one call Ciawani , and the other waraweete . the great river of Orenoque or Baraquan have nine branch which fall out on the north side of his own main mouth : on the south side it have seven other fall into the sea , so it disemboqu by sixteen arm in all , between hand and break ground , but the hand be very great , many of they as big as the isle of wight , and big , and many less . from the first branch on the north to the last of the south , it be at least 100 league , so as the river mouth be 300 mile wide at his entrance into the sea , which i take to be far big than that of Amazones . all those that inhabit in the mouth of this river upon the several north branch , be these Tivitivas , of which there be two chief lord which have continual war one with the other . the hand which lie on the right hand , be call Pallamos , and the land on the left , Horotomaka , and the river by which John Dowglas return within the land from Amana to Capuri , they call Macuri . Theise Tivitivas be a very goodly people and very 382 valiant , and have the most manly speech and most deliberate that ever i hear , of what nation soever . in the summer they have house on the ground , as in other place : in the winter they dwell upon the tree , where they build very artificiali town and village , as it be write in the spanish story of the west Indies , that those people do in the low land near the gulf of Uraba : for between may and September the river of Orenoque rise thirty foot upright , and then be those island overflow twenty foot high above the level of the ground , save some few raise ground in the middle of they : and for this cause they be enforce to live in this manner . they never eat of any thing that be set or so wen : and as at home they use neither plant nor other manurance , so when they come abroad , they refuse to feed of aught , but of that which nature without labour bring forth . they use the top of palmito for bread , and kill dear , fish , and pork , for the rest of their sustenance . they have also many sort of fruit that grow in the wood , and great variety of bird and foul . and if to speak of they be not tedious , and vulgar , sure we see in those passage of very rare colour and form , not elsewhere to be find , for as much as i have either see or read . of these people those that dwell upon the branch of Orenoque , call Capuri and Macureo , be for the most part carpenter of canoas , for they make the most and fair canoas , and sei they into Guiana for gold , and into Trinidad for tobacco , in the excessive take whereof , they exceed all nation ; and notwithstanding the moistness of the air in which they live , the hardness of their diet , and the great labour they suffer to hunt , fish and foul for their live ; in all my life , either in the Indies or in Europe , do i never behold a more goodly or better favour people or a more manly . they be wont to make war upon all nation , and especial on the cannibal , so as none 383 than Arwacas on the south side of Orenoque . the port of the Ciatvani . a river call the great Amana . the english voyage dare without a good strength trade by those river : but of late they be at peace with their neighbour , all hold the Spaniard for a common enemy . when their commander die , they use great lamentation , and when they think the flesh of their body be putrify , and fall from the bone , than they take up the carcase again , and hang it in the cacique house that die , and deck his scull with feather of all colour , and hang all his gold plate , about the bone of his arm , thigh , and leg . those nation which be call Arwacas , which dwell on the south of Orenoque , ( of which place and nation our Indian pilot be ) be disperse in many other place , and do use to beat the bone of their lord into powder , and their wife and friend drink it all in their several sort of drink . after we depart from the port of these Ciawani , we pass up the river with the flood , and anchor the ebb , and in this sort we go onward . the three day that we enter the river , our galley come on ground , and stick so fast , as we think that even there our discovery have end , and that we must have leave fourscore and ten of our man to have inhabit like rook upon tree with those nation : but the next morning , after we have cast out all her ballast , with tug and hail to and fro , we get her aflote , and go on . at four day end we fall into as goodly a river as ever i behold , which be call the great Amana , which run more direct without wind and turn then the other : but soon after the flood of the sea leave we ; and be enforce either by main strength to row against a violent current , or to return as wise as we go out , we have then no shift but to persuade the company that it be but two or three day work , and therefore desire they to take pain , every gentleman 8c other take their turn to row , and to spell one the other at the hour end . Every day we pass by goodly branch of 384 river , some fall from the west , other from the east into Amana , but those i leave to the description in the cart of discovery , where every one shall name with his rise and descent . when three day more be overgo , our company begin to despair , the [ three . 645 . ] weather be extreme hot , the river border with very high tree , that keep away the air , and the current against we every day strong than other : but we evermore command our pilot to promise a end the next day , and use it so long , as we be drive to assure they from four reach of the river to three , and so to two , and so to the next reach : but so long we labour , that many day be spend , and we drive to draw our self to hard allowance , our bread even at the last , and no drink at all ; and our man and our self so weary and scorch , and doubtful withal , whether we shall ever perform it or no , the heat increase as we draw towards the line ; for we be now in five degree . they be in the further we go on ( our victuali decrease and degree . the air breed great faintness ) we grow weak and weak , when we have m ● st need of strength and ability ; for hourly the river run more violent than other against we , and the barge , whery , and ship boat of captain Gifford and captain Calfield , have spend all their provision ; so as we be bring into despair and discomfort , have we not persuade all the company that it be but only one day work more to attain the land where we shall be relieve of all we want , and if we return , that we be sure to starve by the way , and that the world will also laugh we to scorn . on the bank of these river be diverse sort of fruit good to eat , flower and tree of such variety , as be sufficient to make ten volume of herbal : we relieve our self many time with the fruit of the country , and sometime with foul and fish . we see bird of all colour , some carnation , some crimson , orenge - tawny , purple , watchet , and of ten 385 2 b all other sort both simple and mix , and it be unto we a great good pass of the time to behold they , beside the relief we find by kill some store of they with our fowl piece ; without which , have little or no bread , and less drink , but only the thick and trouble water of the river , we have be in a very hard case . our old pilot of the Ciawani ( who , as i say before , we take to redeem Ferdinando ) tell we , that if we will enter a branch of a river on the right hand with our barge and whery , and leave the galley at anchor the while in the great river , he will bring we to a town of the Arwacas , where we shall find store of bread , hen , fish , and of the country wine ; and persuade we , that depart from the galley at noon , we may return year night . i be very glad to hear this speech , and present take my bark , with eight musketeer , captain giffords whery , with himself and four musketeer , and captain Calfield with his whery , and as many ; and so we enter the mouth of this river : and because we be persuade that it be so near , we take no victuali with we at all . when we have row three hour , we marvel we see no sign of any dwell , and ask the pilot where the town be : he tell we a little further . after three hour more , the sun be almost set , we begin to suspect that he lead we that way to betray we : for he confess that those Spaniard which flee from Trinidad , and also those that remain with Carapana in Emeria , be join together in some village upon that river . but when it grow towards night ; and we demand where the place be ; he tell we but four reach more . when we have row four and four ; we see no sign ; and our poor watermen , even heartbroken , and tire , be ready to give up the ghost : for we have now come from the galley near forty mile . at the last we determine to hang the pilot ; and 386 if we have well know the way back again by night , he have sure go ; but our own necessity plead sufficient for his safety : for it be as dark as pitch , and the river begin so to narrow it self , and the tree to hang over from side to side , as we be drive with arm sword to cut a passage through those branch that cover the water . we be very desirous to find this town , hope of a feast , because we make but a short breakfast aboard the galley in the morning and it be now eight a clock at night , and our stomach begin to gnaw apace : but whether it be best to return or go on , we begin to doubt , suspect treason in the pilot more and more : but the poor old Indian ever assure we that it be but a little further , but this one turn and that turn : and at the last about one a clock after midnight we see a light ; and row towards it , we hear the dog of the village . when we land we find few people ; for the lord of that place be go with diverse canoas above four hundred mile off , upon a journey towards the head of Orenoque to trade for gold , and to buy woman of the cannibal , who afterward unfortunate pass by we as we ride at a anchor in the port of morequito in the dark of the night , and yet come so near we , as his canoas grate against our barge : he leave one of his company at the port of morequito , by who we understand that he have bring thirty young woman , diverse plate of gold , and have great store of fine piece of cotton cloth , and cotton bed .