that they put it to a part of copper , otherwise they can not work it , and that they use a great earthen pot with hole round about it , and when they have mingle the gold and copper together , they fasten cane to the hole , and so with the breath of man they increase the fire till the metal run , and then they cast it into mould of stone and clay , and so make those plate and image . i have send your honour of two sort such as i can by chance recover , more to show the manner of they , then for the value : for i do not in any sort make my desire of gold know , because i have neither time , nor power to have a great quantity . i give among they many more piece ot gold , than i receive , of the new money of 20 shilling with her majesty picture to wear , with promise that they will become her servant thenceforth . i have also send your honour of the ore , whereof i know some be as rich as the earth yield any , of s ^- ore . most rich which i know there be sufficient , if nothing else be to be hope for . but beside that we be not able to tarry and search the hill , so we have neither pioner , bar , ledge , nor wedge of iron to break the ground , without which there be no work in mine : but we see all the hill with stone of the colour of gold and silver , and we try they to be no marquesite , and therefore such as the Spaniard call el madre del oro , or , the mother of gold , which be a undoubted assurance of the general abundance : and my self see the outside of many mine of the spar , which i know to be the same that all covet in this world , and of those , more than i will speak of . have learn what i can in Canuri and Aromaia , and receive a faithful promise of the principall of those province to become servant to her majesty , and to resist the Spaniard , if they make any attempt in our absence , and that they will draw in the nation about the lake of Cassipa , and those iwarawaqueri , i the lake of then part from old Topiawari , and receive his son c ™ 1 ? 0 - 415 for a pledge between we , and leave with he two of we as aforesaid . to Francis sparrow i give instruction to travel to Marcureguarai , with such merchandize as i leave with they , thereby to learn the place , and if it be possible , to go on to the great city of Manoa : which be do , we weigh anchor , and coast the Guiana on the river on Guiana side , because we come upon the north Southside . side , by the lane of the saima and wikiri . there come with we from Aromaia a cacique call Putijma , that command the province of Warapana , ( which Putijma slay the nine Spaniard upon Caroli before speak of ) who desire we to rest in the porte of his country , promise to bring we unto a mountain adjoin to his town that have stone of the colour of gold , which he perform . and after we have rest there one night , i go my self in the morning with most of the gentleman of my company , over land towards the say mountain , march by a river Mana . side call Mana , leave on the right hand a town call Tuteritona , stand in the province of Tarracoa , of the which Wariaaremagoto be principali . beyond it lie another town towards the south , in the valley of Amariocapana , which bear the name of the say valley , who plain stretch themselves some sixty mile in length , east and west , as fair ground , and as beautiful [ three . 657 . ] field , as any man have ever see , with diverse copse scatter here and there by the river side , and all as full of dear as any forest or park in England , and in every lake and river the like abundance of fish and foul , of which Irraparragota be lord . from the river of Mana , we cross another river in Diana . the say beautiful valley call Oiana , and rest our self by a clear lake , which lie in the middle of the say Oiana , and one of our guide kindle we fire with two stick , we stay a while to dry our shirt , which with the heat hang very wet and heavy on our shoulder . afterwards we seek the ford to pass over towards the mountain call Iconuri , where 416 Putijma foretell we of the mine . in this lake we see one of the great fish , as big as a wine pipe , which they call Manati , be most excellent and wholesome meat . but after i perceive , that to pass the say river will require half a day march more , i be not able my self to endure it , and therefore i send captain Keymis with six shot to go on , and give he order not to return to the port of Putijma , which be call chiparepare , but to take leisure , and to march down the say valley , as far as a river call Cumaca , where i promise to meet he again , Putijma himself promise also to be his guide : and as they march , they leave the town of Emparepana , and Capurepana , on the right hand , and march from Putijmas house down the say valley of Amariocapana , and we return the same day to the river side , see by the way many rock , like unto gold over , and on the left hand , a round mountain which consist of minerali stone . from hence we row down the stream , coast the province of Parino : as for the branch of river which i overpass in this discourse , those shall be better express in the description with the mountain of Ajo , Ara , and the rest , which be situate in the province of Parino and Carricurrina . when we be come as far down as the land call Ariacoa , ( where Orenoque divide it self into three great branch , each of they be most goodly river ) i send away captain Henry thin , and captain greenevile with the galley , the near way , and take with i captain Gifford , captain calfield , Edward porter , and captain Eynos with my own barge , and the two wherry , and go down that branch of Orenoque , which be call Cararoopana , which lead towards Emeria the province of Carapana , and towards the east sea , as well to find out captain Keymis , who i have send over land , as also to acquaint my self with Carapana , who be one of the great of all the lord of the Orenoqueponi : and when i come to the ten 417 2d A . D . * 595 - great fish call Manati most excellent meat . river of Cumaca ( to which Putijma promise to conduct captain Keymis ) i leave captain Eynos and master porter in the say river to expect his come , and the Emeria . rest of we row down the stream towards Emeria . in this branch call Cararoopana be also many goodly island , some of six mile long , some of ten , and some of twenty . when it grow towards sunset , we enter a branch of a river that fall into Orenoque winicapora . call winicapora : where i be en form of the mountain of crystal , to which in truth for the length of the way , and the evil season of the year , i be not able to march , nor abide any long upon the journey : we see it afar off and it appear like a white church - a mighty cata - tower of a exceed height . there fall over it a rack or overfall mjghty river which touch no part of the side of the ojviaer . mountain , but rush over the top of it , and fall to the ground with so terrible a noise and clamour , as if a thousand great bell be knock one against another . i think there be not in the world so strange a overfall , nor so wonderful to behold : Berreo tell i that there diamond and be diamond and other precious stone on it , and that other precious shine very far off : but what it have i know ' not , neither dare he or any of his man ascend to the top of the say mountain , those people adjoin be his enemy ( as they be ) and the way to it so impassable . upon this river of Winicapora we rest a while , and from thence march into the country to a town call after the name of the river , whereof the captain be one Timitwara , who also offer to conduct i Wacarima . to the top of the say mountain call Wacarima : but when we come in first to the house of the say Timitwara , be upon one of their say feast day , we find they all as drink as beggar , and the pot walk from one to another without rest : we that be weary , and hight with march , be glad of the plenty though a small quantity satisfy we , their drink be very strong and heady , and so rest our self 418 a while ; after we have feed , we draw our self back to our boat , upon the river and there come to we all the lord of the country , with all such kind of victuali as the place yield , and with their delicate wine of pina , and with abundance of hen , and other provision , and of those stone which we call spleen - stone . we understand by the chieftain of Winicapora , that their lord Carapana be depart from Emeria which be now in sight , and that he be flee to Cairamo , adjoin to the mountain of Guiana , over [ three . 658 . ] the valley call Amariocapana , be persuade by those ten Spaniard which lie at his house , that we will destroy he , and his country . but after these cacique of Winicapora and sapora - tona his follower perceive our purpose , and see that we come as enemy to the Spaniard only , and have not so much as harm any of those nation , no though we find they to be of the Spaniard own servant , they assure we that Carapana will be as ready to serve we , as any of the lord of the province , which we have pass ; and that he dare doe no other till this day but entertain the Spaniard , his country lie so direct in their way , and next of all other to any entrance that shall be make in Guiana on that side . and they far assure we , that it be not for fear of our come that he be remove , but to be acquit of the Spaniard or any other that shall come hereafter . for the province of Cairoma be situate at the mountain foot , which divide the plain of Guiana from the country of the Orenoqueponi : by mean whereof if any shall come in . our absence into his town , he will slip over the mountain into the plain of Guiana among the Epuremei , where the Spaniard dare not follow he without great force . but in my opinion , or rather i assure my self , that Carapana ( be a notable wise and subtle fellow , a man 419 of one hundred year of age , and therefore of great experience ) be remove , to look on , and if he find that we return strong he will be we , if not , he will excuse his departure to the Spaniard , and say it be for fear of our come . we therefore think it bootless to row so far down the stream , or to seek any far of this old fox : and therefore from the river of Waricapana ( which lie at the entrance of Emeria ) we return again , and leave to the eastward those four river which fall from the mountain of Emeria into Orenoque , which be waracayari , Coirama , akaniri , and Iparoma : below those four be also these branch and mouth of Orenoque , which fall into the east sea , whereof the first be araturi , the next Amacura , the three Barima , the four Wana , the five Morooca , the sixth paroma , the last Wijmi : beyond they there fall out of the land between Orenoque and Amazones 14 river which i forbear to name , inhabit by the Arwacas and cannibal . it be now time to return towards the north , and we find it a wearisome way back from the border of Emeria , to recover up again to the head of the river Carerupana , by which we descend , and where we part from the galley , which i direct to take the next