place , will perhaps secret hasten thither , may be behold to i for this caveat , if they take notice a good caveat . thereof . they may be assure , that this people , as they no way seek our harm , but use our man with all kindness : so be they impatient of such a wrong , as to have any of their people perforce take from they , and will doubtless seek revenge . the example of the like practice upon the coast of guinie , in the year 1566 , and again at Dominica , where Aiderman wat his ship hardly escape be take , may serve for our warning in like case to look for no good , before they be satisfy for this injury . when we have take aboard we such victual as be in the pinnace : we set fire in she , ( for her rudder can serve she to no long use ) and stop the flood , ply to windwarde with the ebb near the shore , until we be sixteen league to the eastward of the river mouth , and then stand off to sea , we fall in twenty four hour sail with Punta de galera 477 the english voyage the northeaster most part of Trinidad . but have tabaco - island in sight , we first go thither . this island be plentiful of all thing , and a very good soil . it be not now inhabit , because the charibe of Dominica be evil neighbour unto it . they of Trinidad have a meaning and purpose to fly thither , when no long they can keep Trinidad . their only doubt be , that when they be seat there , the Spaniard will seek to possess it also . the governor of Margarita go late in a pinnace to view this island . Gilbert my pilot who sometime live there , note it for the best and fruitful ground that he know . Thence we return to Punta de galera and anchor in ten fathom under the north side of the island some five or six mile from the say point . the flood - tide strike alongst the coast to the eastward very strong . we discharge a piece of ordinance , and afterward go to the shore in our boat : but no Indian come unto we . i will have send John of Trinidad to procure some of they to speak with we : but he be altogether unwilling , allege that their dwelling be far within the mountain , and that he know no part of that side of the island . from this place we set sail for Santa Lucia , but fall with Granata , which we find not inhabit . saint Vincent we hardly recover , by turn under the lee of the island . the tobacco of this place be good : but the Indian be cannibal , promise we store , and delay we from day to day , seek only opportunity to betray , take , and eat we , as late they have devour the whole company of a french ship . this their treachery be by one of their slave reveal , from thenceforth they do all forbear to come unto we . to sit down on their low stool , when they by offer such ease , will seem to show courtesy , abode death to stranger , that shall trust they . at Matalino or Martinino we find not any inhabitant . last , we come to Dominica , where we can get no good tobacco . but have intelligence 478 of a spanish ship , that be take in of fresh water , at the northwest side of the island , we weigh anchor to seek he . he descry we , steal away by night . the Indian of this place have determine to remove , and joy ne with they of Guanipa , against the Spaniard , who late dispeople one of their island , and at our being there one of their canoas return from Guanipa , and certify we , that the ten spanish ship at Trinidad do ride , some of they at Conquerabia , the rest at the small hand near the disemboge place . here - hence we steer north and by east , take the direct course to shorten our way homeward . thus have i empty your purse , spend my time [ three . 683 . ] and travel in follow your lordship direction for the full discovery of this coast , and the river thereof . concern they not make of a voyage for your private profit , i pretend nothing . sorry i be , that where i seek no excuse , by the Spaniard be there i find my defect remediless . and for my own part , i do protest , that if the consideration of the public good that may ensue , have not overpoise all other hope and desire : i will rather have adventure by such small and weak mean as i have , to do well with danger , than to return only with safety . now although in a cause not doubtful , my allegation be no way needful : yet because the weightiness thereof , and the expectation of other , seem of due and right to claim something to be say by i , who your especial trust and favour have credit and grace with this employment : pardon it ( i beseech your honour ) if , where my lamp have oil , it borrow light also ; and my speech , which be altogether unsavoury , season it self with some of the leaven of your own discourse touch this discovery . the particular relation of some certain thing i have reserve as proper belong to your self , who only , as know most , can make best use thereof . so much in general be here touch , as ( i hope ) may serve to refresh the memory of this worthy enterprise in those 479 who it may concern , and testify your care and expense in follow the same : that in a second age , when in time truth shall have credit , and man wonder at the riches , and strength of this place ( which nature it self have marvelous fortify , as her chief treasurehouse ) shall mourn and sigh to hold idle cicle , while other reap and gather in this harvest , it be not say , that sir Walter Ralegh be of all man live in his day , most industrious in seek , most fortunate in attain to the fullness of a inestimable public good : if , know that for envy and private respect , his labour be lessen , his information mistrust , his proffer not regard , and the due honour of his desert impart to other : if ( i say ) see , know and bear all this , he with patience have persist in so good a way in do he princess , and country service ; and have but perfect his first discovery by send a ship or two for that purpose : for then sure all let and doubt be removed , and so large a kingdom , so exceed rich , so plentiful of all thing , as this by his discourse appear to be , be offer : no devise and vain surmise can have take place , no illusion can have prevail : it have be blindness and deafness in those , that be near her majesty do spend their day in serve the common weal , not to see , and know in so weighty a matter : it have be malicious obstinacy , impotency of mind , and more than treason to the common wealth , the matter stand only upon acceptance , to seek either to foreslow so fit a occasion , or forsake so general a blessing . this ( if ) be now cut off through a singular and incomparable temper , in overcome evile with good . this your second discovery have not only find a free and open entrance into Raleana , which the natural call Orenoque : but moreover yield choice of fourty several great river ( the lesser i do not reckon ) be for the most part with small vessel navigable for our merchant and other , that do now find little profit in set forth for reprisal , to exercise trade in . to such as shall be willing to adventure in search of they , i can propose some hope of gold mine , and certain assurance of piece of make gold , of spleen - stone , kidney - stone , and other of better estimate . but because our belief seem to be mate in these great matter , and a certainty of small profit be the ready inducement to quicken our weak hope ; i not go so far as i own eye may warrant i , do only promise in the aforesaid river brasil - wood , honey , cotton , balsamum , and drug to help to defray charge : and further , because without a begin there can be no continuance of these benefit unto our country to any that shall be the first undertaker hereof , i be glad content to give such light and knowledge , as by conference with the Indian i have attain unto . my self , and the remain of my few year , i have bequeathe whole to Raleana , and all my thought live only in that action . the prosecute whereof be in it self just , profitable , and necessary . just , because it be intend for the defence of harmless people , who fear thralldome and oppression , desire to protect themselves and their country under her majesty tuition : profitable , as may be gather not only by many spanish letter intercept , but also by the proof mention in the discourse of the first discovery , and since that , by the Indian own voluntary relation : and last , by the provision that the Spaniard do make to acquit we thereof . necessary it be , as be the only help to put a bit in the mouth of the unbridle Spaniard ; the only way to enter into his treasury of Nuevo Reyno , and Peru ; the only mean to animate the wrong Indian with our assistance to seek revenge for the extreme murder and cruelty , which they have endure , [ in . 684 . ] and to ruinate his • naked city in all those part of the inland ; who foundation have be lay in the blood of their parent and ancestor . the force that the Spaniard have already send to ten 481 2 h Trinidad , to fortify there , and keep the passage of this river , be a evident argument that the king fear and doubt the sequel of this discovery . for can it be a small matter ? or have he so waste employment for his man and ship , that upon no ground , he will send eight and twenty ship , to keep we only from tobacco ? for what else that good be can Trinidad yield we ? no doubtless , if the return of Berreo his campmaster with ten of these ship be compare with precedent advertisement concern he : it will appear more than probable , that the guiana - golde wage these man and ship : and that they be now more careful to obtain this place , than to keep other , which they have already get , which note , except in matter of extraordinary account , be not incident to their policy and proceed . again , it can be think that either it be senseless madness in the governor of Margarita , and the Caracas , to bring their state and live in question , by seek , contrary to their king order , to enter Guiana , and kill Berreo with his follower : or else the abundance of pearl in Margarita , and the gold mine in the Caracas , seem matter of small account : Guiana only be in their judgement , rich , plentiful , and able of it self to redeem their trespass and offence , how great soever it shall be . the sundry attempt and overthrow of the Spaniard be man of power , and honourable place , in labour threescore and three year and upwards , to enlarge the kingdom of Spain with this mighty and great empire , do plain show , that they long time seek a path , where in one month a high way be find : that the loss of their life witness their desire , and the worthiness of the thing , where to we the easiness of obtain discredit the greatness of the attempt : and that if now at the last they do prevail , they must hold by tyrannic that which they get by the sword ; where than our return nothing by the Indian be more wish for , nothing expect more earnest . 482 those objection , which have be make by many seem wise , and the impediment likely to arise , as they have suppose , be best answer by the unreproved witness of those man action . some have term these discovery fable , and fantasy , as if there have be no such land or territory : other allow both of the place , and that such a kingdom or country be discover , make conclusion , that if it have be so rich as we have suppose , that no doubt the king of Spain will by this time have possess it . but if they consider that the spanish nation have already conquer the two empire of Mexico and Peru , with so many other kingdom and province : we may very well answer , that his power be not infinite , and that he have do well for the time . and yet it be manifest , that this very empire have be by all those several Spaniard ( the catalogue of who name be by it self hereunto annex ) at sundry time undertake , and never perform . howbeit , the world have reason to admire their constancy , and their great labour , and we may well blush at our own idle , despairfull , and loiter disposition , that can find ability in another barren , and starve nation , to possess so much of the world , and can do nothing but frame argument against our self , as unfit and powerless to possess one province already discover , and of which our nation Kath assurance of the people love , and that all the chieftain and principal have vow their obedience to her majesty ; the navigation be withal so short , dangerless , and free from infectious sickness . if doubt of peril may moderate the mind of our man once move with steadfast hope , that gold shall be the reward of their travel : it may