in his house we have good store of bread , fish , hen , and Indian drink , and so rest that night , and in the morning after we have trade with such of his people as come down , we return [ three . 646 . ] towards our gay , and bring with we some quantity of bread , fish , and hen . on both side of this river , we pass the most beauty - a most beautiful country that ever my eye behold : and whereas all countrey ^ that we have see before be nothing but wood , prickle , 387 the river of Lagartos , or crocodile . two canoas take . three Spaniard escape . the english voyage bush , and thorn , here we behold plain of twenty mile in length , the grass short and green , and in diverse part grove of tree by themselves , as if they have be by all the art and labour in the world so make of purpose : and still as we row , the dear come down feed by the water side , as if they have be use to a keeper call . upon this river there be great store of fowl , and of many sort : we see in it diverse sort of strange fish , and of marvellous bigness : but for lagartos iter exceed , for there be thousand of those ugly serpent ; and the people call it for the abundance of they , the river of Lagartos , in their language . i have a negro a very proper young fellow , who leap out of the galley to swim in the mouth of this river , be in all our sight take and devour with one of those lagartos . in the mean while our company in the gay thought we have be all lose , ( for we promise to return before night ) and send the lion whelp ship boat with captain Whiddon to follow we up the river ; but the next day , after we have row up and down some fourscore mile , we return , and go on our way , up the great river ; and when we be even at the last cast for want of victual , captain Gifford be before the galley and the rest of the boat , seek out some place to land upon the bank to make fire , espy four canoas come down the river ; and with no small joy cause his man to try the uttermost of their strength , and after a while two of the four give over , and run themselves ashore , every man betake himself to the fastness of the wood , the two other lesser get away , while he land to lay hold on these ; and so turn into some by - creeke , we know not whither . those canoas that be take , be load with bread , and be bind for Margarita in the west Indies , which those Indian ( call Arwacas ) purpose to carry thither for exchange : but in the lesser there be three Spaniard , who have hear of the defeat of their goyernour in Trinidad , and that we purpose to enter Guiana , come away in those canoas : one of they be a 388 * 595 - cavallero , as the captain of the Arwacas after tell we , another a soldier , and the three a refiner . in the mean time , nothing on the earth can have be more welcome to we , next unto gold , than the great store of very excellent bread which we find in these canoas ; for now our man cry , let we go on , we care not how far . after that captain Gifford have bring the two canoas to the galley , i take my barge , and go to the bank side with a dozen shot , where the canoas first run themselves ashore , and land there , send out captain Gifford , and captain thy on one hand , and captain Calfield on the other , to follow those that be flee into the wood : and as i be creep through the bush , i see a Indian basket hide , which be the spanish refiner basket ; for i find in it his quicksilver , saltpeter , and diverse thing for the trial of metal , and also aing ta ^ en the dust of such ore as he have refine , but in those canoas which escape there be a good quantity of ore and gold . i then land more man , and offer five hundred pound to what soldier soever can take one of those three Spaniard that we think be land . but our labour be in vain in that behalf ; for they put themselves into one of the small canoas : and so while the great canoas be in take they escape . but seek after the Spaniard , we find the Arwacas hide in the wood , which be pilot for the Spaniard , and row their canoas ; of which i keep the chief for a pilot , and carry he with i to Guiana , by who i understand where and in what country the Spaniard have labour for gold , though i make not the same know to all : for when the spring begin to break , and the river to raise themselves so sudden , as by no mean we can abide the dig of any i , especial for that the rich be defend with rock of hard stone , which we r ' lch call the white spar , and that it require both time , man , and instrument fit for such a work , i think it best not ew to hover thereabouts , lest if the same have be perceive by the company , there will have be by this 389 * 595 ' .. , , time many bark and ship set out , and perchance other nation will also have get of we for pilot ; so as both our self may have be prevent , and all our care take for good usage of the people be utter lose , by those that only respect present profit , and such violence or insolence offer , as the nation which be borderer will have change their desire of our love and defence into hatred and violence . and for any long stay to have bring a more quantity ( which i hear have be often object ) whosoever have see or prove the fury of that river after it begin to arise , and have be a month and odd day , as we be , from hear aught from our ship , leave they mean man 400 mile off , will perchance have turn somewhat soon than we do , if all the mountain have be gold , or rich stone . and to say the truth , all the branch and small river which fall into Orenoque be raise with such [ three . 647 . ] speed , as if we wade they over the shoe in the morning outward , we be cover to the shoulder homeward the very same day : and to stay to dig out gold with our nail , have be opus laboris but not Ingenii : such a quantity as will have serve our turn we can not have have , but a discovery of the mine to our infinite disadvantage we have make , and that can have be the best profit of far search or stay : for those mine be not easy break , nor open in haste , and i can have return a good quantity of gold ready cast , if i have not shoot at another mark , then present profit . this arwacan pilot with the rest , fear that we will have eat they , or otherwise have put they to some the Spaniard cruel death ( for the Spaniard , to the end that none of the dtvehsh hes . peop [ e jn the passage towards Guiana or in Guiana it self may come to speech with we , persuade all the nation , that we be men - eater , and cannibal ) but when the poor man and woman have see we , and that we give they meat , and to every one something or other , which be rare and strange to they , they begin to conceive the deceit and purpose of the Spaniard , who indeed ( as 39 ° they confess ) take from they both their wife and daughter daily , and use they for the satisfy of their own lust , especial such as they take in this manner by strength . but i protest before the majesty of the live God , that i neither know nor believe , that any of our company one or other , by violence or otherwise , ever know any of their woman , and yet we see many hundred , and have many in our power , and of those very young , and excellent favour , which come among we without deceit , stark naked . Nothing get we more love among they then this usage : for i suffer not any man to take from any of the nation so much as a Pina , or a potato root , without give they contentment , nor any man so much as to offer to touch any of their wife or daughter : which course so contrary to the Spaniard ( who tyrannize over they in all thing ) draw they to admire her majesty , who commandment i tell they it be , and also wonderful to honour our nation . but i confess it be a very impatient work to keep the mean sort from spoil and steal , when we come to their house : which because in all i can not prevent , i cause my Indian interpreter at every place when we depart , to know of the loss or wrong do , and if aught be steal or take by violence , either the same be restore , and the party punish in their sight , or else be pay for to their uttermost demand . they also much wonder at we , after they hear that we have slay the Spaniard at Trinidad , for they be before resolve , that no nation of Christians dare abide their presence , and they wonder moor when i have make they know of the great overthrow that her majesty army and fleet have give they of late year in their own country . after we have take in this supply of bread , with diverse basket of root which be excellent meat , i give one of the canoas to the Arwacas , which belong to the Spaniard that be escape , and when i have dismiss all 391 A . D . 1595 - a notable course of justice . but the captain ( who by the Spaniard be christen Martin ) i send back in the same Canoa the old ciawan , and Ferdinando my first pilot , and give they both such thing as they desire , with sufficient victuali to carry they back , and by they write a letter to the ship , which they promise to deliver , and perform it , and then i go on , with my new hire pilot Martin the arwacan : but they come on the next or second day after , we come aground again ground with w ^ h our galley , and be like to cast she away , with all etr ga y . our victuali and provision , and so lie on the sand one whole night and be far more in despair at this time to free she then before , because we have no tide of flood to help we , and therefore fear that all our hope will have end in mishap : but we fasten a anchor upon the land , and with main strength draw she off : and so the fifteen day we discover afar off the mountain of Guiana to our great joy , and towards the evening have a slent of a northerly wind that blow very strong , which bring we in sight of the great river Orenoque ; out of which this river descend wherein we be : we descry afar off three other canoas as far as we can discern they , after who we hasten with our barge and wherry , but two of they pass out of sight , and the third enter up the great river , on the right hand to the westward , and there stay out of sight , think that we mean to take the way eastward towards the province of Carapana , for that way the Spaniard keep , not dare to go upward to Guiana , the people in those part be all their enemy , and those in the canoas think we to have be those Spaniards that be flee from Trinidad , and have escape kill : and when we come so far down as the open of that branch into which they slip , be near they with our barge and wherry , we make after they , and ere they can land , come within call , and by our interpreter tell they what we be , wherewith they come back [ three . 648 . ] will aboard we : and of such fish and Tortugas egg 392 * 595 - as they have gather , they give we , and promise in the morning to bring the lord of that part with they , and to do we all other service they can . that night we