: deer of all sort , pork , hare , lion , tiger , leopard , and diverse other sort of beast , either for chase , or food . it have a kind of beast call Cama , or Anta , as big as a english beef , and in great plenty . to speak of the several sort of every kind , i fear will be troublesome to the reader , and therefore i will omit they , and conclude that both for health , good air , pleasure , and riches i be resolve it can be equal by any region either in the east or west . Moreover the country be so healthful , as of a hundred person and more ( which lie without shift most sluttish , and be every day almost melt with heat in row and march , and sudden wet again with great shower , and do eat of all sort of corrupt fruit , and make meal of fresh fish without season , of Tortugas , of Lagartos or crocodile , and of all sort good and bad , without either order or measure , and beside lodge in the open air every night ) we lose not any one , nor have one ill dispose to my knowledge , nor find any Calentura , or other of those pestilent disease which dwell in all hot region , and so near the equinoctial line . where there be store of gold , it be in effect needless to remember other commodity for trade : but it have towards the south part of the river , great quantity of brasil - wood , and diverse berry that die a most perfect crimson and carnation : and for paint , all France , Italy , or the east Indies yield none such : for the more the skin be wash , the fair the colour appear , and 426 the short , easy , and commodious navigation to Guiana . the discovery of Guiana a . d . ... * 595 - with which , even those brown and tawny woman spot themselves , and colour their cheek . all place yield abundance of cotton , of silk , of balsamum , and of those cotton , silk , kind most excellent , and never know in Europe , of all sort of gum , of Indian pepper : and what else an the country may afford within the land we know not , neither have we time to abide the trial , and search . the soil beside be so excellent and so full of river , as it will carry sugar , ginger , and all those other commodity , which the west Indies have . the navigation be short , for it may be sail with a ordinary wind in six week , and in the like time back again , and by the way neither lee shore , enemy coast , rock , nor sand , all which in the voyage to the west Indies , and all other place we be subject unto , as the channel of Bahama , come from the west Indies , can well be pass in the winter , and when it be at the best , it be a perilous and a fearful place . the rest of the Indies for calm , and disease very troublesome , and the sea about the Bermuda a hellish sea for thunder , lightning , and storm . this very yeere * there be seventeen sail of Spanish 1595 . ship lose in the channel of Bahama , and the great fillip like to have sink at the Bermuda be put back to saint Juan de Puerto rico . and so it fall out in that navigation every year for the most part , which in this voyage be not to be fear : for the time of year to leave England be best in July , and the summer in Guiana be in October , November , December , Januarie , February , and march , and then the ship may depart thence in April , and so return again into England in June , so as they shall never be subject to winter - weather , either come , go , or stay there : which for my part , i take to be one of the great comfort and encouragements that can be think on , have ( as i have do ) taste in this voyage by the west Indies so many calm , so much heat , such outrageous gust , foul weather , and contrary wind . 427 to conclude , Guiana be a country that have yet her maidenhead , never sack , turn , nor wrought , the face of the earth have not be tear , nor the virtue and salt of the soil spend by manurance , the grave have not be open for gold , the mine not break with sledge , nor their image pull down out of their temple . it have never be enter by any army of strength , and never conquer or possess by any christian prince . it be beside so defensible , that if two fort be build in one of the province which i have see , the flood set in so near the bank , where the channel also lie , that no ship can pass up but within a pike length of the artillery , first of the one , and afterward of the other : which two fort will be a sufficient guard both to the empire of Inga , and to a hundred other several kingdom , lie within the say river , even to the city of Quito in Peru . there be therefore great difference between the easiness of the conquest of Guiana , and the defence of it be conquer , and the west or east Indies : Guiana have but one entrance by the sea ( if it have that ) for any vessel of burden : so as whosoever shall first possess it , it shall be find unaccessible for any enemy , except he come in wherry , barge , or canoas , or else in flat bottomed boat , and if he do offer to enter it in that manner , the wood be so thick two hundred mile together upon the river of such entrance , as a mouse can sit in a boat unhit from the bank . by land it be more impossible to approach , for it have the strong situation of any region under the sun , and be so environ with impassable mountain on every side , as it be impossible to victuali any company in the passage : which have be well prove by the spanish nation , who since the conquest of Peru have never leave five year free from attempt this empire , or discover some way into it , and yet of three and twenty several gentleman , knight , and noble man , there be never any that know which way to lead a army by land , or to con - 428 ... I595 * dust ship by sea , any thing near the say country . Orellana , of who the river of Amazones take name , be the first , and don Antonio de Berreo ( who we displant ) the last : and i doubt much , whether he himself or any of he yet know the best way into the say empire . tt can therefore hardly be regain , if any strength be former set down , but in one or two place , and but two or three crumster or galley build , and furnish upon the river within : the west Indies have many port , water place , and landing , and near than three hundred mile to Guiana , no man can harbour a ship , except he know one only place , which be not learned in haste , and which i will undertake there be not any one of my company that know , whosoever hearken most after it . beside by keep one good fort , or build one town of strength , the whole empire be guard , and whatsoever company shall be afterwards plant within the land , although in twenty several province , those shall be able all to reunite themselves upon any occasion either by the way of one river , or be able to march by land without either wood , bog , or mountain : whereas in the west Indies there be few town or province that can succour or relieve one the other , either by land or sea : by land the country be either desert , mountainous , or strong enemy : by sea , if any man invade to the eastward , those to the west can in many month turn against the breeze and eastern wind , beside the Spaniard be therein so disperse , as they be no where strong , but in Nueva Espanna only : the sharp mountain , the thorn , and poison [ three . 662 . ] prickle , the sandy and deep way in the valley , the smother heat and air , and want of water in other place be their only and best defence , which ( because those nation that invade they be not victual or provide to stay , neither have any place to friend adjoin ) do serve they in steed of good arm and great multitude . 429 the west Indies be first offer her majesty grandfather by Columbus a stranger , in who there may be doubt of deceit , and beside it be then think incredible that there be such and so many land and region never write of before . this empire be make know to her majesty by her own vassal , and by he that owe to her more duty than a ordinary subject , so that it shall ill sort with the many grace and benefit which i have receive to abuse her highness , either with fable or imagination . the country be already discover , many nation win to her majesty love and obedience , and those Spaniard which have late and long labour about the conquest , beat out , discourage and disgrace , which among these nation be think invincible . her majesty may in this enterprise employ all those soldier and gentleman that be young brethren , and all captain and chieftain that want employment , and the charge will be only the first set out in victual and arm they : for after the first or second year i doubt not but to see in London a contractation house of more receipt for Guiana , than there be now in Seville for the west Indies . and i be resolve that if there be but a small army a foot in Guiana , march towards Manoa the chief city of Inga , he will yield to her majesty by composition so many hundred thousand pound yearly , as shall both defend all enemy abroad , and defray all expense at home , and that he will beside pay a garrison of three or four thousand soldier very royal to defend he against other nation : for he can but know , how his predecessor , yea how his own great uncle Guascar and Atabalipa son to Guainacapa emperor of Peru , be ( while they contend for the empire ) beat out by the Spaniard , and that both of late year and ever since the say conquest , the Spaniard have seek the passage and entrey of his country : and of their cruelty use to the 43 ° * 595 - borderer he can be ignorant . in which respect no doubt but he will be bring to tribute with great gladness , if not , he have neither shot nor iron weapon in all his empire , and therefore may easy be conquer . and i far remember that Berreo confess to i and other ( which i protest before the majesty of God to be true ) that there be find among prophecy in Peru ( at such time as the empire be reduce to the spanish obedience ) in their chief temple , among diverse other which foreshow the loss of the say empire , that from Inglatierra those Ingas shall be again in time to come restore , and deliver from the servitude of the say conqueror . and i hope , as we with these few hand have displant the first garrison , and drive they out of the say country , so her majesty will give order for the rest , and either defend it , and hold it as tributary , or conquer and keep it as empress of the same . for whatsoever prince shall possess it , shall be great , and if the king , of Spain enjoy it , he will become unresistable . her majesty hereby shall confirm and strengthen the opinion of all nation , as touch her great and princely action . and where the south border of Guiana reach to the dominion and empire of the Amazon , those woman shall hereby hear the name of a virgin , which be not only able to defend she own territory and her neighbour , but also to invade and conquer so great empire and so far remove . to speak more at this time , i fear will be but troublesome : i trust in God , this be true , will suffice , and that he which be king of all king and lord of lord , will put it into her heart which be lady of lady to possess it , if not , i will judge those man worthy to be king thereof , that by her grace and leave will undertake it of themselves .