dispatch his campmaster for Spain , with all that he have gather , therewith to levy soldier , and by the show thereof to draw other to the love of the enterprise . and have send diverse image aswell of man as beast , bird and fish , so curious wrought 376 in gold , he doubt not but to persuade the king to yield to he some further help , especial for that this land have never be sack , the mine never wrought , and in the Indies their work be well spend , and the gold draw out with great labour and charge . he also dispatch messenger to his son in Nuevo reyno to levy all the force he can , 8c to come down the river Orenoque to Emeria , the province of Carapana , [ three . 642 . ] to meet he : he have also send to saint Iago de Leon on the coast of the Caracas , to buy horse and mule . after i have thus learn of his proceed past and purpose , i tell he that i have resolve to see Guiana , and that it be the end of my journey , and the cause of my come to Trinidad , as it be indeed , ( and for that purpose i send Jacob Whiddon the year before to get intelligence with who Berreo himself have speech at that time , and remember how inquisitive Jacob Whiddon be of his proceed , and of the country of Guiana ) Berreo be strike into a great melancholy and sadness , and use all the argument he can to dissuade i , and also assure the gentleman of my company that it will be labour lose , and that they shall suffer many misery if they proceed . and first he deliver that i can not enter any of the river with any bark or pinnace , or hardly with any ship boat , it be so low , sandy , and full of flat , and that his company be daily ground in their canoas , which draw but twelve inch water . he further say , that none of the country will come to speak with we , but will all fly ; and if we follow they to their dwelling , they will burn their own town : and beside that , the way be long , the winter at hand , and that the river begin once to swell , it be impossible to stem the current , and that we can not in those small boat by any mean carry victuali for half the time , and that ( which indeed most discourage my company ) the king and lord of all the border of Guiana have decree that none of 377 they shall trade with any Christians for gold , because the same will be their own overthrow , and that for the love of gold the Christians mean to conquer and dispossess they of all together . many and the most of these i find to be true , but yet i resolve to make trial of all whatsoever happen , direct captain George Gifford my viceadmiral to take the lion whelp , and captain Calfield his bark the fwer of to turn to the eastward , against the mouth of a river Capuri . call Capuri , who entrance i have before send captain Whiddon , and John Dowglas the master , to discover , who find some nine foot water or better upon the flood , and five at low water , to who i have give instruction that they shall anchor at the edge of they shall , and upon the best of the flood to thrust over , which shall John Dowglas bwoy and beckon for they before : but they labour in vain ; for neither can they turn it up altogether so far to the east , neither do the flood continue so long , but the water fall year they can have pass the sand ; as we after find by a second experience : so as now we must either give over our enterprise , or leave our ship at adventure four hundred mile behind we , must run up in our ship boat , one barge , and two whery . but be doubtful how to carry victual for so long a time in such baby , or any strength of man , especial for that Berreo assure we that his son must be by that time come down with many soldier , i send away one king , master of the lion whelp , with his shipboat , to try another branch of a river in the bottom of the bay of Guanipa , which be call Amana , to prove if there be water to be find for either of the small ship to enter . but when he come to the mouth of Amana , he find it as the rest , but stay not to discover it thorough , because he be assure by a Indian , his guide , that the cannibal of Guanipa will assail they with many canoas , and that they shoot poison arrow ; so as if he haste not back , they shall all be lose . 378 in the mean time , fear the worst , i cause all the carpenter we have , to cut down a Galego boat , which we mean to cast off , and to fit she with bank to row on , and in all thing to prepare she the best they can , so as she may be bring to draw but five foot , for so much we have on the bar of Capuri at low water . And doubt of king return , i send John Dowglas again in my long barge , aswell to relieve he , as also to make a perfect search in the bottom of that bay : for it have be hold for infallible , that whatsoever ship or boat shall fall therein , can never disemboque again , by reason of the violent current which set into the say bay , as also for that the breeze and easterly wind blow direct into the same . of which opinion i have hear John Hampton of Plymmouth , one of the great experience of England , and diverse other beside that have trade to Trinidad . i send with John Dowglas a old cacique of Trinidad for a pilot , who tell we that we can not return again by the bay or gulf , but that he know a by - branch which run within the land to the eastward , and that he think by it we may fall into Capuri , and so return in four day . John Dowglas search those river , and find four goodly entrance , whereof the least be as big as the Thames at Wolwich ; but in the bay thitherward it be shall , and but six foot water : so as we be now without hope of any ship or bark to pass over , and therefore resolve to go on with the boat , and the bottom of the Galego , in which we thrust 60 man . in the lion whelp boat and whery we carry 20 . captain Calfield in his whery carry ten more , and in my barge other ten , which make up a hundred : we have no other mean but to carry victuali for a month in the same , and also to lodge therein as we can , and to boil and dress our meat . captain Gifford have with he master Edward porter , captain Eynos , and eight more in his whery , with all their victuali , weapon , and provision . captain Calfield have with he my 379 John Hampton captain of the minion under sir John Hawkins in his voyage to saint Juan de ullua . [ he . 643 . ] cousin Butshead Gorges , and eight more . in the galley , of gentleman and officer my self have captain thin , my cousin John Greenvile , my nephew John Gilbert , captain Whiddon , captain Keymis , Edward handcocke , captain Clarke , lieutenant Hewes , Thomas Upton , captain fancy , Jerome Ferrar , Anthony Welles , William connocke , and above fifty more . we can not learn of Berreo any other way to enter but in branch , so far to windward , as it be impossible for we to recover : for we have as much sea to cross over in our whery , as between Dover and Calais , and in a great billow , the wind and current be both very strong , so as we be drive to go in those small boat the bay of direct before the wind into the bottom of the bay Guanipa . of Guanipa , anJ from thence to enter the mouth of some one of those river which John Dowglas have last discover , and have with we for pilot a Indian of Barema , a river to the south of Orenoque , between that and Amazones , who canoas we have former take as he Barema . be go from the say Barema , lade with cassavi - bread , to sell at Margarita . this arwacan promise to bring i into the great river of Orenoque , but indeed of that which he enter he be utter ignorant , for he have not see it in twelve year before ; at which time he be very young , and of no judgement : and if God have not send we another help , we may have wander a whole year in that labyrinth of river , year we have find any way , either out or in , especial after we be pass ebb and flow , which be in four day , for i know a wonder ap the earth do not yield the like confluence of ‘ stream stream and branch , the one cross the other so many ' time , and all so fair and large , and so like one to another , as no man can tell which to take : and if we go by the sun or compass , hope thereby to go direct one way or other , yet that way we be also carry in a circle among multitude of island , and every island so border with high tree , as no man can see any further than the breadth of the river , or length of the breach . 380 but this it chance , that enter into a river , ( which because it have no name , we call the river of the red cross , our self be the first Christians that ever come therein ) the two and twenty of May , as we be row up the same , we espy a small canoa with three Indian , which ( by the swiftness of my barge , row with eight oar ) i overtake year they can cross the river , the rest of the people on the bank shadow under the thick wood , gaze on with a doubtful conceit what may befall those three which we have take . but when they perceive that we offer they no violence , neither enter their canoa with any of we , nor take out of the canoa any of they , they then begin to show themselves on the bank side , and offer to traffic with we for such thing as they have . and as we draw near , they all stay , and we come with our barge to the mouth of a little creek which come from their town into the great river . as we abide there a while , our Indian pilot , call Ferdinando , will needs go ashore to their village to fetch some fruit , and to drink of their artificiali wine , and also to see the place , and know the lord of it against another time , and take with he a brother of he , which he have with he in the journey : when they come to the village of these people , the lord of the island offer to lay hand on they , purpose to have slay they both , yield for reason that this Indian of we have bring a strange nation into their territory , to spoil and destroy they . but the pilot be quick , and of a dispose body , slip their finger , and run into the wood , and his brother be the better footman of the two , recover the creek mouth , where we stay in our barge , cry out that his brother be slay : with that we set hand on one of they that be next we , a very old man , and bring he into the barge , assure he that if we have not our pilot again , we will present cut off his head . this old man be resolve that he shall pay the loss of the other , cry out to those in the wood to save Ferdinando 381 the river of the red cross . [ Iii . 644 . ] two nation of the Tivitivas , call ciawani , and waraweete . a description of the mighty river of Orenoque or Baraquan . what manner of people the Tivitivas be . the english voyage our pilot ; but they follow he notwithstanding , and hunt after he upon the foot with the dear - dog , and with so main a cry , that all the wood echo with the shout they make : but at the last this poor chase Indian recover the river side , and get upon a tree , and as we be coast , leap down and swim