come to a anchor at the part of the three goodly river ( the one be the river of Amana by which we come from the north , and run athwart towards the south , the other two be of Orenoque twa branch which cross from the west and run to the sea towards the east ) and land upon a fair sand , where ’ we find thousand of Tortugas egg , which be very wholesome meat , and great restore , so as our man be now well fill and high content both with the fare , and nearness of the land of Guiana which appear in sight . in the morning there come down accord to promise the lord of that border call Toparimaca , with some thirty or fourty follower , and bring we diverse sort of fruit , and of his wine , bread , fish , and flesh , who we also feast as we can , at least we drink good spanish wine ( whereof we have a small quantity in bottle ) which above all thing they love . i confer with this toparimaca of the next way to Guiana , who Toparimaca . conduct our galley and boat to his own port , and carry we from thence some mile and a half to his town , where some of our captain karouse of his wine till they be reasonable pleasant , for it be very strong with pepper , and the juice of diverse herb , and fruit digest and purge , they keep it in great earthen pot of ten or twelve galon very clean and sweet , and be themselves at their meeting and feast the great karouser and drunkard of the world : when we come to his town we find two cacique , whereof one be a stranger that have be up the river in trade , and his boat , people , and wife encamp at the port where we ancker , and the other be of that country a follower of Toparimaca : they lie each of they in a cotton Hamaca , which we call brazil bed , and two woman attend they with six cup and a little 393 ladle to fill they , out of a earthen pitcher of wine , and so they drink each of they three of those cup at a time one to the other , and in this sort they drink drink at their feast and meeting . that cacique that be a stranger have his wife stay at the port where we ancker , and in all my life i have seidome see a better favour woman : she be of good stature , with black eye , fat of body , of a excellent countenance , her hair almost as long as her self , tie up again in pretty knot , and it seem she stand not in that awe of her husband , as the rest , for she speak and discourse , and drink among the gentleman and captain , and be very pleasant , know her own comeliness , and take great pride therein . i have see a lady in England so like to she , as but for the difference of colour , i will have swear may have be the same . the seat of this town of Toparimaca be very pleasant , stand on a little hill , in a excellent prospect , with goodly garden a mile compass round about it , and two very fair and large pond of exedra town of Lent fish adjoin . this town be call Arowocai : the arowocay . people be of the nation call Nepoios , and be follower of Carapana . in that place i see very age people , that we may perceive all their sinew and vein without any flesh , and but even as a case cover only with the great skin . the lord of this place give i a old man ^ er ^ ore ^ or ot ’ who be great experience and travel , and we know the river most perfect both by day and night : and it shall be requisite for any man that pass it , to have such a pilot , for it be four , five , and six mile over in many place , and twenty mile in other place , with wonderful eddy , and strong current , many great island , and diverse shold , and many dangerous rock , and beside upon any increase of wind so great a bilowe , as we be sometime in great peril of drown in the galley , for the small boat dare not come from the shore , but when it be very fair . 394 the next day we haste thence , and have a easterly wind to help we , we spare our arm from row : for after we enter Orenoque , the river lie for the most part east and west , even from the sea unto Quito in Peru . this river be navigable with bark , little less than a thousand mile , and from the place where we enter , it may be sail up in small pinnace to many of the best part of Nuevo reyno de Granada , and of Popayan : and from no place may the city of these part of the Indies be so easy take and invade as from hence . all that day we sail up a branch of that river , have on the left hand a great island which they call Assapana which may contain some five and twenty mile in length , and six mile in breadth , the great body of the river run on the other side of this island . beyond that middle branch there be also another island in the river call Iwana , which be twice as big as the isle of wight , and beyond it , and between it and the main of Guiana , run a third branch of Orenoque call Arraroopana : all three be goodly branch , and all navigable for great ship . i judge the river in this place to be at least thirty mile broad , reckon the island which divide the branch in it , for afterward i seek also both the other branch . after we reach to the head of the island , call Assapana , a little to the westward on the right hand there open a river which come from the north , call Europa , and fall into the great river , and beyond it on the same side , we ancker for that night , by another island six mile long , and two mile broad , which they call Ocaywita : from hence in the morning we land two guianians , which we find in the town of Toparimaca , that come with we , who go to give notice of our come to the lord of that country call Putyma , a follower of Topiawari , chief lord of Aromaia , who succeed morequito , who ( as you have hear before ) Berreo put to death : but his town be far within the land , he come not unto we that day , so as we anchor 395 A . D . 1595 - they enter the river Orenoque which run east and west . the isle of Assapana . the island of Iwana . [ Iii . 649 . ] the isle of Ocaywita . again that night near the bank of another island , the isle of of bigness much like the other , which they call puta - putapayma . payma > over against which island , on the main land , be a very high mountain call oecope : we covet to anchor rather by these island in the river , then by the main , because of the Tortugas egg , which our people find on they in great abundance , and also because the ground serve better for we to cast our net for fish , the main bank be for the most part stony and high , and the rock of a blue metalline steele - ore . colour , like unto the best steele - ore , which i assure take it to be : of the same blue stone be also diverse great mountain , which border this river in many place . the next morning towards nine of the clock , we weigh anchor , and the breeze increase , we sail always west up the river , and after a while open the land on the right side , the country appear to be champain , and the bank show very perfect red . i therefore send two of the little barge with captain Gifford , and with he captain thou , captain Calfield , my cousin Greenvile , my nephew John Gilbert , captain Eynus , master Edward porter , and my cousin butshead Gorges , with some few soldier , to march over the bank of that red land , and to discover what manner of country it be on the other side , who at their return find it all a plain level , as far as they go or can discern , from the high tree they can get upon : and my old pilot , a man of great travel , brother to the cacique Toparimica tell i , that those be call the plain of the plain of the Sayma , and that the same level cu - h reac ^ ed to Cumana , and Caracas in the west Indies , " mana , and the which be a hundred and twenty league to the north , Caracas . and that there inhabit four principali nation . the first be the Sayma , the next Assawai , the third and great the Wikiri , by who Pedro Hernandez de Serpa before mention be overthrow , as he pass with three hundred horse from Cumani towards oren - 396 oque , in his enterprise of Guiana : the four be call Aroras , and be as black as negro , but have smooth hair , and these be very valiant , or rather desperate people , and have the most strong poison on their arrow , and most dangerous of all nation , of which poison i will speak somewhat be a digression not unnecessary . there be nothing whereof i be more curious , than to find out the true remedy of these poison arrow : for beside the mortality of the wound they make , the par tie shot endure the most insufferable torment in the world , and abide a most ugly and lamentable death , sometime die stark mad , sometime their bowel break out of their belly : which be present discolour as black as pitch , and so unsavoury , as no man can endure to cure , or to attend they . and it be more strange to know , that in all this time there be never Spaniard either by gift or torment that can attain to the true knowledge of the cure , although they have martyr and put to invent torture i know not how many of they . but every one of these Indian know it not , no not one among thousand , but their soothsayer and priest , who do conceal it , and only teach it but from the father to the son . those medicine which be vulgar , and serve for the ordinary poison , be make of the juice of a root call Tupara : the same also quench marvellous the heat of burn fever , and heal inward wound , and break vein , that bleed within the body . but i be more behold to the guianians then any other : for Anthonio de Berreo tell i that he can never attain to the knowledge thereof , and yet they teach i the best way of heal as well thereof , as of all other poison . some of the Spaniard have be cure in ordinary wound , of the common poison arrow with the juice of garlic : but this be a generail rule for all man that shall hereafter travel the Indies where poison arrow be use , that they must abstain from 397 A . D . I595 - Aroras a black people use venomous arrow . the juice of garlic good against ordinary poison . speedy drink to be avoid of such as be wound with poison arrow . the province Aromaia . the pie of Murrecotima . the english voyage drink , for if they take any liquour into their body , as they shall be marvelous provoke thereunto by drought , i say , if they drink before the wound be dress , or soon upon it , there be no way with they but present death . and so i will return again to our journey which for this third day we finish , and cast anchor again near the continent or the left hand between two mountain , the one call Aroami , and the other aio : i make no stay here but till midnight , for i fear hourly lest any rain shall fall , and then it have be impossible to have go any further up , notwithstanding that there be every day a very strong breeze , and easterly wind . i defer the search of the country on guiana - side , till my return down the river . the next day we sail by a great island in the middle of the river call Manoripano , and as we walk a while on the island , while the galley get a head of we , there come for we from the main a small Canoa with seven or eight guianians , to invite we to anchor at their port , but i defer till