a abstract take out of certain Spaniards letter concern Guiana and the country lie upon the great river Orenoque : with certain report also touch the same . a advertisement to the reader . hose letter out of which the abstract follow be take , be surprise at sea as they be pass for Spain in the year 1594 . by captain George Popham : who the next year , and the same that sir Walter Ralegh discover Guiana , as he be in a voyage for the west Indies , learn also the report annex . all which , at his return , be two month after sir [ three . 663 . ] Walter , as also so long after the write of the former discourse , hear also of his discovery : he make know and deliver to some of her majesty most honourable privy council and other . the which see they confirm in some part the substance , i mean , the riches of that country : it have be think fit that they shall be thereunto adjoin . wherein the reader be to be advertise , that although the Spaniard seem to glory much of their formali possession take before morequito the lord of Aromaya , and other thereabouts , which thorough understand they not at that time , whatsoever the Spaniard otherwise pretend : yet , accord to the former discourse , and as also it be relate by Cayworaco , the son of Topiawary now chief lord of the say Aromaya , who be bring into England by sir Walter Ralegh , and be present at the same possession and discovery of the Spaniard mention in these letter ; it appear that after they be go out of their country , the Indian then have far consideration of the matter , and more than conjecture of their intent , have know and hear of their former 432 cruelty upon their borderer and other of the Indian elsewhere : at their next come , there be ten of they send and employ for a far discovery , they be provide to receive and entertain they in a other manner of sort than they have do before ; that be to say , they slay they and bury they in the country so much seek . they give they by that mean a full and complete possession , the which before they have but begin . and so they be mind to do , to as many Spaniard as come after . other possession they have have none since . neither do the Indian mean , as they protest , to give they any other . one other thing to be remember be that in these letter the Spaniard seem to call Guiana and other country near it , border upon the river of Orenoque , by the name of Nueva Dorado , because of the great plenty of gold there in most place to be find . allude also to the name of el Dorado which be give by Martinez to the great city of Manoa , as be in the former treatise specify . this be all i think good to advertise . as for some other matter , i leave they to the consideration and judgement of the indifferent reader . W . R .