rain : and in some place we take it at the first for a smoke that have rise over some great town . for my own part i be well persuade from thence to have return , be a very ill footman , but the rest be all so desirous to go near the say strange thunder of water , as they draw i on by little and little , till we come into the next valley where we may better discern a mostbeauti - the same . i never see a more beautiful country , nor full country . more lively prospect , hill so raise here and there over the valley , the river wind into diverse branch , the plain adjoin without bush or stubble , all fair green grass , the ground of hard sand easy to march on , either for horse or foot , the dear cross in every path , the bird towards the evening sing on every tree with a thousand several tune , crane and herons of white , crimson , and carnation perch in the river side , the air fresh with a gentle easterly wind , and every stone that we stoop to take up , promise either gold or silver by his complexion . your lordship shall see of many sort , and i hope some of they can be better under the sun , and yet we have no mean but with our dagger and finger to tear they out here and there , the abundance of rock be most hard of that minerali spar afore -^ sparre say , which be like a flint , and be altogether as hard or it hard , and beside the vein lie a fathom or two deep in the rock . but we want all thing requisite save only our desire and good will to have perform more if it have please God . to be short , when both our company return , each of they bring also several sort of stone that appear very fair , but be such as they find loose on the ground , and be for the most part but colour , and have not any gold fix in they , yet such as have no judgement or experience keep all that glister , and will not be persuade but it be rich because of the lustre , and bring of those , and of mar - 404 1595 - quesite with all , from Trinidad , and have deliver of those stone to be try in many place , and have thereby breed a opinion that all the rest be of the same : yet some of these stone i show afterward to a Spaniard of the Caracas , who tell i that it be el Madre del oro , that be the mother of gold , and that the mine be far in the ground . but it shall be find a weak policy in i , either to betray my self , or my country with imagination , neither be i so far in love with that lodging , watch , care , peril , disease , ill savour , bad fare , and many other mischiefs that accompany these voyage , as to woo my self again into any of they , be i not assure that the sun cover not so much riches in any part of the earth . captain Whiddon , and our chirurgeon Nicholas millechap bring i a kind of stone like saphire , what they may prove i know not . i show they to some of the Orenoqueponi , and they promise to bring i to a mountain , that have of they very large piece grow diamond wise : whether it be crystal of the mountain , bristol - diamond , or saphire i do not yet know , but i hope the best , sure i be that the place be as likely as those from whence all the rich stone be bring , and in the same height or very near . on the left hand of this river Caroli be seat those nation which be call Iwarawakeri before remember , which be enemy to the Epuremei : and on the head of it adjoin to the great lake Cassipa , be situate those other nation which also resist Inga , and the Epuremei , call Cassepagotos , Eparegotos , and Arrawagotos . i far understand that this lake of Cassipa be so large , Cassipa a as it be above one day journey for one of their canoas gnat lake . to cross , which may be some fourty mile , and that thereinto fall diverse river , and that great store of grain of gold be find in the summer time when the lake fall by the bank , in those branch . there be also another goodly river beyond Caroli which the nver of be call arui , which also run through the lake Cassipa , arui - 405 Ewaipanomaa strange headless nation . [ he . 653 . ] the english voyage and fall into Orenoque far west , make all that land between Caroli and arui a island , which be likewise a most beautiful country . next unto arui there be two river Atoica and Caora , and on that branch which be call Caora , be a nation of people , who head appear not above their shoulder ; which though it may be think a mere fable , yet for my own part i be resolve it be true , because every child in the province of Arromaia and Canuri affirm the same : they be call Ewaipanoma : they be report to have their eye in their shoulder , and their mouth in the middle of their breast , and that a long train of hair grow backward between their shoulder . the son of Topiawari , which i bring with i into England tell i that they be the most mighty man of all the land , and use bow , arrow , and club thrice as big as any of Guiana , or of the Orenoqueponi , and that one of the Iwarawakeri take a prisoner of they the year before our arrival there , and bring he into the border of Aromaia his father country . and far when i seem to doubt of it , he tell i that it be no wonder among they , but that they be as great a nation , and as common as any other in all the province , and have of late year slay many hundred of his father people , and of other nation their neighbour , but it be not my chance to hear of they till i be come away , and if i have but speak one word of it while i be there , i may have bring one of they with i to put the matter out of doubt . such a nation be write of by Mandevile , who report be hold for fable many year , and yet since the east Indies be discover , we find his relation true of such thing as heretofore be hold incredible : whether it be true or no , the matter be not great , neither can there be any profit in the imagination ; for my own part i see they not , but i be resolve that so many people do not all combine , or forethink to make the report . when i come to Cumana in the west Indies afterward by chance i speak with a Spaniard dwell not far from 406 1595 - thence , a man of great travel , and after he know that i have be in Guiana , and so far direct west as Caroli , the first question he ask i be , whether i have see any of the Ewaipanoma , which be those without head : who be esteem a most honest man of his word , and in all thing else , tell i that he have see many of they : i may not name he , because it may be for his disadvantage , but he be well know to monsieur mucherons son of London , and to Peter Mucheron merchant of the flemish ship that be there in trade , who also hear what he avow to be true of those people . the four river to the west of Caroli be Casnero the river of which fall into Orenoque on this side of Amapaia , casnen ' and that river be great than Danubius , or any of Europe : it rise on the south of Guiana from the mountain which divide Guiana from Amazones , and i think it to be navigable many hundred mile : but we have no time , mean , nor season of the year , to search those river for the cause aforesaid , the winter the winter be come upon we , although the winter and summer ° fgu ' lana - as touch cold and heat differ not , neither do the tree ever sensible lose their leaf , but have always fruit either ripe or green , and most of they both blossom , leaf , ripe fruit , and green at one time : but their winter only consist of terrible rain , and overflow of the river , with many great storm and gust , thunder and lightning , of which we have our fill , ere we return . on the north side , the first river that fall into Orenoque be Cari , beyond it on the same side be the river of Limo , between these two be a great nation of cannibal , and their chief town bear the name of the river , and be call Acamacari : at this town be a continual market of woman for three or four hatchet a piece , they be buy by the Arwacas , and by they sell into the west Indies . to the west of Limo be the river Pao , beyond it Caturi , beyond that Voari and Capuri which fall out of the great river of Meta , by 4 ° 7 which Berreo descend from Nuevo reyno de Granada . to the westward of Capuri be the province of Amapaia , where Berreo winter , and have so many of his people poison with the tawny water of the marsh of the anebas . above Amapaia towards Nuevo reyno fall in Meta , Pato , Meta , Pato , and Cassanar . to the west of those to - cassanar . ward the province of the ashaguas and Catetios be the river of Beta , Dawney , and Ubarro , and towards the frontier of Peru be the province of Thomebamba , and Caxamalca . adjoin to Quito in the north side of Peru be the river of Guiacar and Goauar : and on the other side of the say mountain the river of Papamene . Papamene which descend into Marannon or Amazones pass through the province Mutylones where don Pedro de Osua who be slay by the traitor Agiri before rehearse , build his brigandine , when he seek Guiana by the way of Amazones . the isle of between dawney and Beta lie a famous island in Baraquan . Orenoque now call Baraquan ( for above Meta it be not know by the name of Orenoque ) which be call Athule , beyond which , ship of burden can pass by reason of a most forcible overfall , and current of water : but in the eddy all small vessel may be draw even to Peru it self : but to speak of moor of these river without the description be but tedious , and therefore Orenoque a i with leave the rest to the description . this river of Orenoque be navigable for ship little less than 1000 Peru , Nuevo mile , and for lesser vessel near 2000 by it ( as afore - reyno , and say ) Peru , Nuevo reyno , and Popaian , may be invade : Popaian may it also lead to the great empire of Inga , and to the province of Amapaia , and Anebas which abound in gold : l ' ’ J he branch of Cosnero , manta , Caora descend from the middle land and valley , which lie between the easter province of Peru and Guiana ; and it fall into the sea between Marannon and Trinidad in two degree and a half : all which your honour shall better perceive in the general description of Guiana , Peru , Nuevo reyno , the kingdom of Popayan , and Roidas , with the 408 province of Venezuela , to the bay of Uraba , behind Cartagena westward ; and to Amazones southward . while we lay at anchor on the coast of Canuri , and have Canuri . take knowledge of all the nation upon the head and branch of this river , and have find out so many several people , which be enemy to the Epuremei , and the new conqueror : i think it time lose to linger any long in that place , especial for that the fury of Orenoque begin daily to threaten we with danger in our return : for no half day pass , but the river begin to rage and overflow very fearful , and the rain come down in terrible shower , and gust in great abundance : and withal , our man begin to cry out for want of shift , for no man have place to bestow any other apparel then that which he wear on his back , and that be thorough wash on his body for the most part ten time in one day : and we have now be well near a month , every day pass to the westward far and far from our ship . we therefore turn towards