affirm that there fall a hundred river many into Orenoque from the north and south , whereof the least be as big as Rio grande , that pass in ° > en ° iue ' between Popayan and Nuevo reyno de Granada ( Rio grande being esteem one of the renown river in all the west Indies , and number among the great river of the world : ) but he know not the name of any of these , but Caroli only ; neither from what nation they descend , neither to what province they lead ; for he have no mean to discourse with the inhabitant at any time : neither be he curious in these thing , be utter unlearned , and not know the east from the west . but of all these i get some knowledge , and of many more , partly by my own travel , and the rest by conference : of some one i learn one , of other the rest , have with i a Indian that speak many language , and that of Guiana natural . i seek out all the age man , and such as be great traveller , and by the one and the other i come to understand the situation , the river , the kingdom from the east sea to the border of Peru , and from Orenoque southward as far as Amazones or Marannon , and the religion of Maria Tamball , and of all the king of province , and captains of town and village , how they stand in term of peace or war , and which be friend or [ in . 640 . ] enemy the one with the other , without which there can be neither entrance nor conquest in those part , nor elsewhere : for by the dissension between Guascar and Atabalipa , Pizarro conquer Peru , and by the hatred that the tlaxcallians bear to Mutezuma , Cortes be victorious over Mexico ; without which both the one and the other have fail of their enterprise , and of the great honour and riches which they attain unto . now Berreo begin to grow into despair , and look for no other success than his predecessor in this enter - 37 i 1595 - the province of Emeria inhabit by gentle Indian . Carapana . the english voyage prize , until such time as he arrive at the province of Emeria towards the east sea and mouth of the river , where he find a nation of people very favourable , and the country full of all manner of victuali . the king of this land be call Carapana , a man very wise , subtle , and of great experience , be little less than a hundred year old : in his youth he be send by his father into the island of Trinidad , by reason of civil war among themselves , and be breed at a village in that island , call Parico ; at that place in his youth he have see many Christians , both french and spanish , and go diverse time with the Indian of Trinidad to Margarita and Cumana in the west Indies ( for both those place have ever be relieve with victuali from Trinidad ) by reason whereof he grow of more understanding , and note the difference of the nation , compare the strength and arm of his country with those of the christian , and ever after temporize so , as whosoever else do amiss , or be waste by contention , Carapana keep himself and his country in quiet and plenty : he also hold peace with the caribe or cannibal his neighbour , and bid free trade with all nation , whosoever else have war . Berreo sojourn and rest his weak troop in the town of Carapana six week , and from he learn the way and passage to Guiana , and the riches and magnificence thereof ; but be then utter disable to proceed , he determine to try his fortune another year , when he have renew his provision , and regathered more force , which he hope for as well out of Spain as from Nueva reyno , where he have leave his son , don Antonio Ximenes to second he upon the first notice give of his entrance , and so for the present embark himself in canoas , and by the branch of Orenoque arrive at Trinidad , have from Carapana sufficient pilot to conduct he . from Trinidad he coast Paria , and so recover Mar - 372 garita : and have make relation to don Juan ser - miento the governor , of his proceed , and persuade he of the riches of Guiana , he obtain from thence fifty soldier , promise present to return to carapana , and so into Guiana . but Berreo mean nothing less at that time ; for he want many provision necessary for such a enterprise , and therefore depart from Margarita , seat himself in Trinidad , and from thence send his campmaster , and his sergeantmajor back to the border to discover the near passage into the empire , as also to treat with the borderer , and to draw they to his party and love ; without which , he know he can neither pass safe , nor in any sort be relieve with victuali or ought else . Carapana direct his company to a king call more - morequito . quito , assure they that no man can deliver so much of Guiana as morequito can , and that his dwelling be but five day journey from macureguarai , the first civil town of Guiana . now your lordship shall understand , that this morequito , one of the great lord or king of the border of Guiana , have two or three year before be at Cumana and at Margarita , in the west Indies , with great store of plate of gold , which he carry to exchange for such other thing as he want in his own country , and be daily feast , and present by the governor of those place , and hold among they some two month , in which time one vides governor vides the goof Cumana win he to be his conductor into ™ ' nou_r_ ° f Guiana , be allure by those croissant and image pe ^ tor " of gold which he bring with he to trade , as also Berreo in the by the ancient fame and magnificence of el Dorado : conquest of whereupon vides send into Spain for a patent to this - Guiana . cover and conquer Guiana , not know of the precedence of berreos patent , which , as Berreo affirm , be sign before that of vides : so as when vides understand of Berreo , and that he have make entrance into that territory , and forgo his desire and hope , it 373 be very think that vides practise with morequito to hinder and disturb Berreo in all he can , and not to suffer he to enter through his signory , nor any of his company ; neither to victuali , nor guide they in any sort ; for vides governor of Cumana , and Berreo , be become mortali enemy , aswell for that Berreo have get Trinidad into his patent with Guiana , as also in that he be by Berreo prevent in the journey of Guiana it self : howsoever it be , i know not , but morequito for a time dissemble his disposition , suffer Spaniard , and a friar ( which Berreo have send to discover Manoa ) to travel through his country , mature - give they a guide for Macureguaray , the first town g ^ ray . civq [ anj apparel people , from whence they have other guide to bring they to Manoa the great city of Inga : and be furnish with those thing which they have learn of Carapana be of most price in ten span - Guiana , go onward , and in eleven day arrive at at Maiea1 Manoa , as Berreo affirm for certain ; although i [ three . 641 ' ] can not be assure thereof by the lord which now govern the province of morequito , for he tell i that they get all the gold they have , in other town on this side Manoa , there be many very great and rich , and ( as he say ) build like the town of Christians , with many room . when these ten Spaniard be return , and ready Aromaia . to put out of the border of Aromaia , the people of morequito set upon they , and slay they all but one that swim the river , and take from they to the value of forty thousand pezo of gold : and one of they only live to bring the news to Berreo , that both his nine soldier and holy father be benight in the say province . i my self speak with the captain of morequito that slay they , and be at the place where it be execute . Berreo enrage herewithal , send all the strength he can make into Aromaia , to be revenge of he , his people , and country . but morequito suspect the same , flee over Orenoque , 374 * 595 - and through the territory of the saima , and wikiri , Salma and recover Cumana , where he think himself very safe , with vides the governor . but Berreo send for he in the king name , and his messenger find he in the house of one Fashardo on the sudden year he be suspect , so as he can not then be convey away , vides dare not deny he , aswell to avoid the suspicion of the practice , as also for that a holy father be slay by he and his people . morequito offer Fashardo the weight of three quintal in gold , to let he escape : but the poor guianian , betray on all side , be deliver to the campmaster of Berreo , and be present execute . morequito after the death of this morequito , the soldier of execute • Berreo spoil his territory , and take diverse prisoner , among other they take the uncle of morequito , call Topiawari , who be now king of Aromaia ( who son i bring with i into England ) and be a man of great understanding and policy : he be above a hundred year old , and yet of a very able body . the Spaniard lead he in a chain seventeen day , and make he their guide from place to place between his country and Emeria , the province of Carapana aforesaid , and he be at last redeem for a hundred plate of gold , and diverse stone call Piedras hijada , or spleen - stone . now Berreo for execute of morequito , and other cruelty , spoil , and slaughter do in Aromaia , have lose the love of the Orenoqueponi , and of all the borderer , and dare not send any of his soldier any further into the land then to Carapana , town ° f which he call the port of Guiana : but from thence by the help of Carapana he have trade further into the G ^ ana , i country , and always appoint ten Spaniard to reside in carapanas town , by who favour , and by be conduct by his people , those ten search the country thereabouts , aswell for mine , as for other trade and commodity . they also have get a nephew of Morequito * who 375 some feme Spaniards be now seat in Dissequebe . they have christen , and name don Juan , of who they have great hope , endeavour by all mean to establish he in the say province . among many other trade , those Spaniard use canoas to pass to the river of Barema , Pawroma , and Dissequebe , which be on the south side of the mouth of Orenoque , and there buy woman and child from the cannibal , which be of that barbarous nature , as they will for three or four hatchet sell the son and daughter of their own brethren and sister , and for somewhat more , even their own daughter . hereof the Spaniard make great profit : for buy a maid of twelve or thirteen year for three or four hatchet , they sell they again at Margarita in the west Indies for fifty and a hundred pezo , which be so many crown . the master of my ship , John Dowglas , take one of the canoas which come lade from thence with people to be sell , and the most of they escape ; yet of those he bring , there be one as well favour , and as well shape as ever i see any in England , and afterward i see many of they , which but for their tawny colour may be compare to any of Europe . they also trade in those river for bread of Cassavi , of which they buy a hundred pound weight for a knife , and sell it at Margarita for ten pezo . they also recover great store of cotton , Brasill wood , and those bed which they call Hamacas or Brasill bed , wherein in hot country all the Spaniard use to lie common , and in no other , neither do we our self while we be there . by mean of which trade , for ransom of diverse of the guianians , and for exchange of hatchet and knife , Berreo recover some store of gold plate , eagle of gold , and image of man and diverse bird , and