, for that which lead to Carapana his dwell , be in some place difficult , and mountainous . that a nation of clothe people , call Cassanari , do dwell not far from the place , where the river do first take the name of Orenoque , and that far within , they border upon a sea of salt water , name Parime . that a great river , call Macurwini , pass through their country into Orenoque . that Manoa stand twenty day journey from the mouth Wiapoco : sixteen day from Barima , 464 thirteen day from Amacur , and ten day from Aratoori . that the best way unto it , be not by macureguerai . that of all other the charibe that dwell high up in Orenoque , know most the inland , and of those nation , and they speak no other language , than such as John your interpreter do well understand . he certify i of the headless man , and that their mouth in their breast be exceed wide . the name of their nation in the charibe language be Chiparemai , and the guianians call they Ewiapanomos . what i have hear of a sort of people more monstrous , i omit to mention , because it be no matter of difficulty to get one of they , and the report otherwise will appear fabulous . last he tell i of a inland river , name Cawrooma , adjoin to Aratoori , and that the quepyn mountains , where Carapana dwell , be hardly accessible . that the Amapagotos have image of gold of incredible bigness , and great store of unman horse of the Caracas breed : and they dwell five day journey up the river about Caroli . we with our fleet of canoas be now not far from carapanas port , when our intelligencer return and inform we that ten spaniards be late go with much trade to Barima , where these Indian dwell , to buy Cassavi bread ; and that within one day two other canoas of Spaniards be appoint to come by the river Amana , to Carapana his port . upon this occasion they take counsel , and in the end desire to return to their house , lest the spaniards find they from home , and imagine that they do purposely absent themselves , shall take away their wife and spoil their dwelling . they far resolve if it be possible to cut they off : which afterwards they do perform . for when they be disperse in their house seek Cassavi , sudden at one time , in all place they be assault , and not one of they escape . Carapana , who hand be in lay this plot , send we this news , as we return down the river . ten 465 2 g they have eminent head like dog , and live all the day time in the sea , they speak the charibe language . a sudden as salt of the Spaniard by the Indian . the two other canoas that come from Trinidad by Amana , notwithstanding that we keep a league before the ship with our boat , see the ship before we have sight of they , and present with all speed go to Berreo to advertise he of our come . he forthwith dispatch two or three messenger to Trinidad . one of his canoas meet with our spy , who the Indian of Barima have leave to go with we : they rifle he of his victual , give he knife , and dismiss he .. in eight day sail still before a wind , we arrive at topiawaries porte , in all which time no Indian that we know came aboard we . for the time of our return promise at your lordship departure from thence be expire ; they in despair sever they - [ three . 678 . ] self among the other nation . here the Spaniard a ranchma have seat their Rancheria of some twenty or thirty “ kmtedbj the house . the high rocky island , that lie in the Spaniard at midst of the river , against the mouth of Caroli , be a port of their fort or refuge , when they misdoubt safety in Toftawary . their town , or have notice of any practice against they : but now leave both town and island , they join themselves altogether , and return to the mouth of river Caroli , place there a secret ambush , to defend the passage to those mine , from whence your oar and white stone be take the last year : we all not without grief to see ourselves thus defeat , and our hungry hope make void , be witness of this their remove . as we ride at a anchor within musket shoot of their town , a Indian come unto we with lean cheek , thin hair , and a squint eye , to inform we that they be very strong , that Berreo his son be with he , that they have but two small pinniss at Trinidad , which they daily look for to come up the river , and last to view our ship well , and our provision , but especial to learn whether Gualtero , topiawarie his son be with we . this informer very countenance give he to be 466 suspect , and therefore partly by threaten , partly by promise of reward we win he to confess the truth . which he do , assure we that Berreo have not full fifty five man with he , whereof twenty come late from Trinidad , twenty from Nuevo Reyno , and the rest he bring with he about six month since , when he flee from Carapana his porte , and be drive with his small company to keep the aforesaid island near Caroli . and that though now his number be thus increase yet dare he not adventure at any time to leave the fast wood , and to go but half a league from his hold into the plain . that some few of the Arwaccas be abide with he . that he daily look for his son from Nuevo Reyno , for his campemaster from Trinidad , and for horse from the Caraccas . that topiawarie be dead : the Indian of that coast all flee , and disperse , except the son of one Curmatoi , and another woman of account , who the Spaniard hold prisoner , for consent to the death of their nine man , and the holy friar in morekito his time . This Curmatoi be flee topiawarie towards Guanipa , and be a man of speciali note among the Indian . that iwiakanarie Gualtero his near kinsman , have hold the country to his use , by his father appointment , ever since your be in the river . that there be ten ship , and many Spaniard at Trinidad . that the Indian our friend do fear , lest you with your company be all slay , and your ship sink at Cumana ( for so the Spaniard noise it among the common they , ) that some of Gualtero his friend with Putijma , be in the mountain not far from the hill aio . fantar esand that Berreo have send for six piece of ordinance , which he mean to plant , where they may best command the river . when we have stay here two day , consider that where no hope be leave of do good , to abide there in harm way do nothing , will be bootless : i resolve to seek Putijma in the mountain : and 467 turn down the river with the force of the stream some twenty mile in six hour : the next morning with ten shot i go ashore , intend if the Indian shall think themselves too weak , with our help to displant the Spaniard : to set some of they on work , for hatchet and knife to return we gold grain , and white stone from such place , as they shall be direct unto . when we come to the place of their usual abode ; we see that they late have be there , but can speak with none of they . it may be that fear ( which be easy of belief ) persuade they that we be Spaniards . Gilbert my pilot here offer to bring we either to the my of white stone near winicapora , or else to a gold my , which Putijma have show he , be but one day journey overland , from the place where we now stay at a anchor . i see far off the mountain adjoin to this gold my , and have measure their path near the same place this last year , can not judge it to be fifteen mile from we . i do well remember how come that way with Putijma the year before , he point to this same mountain , make sign to have i go with he thither . i understand his sign and mark the place , but mistake his meaning , imagine that he will have show i the overfall of the river cur - wara from the mountain . my Indian show i in what sort without dig they gather the gold in the sand of a small river , name Macawini , that spring and fall from the rock where this my be . and far tell i , that he be with Putijma , at what time morekito be to be execute by the Spaniard , and that then the chief of morekito his friend be in consultation , to show this my unto they if so they may redeem their captain life , but upon better advice , suppose they in this case to be implacable , and that this may prove a mean to loose not only their king , but their country also : they have to this day conceal it from they , be of all other the 468 rich and most plentiful ! . the age sort to keep this from common knowledge , have devise a fable of a dangerous dragon that haunt this place and de - [ he . 679 . ] vour all that come near it . but our Indian , if when we return , we do bring store of strong wine ( which they love beyond measure ) with it will undertake so to charm this dragon , that he shall do we no harm . i , that for this end come from home , and in this journey have take much more pain to less purpose , will very glad from this mountain have take so good a proof to witness my be in the country : but withal consider that not one Indian of our know friend come unto we : that don Juan the cousin of Gualtero , who live here a revolt from the Spaniard , be now in election to be chief commander of all the Indian force in these part , can in policy , for Gualtero his sake , who inheritance he seek to usurp , be a fast friend unto we : that the Spaniard abide in Winicapora ( for there be ten ) may well before we can do any thing , and return , cause some other of Berreo his man to join with they , in the way to intercept we : and forthink withal , that there be no mean but our self , to make know our discovery , if we return not ; in our misfortune the hope of follow this voyage will be bury : but beside all this , and the respect of such spial , as the Spaniard keep to observe our do , foreknow that if the enemy shall by our linger , stop our passage , which in one or two place of advantage , few of they may easy doe : it will be a question how with our ship to get out of the river , except first we can remove they : i think it best ( all other possibility set apart ) to seek in time to be free from the hazard of the aforesaid evil passage . while we be search at the shore for the Indian , my barge take a Canoa , with three man in 469 this transplant of Indian be worthy of consideration . the english voyage she : the one a servant to Berreo , ( as before be mention ) the other two merchant of Cassavi . they have a letter send from the governor to be convey to Trinidad , which i receive . there be also a great hatchet , and twenty knife , wherewith this Indian servant shall buy a Canoa , and hire Indian to carry she up the river towards Nuevo Reyno . This Canoa forsooth with four other be to be send to bring down Berreo his son with all his force , which now have be , i think , full three year in prepare . if five such boat be sufficient to convoy he , his man and all their provision : it may seem , he come with no great strength . this servant as he be a man of especial trust , and near Berreo : so appear he to have some insight in his proceed . he show i that the Indian , who with these knife shall be hire , be to pass up so high , as where some of the Cassanari do dwell in small village . that Berreo his purpose be , when they come thither to leave they there , and make they officer over the other Indian : and in their place some of the Cassanari shall return , who likewise shall be make justice and constable over they of Guiana : that from Trinidad he mean to remove most of the old inhabitant , that will be tractable ; and interpose they among the cassanarians of Guiana , and the guianians of the Cassanari . that the Arwaccas shall whole possess Trinidad , and the river side of Raleana . that they already be provide of threescore negro , to work the mine in these place . and that by this mean Berreo hope to keep these several nation in mutual enmity each against other , all to serve his turn , and never to become strong , or likely to join themselves against he . he far show i , that Topiawary , soon after our departure from the river , flee into the mountain , carry huge Godwyn with he , and leave a substitute in his country , as aforesaid : and that the next news 470 » 596 - they hear of he be , that he be dead , and the english boy eat by a tiger . that the Spaniard believe neither the one nor the other . that about the end of June , when the river shall be impassable , the ten ship shall depart from Trinidad . and that Berreo ever since his come to Guiana , have spend his time