easy be perceive , that all those let and hindrance that can any way be allege , or wrest so much , as but to touch we , do deep and near concern the spanish king , and in a manner violent withhold he from that , which he notwithstanding carry with success , while we 483 out of season do affect the bare stile , to be name man stay and circumspect in our proceed . it be report , that Calanus the Indian throw down before Alexander the great , a dry sere piece of leather , and then put his foot on one of the end of it : the leather be tread down at that side , rise on all part else . by this the wise man do show unto he a figure and similitude of his kingdom , which be exceed large , must of necessity in all other part , except the place of the king residence , be always full of stir , tumult , and insurrection . the end afterward confirm , that this empire consist of sundry nation , can not keep it self from dissolution . no potentate living have , or can have so faithful and incorrupt counseller , as be the example and history of forepass time and age . we may therefore be bold to think [ three . 685 . ] that the governor of the spanish affair shall mind it , that their king lustful desire , and ambitious thought to establish over all Europe one law , one lord , one religion , be build and erect on a dangerous ungrounded resolution : consider that many of the neighbour kingdom be of equal force in man , or great than he can make , be settle in a long continue estate , be entire within themselves , and hate to hear the voice of a stranger . it be not unlikely that they in this case shall lay before their king the fatal destiny of many worthy , that have be constrain for want of sufficient number of their natural subject , after many year spend in the war , to retire to their own country , and have be glad peaceable to hold their own signiory at home , resign all that unto other , which they have get abroad by hard adventure , and much effusion of blood . the king of Spain can but discern , that his spacious empire and kingdom be so many , and so far divide one from another , be like the member of a monstrous body , tie together with cable only . for take away the traffic of unnece - 484 sarie commodity transport out of Spain : those huge country of the Indies have no common link of affinity , law , language , or religion , and be of themselves able to maintain themselves without foreign commerce , be not so simple , as not to know their own strength , and to find , that they do rather possess Spaniard , then that they be possess by they . he can be ignorant that Spain it self be on all side environ with many puissant enemy , mighty and great prince , who know it to be rich without man , confident without reason , proud and adventurous without mean sufficient ; may happy confederate to chastise he , as a insolent intruder , and disturber of all quietness ; and go no further than Spain it self , may even there shake the foundation of his long contrive devise , and in one act redeem the time , control his aspire humour , and break the band in sunder that import servitude , and subversion to all the dominion of Christendom . again , his counsel may well inform he , that to dispeople and disable himself at home , in hope to obtain Guiana , be a country strong of it self , and defend with infinite multitude of Indian enemy , be rich , and by the inhabitant offer unto the english : he contempt towards we will seem so intolerable and despiteful , as may be sufficient to provoke we , though otherwise we have no such inclination ; if he unprovide of able help to effect it , shall rest himself on a careless presumption , that we can , we dare not , we will not stir in a matter that promises we so great benefit , and may so high offend he . he may be persuade , that to leave no other succour or safety to his nakedness , but the old stale practice of spread rumour , and give out false intelligence of preparation to invade England , thereby to keep we at home ; or else of hire and suborn some machavellian under hand by secret conveyance , to stop the course of our proceed ; or last , of 485 procure some wild outlaw to disquiet our tranquillity ; be but a poor , weak , and uncertain stay to uphold his estate by . and yet set such like drift aside : what can be imagine likely to hinder we from prevail in Guiana , rather than he , who disadvantage be to be encumber with the self same , and manifold moor impediment , then can any way be suppose , with good cause to impeach , or divorce we from so profitable a attempt ? all this notwithstanding , if the spanish king not be able to dissemble his desire , or bear the loss of this one kingdom ; put himself out of his strength at home , and expose his people to the hazard of all casualty abroad , be resolve , whatsoever shall happen , not to relinquish Guiana , but to keep this one iron more in the fire , on no other assurance , but a peremptory disdain of prevention : if he appear so eager bend for Guiana , as if it be enact for a law among themselves , vii and modis to thrust for it , and not to hear , conceive , or believe any thing , that may dissuade or deter from the conquest thereof : it then appertain unto we , not to enforce those objection against our self , which he with less reason reject as frivolous ; since by how much the more earnest he be in follow this purpose , by so much the less cause have we to be divert from it . to such as shall be willing further to wade in this argument ; for brevity sake , i do propose only this bare assertion : that England and Guiana conjoin , be strong , and more easy defend , then if England alone shall repose her self on her own force , and powerfulness . the reason that may be infer to prove this need no rationail discourse : they be all intimate in the only example of Spain it self ; which without the Indies be but a purse without money , or a paint sheath without a dagger . in sum : it seem unto i , that whereas the difficulty of perform this enterprise have be produce for a discouragement : it be 486 of dull conceit of strange weakness in our self , to distrust our own power so much , or at least , our own heart and courage ; as value the spanish nation to be omnipotent ; or yield that the poor Portugal have that master spirit and conquer industry , above we ; as to be able to seat himself among the [ three . 686 . ] many mighty prince of the east Indies , to frontier China , to hold in subjection the philippinas , Zeilan , Calecut , goa , ormus , Mozambique , and the rest ; the navigation be so tedious and full of peril : to suffer our self to be put back for worthless cipher , out of place , without account . all which region be now also by the late conquest of Portugal , entitle to the spanish king : to who the colony of those part do yet general refuse to swear fealty and allegiance : and the care depend on he , not only in govern they in the east , so far off ; but also of order and strengthen of those disunit , scatter , and ill guard empire and province in the west : it may very well be allege to the say spanish king , that it be more wisdom for he to assure and fortify some part of those already get , than to begin the conquest of Guiana , so far separate from the rest of his Indies : in which he have have so many misfortune , and against who the natural people be so impetuous bend , and oppose : be it not , that it exceed all the rest in abundance of gold , and other riches . the case then so stand , be it not mere wretchedness in we , to spend our time , break our sleep , and waste our brain , in contrive a cavil false title to defraud a neighbour of half a acre of land : whereas here whole shire of fruitful rich ground , lie now waste for want of people , do prostitute themselves unto we , like a fair and beautiful woman , in the pride and flower of desire year : if we do but consider , how unhappy Berreo his affair , with his assistant have of late year , in our own knowledge succeed : who can say , if the hand 487 of the almighty be not against they , and that he have a work in this place , in stead of papistry , to make the sincere light - of his gospel to shine on this people ? the effect whereof shall be a royal crown of everlasting remembrance to all other blessing , that from the beginning the lord have plentiful pour on our dread sovereign , in a eminent and supreme degree of all perfection . if the castilian , pretend a religious care of plant Christianity in those part , have in their do preach nought else but avarice , rapine , blood , death , and destruction to those naked , and sheeplike creature of God ; erect statue and trophy of victory unto themselves , in the slaughter of million of innocent : do not the cry of the poor succourless ascend unto the heaven ? have God forget to be gracious to the workmanship of his own hand ? or shall not his judgement in a day of visi - hermajestie . tation by the ministry of his choose servant , come on these bloodthirsty butcher , like rain into a fleece of wool ? aliquando manifesta ; aliquando occulta ; semper justa sunt dei judicia . to leave this digression , it be fit only for a prince to begin , and end this work : the maintenance and order thereof require sovereign power , authority , and commandment . the river of Raleana give open and free passage , any provision that the Spaniard can make to the contrary notwithstanding , ( for once yearly the land near the river be all drown ) to convey man , horse , munition , and victuali for any power of man that shall be send thither . i do speak it on my soul health , as the best testimony , that i can in any cause yield to aver a truth , that have now the second time be in this country , and with the help of time and leisure well advise my self upon all circumstance to be think on ; i can discern no sufficient impediment to the contrary , but that with a competent number of man , her majesty may to she and her successor enjoy 488 this rich and great empire : and have once plant there , may for ever ( by the favour of God ) hold and keep it , contra ludaeos and gentes . Subjects , i doubt not , may through her majesty gracious sufferance , join their strength together , invade , spoil , and overrun it , return with gold and great riches . but what good of perpetui tie can follow thereof ? or who can hope that they will take any other course then such , as tend to a private and present benefit ; consider that a empire once obtain , be of congruity , how , and wheresoever the charge shall grow , to be annex unto the crown ? the riches of this place be not fit for any private estate : no question , they will rather prove sufficient to cross and countervail the Spaniard his proceed in all part of christendom , where his money make way to his ambition . if the necessity of follow this enterprise do nothing urge we , because in some case better a mischief , than a inconvenience : let the conveniency thereof somewhat move we , in respect both of so many gentleman , soldier , and young brother , who , if for want of employment they do not die like cloy cattle in rank easefulnesse ; be enforce for maintenance sake , sometime to take shameful and unlawful course : and in respect of so many handycraftsman have able body , that do live in cleanness of tooth and poverty . to sacrifice the child of Belial unto the common weal , be not to defile the land with blood , because the law of God do not prohibit it , and [ three . 687 . ] the execution of justice require it to be so : but yet if the waterboughe , that suck and feed on the juice , and nourishment that the fruitful branch shall live by , be to be cut down from the tree , and not regard : lucky and prosperous be that right hand , that shall plant and possess a soil , where they may fructify , increase , and grow to good : thrice honourable and bless be the memory of so charitable a deed , from one generation to another . 489 to conclude , your lordship have pay for the discovery and search , both in your own person , and since by i . you have frame it , and mould it ready for her majesty , to set on her seal . if either envy or ignorance , or other devise frustrate the rest , the good which shall grow to our enemy , and the loss which will come to her majesty and this kingdom , will after a few year show it self . we have more people , more ship , and better mean , and yet do nothing . the spanish king have have so sweet a taste of the riches thereof , as notwithstanding that he be lord of so many empire and kingdom already , notwithstanding his enterprise of France and Flanders , notwithstanding that he attend this year a home invasion : yet he send twenty eight sail to Trinidad ,