the second voyage to Guiana . Unday the 26 . of January , in the year of our lord 1596 . we depart from Portland road , in the darling of London , have in company the discoverer , a small pinnace , who we lose at sea , in foul weather , the Thursday next follow . Friday , the 13 . of February , we fall with the canary island , where we expect our pinnace , accord to our appointment , seven or eight day . here we take two boat , the one a passenger , we bulge , the other we tow at our ship stern , steer southsouthwest for the island of cape Verde . therehence we set sail the 28 . of February , keep a westsouthwest 452 course . in this passage we find very smooth sea , fair weather , and steady wind , blow ordinary between the east and Northeast point . near 30 . league from these island , we come into a grow sea , the swell water make a strange noise and hurtle together , as if it may be two strong current encounter each other . the 12 . of march we sound , and have sandy ground in 47 . fathom . at midnight in twelve fathom we come to a anchor , the ground sandy oaze . Sunday the 14 . towards night , about some six league from the shore , we descry a low land in the bottom of a bay . from the 9 of march until this time , we keep for the most part a southsouthwest course . the water in this place be smooth , but muddy , and the colour red or tawny . from the westermost of the cape verde - island unto this bay i do [ three . 673 . ] estimate the distance to be near 550 . league . it seem to most of our seaman , to be the very bank of a shall upon a lee - shore : the rather because without it , in the clean green sea we have but 7 . fathom depth : but after by proof find that there be no sudden alteration in any part of the coast , and that the sea be smooth near the land , we always at night seek to anchor in three or four fathom . and doubtless as the hand of God be wonder in all his work : so herein his merciful providence be most at notable admirable , that upon a lee - shore subject unto a perpetuali observation . easterly gale , neither much wind can endanger ship , by reason that the foul heavy water be not capable of vehement motion , and the soft light oaze , if they touch , can bruise they : nor be there any jeopardy in be wind - bound , or imbay : for the most forcible wind make the great flood - tide , whereby the freshet when they take their ordinary course of ebb , do grow strong and swift , set direct off to sea against the wind . they anchor in we by turn go clear of all bay : howbeit in this the mouth of case , as also in the river , the use of a drove sail seem a , rrowari a good and ready help . the first place wherein we anchor , be in the mouth of Arrowari , a fair and great ute , . * 453 river . it stand in one degree and fourty minute : for we fall so far to the southward by your lordship direction . the bar without have at the least three fathom , at the shoald place , when it be low ebb . the depth within be eight and ten fathom . the water always brackish . we find not any inhabitant in this place near the sea coast . i omit here to recite the name of the nation that be borderer , their town , captain and commodity that their country do yield , as also the sounding , tide , and how the coast lie etc think it fit to reduce these disjoin and scatter remembrance to one place . as we pass we always keep the shore within view and stop the flood , still anker at night in three or four fathom . when we come to the north headland of this bay ( which we name cape Cecyl ) we see two high mountain like two island , but they join with the main . in this tract lie northnorthwest near 60 . league , there fall into the sea these several great river , Arrowari , iwaripoco , Maipari , Coanawini , Caipurogh . we anchor in two fathom not far from these hill , and fill all our cask with fresh water by the ship side , for in the sea thirty mile from the mouth of any river it be fresh and good . this second bay extend it self above thirty league to the westward , and contain within it these river Arcooa , Wiapoco , Wanari , Caparwacka , Cawo , Caian , Wia , Macuria , cawroor , curassawini . here leave the ship at anchor , i take into the boat John provost , my Indian interpreter , John Linsey , and eight or nine other , intend to search some of these river , and to seek speech with the Indian . in Wiapoco , at the foot of the eastermost mountain , where the river fall into the sea , we find twenty or thirty house , but not inhabit . we stay there but one night . Wanari we overpass , because the entrance be rocky and not deep . in Caperwacka we sail some fourty mile , but can see no Indian . at one of their port under the side of a hill , we take in so much Brasill wood as our 454 boat can carry . among other tree we cut down one for a example , which i do very believe to be the same sort of cinnamon , which be find in the strait of Magellan . from Caperwacka we pass to Cawo , and there meet with a Canoa , wherein be two Indian . it be long time before we can procure they to come near we , for they doubt lest we be Spanish . when my interpreter have persuade they the contrary , and that we come from England , they without far speech or delay , bring we to Wareo their captain , who entertain we most friendly , and then at large declare unto we , that he be late chase by the Spaniard from Moruga , one of the neighbour river to Raleana , or Orenoque : and that have burn his own house , and destroy his fruit and garden , he have leave his country and town to be possess by the Arwaccas who be a vagabond nation of Indian , which find no certain place of abode of their own , do for the most part serve and follow the Spaniard . he show i that he be of the nation of the laos , who be a mighty people , and of a late time be lord of all the sea coast so far as Trinidad , which they likewise possess . howbeit , that with a general consent , when the Spaniard first begin to borrow some of their wife , they all agree to change their habitation , and do now live unite for the most part towards the river of Amazones . but the especial cause of his present remove be , because two or three year past , twenty Spaniards come to his town , and seek to take his best wife from he : but before they carry she away , he at time and place of advantage kill half of they : the rest flee , most of they sore hurt . now in this case he think it best to dwell far enough from they . your Indian pilot Ferdinando , who conduct you by Amana , and now abide near the 1596 . the laos a mlghtle nation . Ferdinando the Indian pilot of sir head of Dessekebe , be one of this man subject : by Walter who ( as it may seem ) he have take good notice Ralegh . of our princess and country . for he descend more [ three . 674 . particular to inquire what force be come with we , 455 assure i of the Spaniard be in Trinidad , and that the Indian our friend betwixt hope and fear , have earnest expect our return from England these four or five month . when i have answer he , that at our departure we leave no Spaniards alive to annoy they ; that we now come only to discover , and trade with they ; and that if her majesty shall have send a power of man , where no enemy be to resist , the Indian may perhaps imagine , that we come rather to invade , than to defend they : he reply , that this course very well sort with the report which they have hear of our princess justice , rare grace , and virtue : the fame of who power in be able to vanquish the Spaniard , and singular goodness in undertake to succour and defend the afflict Indian , be now so general , that the nation far and near be all agree to join with we , and by all mean possible to assist we in expelling and root out the Spaniard from all part of the land : and that we be deceive , if we think this country not large enough to receive we , without molestation or intrusion upon the Indian , who want not choice of dwellingplace , if they forsake one to live in another : but stand in need of our presence at all time to aid they , and maintain their liberty , which to they be dear than land or live . he then far desire , that he with his people may have our favour against the Arwaccas , who not be content to enjoy their ground and house , have take from they many of their wife and child , the best of who fortune be , if they live , to live in perpetuali slavery under the Spaniard . we put he in good hope and comfort thereof . and he to deserve some part of this friendship , commend unto we a elderly man to be our pilot in bring we to Raleana . when we be ready to depart , he demand whether we brasil - wood , want any Urapo , which be the wood , that be usual carry from these part to Trinidad in canoas , and be there sell to the french for trade : he offer , if we will bring our ship near his port , to put in her lade thereof , 456 but because most of our cask be not iron - bound , and in make stowage - way to remove it , will have be the loss of our cider and other drink ; i therefore refer the take of any quantity to fit opportunity : think it sufficient at this time , to have only my boat lade thereof : which afterward in extremity of foul weather , before we can get aboard our ship , we be enforce in a dark night to heave all overboard : think our self happy , to have recover thither at seven day end , with safety of life only . all which time we can not where set foot on shore , but rest day and night wet and weatherbeaten in our covertlesse boat , which be sometime ready to sink under we . for we have in this place without comparison more rain , wind , and gust , then else where at any time . to be brief , my man become weak and sick , and if we have stay any long time out , i doubt whether the great part of we have ever come aboard again . i afterward understand by my Indian pilot , that this weather be for most part of the year usual , near the island oncaiarie , which lie north from the unseasonable river Capurwacka some six league into the sea : and out that they hold opinion how this hand be keep by some qncaia ° ie evil spirit : for they very believe , that to sleep in the day time near it ( except it be after much drink ) be present death . the only season wherein little rain do fall there , be ( as i gather by their speech , they divide all time by their moon ) at our winter solstice . the mother - wind of this coast be for the most part to the northward of the east , except when the sun be on this side of they . equinoctial ! , for than it often veare southerly , but most in the night . this our guide be of the laos , who do all mark themselves , thereby to how the bee know from other nation after this manner . with natim ° ftke the tooth of a small beast like a rat , they raze some their ^^ emshvet to face , some their body , after diverse form , as if it be know be with the scratch of a pin , the print of which rasure from other can never be do away again during life . when 457 port Howard otherwise call Gowateri . [ he . 675 . ] the english voyage he have sometime converse with our Indian , that go from England with we , he become willing to see our country . his sufficiency , trustiness , and knowledge be such , that if the pretend voyage for Guiana do take place , you shall ( i doubt not ) find he many way able to steed your lordship in your design and purpose . for beside his precise knowledge of all the coast , and of the Indian town and dwelling , he speak all their language , be breed in Guiana , be a swear brother to Putima , who slay the Spaniard in their return from Manoa , can direct we to many gold mine , and in nothing will undertake more , than he assure will perform . to the westward this bay have many good road under small island , whereof the great name Gowateri , be inhabit by the shebaios : and beside the plenty of foul , fish , fruit , wild pork and dear , which be there to be have , where Caiane fall into the sea , ( for it stand in the mouth of Wia and Caiane ; ) it yield safe and good harbour in four and five fathom for ship of great burden . on all that coast we find not any like it : we therefore honour this